**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  11852-9  (2003) :  Automotive  Vehicles  -  Brakes  and  Braking 
Systems,  Part  9:  Requirements  for  Vehicles  Equipped  with 
Anti-Lock  Braking  Systems  [TED  4:  Automotive  Braking 
Systems] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


a^v  j  i  iw&*<m&a  rsi>frgamsBP 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  11 852  (Part  9):  2003 

wt  9   7,sft-offt>  ^Rb4l  ^TeT  w^rf  3>  fen?  srtamf 

Indian  Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES  — BRAKES  AND 
BRAKING  SYSTEMS 

PART  9    REQUIREMENTS  FOR  VEHICLES  EQUIPPED  WITH 
ANTI-LOCK  BRAKING  SYSTEMS 


ICS  43.040.40 


©  BIS  2003 

BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW    DELHI    l  I0002 

September  2003  Price  Group  9 


Automotive  Braking  Systems,  Vehicle  Testing  and  Performance  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee,  TED  4 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (Part  9)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the 
Automotive  Braking  Systems,  Vehicle  Testing  and  Performance  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved 
by  the  Transport  Engineering  Division  Council. 

This  standard  on  brakes  and  braking  systems  which  was  earlier  issued  in  eight  parts,  has  now  been  revised  and 
issued  in  nine  parts.  The  other  parts  are: 

(Part  1) :  2001  Terminology 

(Part  2) :  2001  General  functions  and  features 

(Part  3) :  2001  Performance  requirements  and  evaluation 

(Part  4) :  200 1  Compressed  air  and  air  assisted  brakes  —  Special  requirements 

(Part  5) :  200 1  Compressed  air  and  air  assisted  brakes  —  Pressure  test  connections 

(Part  6) :  2001  Vacuum  braking  systems  -  Special  requirements 

(Part  7) :  2001  Inertia  dynamometer  test  method  for  brake  linings 

(Part  8) :  200 1  Test  procedures 

IS  1 1 852  (Part  7) :  1 995  'Automotive  vehicles  —  Recommendations  for  brakes  and  braking  systems:  Part  7  Model 
test  report'  has  been  withdrawn  in  this  revision  and  has  been  replaced  with  a  part  covering,  'Inertia  dynamometer 
test  methods  for  brake  linings'.  In  this  standard  the  requirements  for  vehicles  equipped  with  anti-lock  braking 
devices  has  been  added. 

During  braking  of  automotive  vehicles,  wheels  lock  if  the  brake  force  applied  is  more  than  the  friction  between  the 
road  and  tyre.  This  often  happens  in  a  panic  braking  situation,  especially  on  a  slippery  road.  When  the  front  wheels 
lock,  the  vehicle  slides  in  the  direction  of  motion  and  when  the  rear  wheels  lock,  the  vehicle  swings  around.  It  is 
impossible  to  steer  around  an  obstacle  with  wheels  locked  that  can  result  in  accidents.  Skidding  also  reduces  tyre 
life.  Anti-lock  braking  system  (ABS)  prevents  wheel  lock  during  panic  braking.  ABS  maintains  vehicle  stability 
and  ensures  steerability  during  braking,  thus  avoiding  accidents.  This  part  of  the  standard  specifies  the  requirements 
for  vehicles  equipped  with  the  ABS. 

In  this  standard,  the  following  International  Standards  have  been  referred  for  which  at  present  there  are  no  equivalent 
Indian  Standards: 

ISO  7638  Road  vehicles  —  Electrical  connectors  for  braking  systems 

(Part  1) :  1997       Connectors  for  24  V  nominal  supply  voltage 
(Part  2) :  1997       Connectors  for  12  V  nominal  supply  voltage 

The  composition  of  the  Committee  responsible  for  the  formulation  of  this  standard  is  given  at  Annex  F. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  2  :  I960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)'.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the 
rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


AMENDMENT  NO.    1    MAY  2004 

TO 

IS  11852 (PART 9)  :  2003    AUTOMOTIVE 

VEHICLES  —BRAKES  AND  BRAKING  SYSTEMS 

PART  9    REQUIREMENTS  FOR  VEHICLES  EQUIPPED  WITH 
ANTI-LOCK  BRAKING  SYSTEMS 

(  Page  4,  clause  6 3.1 )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

'63.1  The  wheels  directly  controlled  by  an  anti-lock  system  shall  not  lock  when 
the  full  force  is  suddenly  applied  on  the  control  device,  on  the  road  surfaces 
specified  in  6.2.2,  at  an  initial  speed  of  40  km/h  and  at  a  high  initial  speed  as 
indicated  in  the  table  below: 


Type  of  Road  Surface 
(I) 

Vehicle  Category 
(2) 

Maximum  Test  Speed 
(3) 

High-adhesion  surface 

All  categories  except 
N2,  N3  laden 

0.8Vmax    <  120  km/h 

N2,  N3  laden 

0.8Vmax    <   80km/h 

Low-adhesion  surface 

M1,N1 

0.8Vmax    <  120  km/h 

M2,  M3, 

N2  except  tractors  for  semi-trailer 

0.8Vmax     <   80  km/h 

N2  tractors  for  semi-trailer,  N3 

0.8Vmax    £  70  km/h 

(TED4) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 

Indian  Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES  — BRAKES  AND 
BRAKING  SYSTEMS 

PART  9    REQUIREMENTS  FOR  VEHICLES  EQUIPPED  WITH 
ANTI-LOCK  BRAKING  SYSTEMS 


1  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (Part  9)  covers  the  requirements  for 
braking  performance  for  road  vehicles  fitted  with  anti- 
lock  systems. 

In  addition,  motor  vehicles  which  are  authorized  to 
draw  a  trailer  of  categories  T3  and  T4,  and  trailers  of 
categories  T3  and  T4  equipped  with  compressed-air 
braking  systems  shall,  when  the  vehicles  are  laden,  meet 
the  requirements  for  compatibility  set  out  in  Annex  A. 

1.2  The  anti-lock  systems  known  at  present  comprise 
a  sensor  or  sensors,  a  controller  or  controllers  and  a 
modulator  or  modulators.  Any  device  of  a  different 
design,  which  may  be  introduced  in  the  future,  will  be 
deemed  to  be  an  anti-lock  braking  system  within  the 
meaning  of  this  standard,  if  it  provides  performance 
equal  to  that  prescribed  in  this  standard. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  following  standards  contain  provisions,  which 
'through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of 
this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication  the  editions 
indicated  were  valid.  All  standards  are  subject  to 
revision,  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this 
standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the  possibility 
of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the  standards 
indicated  below. 

Title 

Denominations  and  definitions  of 
weights  of  road  vehicles  {first 
revision ) 

Automotive  vehicles  —  Brakes  and 

braking  systems: 

General  functions  and  features  {first 

revision) 

Performance  requirements  and 

evaluation  {first  revision ) 

Compressed  air  and  air  assisted 

brakes — Special  requirements  (first 

revision) 

Compressed  air  and  air  assisted 

brakes  —  Pressure  test  connections 

Automotive  vehicles  —  Electrical 
connections  between  towing 
vehicles  and  towed  vehicles  with 
6  or  12  V  electrical  equipment  — 
Type  12  N  (Normal) 


IS  No 

9211  :  1979 

11852 

(Part  2) : 

2001 

(Part  3) : 

2001 

(Part  4) : 

2001 

(Part  5) : 

2001 

13461  :  1992 

IS  No.  Title 

13491  :  1992  Automotive  vehicles  —  Electrical 
connections  between  towing 
vehicles  and  towed  vehicles  with 
24  V  electrical  equipment — Type 
24  N  (Normal) 

3  DEFINITIONS 

In  addition  to  the  definitions  given  hereunder,  the 
symbols  and  definitions  as  given  in  Annex  B  may  also 
be  referred. 

3.1  Anti-lock  Device/System,  means  device  which 
automatically  controls  the  level  of  slip,  in  the  direction 
of  rotation  of  the  wheel(s),  on  one  or  more  wheels  of  a 
vehicle  during  braking. 

3.2  Sensor,  means  the  component  responsible  for 
sensing  the  conditions  of  rotation  of  the  wheel  (s)  or 
the  dynamic  condition  of  the  vehicle  and  for 
transmitting  this  information  to  the  controller. 

3.3  Controller,  means  the  component  responsible  for 
evaluating  the  information  supplied  by  the  sensor  and 
for  transmitting  an  order  to  the  modulator. 

3.4  Modulator,  means  the  component  responsible  for 
modulating  the  force  developed  by  the  brake  actuators 
as  a  function  of  the  order  received  from  the  controller. 

3.5  Directly  Controlled  Wheel,  means  a  wheel  whose 
braking  force  is  modulated  according  to  data  provided 
at  least  by  its  own  sensor. 

3.6  Indirectly  Controlled  Wheel,  means  a  wheel 
whose  braking  force  is  modulated  according  to  data 
provided  by  the  sensor(s)  of  other  wheel(s). 

NOTE  —  Anti-lock  systems  with  select-high  control  are  deemed 
to  include  both  directly  and  indirectly  controlled  wheels;  in 
systems  with  select-low  control,  all  sensed  wheels  are  deemed 
to  be  directly  controlled  wheels. 

3.7  Full  Cycling,  means  that  the  anti-lock  system  is 
repeatedly  modulating  the  brake  force  to  prevent  the 
directly  controlled  wheels  from  locking.  Brake 
applications  where  modulation  only  occurs  once  during 
the  stop  shall  not  be  considered  to  meet  this  definition. 
In  the  case  of  trailers  with  pneumatic  braking  systems, 
full  cycling  of  the  anti-lock  braking  system  is  only 
assured  when  the  pressure  available  at  any  brake 
actuator  of  a  directly  controlled  wheel  is  more  than 
1  bar  above  the  maximum  cycling  pressure  throughout 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


a  given  test.  The  supply  pressure  available  may  not  be 
increased  above  8  bar. 

4  TYPES  OF  ANTI-LOCK  SYSTEMS 

4.1  A  motor  vehicle  is  deemed  to  be  equipped  with  an 
anti-lock  system  within  the  meaning  of  A-l,  if  one  of 
the  following  systems  is  fitted. 

4.1.1  Category  1  Anti-lock  System 

A  vehicle  equipped  with  a  Category  1  anti-lock  system 
shall  meet  all  the  relevant  requirements  of  this  standard. 

4.1.2  Category  2  Anti-lock  System 

A  vehicle  equipped  with  a  Category  2  anti-lock  system 
shall  meet  all  the  relevant  requirements  of  this  standard, 
except  those  of  6.3.5. 

4.1.3  Category  3  Anti-lock  System 

A  vehicle  equipped  with  a  Category  3  anti-lock  system 
shall  meet  all  the  relevant  requirements  of  this  standard, 
except  those  of  6.3.4  and  6.3.5.  On  such  vehicles,  any 
individual  axle  (or  bogie)  which  does  not  include  at 
least  one  directly  controlled  wheel  shall  fulfil  the 
conditions  of  adhesion  utilization  and  the  wheel-locking 
sequence  of  Annex  A  instead  of  adhesion  utilization 
requirements  of  6.2  with  regard  to  the  braking  rate  and 
the  load  respectively.  However,  if  the  relative  positions 
of  adhesion  utilization  curves  do  not  meet  requirements 
of  A-3.1.1,  a  check  shall  be  made  to  ensure  that  the 
wheels  on  at  least  one  rear  axle  do  not  lock  before  those 
on  front  axles  or  axles  under  the  conditions  prescribed 
in  A-3.1.1  and  A-3.1.4.  These  requirements  may  be 
checked  on  high  and  low  adhesion  road  surfaces  (about 
0.8  and  0.3  maximum)  by  modulating  the  service 
braking  control  force. 

NO Tl:  —  It  is  recommended  that  anti-lock  braking  devices  fitted 
on  N3  vehicles  authorized  to  draw  category  T4  trailers  and  M3 
vehicles  shall  be  of  category  1. 

4.2  A  trailer  is  deemed  to  be  equipped  with  an  anti- 
lock  system  within  the  meaning  of  A-l  when  at  least 
two  wheels  on  opposite  sides  of  the  vehicle  are  directly 
controlled  and  all  remaining  wheels  are  either  directly 
or  indirectly  controlled  by  the  anti-lock  system.  In  the 
case  of  full  trailers,  at  least  two  wheels  on  one  front 
axle  and  two  wheels  on  one  rear  axle  are  directly 
controlled  with  each  of  these  axles  having  at  least  one 
independent  modulator  and  all  remaining  wheels  are 
either  directly  or  indirectly  controlled.  In  addition,  the 
anti-lock  equipped  trailer  shall  meet  one  of  the 
following  conditions: 

4.2.1  Category  A  Anti-lock  System  for  Trailers 

A  trailer  equipped  with  a  Category  A  anti-lock  system 
shall  meet  all  the  relevant  requirements  of  this  standard. 

4.2.2  Category  B  Anti-lock  System  for  Trailers 

A  trailer  equipped  with  a  Category  B  anti-lock  system 


shall  meet  all  the  relevant  requirements  of  this  standard, 
except  7.3.2. 

5  GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 

5.1  Any  electrical  failure  or  sensor  anomaly  that  affects 
the  system  with  respect  to  the  functional  and 
performance  requirements  in  this  standard,  including 
those  in  the  supply  of  electricity,  the  external  wiring  to 
the  controller(s),  the  controller(s)  and  the  modulator(s) 
shall  be  signalled  to  the  driver  by  a  specific  optical 
warning  signal.  Such  signals  shall  be  visible  in  daylight. 

NOTE  —  Until  uniform  test  procedures  have  been  agreed,  the 
manufacturer  shall  provide  the  test  agency  with  an  analysis  of 
potential  failures  within  the  controller(s)  and  their  effects.  This 
information  shall  be  subject  to  discussion  and  agreement 
between  the  test  agency  and  the  vehicle  manufacturer. 

5.1.1  The  warning  signal  shall  light  up  when  the  anti- 
lock  system  is  energized  and  with  the  vehicle  stationary 
and  it  shall  be  verified  that  none  of  the  above-mentioned 
defects  are  present  before  extinguishing  the  signal. 

5.1.2  The  static  sensor  check  may  verify  that  a  sensor 
was  not  functioning  the  last  time  that  the  vehicle  was 
at  a  speed  greater  than  10  km/h.  Also  during  this 
verification  phase,  the  electrically  controlled 
(pneumatic)  modulator  val  ve(s)  shall  cycle  at  least  once. 

NOTE  —  The  warning  signal  may  light  up  again  when  the 
vehicle  is  stationary,  provided  that  it  is  extinguished  before  the 
vehicle  speed  reaches  10  km/h  when  no  defect  is  present. 

5.2  Motor  vehicles  equipped  with  an  anti-lock  system 
and  authorized  to  draw  a  trailer  equipped  with  such  a 
system,  with  the  exception  of  vehicles  of  Categories 
Ml  and  Nl,  shall  be  fitted  with  a  separate  optical 
warning  signal  for  the  anti-lock  system  of  the  trailer, 
meeting  the  requirements  of  5.1. 

This  warning  signal  shall  not  light  up  when  a  trailer 
without  an  anti-lock  braking  system  is  coupled  or 
when  no  trailer  is  coupled.  This  function  shall  be 
automatic. 

5.3  The  electrical  connections  used  for  the  anti-lock 
systems  of  all  vehicles  including  drawing  vehicles  and 
trailers  shall  be  effected  by  special  connector 
conforming  to  ISO  7638  (Parts  1  and  2). 

NOTE — To  ensure  compatibility  of  all  vehicles  until  the  special 
ISO  connector  is  in  general  use,  trailers  shall  also  fulfil  one  of 
the  following  two  conditions: 

a)  The  trailer  anti-lock  system  shall  be  capable  of  operation 
via  the  stop  tamp  circuit  [using  pin  4  of  the  ISO  7638  (24N) 
connector  and  without  exceeding  the  present  limits  of  the 
stop  lamp  circuit]  and  the  trailer  shall  be  equipped  with  an 
optical  warning  signal,  within  the  field  of  view  of  the 
driver's  rear-view  mirror  and  visible  even  in  day  light,  to 
warn  him  of  any  break  in  the  supply  of  electricity  and/or 
in  the  wiring  external  to  the  controller  of  the  anti-lock 
system  of  the  trailer;  or 

b)  The  trailer  braking  system  shall  satisfy  the  requirements 
of  Annex  A. 

The  wiring  specification  as  per  ISO  7638  (Parts  1  and  2) 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


for  the  trailer  may  only  be  reduced  if  the  trailer  is  installed  with 
its  own  independent  fuse.  The  rating  of  the  fuse  shall  be  such 
that  the  current  rating  of  the  conductors  is  not  exceeded.  With 
the  exception  of  vehicles  of  category  N3  and  04  and  until  a 
uniform  international  standard  has  been  agreed,  the  electrical 
connection  between  drawing  vehicles  and  trailers  equipped  with 
a  12  V  electrical  system  shall  conform  with  IS  13461. 

5.4  In  the  event  of  failure  in  the  anti-lock  system,  the 
residual  braking  performance  shall  be  that  prescribed 
for  the  vehicle  in  question  in  the  event  of  failure  of 
part  of  the  transmission  of  the  service  braking  system 
[see  4.2.1.4  of  IS  11 852  (Part  2)].  This  requirement 
shall  not  be  construed  as  a  departure  from  the 
requirements  concerning  secondary  braking.  In  the 
case  of  trailers  the  residual  braking  performance  in 
the  event  of  a  defect  in  the  anti-lock  system  according 
to  5.1  shall  be  at  least  80  percent  of  the  prescribed 
laden  performance  for  the  service  braking  system  of 
the  relevant  trailer. 

5.5  The  operation  of  the  anti-lock  system  shall  not  be 
adversely  affected  by  magnetic  or  electrical  fields. 

NOTE  —  Until  uniform  test  procedures  have  been  agreed,  the 
manufacturer  shall  provide  the  test  agency  with  their  test 
procedures  and  results. 

5.6  A  manual  device  may  not  be  provided  to 
disconnect  or  change  the  control  mode  of  the  anti- 
lock  system,  except  on  off-road  motor  vehicles  of 
Categories  N2  and  N3.  Where  a  device  is  fitted  to 
N2  or  N3  category  vehicles,  the  following  conditions 
shall  be  met. 

NOTIi  —  It  is  understood  that  devices  changing  the  control 
mode  of  the  anti-lock  system  are  not  subject  to  5.6  if  in  the 
changed  control  mode  condition  all  requirements  for  the 
category  of  anti-lock  system,  with  which  the  vehicle  is  equipped, 
are  fulfilled.  However  in  this  case  5.6.2,  5.6.3,  and  5.6.4 
shall  be  met. 

5.6.1  The  motor  vehicle  with  the\nti-lock  system 
disconnected  or  the  control  mode  changed  by  the  device 
referred  to  in  5.6  shall  satisfy  all  the  relevant 
requirements  given  in  Annex  A. 

5.6.2  An  optical  warning  signal  shall  inform  the  driver 
that  the  anti-lock  system  has  been  disconnected  or  the 
control  mode  changed;  the  anti-lock  failure  warning 
signal  may  be  used  for  this  purpose. 

5.6.3  The  anti-lock  system  shall  automatically  be 
reconnected/returned  to  on-road  mode  when  the 
ignition  (start)  device  is  again  set  to  the  4ON'  (run) 
position. 

5.6.4  The  vehicle  user's  handbook  provided  by  the 
manufacturer  should  warn  the  driver  of  the 
consequences  of  manual  disconnection  or  mode  change 
of  the  anti-lock  system. 

5.6.5  The  device  referred  to  in  5.6  may,  in  conjunction 
with  the  drawing  vehicle,  disconnect/change  the  control 
mode  of  the  anti-lock  system  of  the  trailer;  a  separate 
device  for  the  trailer  alone  is  not  permitted. 


6  SPECIAL  PROVISIONS  CONCERNING 
MOTOR  VEHICLES 

6.1  Energy  Consumption 

Power-driven  vehicles  equipped  with  anti-lock  systems 
shall  maintain  their  performance  when  the  service 
braking  control  device  is  fully  applied  for  long  periods. 
Compliance  with  this  requirement  shall  be  verified  by 
means  of  the  following  tests. 

6.1.1  Test  Procedure 

6.1.1.1  The  initial-energy  level  in  the  energy  storage 
device(s)  shall  be  that  specified  by  the  manufacturer. 
This  level  shall  be  at  least  such  as  to  ensure  the 
efficiency  prescribed  for  service  braking  when  the 
vehicle  is  laden.  The  energy  storage  device(s)  for 
pneumatic  auxiliary  equipment  shall  be  isolated. 

6.1.1.2  From  an  initial  speed  of  not  less  than  50  km/h 
or  80  percent  of  the  maximum  design  speed  of  the 
vehicle  whichever  is  lower,  on  a  surface  with  a 
coefficient  of  adhesion  of  0.3  or  less  (see  Annex  E), 
the  brakes  of  the  laden  vehicle  shall  be  fully  applied 
for  a  time  /,  during  which  time  the  energy  consumed 
by  the  indirectly  controlled  wheels  shall  be  taken  into 
consideration  and  all  directly  controlled  wheels  shall 
remain  under  control  of  the  anti-lock  system  throughout 
that  time. 

NOTE  —  Until  such  test  surfaces  become  generally  available, 
tyres  at  the  limit  of  wear,  and  higher  values  up  to  0.4  may  be 
used  at  the  discretion  of  the  test  agency.  The  actual  value 
obtained  and  the  type  of  tyres  and  surface  shall  be  recorded. 

6.1.1.3  The  vehicle's  engine  shall  then  be  stopped  or 
the  supply  to  the  energy  transmission  storage  devicc(s) 
cut  off. 

6.1.1.4  The  service  braking  control  device  shall  then 
be  fully  actuated  four  times  in  succession  with  the 
vehicle  stationary. 

6.1.1.5  When  the  control  device  is  applied  for  the  fifth 
time,  it  shall  be  possible  to  brake  the  vehicle  with  at 
least  the  performance  prescribed  for  secondary  braking 
of  the  laden  vehicle. 

6.1.1.6  During  the  tests,  in  the  case  of  a  power-driven 
vehicle  authorized  to  draw  a  trailer  equipped  with  a 
compressed-air  braking  system,  the  supply  line  shall 
be  stopped  and  an  energy  storage  device  of  0.5  litre 
capacity  shall  be  connected  to  the  pneumatic  control 
line  in  accordance  with  3.2.2.3  of  IS  1 1852  (Part  4). 
When  the  brakes  are  applied  for  the  fifth  time,  as 
provided  in  6.1.1.5,  the  energy  level  supplied  to  the 
control  line  shall  not  be  below  half  the  level  obtained 
at  a  full  application  starting  with  the  initial  energy  level. 

6.1.2  Additional  Requirements 

6.1.2.1  The  coefficient  of  adhesion  of  the  road  surface 
shall  be  measured  with  the  vehicle  under  test,  by  the 
method  described  in  C- 1.1. 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


6.1.2.2  The  braking  test  shall  be  conducted  with  the 
engine  disconnected  and  idling  and  with  the  vehicle 
laden. 

6.1.2.3.  The  braking  time  /  shall  be  determined  by  the 
formula:  /  =  Fmax  II  (but  not  less  than  15  s)  where  /  is 
expressed  in  seconds  and  Kmax  represents  the  maximum 
design  speed  of  the  vehicle  expressed  in  km/h,  with  an 
upper  limit  of  160  km/h. 

6.1.2.4  If  the  time  /  cannot  be  completed  in  a  single 
braking  phase,  further  phases  may  be  used,  up  to  a 
maximum  of  four  in  all. 

6.1.2.5  If  the  test  is  conducted  in  several  phases,  no 
fresh  energy  shall  be  supplied  between  the  phases  of 
the  test. 

From  the  second  phase,  the  energy  consumption 
corresponding  to  the  initial  brake  application  may  be 
taken  into  account,  by  subtracting  one  full  brake 
application  from  the  four  full  applications  prescribed 
in  6.1.1.4,  6.1.1.5  and  6.1.2.6  for  each  of  the  second, 
third  and  fourth  phases  used  in  the  test  prescribed 
in  6.1.1,  as  applicable. 

6.1.2.6  The  performance  prescribed  in  6.1.1.5  shall  be 
deemed  to  be  satisfied  if,  at  the  end  of  the  fourth 
application,  with  the  vehicle  stationary,  the  energy  level 
in  the  storage  device(s)  is  at  or  above  that  required  for 
secondary  braking  with  the  laden  vehicle. 

6.2  Utilization  of  Adhesion 

6.2.1  The  utilization  of  adhesion  by  the  anti-lock  system 
takes  into  account  the  actual  increase  in  braking  distance 
beyond  the  theoretical  minimum.  The  anti-lock  system 
shall  be  deemed  to  be  satisfactory  when  the  condition 
e  >  0.75  is  satisfied,  where  e  represents  the  adhesion 
utilized,  as  defined  in  C-1.2. 

6.2.2  The  adhesion  utilization  e  shall  be  measured 
on  road  surfaces  with  a  coefficient  of  adhesion  of 
0.3  or  less,  and  of  about  0.8  (dry  road),  with  an 
initial  speed  of  50  km/h  or  80  percent  of  the  maximum 
design  speed  whichever  is  lower.  To  eliminate  the 
effects  of  differential  brake  temperatures  it  is 
recommended  that  rAl.  be  determined  prior  to  the 
determination  of  k. 

NOTE  —  Until  such  test  surfaces  become  generally  available, 
tyres  at  the  limit  of  wear,  and  higher  values  up  to  0.4  may  be 
used  at  the  discretion  of  the  test  agency.  The  actual  value 
obtained  and  the  type  of  tyres  and  surface  shall  be  recorded. 

6.2.3  The  test  procedure  to  determine  the  coefficient 
of  adhesion  (k)  and  the  formulae  for  calculation  of  the 
adhesion  utilization  e  shall  be  those  laid  down  in 
Annex  C. 

6.2.4  The  utilization  of  adhesion  by  the  anti-lock  system 
shall  be  checked  on  complete  vehicles  equipped  with 
anti-lock  systems  of  Categories  1  or  2.  In  the  case  of 
vehicles  equipped  with  Category  3  anti-lock  systems, 


only  the  axle(s)  with  at  least  one  directly  controlled 
wheel  shall  satisfy  this  requirement. 

6.2.5  The  condition  €  >  0.75  shall  be  checked  with  the 
vehicle  laden  and  unladen.  The  laden  test  on  the  high 
adhesion  surface  may  be  omitted  if  the  prescribed  force 
on  the  control  device  does  not  achieve  full  cycling  of 
the  anti-lock  system.  For  the  unladen  test,  the  control 
force  may  be  increased  up  to  100  daN  if  no  cycling  is 
achieved  with  its  full  force  value.  If  100  daN  is 
insufficient  to  make  the  system  cycle,  then  this  test  may 
be  omitted.  For  air  braking  systems  the  air  pressure  may 
not  be  increased  above  the  cut-out  pressure  for  the 
purpose  of  this  test. 

NOTE  —  'Full  force'  means  the  maximum  force  laid  down  in 
IS  1 1 852  (Part  3)  for  the  category  of  vehicles;  a  higher  force 
may  be  used  if  required  to  activate  the  anti-lock  system. 

6.3  Additional  Checks 

The  following  additional  checks  shall  be  carried  out, 
engine  disconnected,  with  the  vehicle  laden  and 
unladen. 

6.3.1  The  wheels  directly  controlled  by  an  anti-lock 
system  shall  not  lock  when  the  full  force  is  suddenly 
applied  on  the  control  device,  on  the  road  surfaces 
specified  in  6.2.2,  at  an  initial  speed  of  40  km/h  and  at 
a  high  initial  speed  as  indicated  below: 


Type  of 

Road 

Surface 

High- 
adhesion 
surface 


Low- 
adhesion 
surface 


Vehicle  Category 


All  categories 
except  N2,  N3 
laden 

N2,  N3  laden 
M1,N1 

M2,  M3,  N2 
except  tractors 
for  semi-trailer 

N2  tractors  for 
semi-trailer,  N3 


Maximum  Test 
Speed 

0.8  J'      £120  km/h 


0.8  Vmtx  <  80  km/h 
0.8  Kmtt  <  120  km/h 

0.8  Vmtx  <   80  km/h 


0.8  J'      <   70  km/h 


6.3.2  When  an  axle  passes  from  a  high-adhesion  surface 
(kH)  to  a  low-adhesion  surface  (kL)  where  kHz  0.5  and 
knlkL  z  2  with  the  full  force  applied  on  the  control  device, 
the  directly  controlled  wheels  shall  not  lock.  The 
running  speed  and  the  instant  of  applying  the  brakes 
shall  be  so  calculated  that,  with  the  anti-lock  system 
fully  cycling  on  the  high-adhesion  surface,  the  passage 
from  one  surface  to  the  other  is  made  at  high  and  at 
low  speed,  under  the  conditions  laid  down  in  6.3.1. 

6.3.3  When  a  vehicle  passes  from  a  low-adhesion 
surface  (kL)  to  a  high-adhesion  surface  (kH)  where 
kHz  0.5  and  kHlkL  z  2,  with  the  full  force  applied  on  the 
control  device,  the  deceleration  of  the  vehicle  shall  rise 
to  the  appropriate  high  value  within  a  reasonable  time 
and  the  vehicle  shall  not  deviate  from  its  initial  course. 
The  running  speed  and  the  instant  of  applying  the  brakes 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


shall  be  so  calculated  that,  with  the  anti-lock  system 
fully  cycling  on  the  low-adhesion  surface,  the  passage 
from  one  surface  to  the  other  occurs  at  approximately 
50  km/h  or  80  percent  of  the  design  speed  of  the  vehicle 
whichever  is  lower. 

6.3.4  In  the  case  of  vehicles  equipped  with  anti-lock 
systems  of  Categories  1  or  2,  when  the  right  and  left 
wheels  of  the  vehicle  are  situated  on  surfaces  with 
differing  coefficients  of  adhesion  (kH  and  kL%  where 
AH>  0.5  and  k^/kL  >  2,  the  directly  controlled  wheels 
shall  not  lock  when  the  full  force  is  suddenly  applied 
on  the  control  device  at  a  speed  of  50  km/h  or  80  percent 
of  the  design  speed  whichever  is  lower. 

6.3.5  Furthermore,  laden  vehicles  equipped  with  anti- 
lock  systems  of  Category  1  shall,  under  the  conditions 
of  6.3.4  satisfy  the  prescribed  braking  rate  as  in 
Annex  D. 

6.3.6  However,  in  the  tests  provided  in  6.3.1  to  6.3.5, 
brief  periods  of  wheel-locking  shall  be  allowed. 
Furthermore,  wheel-locking  is  permitted  when  the 
vehicle  speed  is  less  than  1 5  km/h;  likewise,  locking  of 
indirectly  controlled  wheels  is  permitted  at  any  speed, 
but  stability  and  steerability  shall  not  be  affected. 

6.3.7  During  the  tests  provided  in  6.3.4  and  6.3.5, 
steering  correction  is  permitted  if  the  angular  rotation 
of  the  steering  control  is  within  120°  during  the  initial 
2s,  and  not  more  than  240°  in  all.  Furthermore,  at  the 
beginning  of  these  tests  the  longitudinal  median  plane 
of  the  vehicle  shall  pass  over  the  boundary  between 
the  high-and  low-adhesion  surfaces  and  during  these 
tests  no  part  of  the  (outer)  tyres  shall  cross  this 
boundary. 

NOTES 

1  Tul I  force'  means  the  maximum  force  laid  down  in  IS  1 1852 
(Part  3)  for  the  category  of  vehicles;  a  higher  force  may  he 
used  if  required  to  activate  the  anti-lock  system. 

2  The  purpose  of  this  test  is  to  check  that  the  wheels  do  not 
lock  and  that  the  vehicle  remains  stable;  it  is  not  necessary, 
therefore,  to  make  complete  stops  and  bring  the  vehicle  to  a 
halt  on  the  low-adhesion  surface. 

3  ku  is  the  high-adhesion  surface  coefficient  kx  is  the  low- 
adhesion  surface  coefficient  kn  and  kx  arc  measured  as  laid  down 
in  Annex  C. 

4  To  ensure  compatibility  of  all  vehicles  until  the  special  ISO 
connector  is  in  general  use,  trailers  shall  also  fulfil  one  of  the 
following  two  conditions: 

a)  the  trailer  anti-lock  system  shall  be  capable  of  operation 
via  the  stop  lamp  circuit  fusing  pin  4  of  the  IS  7638 
(Part  I )]  connector  and  without  exceeding  the  present  limits 
of  the  stop  lamp  circuit,  and  the  trailer  shall  be  equipped 
with  an  optical  warning  signal,  within  the  field  of  view  of 
the  driver's  rear-view  mirror  and  visible  even  in  day  light, 
to  warn  him  of  any  break  in  the  supply  of  electricity  and/or 
in  the  wiring  external  to  the  controller  of  the  anti-lock 
system  of  the  trailer;  or 

b)  the  trailer  braking  system  shall  satisfy  the  requirements  of 
Annex  A. 

The  wiring  specification  as  per  ISO  7638  (Parts  1  and  2)  for  the 


trailer  may  only  be  reduced  if  the  trailer  is  installed  with  its 
own  independent  fuse.  The  rating  of  the  fuse  shall  be  such  that 
the  current  rating  of  the  conductors  is  not  exceeded.  With  the 
exception  of  vehicles  of  category  N3  and  04  and  until  a  uniform 
international  standard  has  been  agreed,  the  electrical  connection 
between  drawing  vehicles  and  trailers  equipped  with  a  12  V 
electrical  system  shall  conform  with  IS  13461. 

7  SPECIAL  PROVISIONS  CONCERNING 
TRAILERS 

7.1  Energy  Consumption 

Trailers  equipped  with  anti-lock  systems  shall  be  so 
designed  that,  even  after  the  service  braking  control 
device  has  been  fully  applied  for  some  time,  the  vehicle 
retains  sufficient  energy  to  bring  it  to  a  halt  within  a 
reasonable  distance. 

7.1.1  Compliance  with  the  above  requirement  shall  be 
checked  by  the  procedure  specified  below,  with  the 
vehicle  unladen,  on  a  straight  and  level  road  with  a 
surface  having  a  good  coefficient  of  adhesion  and  with 
the  brakes  adjusted  as  closely  as  possible  and  with  the 
proportioning/load-sensing  valve  (if  fitted)  held  in  the 
'laden'  position  throughout  the  test. 

NOTE  —  If  the  coefficient  of  adhesion  of  the  track  is  too  high, 
preventing  the  anti-lock  system  from  cycling  then  the  test  may 
be  carried  out  on  a  surface  with  a  lower  coefficient  of  adhesion. 

7.1.2  In  the  case  of  compressed-air  braking  systems, 
the  initial  energy  level  in  the  energy  transmission 
storage  device(s)  shall  be  equivalent  to  a  pressure 
of  8.0  bar  at  the  coupling  head  of  the  trailer's  supply 
line. 

7.1.3  With  an  initial  vehicle  speed  of  at  least  30  km/h 
the  brakes  shall  be  fully  applied  for  a  time,  /  =  15  s, 
during  which  all  wheels  shall  remain  under  control  of 
the  anti-lock  system.  During  this  test,  the  supply  to  the 
energy  transmission  storage  device(s)  shall  be  cut  off. 
If  the  time  /  =  15  s  cannot  be  completed  in  a  single 
braking  phase,  further  phases  may  be  used.  During  these 
phases  no  fresh  energy  shall  be  supplied  to  the  energy 
transmission  storage  device(s)  and,  as  from  the  second 
phase,  the  additional  energy  consumption  for  filling  the 
actuators  is  to  be  taken  into  account,  for  example,  by 
the  following  test  procedure: 

The  pressure  in  the  reservoir(s)  when  starting  the  first 
phase  is  to  be  that  stated  in  7.1.2.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  following  phase(s)  the  pressure  in  the  reservoir(s) 
after  application  of  the  brakes  shall  be  not  less  than  the 
pressure  in  the  reservoir(s)  at  the  end  of  the  preceding 
phase. 

At  the  subsequent  phase(s),  the  only  time  to  be  taken 
into  account  is  from  the  point  at  which  the  pressure  in 
the  reservoir(s)  is  equal  to  that  at  the  end  of  the 
preceding  phase. 

7.1.4  At  the  end  of  the  braking,  with  the  vehicle 
stationary,  the  service  braking  control  device  shall  be 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


fully  actuated  four  times.  During  the  fifth  application, 
the  pressure  in  the  operating  circuit  shall  be  sufficient 
to  provide  a  total  braking  force  at  the  periphery  of  the 
wheels  equal  to  not  less  than  22.5  percent  of  the 
maximum  stationary  wheel  load  and  without  causing 
an  automatic  application  of  any  braking  system  not 
being  under  the  control  of  the  anti-lock  system. 

7.2  Utilization  of  Adhesion 

7.2.1  Braking  systems  equipped  with  an  anti-lock 
system  shall  be  deemed  acceptable  when  the  condition 
€  >  0.75  is  satisfied,  where  e  represents  the  adhesion 
utilized,  as  defined  in  C-2.  This  condition  shall  be 
verified  with  the  vehicle  unladen,  on  a  straight  and  level 
road  with  a  surface  having  a  good  coefficient  of 
adhesion. 

NOTES 

1  If  the  coefficient  of  adhesion  of  the  track  is  too  high, 
preventing  the  anti-lock  system  from  cycling  then  the  test  may 
be  carried  out  on  a  surface  with  a  lower  coefficient  of  adhesion. 

2  In  case  of  trailers  fitted  with  load  sensing  device  the  pressure 
setting  may  be  increased  to  ensure  full  cycling. 

7.2.2  To  eliminate  the  effects  of  differential  brake 
temperatures,  it  is  recommended  to  determine  zRAL 
prior  to  the  determination  of  kR. 

7.3  Additional  Checks 

7.3.1  At  speeds  exceeding  1 5  km/h,  the  wheels  directly 
controlled  by  an  anti-lock  system  shall  not  lock  when 
the  full  force  is  suddenly  applied  on  the  control  device 
of  the  drawing  vehicle.  This  shall  be  checked,  under 


the  conditions  prescribed  in  7.2,  at  initial  speeds  of 
40  km/h  and  80  km/h  or  80  percent  of  the  maximum 
speed  of  the  vehicle,  whichever  is  lower. 

NOTE  —  'Full  force'  means  the  maximum  force  laid  down  in 
IS  1 1852  (Part  3)  for  the  category  of  vehicles;  a  higher  force 
may  be  used  if  required  to  activate  the  anti-lock  system. 

7.3.2  The  provisions  of  this  para  shall  only  apply  to 
trailers  equipped  with  an  anti-lock  system  of  Category 
A.  When  the  right  and  left  wheels  are  situated  on 
surfaces  which  produce  differing  maximum  braking 
rates  (zralh  and  Zrall), 

where 

*ralh/€h£0.5    and   Zralh/zrall^2 

the  directly  controlled  wheels  shall  not  lock  when  the 
full  force  is  suddenly  applied  on  the  control  device  of 
the  drawing  vehicle  at  a  speed  of  50  km/h  or  0.8  times 
the  maximum  speed  of  the  coupled  motor  vehicle 
whichever  is  lower.  The  ratio  zRALH  /  2RALL  may  be 
ascertained  by  the  procedure  in  C-2  or  by  calculating 
the  ratio  Zralh  /  Zrall-  Under  this  condition  the  unladen 
vehicle  shall  satisfy  the  prescribed  braking  rate  in 
Annex  D. 

NOTE  —  In  case  of  trailers  fitted  with  load  sensing  device  the 
pressure  setting  may  be  increased  to  ensure  full  cycling. 

7.3.3  At  vehicle  speeds  £  15  km/h  the  directly 
controlled  wheels  are  permitted  to  lock  for  brief  periods, 
but  at  speeds  <  15  km/h  any  locking  is  permissible. 
Indirectly  controlled  wheels  are  permitted  to  lock  at 
any  speed  but  in  all  cases  stability  shall  not  be  affected. 


ANNEX  A 

(Clauses  1.1, 4.1.3,  5.3,  5.6.1  and  63  J) 

DISTRIBUTION  OF  BRAKING  EFFORT  AMONG  VEHICLE  AXLES 


A-l  GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 

This  Annex  is  applicable  to  motor  vehicles  equipped 
with  ABS  and  authorized  to  draw  trailers  of  Category 
T3  and  T4  and  trailers  of  Category  T3  and  T4  equipped 
with  compressed  air  braking  system  in  laden  condition. 
However,  vehicles  —  other  than  those  of  Category 
M 1  — which  are  equipped  with  an  anti-lock  system  as 
defined  in  this  standard,  shall  also  meet  the  requirements 
of  A-7  and  A-8  if  they  are  in  addition  fitted  with  a 
special  automatic  device  which  controls  the  distribution 
of  braking  among  the  axles.  In  the  event  of  failure  of 
its  control,  it  shall  be  possible  to  stop  the  vehicle  as 
stipulated  under  A-6. 

A-2  SYMBOLS 

/  =  axle  index  ( /  =  1 ,  front  axle;  i  -  2,  second  axle; 
etc) 


Px  =  normal  reaction  of  road  surface  on  axle  i  under 
static  conditions 

Nt  =  normal  reaction  of  road  surface  on  axle  /  under 
braking 

T,  =  force  exerted  by  the  brakes  on  axle  i  under 
normal  braking  conditions  on  the  road 

/i  =  TJN%  adhesion  used  by  axle  i 

NOTE  —  Adhesion  curves  used  by  each  axle  means  curves 
showing  the  adhesion  used  by  axle  i  plotted  against  the  vehicle 
braking  rate  under  specified  load  conditions. 

y*  deceleration  of  vehicle 

g  =  acceleration  due  to  gravity  g  =  9.81  m/s2 

z  =  braking  rate  of  vehicle  =  J/g 

NOTE  —  For  semi-trailers,  r  is  the  braking  force  divided  by 
the  static  mass  on  the  semi-trailer  axle(s). 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


P  =  mass  of  vehicle 

h  =  height  above  ground  of  centre  of  gravity 
specified  by  the  manufacturer  and  agreed  by 
the  test  agency  conducting  the  approval  test 

£=  wheelbase 

k  =  theoretical  coefficient  of  adhesion  between 
tyre  and  road 

kc  =  correction  factor — semi-trailer  laden 

ky,  =  correction  factor — semi-trailer  unladen 

7V,  =  sum  of  braking  forces  at  the  periphery  of 
wheels  of  drawing  vehicles  for  trailers  or  semi- 
trailers 

PM  =  total  normal  static  reaction  between  road 
surface  and  wheels  of  drawing  vehicles  for 
trailers  or  semi-trailers  as  referred  to  in  A-3.1 .4 
and  A-3.1. 5  respectively 

Pm  =  pressure  at  coupling  head  of  control  line 

TR  =  sum  of  braking  forces  at  periphery  of  all 
wheels  of  trailer  or  semi-trailer 

PR  -  total  normal  static  reaction  of  road  surface  on 
wheels  of  trailer  or  semi-trailer 

^Rmax  -  value  of  PR  at  maximum  mass  of  semi-trailer 
ER  =  distance  between  king-pin  and  centre  of  axle 
or  axles  of  semi-trailer 

hR  =  height  above  ground  of  centre  of  gravity  of 
semi-trailer  specified  by  the  manufacturer  and 
agreed  by  the  test  agency  conducting  the 
approval  test. 

A-3  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  MOTOR  VEHICLES 

A-3.1  Two-Axle  Vehicles 

A-3. 1.1  For  All  Categories  of  Vehicles  for  k  Values 
Between  0.2  and  0.8 

z>0.\  +  0.85  (*- 0.2) 

For  all  states  of  load  of  the  vehicle,  the  adhesion  curve 
of  the  front  axle  shall  be  situated  above  that  of  the  rear 
axle: 

For  all  braking  rates  of  between  0.15  and  0.30  in  the 
case  of  all  categories  other  than  M 1  and  N 1 . 

NOTE  —  The  provisions  of  A-3.1. 1  do  not  affect  the 
requirements  of  IS  1 1852  (Part  3)  relating  to  the  braking 
efficiency.  However,  if,  when  verifying  the  provisions  of 
A-3. 1.1  braking  efficiencies  are  obtained  which  are  higher  than 
those  prescribed  in  IS  1 18S2  (Part  3),  the  provisions  relating  to 
the  adhesion  utilization  curve  shall  be  applied  within  the  area 
of  Fig.  1  defined  by  the  straight  lines  k  =  0.8  and  z  »  0.8. 

This  condition  is  also  considered  satisfied  if,  for  braking 
rates  between  0. 1 5  and  0.30  the  adhesion  utilization 
curves  for  each  axle  are  situated  between  two  parallels 
to  the  line  of  ideal  adhesion  utilization  given  by  the 
equations  k  =  z  +  0.08  and  k  =  z  -  0.08  as  shown  in 
Fig.  1,  and  the  adhesion  utilization  curve  for  the  rear 
axle,  for  braking  rates  z  £  0.3  complies  with  the  relation: 

z2>0.3+  0.74  (A- 0.38). 


A-3. 1.2  In  the  Case  of  a  Motor  Vehicle  Authorized  to 
Draw  Trailers  of  Category  T3  or  T4  Fitted  with 
Compressed-Air  Braking  Systems 

A-3. 1 .2. 1  When  tested  with  the  energy  source  stopped, 
the  supply  line  blocked  off  and  a  reservoir  of  0.5  litre 
capacity  connected  to  the  control  line,  and  the  system 
at  cut-in  and  cut-out  pressures,  the  pressure  at  full 
application  of  the  service  braking  system  control  shall 
be  between  6.5  and  8.5  bar  at  the  coupling  heads  of  the 
supply  line  and  the  control  line,  irrespective  of  the  load 
condition  of  the  vehicle.  These  pressures  shall  be 
demonstrably  present  in  the  drawing  vehicle  when 
uncoupled  from  the  trailer.  The  compatibility  bands  in 
Fig  2,  3  and  4  shall  not  be  extended  beyond  7.5  bar. 

A-3. 1.2.2  It  shall  be  ensured  that  at  the  coupling  head 
of  the  supply  line  a  pressure  of  at  least  7  bar  is  available 
when  the  system  is  at  cut-in  pressure;  this  pressure  shall 
be  demonstrated  without  applying  the  service  braking 
system. 

A-3. 1.3  Verification  of  the  Requirements  of  A-3.  LI 

In  order  to  verify  the  requirements  the  manufacturer 
shall  provide  the  adhesion  utilization  curves  for  the  front 
and  rear  axles  calculated  by  the  following  formulae: 

/=  Tl/Nl  =  Tl/[P]+z(h/E)P]; 
fi  =  T2/N2=T2/[P2-z(h/E)P]; 

The  graphs  shall  be  plotted  in  laden  condition  of  the 
vehicle.  Where  provision  is  made  for  several 
possibilities  of  load  distribution,  the  one  whereby  the 
front  axle  is  the  most  heavily  laden  shall  be  the  one  to 
be  taken  into  consideration. 

A-3. 1.4  Drawing  Vehicles  Other  Than  Tractive  Units 
for  Semi-trailers 

A-3. 1.4.1  In  the  case  of  a  motor  vehicle  authorized  to 
draw  trailers  of  Category  T3  or  T4  fitted  with 
compressed-air  braking  systems,  the  permissible 
relationship  between  the  braking  rate  TM  /  PM  and  the 
pressure  Pm  shall  be  within  the  areas  shown  in  Fig.  2. 

A-3. 1.5  Tractive  Units  for  Semi-trailers 

A-3.1.S.1  Tractive  units  with  unladen  semi-trailer 

An  unladen  articulated  combination  is  considered  to 
be  a  tractive  unit  in  running  order,  with  the  driver  on 
board,  coupled  to  an  unladen  semi-trailer.  The  dynamic 
load  of  the  semi-trailer  on  the  tractive  unit  shall  be 
represented  by  a  static  mass,  mounted  at  the  location 
of  the  king  pin  of  the  fifth  wheel  coupling,  equal  to  1 5 
percent  of  the  maximum  mass  on  the  coupling.  The 
braking  forces  shall  continue  to  be  regulated  between 
the  state  of  the  tractive  unit  with  semi-trailer  (unladen) 
and  that  of  the  tractive  unit  alone  (without  semi-trailer); 
the  braking  forces  relating  to  the  tractive  unit  alone  shall 
be  verified. 


IS  11852  (Part  9)  :  2003 

k(fi) 


t 


0.8 


0-7- 


0.6- 


0-5- 


04 


0.3- 


0.2- 


0.1- 


z-002 


z  ♦0-07 


k  =  z»008 


0-0 


0.1   °'15   0.2  0-3 


NOTE  —  The  lower  limit  of  the  corridor  is  not  applicable  for  the  adhesion  utilization  of  the  rear  axle. 
Fig.  1   Motor  Vehicles  (Other  Than  Those  of  Category  Ml  and  N  and  Full  Trailers) 


A-3. 1.5.2  Tractive  units  with  laden  semi-trailer 

A  laden  articulated  combination  shall  be  considered  to 
be  a  tractive  unit  in  running  order  with  the  driver  on 
board  coupled  to  a  laden  semi-trailer.  The  dynamic  load 
of  the  semi-trailer  on  the  tractive  unit  shall  be 
represented  by  a  static  mass  P„  mounted  at  the  location 
of  the  king  pin  of  the  fifth  wheel  coupling,  equal  to: 

/>,«/>■.(  1+0.45*) 

where  Pso  represents  the  difference  between  the 
maximum  laden  mass  of  the  tractive  unit  and  its  unladen 
mass. 

For  h  the  following  value  shall  be  taken: 
h  =  {h0P0  +  hsP%)IP 


where 

h0  =  height  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  tractive  unit, 

h%  =  height  of  the  coupling  on  which  the  semi-trailer 

rests, 
P0  =  unladen  mass  of  the  solo  tractive  unit. 

A-3.1.5.3  In  the  case  of  a  vehicle  fitted  with  a 
compressed-air  braking  system,  the  permissible 
relationship  between  the  braking  rate  7V,  /  PM  and  the 
pressure  Pm  shall  be  within  the  areas  shown  in  Fig.  3. 

A-3.2  Vehicles  with  More  than  Two  Axles 

The  requirements  of  A-3. 1  shall  apply  to  vehicles  with 
more  than  two  axles.  The  requirements  of  A-3. 1.1  with 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


respect  to  wheel-lock  sequence  shall  be  considered  to 
be  met,  if  in  the  case  of  braking  rates  of  between  0.15 
and  0.30,  the  adhesion  used  by  at  least  one  of  the  front 
axles  shall  be  greater  than  that  used  by  at  least  one  of 
the  rear  axles. 

A-4  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  SEMI-TRAILERS 

A-4. 1  For  Semi-trailers  Fitted  with  Compressed-Air 
Braking  Systems 

The  permissible  relationship  between  the  braking  rate 
7R  /  PR  and  the  pressure  Pm  shall  lie  within  two  areas 
derived  from  Figs.  4  and  5  for  the  laden  and  unladen 
states  of  load.  This  requirement  shall  be  met  for  all 
permissible  load  conditions  of  the  semi-trailer  axles. 

A-5  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  FULL  AND 
CENTRE-AXLE  TRAILERS 

A-5.1  For  Full  Trailers  Fitted  with  Com  pressed- Air 
Braking  Systems 

A-5.1. 1  The  requirements  set  out  in  A-3.1  shall  apply 
to  twin  axle  trailers  (except  where  the  axle  spread  is 
less  than  2  m). 

A-5.1.2  Full  trailers  with  more  than  two  axles  shall  be 
subject  to  the  requirements  contained  in  A-3.2. 

A-5.1. 3  The  permissible  relationship  between  the 
braking  rate  TR  /  PR  and  the  pressure  Pm,  shall  lie  within 
the  designated  areas  in  Fig.  2  for  the  laden  and  unladen 
states  of  load. 

A-5.2  For  Centre-Axle  Trailers  Fitted  with 
Compressed-Air  Braking  Systems 

A-5.2. 1  The  permissible  relationship  between  the 
braking  rate  7V  /  PR  and  the  pressure  Pm  shall  lie  within 
two  areas  derived  from  Fig.  2,  by  multiplying  the 
vertical  scale  by  0.95,  for  the  laden  and  unladen  states 
of  load. 

A-6  CONDITIONS  TO  BE  FULFILLED  IN  THE 
CASE  OF  FAILURE  OF  THE  BRAKING 
DISTRIBUTION  SYSTEM 

When  the  requirements  of  this  Annex  are  fulfilled  by 
means  of  a  special  device  (for  example,  controlled 
mechanically  by  the  suspension  of  the  vehicle),  it  shall 
be  possible,  in  the  event  of  the  failure  of  this  device  or 
its  means  of  control,  to  stop  the  vehicle  under  the 
conditions  specified  for  secondary  braking  in  the  case 
of  motor  vehicles;  for  those  vehicles  authorized  to  draw 
a  trailer  fitted  with  air  brakes,  it  shall  be  possible  to 
achieve  a  pressure  at  the  coupling  head  of  the 
control  line  within  the  range  specified  in  A-3.1.2.  In 
the  event  of  failure  of  the  means  of  controlling  the 
device  in  trailers  and  semi-trailers,  a  braking  rate  of  at 
least  30  percent  of  the  service  braking  system 


performance  prescribed  for  the  vehicle  in  question 
shall  be  attained. 

A-7  MARKINGS 

A-7.1  Vehicles  which  meet  the  requirements  of  this 
Annex,  by  means  of  a  device  mechanically  controlled 
by  the  suspension  of  the  vehicle,  shall  be  marked  to 
show  the  useful  travel  of  the  device  between  the 
positions  corresponding  to  vehicle  unladen  and  laden 
states  respectively  and  any  further  information  to  enable 
the  setting  of  the  device  to  be  checked. 

A-7.L1  When  a  load  sensing  device  is  controlled  via 
the  suspension  of  the  vehicle  by  any  other  means,  the 
vehicle  shall  be  marked  with  information  to  enable  the 
setting  of  the  device  to  be  checked. 

A-7.2  When  the  requirements  of  this  Annex  are  met 
by  means  of  a  device  which  modulates  the  air  pressure 
in  the  brake  transmission,  the  vehicle  shall  be  marked 
to  show  the  axle  loads  at  the  ground,  the  nominal  outlet 
pressures  of  the  device  and  an  inlet  pressure  of  not  less 
than  80  percent  of  the  maximum  design  inlet  pressure, 
as  declared  by  the  vehicle  manufacturer,  for  the 
following  states  of  load. 

A-7.2.1  Technically  permissible  maximum  axle  load 
for  the  axle(s)  which  control(s)  the  device. 

A-7.2.2  Axle  load(s)  corresponding  to  the  mass  of  the 
vehicle  in  running  order  as  defined  in  IS  92 1 1 . 

A-7.2.3  The  axle  load(s)  approximating  to  the  vehicle 
with  proposed  bodywork  in  running  order  where  the 
axle  load(s)  mentioned  in  A-7.2.2  relate(s)  to  the  vehicle 
chassis  with  cab. 

A-7.2.4  The  axle  load(s)  designated  by  the  manufacturer 
to  enable  the  setting  of  the  device  to  be  checked  in 
service  if  this  is  (these  are)  different  from  the  loads 
specified  in  A-7.2.1  to  A-7.2.3. 

A-7.3  The  markings  referred  to  under  A-7. 1  and  A-7.2 
shall  be  affixed  in  a  visible  position  in  indelible  form. 
An  example  of  the  markings  for  a  mechanically 
controlled  device  in  a  vehicle  fitted  with  compressed 
air  braking  is  shown  in  Fig.  6. 

A-8  PRESSURE  TEST  CONNECTIONS 

A-8.1  Braking  systems  incorporating  the  devices 
referred  to  in  A-7.2  shall  be  fitted  with  pressure  test 
connections  in  the  pressure  line  upstream  and 
downstream  of  the  device,  at  the  closest  readily 
accessible  positions.  The  downstream  connection  shall 
not  be  required  if  the  pressure  at  that  point  can  be 
checked  at  the  connection  required  by  6.1  of 
IS  11 852  (Part  4). 

A-8.2  The  pressure  test  connections  shall  comply 
with  2  of  IS  1 1852  (Part  5). 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


Jr  Jm 


NOTFS 

1  It  is  understood  that,  between  the  values 

TM/PM  =  0 and  rM/PM  =  0.\ 

or 
rH//>K  =  0andrR/PKs:s0.1 

It  is  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  proportionality  between  the  braking  rate 

TM/PM  or  T*fP» 
and  the  control  line  pressure  as  measured  at  the  coupling  head. 

2  The  relationship  required  by  the  figure  apply  progressively  for  intermediate  state  of  loading/between  the  laden  and  the  unladen  states 
and  shall  be  achieved  by  automatic  means. 

Fig.  2  Towing  Vehicles  and  Trailers 


10 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


0-2    1 


NOTES 

1  It  is  understood  that,  between  the  values 

rM//'M-0and  7m//>m  =  0.1 
It  is  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  proportionality  between  the  braking  rate 

TM/PM 
and  the  control  line  pressure  as  measured  at  the  coupling  head. 

2  The  relationship  required  by  the  figure  apply  progressively  for  intermediate  state  of  loading  between  the  laden  and  the  unladen  states 
and  shall  be  achieved  by  automatic  means. 

Fig.  3  Tractive  Units  for  Semi-trailers 


11 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


NOTE  —  It  is  understood  that,  between  the  values 

7,R//>k  =  0andrH//>R-0.1 
It  is  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  proportionality  between  the  braking  rate 

And  the  control  line  pressure  for  the  laden  and  unladen  conditions  is  determined  as  follows: 

The  factors  Ac  (laden)  and  k*  (unladen)  arc  obtained  by  reference  to  Fig.  5.  Construct  the  laden  and  unladen  bands  by  applying  the  upper 

and  lower  boundaries  of  the  band  in  Fig.  4  by  two  factors  obtained,  k,  and  K  respectively. 

Fig.  4  Semi-trailers 


12 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


0.2    0.4    0.6    O.t    1.0* 


1.0      1.2      1-4     1.0 


&0m 


Kj-Ut 


K2-0.13 


NOTES 

1        Formula  from  which  Fig.  5  is  derived  is: 


*  = 


1.7- 


0.7  ^ 


1.35- 


0.96 


1.0  + (/hi- 1.2) 


g«P 
Ph 


1.0  - 


/>R-1.0 


2.5 


2       Description  of  the  method  of  use  by  means  of  a  worked  example: 

a)      The  dashed   lines  shown  on  Fig.   5  refer  to  the  determination  of  the  factors  *c  and  *v  for  the   following 


vehicle  where: 


P 
Ph 
P*. 
hH 


Laden 
24  t 
15  t 
15  t 
1.8  m 
6.0  m 


Unladen 

4.2  t 

3     t 
15     t 

1.4  m 

6.0  m 


In  the  following  items  the  figures  in  parenthesis  relate  only  to  the  vehicle  being  used  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the  method  of 
use  of  Fig.  5. 


b) 

Calculate  the  ratios. 

1) 

'     P     * 

laden 

(=16) 

Ph 

2) 

'      P     * 

unladen 

(=1.4) 

Ph 

3) 

r  p  i 

unladen 

(=  0.2) 

P*m* 

Fig.  5  Braking  Rate  for  Semi-trailor  Axles  -Contd. 
13 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 

c)  Determination  of  the  laden  factor  k< 

1 )  Start  at  appropriate  hn  (hR  «  1 .8  m) 

2)  Move  horizontally  to  the  appropriate  gP/PK  line  {gPIPR  «  1 .6) 

3)  Move  vertically  to  appropriate  EH  line  (£R  =  6.0  m) 

4)  Move  horizontally  to  kK  scale,  kc  is  the  laden  factor  required  (k*  -1 .04) 

d)  Determination  of  the  unladen  factor  *v: 

1 )  Determination  of  the  factor  k2 

i)     Start  at  appropriate  hH  (hH  »  1 .4  m). 

ii)    Move  horizontally  to  appropriate  P,JPk  llwx  line  in  group  of  curves  nearest  to  vertical  axis  (PR I PR  ^  *  0.2). 

iii)  Move  vertically  to  horizontal  axis  and  read  off  the  value  of  k2  (k2  *  0. 13  m). 

2)  Determination  of  factor  A, : 

i)     Start  at  appropriate  h*  {hR  «  1 .4  m). 

ii)    Move  horizontally  to  the  appropriate  gP/P*  line  (gP/P*  ~  1 .4). 

iii)  Move  vertically  to  the  appropriate  £R  line  (£R  •  6.0  m). 

iv)  Move  horizontally  to  the  appropriate  PRIPRmmx  line  in  group  of  curves  furthest  from  the  vertical  axis 
(P*JP*^  =  02). 

v)    Move  vertically  to  horizontal  axis  and  read  off  the  value  of  kx  (kx  »  1 .79). 

3 )  Determination  of  factor  £v 

i)     The  unladen  factor  ks  is  obtained  from  the  following  expression: 
*v~*.-*2  (*v-166). 

Fig.  5  Braking  Rate  for  Semi-trailor  Axles 


Control  Data 

Vehicle 
Loading 

Axle  No.  2 

Load  at  the 

Ground  (daN) 

Inlet 

Pressure 

(bar) 

Nominal 

Outlet  Pressure 

(bar) 

Laden 

Laden 

10  000 

6 

6 

/i 

<Y 

F 

/% 

\[ 

> 

F=100mm                    Unladen 
L  =  150  mm 

Unladen 

1500 

6 

2.4 

Fig.  6  Brake  Load  Sensing  Device 


14 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


Symbol 
E 


F 


F[>RAL 

Fcn4 


Ftyn 
*  idyn 

FM 
FMnii  ) 


ANNEX  B 

(Clause  3) 

SYMBOLS  AND  DEFINITIONS 


Definitions 


Wheelbase 


Distance  between  king-pin  and  centre  of  axle 
or  axles  of  semi-trailer  (or  distance  between 
drawbar  coupling  and  centre  of  axle  or  axles 
of  centre-axle  trailer) 

Adhesion  utilized  of  the  vehicle:  quotient  of 
the  maximum  braking  rate  with  the  anti-lock 
system  operative  (zAL)  and  the  coefficient  of 
adhesion  (k) 

e-value  measured  on  axle  i  (in  the  case  of  a 
power-driven  vehicle  with  a  Category  3  anti- 
lock  system) 

e-value  on  the  high-adhesion  surface 

e-value  on  the  low-adhesion  surface 

Force  (N) 

Braking  force  of  the  trailer  with  the  anti-lock 
system  inoperative 

Maximum  value  of  FbR 

Value  of  FbRmM  with  only  axle  /  of  the  trailer 
braked 

Braking  force  of  the  trailer  with  the  anti-lock 
system  operative 

Total  normal  reaction  of  road  surface  on  the 
unbraked  and  non-driven  axles  of  the  vehicle 
combination  under  static  conditions 

Total  normal  reaction  of  road  surface  on  the 
unbraked  and  driven  axles  of  the  vehicle 
combination  under  static  conditions 

Normal  reaction  of  road  surface  under 
dynamic  conditions  with  the  anti-lock  system 
operative 

F^  on  axle  /'  in  case  of  power-driven  vehicles 
or  full  trailers 

Normal  reaction  of  road  surface  on  axle  / 
under  static  conditions 

Total  normal  static  reaction  of  road  surface 
on  all  wheels  of  power-driven  (drawing) 
vehicle 

Total  normal  static  reaction  of  road  surface 
on  the  unbraked  and  non-driven  axles  of  the 
power-driven  vehicle 


Symbol 

FMd'> 


Kdyn 


g 


h0 
hK 

k 

kc 
*v 
*r 
*■« 

k, 

*lock 
Kpeak 

K 

K 
p 


») 


Definitions 


Total  normal  static  reaction  of  road  surface 
on  the  unbraked  and  driven  axles  of  the 
power-driven  vehicle 

Total  normal  static  reaction  of  road  surface 
on  all  wheels  of  trailer 

Total  normal  dynamic  reaction  of  road 
surface  on  the  axle(s)  of  semi-trailer  or 
centre-axle  trailer 

0.01  FMnd  +  0.015  FMd 

Acceleration  due  to  gravity  (9.81  m/s2 ) 

Height  of  centre  of  gravity  specified  by  the 
manufacturer  and  agreed  by  the  test  agency 
conducting  the  approval  test 

Height  of  drawbar  (hinge  point  on  trailer) 

Height  of  Fifth  wheel  coupling  (king-pin) 

Height  of  centre  of  gravity  of  the  trailer 

Coefficient  of  adhesion  between  tyre  and 
road 

Correction  factor-semi-trailer  laden 

Correction  factor-semi-trailcr  unladen 

k- factor  of  one  front  axle 

lvalue  determined  on  the  high-adhesion 
surface 

lvalue  determined  on  axle  /  for  a  vehicle 
with  a  Category  3  anti-lock  system 

A-value  determined  on  the  low-adhesion 
surface 

value  of  adhesion  for  100  percent  slip 

A-factor  of  the  power-driven  vehicle 

maximum  value  of  the  curve  adhesion 
versus  slip 

k- factor  of  one  rear  axle 

^-factor  of  the  trailer 

mass  of  individual  vehicle  (kg) 

Total  normal  static  reaction  of  road  surface 
on  wheels  of  trailer  or  semi-trailer 

Value  of  PK  at  maximum  mass  of  semi- 
trailer 


0  /•Viuuand  ^Md  in  case  of  two-axled  power-driven  vehicles:  these  symbols  may  be  simplified  to  corresponding  Fl-symbots. 


15 


IS  11852 (Part  9): 2003 


Symbol 

Definitions 

Symbol 

R 

ratio  of  ^^  to  ^Jock 

*MALS 

t 

time  interval  (s) 

tm 

mean  value  of  t 

Zr 

•mm 

minimum  value  of/ 

ZRAL 

Z 

braking  rate 

*AL 

braking  rate  z  of  the  vehicle  with  the  anti- 

-Cnuxt 


lock  system  operative 

braking  rate  z  of  the  vehicle  combination, 
with  the  trailer  only  braked  and  the  anti-lock 
system  inoperative 

braking  rate  z  of  the  vehicle  combination, 
with  the  trailer  only  braked  and  the  anti-lock 
system  operative 

maximum  value  of  zc 

maximum  value  of  zc  with  only  axle  /  of  the 
trailer  braked 

mean  braking  rate 

maximum  value  of  z 


Zralh 

Zrall 

Zrals 
*rh 

*rl 

^RHmu 
ZRLmax 
ZRitux 


Definitions 

ZAl  of  the  power-driven  vehicle  on  a  split 
surface 

braking  rate  z  of  the  trailer  with  the  anti-lock 
system  inoperative 

Zal  of  the  trailer  obtained  by  braking  all  the 
axles,  the  drawing  vehicle  unbraked  and  its 
engine  disengaged 

zRAL  on  the  surface  with  the  high  coefficient 
of  adhesion 

zRAL  on  the  surface  with  the  low  coefficient 
of  adhesion 

*ral  on  the  split-surface 

zR  on  the  surface  with  the  high  coefficient  of 
adhesion 

zR  on  the  surface  with  the  low  coefficient  of 
adhesion 

maximum  value  of  zM 

maximum  value  of  zm. 

maximum  value  of  zR 


16 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


ANNEX  C 

(Clauses  6. 1.2. 1,6.2.1, 6.2.3  and  7.2.1) 

UTILIZATION  OF  ADHESION 


C-l  METHOD  OF  MEASUREMENT  FOR 
POWER-DRIVEN  VEHICLES 

C-l. I  Determination  of  the  Coefficient  of  Adhesion 
(*) 

C-l. 1.1  The  coefficient  of  adhesion  (k)  shall  be 
determined  as  the  quotient  of  the  maximum  braking 
forces  without  locking  the  wheels  and  the  corresponding 
dynamic  load  on  the  axle  being  braked. 

C-l.  1.2  The  brakes  shall  be  applied  on  only  one  axle 
of  the  vehicle  under  test,  at  an  initial  speed  of  50  km/h. 
The  braking  forces  shall  be  distributed  between  the 
wheels  of  the  axle  to  reach  maximum  performance.  The 
anti-lock  system  shall  be  disconnected,  or  inoperative, 
between  40  km/h  and  20  km/h. 

C-l. 1.3  A  number  of  tests  at  increments  of  line  pressure 
shall  be  carried  out  to  determine  the  maximum  braking 
rate  of  the  vehicle  ( zmax ).  During  each  test,  a  constant 
input  force  shall  be  maintained  and  the  braking  rate 
will  be  determined  by  reference  to  the  time  taken  ( / ) 
for  the  speed  to  reduce  from  40  km/h  to  20  km/h  using 
the  formula: 

z        =    0.566//; 

zmaK    =    maximum  value  of  z; 

/        =    in  seconds. 

C-l. 1.3.1  Wheel  lock  may  occur  below  20  km/h. 

C-l.  1.3.2  Starting  from  the  minimum  measured  value 
of/,  called  /min,  then  select  three  values  of/  comprised 
within  /mm  and  1 .05  /min  and  calculate  their  arithmetical 
mean  value  /„„  then  calculate  zm  =  0.566//m. 

If  it  is  demonstrated  that  for  practical  reasons  the  three 
values  defined  above  cannot  be  obtained,  then  the 
minimum  time  /min  may  be  utilized.  However,  the 
requirements  of  C-l. 3  shall  still  apply. 

C-l.  1.4  The  braking  forces  shall  be  calculated  from 
the  measured  braking  rate  and  the  rolling  resistance  of 
the  unbraked  axle(s)  which  is  equal  to  0.0 1 5  and  0.0 1 0 
of  the  static  axle  load  for  a  driven  axle  and  a  non-driven 
axle,  respectively. 

C- 1 . 1 .5  The  dynamic  load  on  the  axle  shall  be  that  given 
by  the  formulae  in  Annex  A. 

C-l. 1.6  The  value  of*  shall  be  rounded  off  to  three 
decimal  places. 

C-l.  1.7  Then,  the  test  will  be  repeated  for  the  other 
axle(s)  as  defined  in  C-l. 1.1.  to  C-l.  1.6  (for exemptions 
j«fC-1.4andC-1.5). 


C-l. 1.8  For  example,  in  the  case  of  a  two-axle  rear- 
wheel  drive  vehicle,  with  the  front  axle  ( 1 )  being  braked, 
the  coefficient  of  adhesion  (k)  is  given  by: 

k(-[gPzm-0.0\5F2)/[F^(kzm.P.g)/E] 

C-l.  1.9  One  coefficient  will  be  determined  for  the  front 
axle  kf  and  one  for  the  rear  axle  kr. 

C-l. 2  Determination  of  the  Adhesion  Utilized  (e) 

C-l.2.1  The  adhesion  utilized  (€)  is  defined  as  the 
quotient  of  the  maximum  braking  rate  with  the  anti- 
lock  system  operative  (zAL)  and  the  coefficient  of 
adhesion  (£M),  that  is, 

e  =  zAL/kM 

C-l. 2.2  From  an  initial  vehicle  speed  of  55  km/h,  the 
maximum  braking  rate  (  zAL  )  shall  be  measured  with 
full  cycling  of  the  anti-lock  braking  system  and  based 
on  the  average  value  of  three  tests,  as  in  C-l. 1.3,  using 
the  time  taken  for  the  speed  to  reduce  from  45  km/h  to 
15  km/h,  according  to  the  following  formula: 

zAL  =  0.849  ltm 

C-l. 2. 3  The  coefficient  of  adhesion  kM  shall  be 
determined  by  weighing  with  the  dynamic  axle  loads. 

*M  =  (*f .Ffdyn+  *,.Frdyn)  /Pg 

where 

^n  -    Fr+{h/E).zAL.P.g 

Ffdyn  -    Ft-(h/E).zAL.P.g 

C-l.2.4  The  value  of  g  shall  be  rounded  off  to  two 
decimal  places. 

C-l.2.5  In  the  case  of  a  vehicle  equipped  with  an  anti- 
lock  system  of  Categories  1  or  2,  the  value  of  zAL  will 
be  based  on  the  whole  vehicle,  with  the  anti-lock  system 
operative,  and  the  adhesion  utilized  (e)  is  given  by  the 
same  formula  quoted  in  C-l.2.1. 

C-l. 2.6  In  the  case  of  a  vehicle  equipped  with  an  anti- 
lock  system  of  Category  3,  the  value  of  zAl  will  be 
measured  on  each  axle  which  has  at  least  one  directly 
controlled  wheel.  For  example,  for  a  rear  wheel  drive 
two-axle  vehicle  with  an  anti-lock  system  acting  only 
on  the  rear  axle,  the  adhesion  utilized  (e)  is  given  by: 

e2  -  [  W.g-O.OIO.F,  ]  /  k2  [  F2  -  (h/E).zAlJ\g ) 

This  calculation  shall  be  made  for  each  axle  having  at 
least  one  directly  controlled  wheel. 

C-1.3  If  e  >  1.00  the  measurements  of  coefficients  of 


17 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 


adhesion  shall  be  repeated.  A  tolerance  of  10  percent  is 
accepted. 

C-1.4  For  motor  vehicles  equipped  with  three  axles, 
only  the  axle  not  associated  with  a  close-coupled  bogie 
will  be  used  to  establish  a  k  value  for  the  vehicle. 

NOTE  —  Until  a  uniform  test  procedure  is  agreed,  vehicles 
more  than  three  axles  and  special  vehicles  will  be  subjected  to 
consultation  with  the  test  agency. 

C-1.5  For  vehicles  of  Categories  N2  and  N3  with  a 
wheelbase  less  than  3.80  m  and  with  hIE  >  0.25  the 
determination  of  the  coefficient  of  adhesion  for  the  rear 
axle  will  be  omitted. 

C- 1.5.1  In  that  case  the  adhesion  utilized  (e)  is  defined 
as  the  quotient  of  the  maximum  braking  rate  with  the 
anti-lock  system  operative  (zAL)  and  the  coefficient  of 
adhesion  (  kr ),  that  is 

e  =    zAL/kr 

C-2  METHOD  OF  MEASUREMENT  FOR 
TRAILERS 

C-2.1  General 

C-2. 1.1  The  coefficient  of  adhesion  (k)  shall  be 
determined  as  the  quotient  of  the  maximum  braking 
forces  without  locking  the  wheels  and  the  corresponding 
dynamic  load  on  the  axle  being  braked. 

C-2. 1.2  The  brakes  shall  be  applied  on  only  one  axle 
of  the  trailer  under  test,  at  an  initial  speed  of  50  km/h. 
The  braking  forces  shall  be  distributed  between  the 
wheels  of  the  axle  to  reach  maximum  performance.  The 
anti-lock  system  shall  be  disconnected  or  inoperative, 
between  40  km/h  and  20  km/h. 

C-2. 1.3  A  number  of  tests  at  increments  of  line  pressure 
shall  be  carried  out  to  determine  the  maximum  braking 
rate  of  the  vehicle  combination  (r(  max)  with  the  trailer 
only  braked.  During  each  test,  a  constant  input  force 
shall  be  maintained  and  the  braking  rate  will  be 
determined  by  reference  to  the  time  taken  (/)  for  the 
speed  to  reduce  from  40  km/h  to  20  km/h  using  the 
formula: 

zc  =  0.566// 

C-2. 1.3.1  Wheel  lock  may  occur  below  20  km/h. 

C-2. 1.3.2  Starting  from  the  minimum  measured  value 
of/,  called  /min,  then  select  three  values  of  comprised 
within  /min  and  1 .05  /min  and  calculate  their  arithmetical 
mean  value  /m, 


then  calculate    zc  „ 


0.566  /  /m 


If  it  is  demonstrated  that  for  practical  reasons  the  three 
values  defined  above  cannot  be  obtained,  then  the 
minimum  time  /min  may  be  utilized. 

C-2. 1.4  The  adhesion  utilized  (e)  shall  be  calculated 


by  means  of  the  formula: 

The  k  value  has  to  be  determined  according  to  C-2.2.3 
for  full  trailers  or  C-2.3.1  for  semi-trailers  respectively. 

C-2.1 .5  If  €  >  1 .00  the  measurements  of  coefficients  of 
adhesion  shall  be  repeated.  A  tolerance  of  10  percent  is 
accepted. 

C-2. 1.6  The  maximum  braking  rate  (zRAL)  shall  be 
measured  with  the  anti-lock  braking  system  and  the 
drawing  vehicle  unbraked,  based  on  the  average  value 
of  three  tests,  as  in  C-2. 1.3. 

C-2.2  Full  Trailers 

C-2.2.1  The  measurement  of  k  (with  the  anti-lock 
system  being  disconnected,  or  inoperative,  between 
40  km/h  and  20  km/h)  will  be  performed  for  the  front 
and  the  rear  axles. 

For  one  front  axle  /: 

FbRmaxi  =  zCmwi  (  FM  +  FR  )-0.01FCnd -0.015  FCd 

Fidyn  =    ^1  +  [  ZC  max(  ^M  A>+£  P^R  )  ~  FWM.hD  )  I  E 

For  one  rear  axle  /: 

FbR  max  i  =  zc  max  §  (  F M  +  FR  )  -  0.0 1  FCnd  -  0.0 1 5  FCd 
Fldyn      =  Fx  -  [  zc  max  ( FM.hD+g.P.hK )  -  FWM.hD  ]  I E 

kf     =     TbRmaxi  /  ^idyn 

C-2.2.2  The  values  of  kf  and  kx  will  be  rounded  to 
three  decimal  places. 

C-2.2.3  The  coefficient  of  adhesion  kR  shall  be 
determined  proportionally  according  to  the  dynamic 
axle  loads. 

*R  "    [  ^fydn  +  K  .  /\dyn  ]  /  P.g 

C-2.2.4  Measurement  of  zRAL  (with  the  anti-lock  system 
operative) 

*ral  =  [z^(FM  +  FK)-0MFCnd- 0.015  Fcd]/FR 

Zral  is  to  be  determined  on  a  surface  with  a  high 
coefficient  of  adhesion  and,  for  vehicles  with  Category 
A  anti-lock  system,  also  on  a  surface  with  a  low 
coefficient  of  adhesion. 

C-2.3  Semi-trailers  and  Centre-Axle  Trailers 

C-2.3.1  The  measurement  of  k  (with  the  anti-lock 
system  being  disconnected  or  inoperative,  between 
40  km/h  and  20  km/h)  shall  be  carried  out  with  wheels 
fitted  only  on  one  axle,  the  wheels  of  the  other  axle(s) 
are  removed. 

^bR  max  i  "    2C  ,„«  i  (  FM  +  FR)  ~  FWM 


18 


^Rdvn    =     ^R  ~  [  /'bR  ..M»i  •  Afc  +  ^C  •  £  ^(  K  -  hV)\  I  £R 
«l  ~  ^bR  max  i    /  ^Rdyn 

C-2.3.2  The  measurement  of  zRAl  (with  the  anti-lock 
system  operative)  shall  be  carried  out  with  all  wheels 
fitted. 

^bRA:         ~    ^cal  •  (  ^M   f  ^r)  ~  ^WM 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 

^Rdyn        ~     Fr  "  [  ^bRAL  A  +  Zc.  #.P.(  AR  -  Afc  )]  /  ER 


^bRAL    /  ^1 


Rdyn 


zRAL  is  to  be  determined  on  a  surface  with  a  high 
coefficient  of  adhesion  and,  for  vehicles  with  a 
Category  A  anti-lock  system,  also  on  a  surface  with 
a  low  coefficient  of  adhesion. 


ANNEX  D 

(Clauses  6.3.5  and  7.3.2) 

PERFORMANCE  ON  DIFFERING  ADHESION  SURFACES 


D-l  MOTOR  VEHICLES 

D-l.l  The  prescribed  braking  rate  referred  to  in  6.3.5 
may  be  calculated  by  reference  to  the  measured 
coefficient  of  adhesion  of  the  two  surfaces  on  which 
this  test  is  carried  out.  These  two  surfaces  shall  satisfy 
the  conditions  prescribed  in  6.3.4. 

D-l. 2  The  coefficient  of  adhesion  (ku  and  kL)  of  the 
high-  and  low-adhesion  surfaces,  respectively,  shall  be 
determined  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  in  C- 1.1. 

D-1.3  The  braking  rate  (zMALS)  for  laden  power-driven 
vehicles  shall  be: 

Smals  2>  0.75.(4*i ..  +  *„  )/5  and  zMMS  >  kL 


D-2  TRAILERS 

D-2.1  The  braking  rate  referred  to  in  7.3.2  may  be 
calculated  by  reference  to  the  measured  braking  rates 
^rai.h  and  zRAlL  on  the  two  surfaces  on  which  the  tests 
are  carried  out  with  the  anti-lock  system  operative. 
These  two  surfaces  shall  satisfy  the  conditions 
prescribed  in  7.3.2. 

D-2.2  The  braking  rate  z^ls  shall  be: 

^rals  £    0.75  .  (4.  zRALL  +  zRAl.„  )  /  5  .  €„ 

~rals    >    Zraij.  '  en 

Ife„  >  0.95,  use  eH  =  0.95 


19 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 

ANNEX  E 

(Clause  6.1.1.2) 

METHOD  OF  SELECTION  OF  THE  LOW-ADHESION  SURFACES 


E- 1  Details  of  the  coefficient  of  adhesion  of  the  surface 
selected,  as  defined  in  6.1.1.2,  shall  be  given  to  the  test 
agency. 

E-l .  1  These  data  shall  include  a  curve  of  the  coefficient 
of  adhesion  versus  slip  (from  0  to  100  percent  slip)  for 
a  speed  of  approximately  40  km/h. 

NOTE  —  Until  a  uniform  test  procedure  is  established  for  the 
determination  of  adhesion  curve  for  vehicles  with  a  minimum 
mass  exceeding  3.5  t,  the  curve  established  for  passenger  cars 
may  be  used.  In  this  case  for  such  vehicles,  the  ratio  kpnk  and 
kUKV  shall  be  established  using  a  value  of  kkHik  as  defined  in 
Annex  C. 

With  the  consent  of  the  test  agency,  the  coefficient  of  adhesion 
described  in  this  para  may  be  determined  by  another  method 
provided  that  the  equivalence  of  the  values  of  k^*  and  k^k  are 
demonstrated. 

E-l.  1. 1  The  maximum  value  of  the  curve  will  represent 
Apcak  and  the  value  at  100  percent  slip  will  represent 

*lock' 

E-l. 1.2  The  ratio  R  shall  be  determined  as  the  quotient 
oftheA^and*,^ 

R    "    *p«ek  /  *lock 


E-l.  1.3  The  value  of  R  shall  be  rounded  off  to  one 
decimal  place. 

E-l.  1.4  The  surface  to  be  used  shall  have  a  ratio  R 
between  1.0  and  2.0. 

NOTE  —  Until  such  test  surfaces  become  generally  available, 
a  ratio  R  up  to  2.5  is  acceptable,  subject  to  discussion  with  the 
test  agency. 

E-2  Prior  to  the  tests,  the  test  agency  shall  ensure  that 
the  selected  surface  meets  the  specified  requirements 
and  shall  be  informed  of  the  following: 

a)  Test  method  to  determine  /?, 

b)  Type  of  vehicle  (motor  vehicle,  trailer, . . .),  and 

c)  Axle  load  and  tyres  (different  loads  and  different 
tyres  have  to  be  tested  and  the  results  shown  to 
the  test  agency  which  will  decide  if  they  are 
representative  for  the  vehicle  to  be  approved). 

E-2.1  The  value  of  R  shall  be  mentioned  in  the  test 
report. 

E-2.2  The  calibration  of  the  surface  has  to  be  carried 
out  at  least  once  a  year  with  a  representative  vehicle  to 
verify  the  stability  of/?. 


20 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 

ANNEX  F 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

Automotive  Braking  Systems,  Vehicle  Testing  and  Performance  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee,  TED  4 


Organization 
Vehicle  Research  &  Development  Establishment  (VRDE), 
Ahmcdnagar 

Allied  Nippon  Ltd,  Sahibabad 

Ashok  Ley  land  Ltd,  Chennai 

Association  of  State  Road  Transport  Undertakings,  New  Delhi 

Automotive  Research  Association  of  India,  Pune 

Bajaj  Auto  Ltd,  Pune 

Bajaj  Tempo  Ltd,  Pune 

Brakes  India  Ltd,  Chennai 

Central  Farm  Machine  Training  &  Testing  Institute,  Budni 

Central  Institute  of  Road  Transport,  Pune 

Controllerate  of  Quality  Assurance  (OFV),  Jabalpur 

Daewoo  Motors  India  Ltd,  Surajpur 

Eicher  Motors  Ltd,  Pithampur 

Hero  Honda  Motors  Ltd,  Dharuhera 

Hindustan  Composites  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Hindustan  Ferodo  Ltd,  Mumbai 
Hindustan  Motors  Ltd,  Hooghly 

l-IMT  Ltd,  Pinjore 

IND  Auto  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Indian  Institute  of  Petroleum,  Dehra  Dun 

Kalyani  Brakes  Ltd.  Pune 

Kinetic  Engineering  Ltd,  Pune 

Mahindra  &  Mahindra  Ltd,  Nashik 
Maruti  Udyog  Ltd,  Gurgaon 

Ministry  of  Heavy  Industries  &  Public  Enterprises,  New  Delhi 

Ministry  of  Road  Transport  &  Highways,  New  Delhi 
Ordnance  Factory  Board,  Kolkata 

Rane  Brake  Linings  Ltd,  Chennai 

Royal  Enfield  Motors,  Chennai 


Representative (s) 
Shri  R.  C.  Sethi   (Chairman) 

Shri  N.  Karuppaiah    (Alternate  I) 

Shri  K.  Senthil  Kumar  (Alternate  II) 
Shri  Vijay  Kumar 

Shri  Rajesh  Goyal  (Alternate) 
Shri  R.  R.  G.  Mf.non 
Shri  AS.  Lakra 

Shri  Hira  Lal  (Alternate) 
Shri  B.  Ghosh 

Shrj  M.  S.  Ogale  (Alternate) 
Shri  T.  M.  Balaraman 

Shri  V.  M.  Manel  (Alternate) 
Shri  Vivek  Adyanthaya 

Shri  R.  M.  Kanitkar  (Alternate) 
Shri  V.  S.  Venkatesan 

Shri  K.  N.  Balaji  (Alternate) 
Director 

Senior  Test  Engineer  (Alternate) 
Shri  V.  R.  Jalgaonkar 

Shri  S.  R.  Duraphe  (Alternate) 
Shri  D.  K.  Shukla 

Shri  D.  Chatterjee  (Alternate) 
Shri  Dinesh  Tyagi 

Shri  D.  Dogra  (Alternate) 
Shri  S.  Venkatesh 

Shri  Bhushan  Kothari  (Alternate) 
Shri  S.  B.  Gupta 

Shri  Harjit  Singh  (Alternate) 
Dr  V.  G.  Naik 

Shri  T.  N.  Venkatramani  (Alternate) 
Shri  S.  Ramaswamy 
Shri  U.  K  Kini 

Shri  M.  G.  Jhingran  (Alternate) 
Shri  Alok  Nigam 

Shri  Sriniwas  Sharma  (Alternate) 
Shri  S.  N.  Srinivasan 

Shri  K.  D.  Dighe  (Alternate) 
Shri  A.  K.  Aigal 

Shri  A.  K.  Jain  (Alternate) 
Shri  J.  S.  Khaoilkar 

Shri  Vinod  R.  Kulkarni  (Alternate) 
Shri  V.  R.  Marathe 

Shri  P.  V.  Bhandare  (Alternate) 
Shri  J.  K.  Deb 
Shri  I.  V.  Rao 

Shri  Deepak  Sawkar  (Alternate) 
Shri  V.  C.  Mathur 

Shri  B.  N.  Das  (Alternate) 
Shri  K.  V.  Rami  Reddy 
Shri  D.  K.  Bangotra 

Shri  Vikas  Purwar  (Alternate) 
Shri  V.  Ramakrishnan 

Shri  S.  M.  Iqbal  (Alternate) 
Shri  Veenu  Mathur 

Shri  Y.  Y.  Nagaraj  (Alternate) 


(Continued  on  page  22) 


21 


IS  11852  (Part  9):  2003 

(Continued  from  page  2 1 ) 

Organization 
Scooter  India  Ltd,  Lucknow 

Society  of  Indian  Automobile  Manufacturers,  New  Delhi 

Sundaram  Brake  Linings  Ltd,  Chennai 


Sundaram  Clayton  Ltd,  Chennai 

Swaraj  Mazda  Ltd,  Ropar 

Tata  Engineering  &  Locomotive  Co  Ltd,  Pune 


Toyota  Kirloskar  Motors  Pvt  Ltd,  Bangalore 

TVS  Motor  Co  Ltd,  Hosur 
Volvo  India  Pvt  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Yamaha  Motor  India  Pvt  Ltd,  Faridabad 


BIS  Directorate  General 


Representative(s) 
Shri  P.  D.  Joshi 

Shri  C.  M.  Mehta  (Alternate) 
Shri  Rajat  Nandi 

Shri  Sumit  Sharma  (Alternate) 
Shri  K.  N.  Ravi 

Shri  V.  R.  Janardhanam  (Alternate  I) 

Dr  M.  C.  Shivaglal  (Alternate  II) 
Shri  S.  Selvamani 

Shri  G.  Narayanamurthy  (Alternate) 
Shri  S.  R.  Agarhari 
Shri  V.  R.  Paluskar 

Shri  G.  Nagabhushan  (Alternate  I) 

Shri  Anand  K.  Kulkarni  (Alternate  II) 
Shri  K.  E.  Takavale 

Shri  Yoga  Prasad  (Alternate) 
Shri  S.  Rami  ah 
Shri  Arne  Knaben 

Shri  S.V.  Suderson  (Alternate) 
Shri  S.  Yonezawa 

Shri  B.  Sarkar  (Alternate  I) 

Shri  Aashish  Gupta  (Alternate  11) 
Shri  L.  R.  Singh,  Director  and  Mead  (TED) 
[Representing  Director  General  (Ex-offlcio)] 


Member  Secretary 

Shri  J.  M.  Khanna 

Deputy  Director  (TED),  BIS 


22 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote  harmonious 
development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and  attending  to 
connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing 
the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publication),  BIS. 

'Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
lBIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc:  No.  TED  4  (237). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002 
Telephones:  2323  0131,  2323  3375, 2323  9402 

Regional  Offices: 

Central 


Eastern 


Western 


Branches 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.I.P.  Road,  Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA  700054 


Northern     :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 


Southern     :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600 1 1 3 


Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBA1 400093 


Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 

Telephone 

r  2323  7617 
12323  3841 

r  2337  8499,  2337  8561 
12337  8626,2337  9120 

r  60  3843 
\  60  9285 

r2254  1216,  2254  1442 
12254  2519,2254  2315 

/2832  9295,  2832  7858 
12832  7891,2832  7892 


AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.  VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Printed  at  Simco  Printing  Press,  Delhi 


