Is 7308:1999

$-7R-6MmF%-

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

a-w'i=fwrti F@ � $m?lrw
hzdianStandard
NON-CONIFEROUS LOGS -- SPECIFICATION ( First Revision)
lCS79.040

fDBIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9BAHADUR SHAH ZAFARMARG NEW DELHI 110002

.TI[ne 1999

Price Gnmp 7

Timber Sectional

Comtnittee

CED 8

. FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Timber Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Non-coniferous logs are purchased by several Government departments in bulk, which are further converted and used for various purposes. This standard has, therefore, been formulated to cover minimum requirements on the basis of which non-coniferous logs may be procured. Provisions in respect of teak logs, which cannot be covered in a general specification of this nature have been covered in a separate Indian Standard IS 4895: 1985 `Specification for teak logs (first revision)`. Accordingly, `teak' does not find a mention under Annex A enlisting non-coniferous species to which this standard is applicable. Separate Indian Standards have also been prepared for logs keeping in view the end use to which these may be put. Reference should, therefore, be made to the standards given below when logs are required for a specific purpose: IS 656 : 1988 IS 1140 : 1988 IS 5248 : 1988 IS 6342 : 987 IS 6707 : 972 IS 13240 : 1991. Specification Specification Specification Specification Specification Specification for logs for for logs for plywood (third revision) matches (second revision) of sliced veneers (first revision) of sliced veneers (first revisiqn)

for teak logs for production for rosewood

logs for production

for willow logs for artificial limbs for walnut logs for production of sliced veneers

Logs being intended for conversion, their grading is based on the estimated sawn out-turn by normal method of conversion which again is dependent on : (a) the general quality of wood and (b) the probable loss due to visible defects under normal methods of conversion, Subject to these conditions, the rules covered in this standard provide for its acceptance the maximum number of defects permissible in a given grade. This, however, does not mean that a log having all the permissible defects for a grade would necessarily qualify it for the particular grade. It does not also mean that a log having any one of the defects slightly in excess of the permissible limits would disqualify it for acceptance. Their location, distribution and combination with other defects are important in the final acceptance and determination of the grade. For example, the total absence of a certain defect, say, flutes, may permit a lenient view of another defect. It should therefore, be understood that it is impossible to lay down standards for a natural product like timber strictly based on mathematical calculations and, in practice, much has to be left to the judgement of individual graders. In the formulation of the standard, due weightage has been given to the international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country.

(Continued

on third cover)

IS 7308 : 1999

Indian Standard
NON-CONIFEROUS LOGS SPECIFICATION

(First Revision)
1 SCOPE This standard covers the requirements of the three grades of non-coniferous logs for conversion into sawn timber, 2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES 3.3 Check (Crack) A separation 3.4 Defect An abnormality or irregularity which lowers the values of wood by decreasing its strength or affecting adversely its working or finishing qualities or both, or its appearance or out-turn on conversion. For the purpose of these rules, defects are divided according to kind and are evaluated in units with regard to size and distribution. 3.5 In-Bark Patches of bark partially or wholly enclosed stem of a tree by later growth. 3.6 Knobbly A log is said to be knobbly when a mass of small sized knots is present on the surface. 3.7 Shatter An injury suffered in felling. 3.8 ,Unit of Defect 1150 : 1976 Trade names and abbreviated symbols for timber species (second revision) Methods of measurement and evaluation of defects in timber : Part 1 Logs (firsr revision) Unit of defect is a quantitative representation of the approximate degrade of the material for each defect. 4 GRADES 4.1 The non-coniferous logs shall be classified in three grades, namely, Grade I, Grade II and Grade III as below depending on cumulative values of the permissible defects (see 8): Grade I No single log of length 2.5 m shall contain more than 3 units of defects. No single log of length 2.5 m shall contain more than 6 units of defects. No single log of length 2.5 m shall contain more than 9 units of defects. in the of fibres in the longitudinal direction.

The following standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 401 : 1982 Title Code of practice for preservation of timber (third revision) Glossary of terms applicable to timber technology and utilization (second revision) Code of practice for seasoning of timber (second revision)

707 : 1976

1141 : 1993

3364 (Part 1) : 1976

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 707 and the following shall apply. 3.2 Curvature (Bend) line drawn

Grade II

-

The greatest deviation from a straight between the ends of a log.

Grade III

-

IS 7308 : 1999 4.2 For logs other than 2.5 m in length, the limits given in 4.1 shall be derived by the following equalion:
Permissible number of defects other than 2.5 m in length in logs z-----p 2.5 where L - lengthof login m, and P = permissible defect value for 2.5 m length. 5 SPECIES The species of timber covered by this specification shall he as given in Annex A and Annex B. The nomenclature and abbreviated symbols of the species are based on IS I 150. 6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 6.1 The logs shall not be knobbly. They shall be free ti-om brashness, hollow heart, shatter, spiral grain, any kind of decay (rotj, live insect attack and any other defect (except ihose permitted in 8) which may reduce the usefulness of logs for conversion in sawn timber. 6.2 All buttresses, remnants of branches, large knots, etc. shall be trimmed flush with the bole of log. The two ends should be clean cut with a saw and shall be as close to the plane at right angle to the axis as possible. 7 DIMENSIONS 7.1 Dimensions The minimum following: dimensions of logs shall be the AND MEASUREMENTS 7.2.2.2 If the girth measurements are taken over the bark, a deduction of 10 percent on account of the bark shall be made from the mean girth. 7.2.3 Volume 1.2.2 Mean Girth In a log of regular taper, the mean girth shall be measured at the mid-length of a log but not over the bark or any protuberances. The girth shall be measured in centimetres and rounded off to the nearest lower cm. 7.2.2.1 In a log of irregular taper, three girth measurements shall be taken, that is, one near the midlength and at each end but not over the bark or any protuberance, the mean girth shall be obtained by taking the average of these three measurements.

The volume of logs shall be calculated by the quartergirth formula as given below, the volume shall be expressed in cubic metres correct to three decimal places: V=L C2L I4 I

where V = volume in mX, G = girth in m, and L = length in m. 8 PERMISSIBLE DEFECTS THEIR EVALUATION IN LOGS AND

8.1 Plugging or covering of the visible defects shall not be permissible in any form. 8.2 The defect values apply to individual log and not to consignments as a whole. The permissible defects and their evaluation are given in 8.3 to 8.12. All defects shall be measured as in IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.3 Checks and Splits 8.3.1 For every 2.5 m length of logs, checks less than 50 mm in length and 2 mm in width shall not be considered for evaluation provided they are not so numerous as to effect the out-turn of the material on conversion. 8.3.2 Checks up to 200 mm in length and more than 2 mm in width shall be evaluated as shakes as per IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.3.3 Checks more than 200 mm shall not be permitted.

Length Mean girth
NOTE Dimensions

2.5 m 100 cm
of logs less than the above may be

permitted

if so desired by the purchaser.

7.2 Measurements The measurements of length', girth and the calculation of volume gf logs shall be made as given in 7.2.1 to 7.2.3 below. 7.2.1 Lcwgth It shall be taken as the shortest distance in metres from one end to the other. The length shall be rounded off tn the nearest lower 0.05 m.

2

IS 7308 : 1999 8.3.4 Splits up to 250 mm in length shall be permitted and evaluated as per IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.4 Curvature 8.4.1 For every 2.5 m length of a log measured from its butt end, a deviation of not more than 150 mm shall be permissible. The defect value shall be evaluated as per IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.4.2 Only a single curvature shall be permissible any one log. 8.5 Flutes 8.5.1 Number than 3. of flutes in a log shall not be more in 8.8 In-bark 8.8.1 In-bark up to 200 mm in diameter shall be permissible provided it does not affect the usefulness of log for conversion. 8.8.2 In-bark shall be evaluated as knot as per IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.9 Knots 8.9.1 Sound knots up to 150 mm in diameter occuring 4 in number and up to 250 mm diameter occuring 2 in number in a length of 2.5 m of log shall be permissible. 8.9.2 Unsound knots up to 100 mm in diameter occuring 4 in number in a length of 2.5 m shall be permissible. 8.9.3 The unit of defects shall be evaluated IS 3364 (Part 1). as per

8.5.2 Length of any flute measured from the butt end of a log shall not exceed half length of the log. 8.5.3 Depth of any flute at its deepest point shall not exceed.75 mm and the aggregate depth of all flutes in a log shall not exceed 150 mm. The unit of defect shall be evaluated as per IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.5.4 Logs affected with permissible flutes shall not be more than 10 percent of the logs in a lot in Grade I, 20 percent in Grade II and 30 percent in Grade III. 8.6 Holes 8.6.1 Holes up to 2 mm in diameter other than those due to live powder post beetles shall be permitted and shall not be evaluated for defect value. 8.6.2 Holes having diameter more than 2 mm and upto 12 mm shall be permitted up to 5 in number per rn? area. These shall be evaluated as per IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.6.3 Holes more than 12 mm in diameter shall not be permitted unless agreed to between purchaser and supplier. 8.7 Hollow Heart 8.7.1 Hollow heart up to 6.0 cm in diameter shall be permitted. It shall be permissible only in 10 percent of the logs in a lot. 8.7.2 Hollow heart shall be evaluated as per IS 3364 (Part 1) as heart rot.

8.9.4 The number, size and distribution of knots (sound or unsound) shall be such as not to have a deterimental effect on the usefulness of the log for conversion into sawn timber and not more than half the number is in the central half of a log. 8.10 Rot 8.10.1 Rot (decay) shall be permissible to the extent of 5 percent of the surface area of the log provided the number of logs having rot up to permissible limit shall not be more than 10 percent of the total number of logs in a lot. 8.10.2 Rot shall be evaluated as per IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.11 Shakes 8.11.1 All types of shakes up to 250 mm in length shall be permitted. The defect value shall be evaluated as per IS 3364 (Part 1). 8.11.2 For more than one shake the units of defects shall be added together. 8.11.3 For star shake the value of largest shakes shall be multiplied by half the number of shakes in the star. 8.12 Twist 8.12.1 Twist up to lo" slope shall be permissible shall be evaluated as per IS 3364 (Part 1). and

3

IS 7308 : 1999

9 END COATING
Soon after the inspection, the ends of each log up to a distance of at least 150 mm shall be adequately coated with any of the end coatings mentioned in IS 1141. I0 PROPHYLACTIC TREATMENT

b) c) dj e) t)

Supplier's

identification

mark and year of

suPPlY* Length and mean girth of the log, Grade I by a square, Grade II by a triangle, and Grade III by a circle. Marking with the

11.2 BIS Certification

Soon after the inspection all debarked logs shall be given a prophylactic treatment in accordance with IS101. 11 MARKING 11.1 Each log shall legibly and indelibly marked at suitable place preferably at ends to indicate the following: a) Abbreviation of species,

11.2.1 Each log may also be marked Standard Mark.

11.2.2 The use of Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau oj'lndian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to the manufacturers or the producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

4

IS 7308 : 1999

ANNEX A
(Foreword

and Clause 5)

NON-CONIFEROUS Standard Ikade Name Agiaia Aini Amari Anjan A$m Ash Axlewood(Bakli) Babul Bael Bahera Ballagi Banati Benteak Bhendi Bijasal Birch Black Chuglam Black Locust Black Wattle Blue Gum Bola Bonsum Boxwood Bruguiera Bulletwood Casuarina C&is Champ Chaplash Charoli Chickrassy Chilauni Chooi Cinnamon Civit Debdaru Dhaman Dillenia Dipika(Lapse) Domsal

SPECIES OF INDIAN TIMBERS Name Abbreviated Symbol

Botanical
Aglaia spp. Artocarpus Amoora Hardwickia Fraxinus Acacia

AGL
hirsutus binata

ATN AMA ANJ ARJ ASH

wallichi

Terminalia arjuna spp. latifolia nilotica Anogeissus

(Syn. A.arabica)
Aegle marmelos Terminalia bellirica indicum wightianum lanceolata marsupium Poeciloneuron Lophopetalum Lagerstroemia Thespesia Pterocarpus

BAE BAH BAL BAN BEN BHE BLJ BJR BCH BLO BWA BLG BOL BON BOX BRU BUL CAS a% CHM

populnea

Betula alnoides Terminalia manii Robinia pseud-acacia Acacia mearnsii Eucalyptus Phoebe globulus Morus laevigata

spp. spp. spp.
equisetifolia

Buxus sempervirens Bruguiera Manilkara Casuarina

Celtis australis Michelia spp. Artocarpus Buchanania Chukrasia chaplasha lanzan velutina

(Syn.C.tabularis) Schima wallichii

Sagcraea elliptica
Cinnamomum

spp.

GIN CIV DEE3 DHA DlL DIP DOM

Swintonia floribunda Polyalthia fragrance Grewia tiliifolia Dillenia spp. Mansonia dipikae Miliusa velutina 5

IS 7308

: 1999 Botanical Name
Wightia spp. Diospyros spp.

Standard `Ikade Name Dudhi Ebony Elm Gardenia Garuga Gamari Gluta Gurjan Haldu Haldu Sopa Hathipaila Hill Mahua
HiWX

Abbreviated

Symbol

(other than Dmarmorate)
Ulmus watlichiana Gardinia

spp.

GAR
GAU GAM

Garuga pinnata Gmelina arborea Gluta travancorica Dipterocarpus Adina

spp. HSO HAT HMA HIW HOL HON HO0
tomentosum)

cordifolia acerifolium

Adina oligocephala Ptrerospermum Diploknema Acacea butyracea

leucophloea macrocarpus

Hollock Hollong Hoom Hopea, Horse Chestnut Indian Chestnut Indian Oak
IEX.ll

Terminalia myriocarpa Dipterocarpus Miliusa Iomentosa

(Syn. Saccopetalum
Hopea spp. Aesculus indica Castanopsis Quercus spp. Xylia xylocarpa Acacia tortillis Syzygium spp. Lagerstroemia Prosopis Lannea

HOP HCH ICH IOA IRU IBA JAM
speciosa

spp.

Israeli Babul Jaman Jarill Jathikai Jhand Jhingan Jungali Nimbu Jutili -Kadam KBim Kainji Kala-siris Kanju Karanji Karol Kathal Karani Kasi Keora Khair Kindal Kokkd

JAR JAT JHA JH.I

Knema aitenuata cineraria coromandelica

(Syn.L.grandi) Atalantia monophylla Altingia excelsa Anthocephalus Mitragyna cadamba parvifolia

Litsea wightiana Albizia odoratissima Heloptelea Pongamia Artocarpus Cullenia Bridelia Acacia intergrifolia pinnata integrifolius

Mesua jloribunda exelsa

spp.
apetala catechu

Sonneratia

KHA KIN KOK

Terrninalia paniculata Albizia lebbeck

6

IS 7308 : 1999 Standard `Ikade Name Kumbi Kurchi Kusum Kuthan Lakooch Lampati Laural Lemon-scented Lendi Machilus Mahogany Mahua Makai Mango Maple Mesua Milla Mulberry Myrobalan Mullilam Mundani Murtenga Mysore Gun Narikel Neem Nimi-chambeli Oak Olive Padauk Padri Pah Parrotia(Pohu) Persian lilac Pipli Piney Ping Pitraj Poon Poplar Pussur Pyinma Raini Red Bombwe Red Dhup River-red Gum Rohini Gum Botanical Name Abbreviated Symbol

CGreya arborea Holarrhena Schleichera Artocarpus Duabanga Eucalyptus Machilus Swietenia MGdhuca Mangifera Accr spp. antidysenterica oleosa excelsum lakoocha sonneratioides citriodara parviflora

KUS KU-I LAK LAP LAU

Hymenodictyon

Terminalia Glata Legerstroemia

spp. spp.
longifolia indica

MAC MAG MAU MAK MAN MAP

Shorea assamica

Mesua ferrea
Vitex spp. Morus spp. TerminGha chebula Zanthoxylum Acrocarpus Eucalyptus Azadirachta Milingtonia Olea spp. Pterocarpus Palaquium Parrotiopsis Exbucklandia Hardwickia Cynometra Aphanamiis Calophyllum XylocGrpus Lagerstroemia Planchonia Parishia Eucalyptus dalbergioides Stereospermum rhetsa jiaxinifolius tereticornis indica hortensis

Bursera serrata

MGU NAR NCH OAK OLI PAA PAD PAL PAR PLI PIP PIN PIG PIT POP PUS PYI RAI RI30 RDH RGU ROH

PteI-ygOtG GlGtG

Quercus semicarpifolia

spp.

ellipticum jacquemontiana pop&tea pinnata polyandra polystachya

Melia azedarach

spp. spp.
hypoleuca andamanica camaldulensis

Populus deltoides

MaBotus philippensis insignis

Soymida febrifuga

7

IS 7308

: 1999 Botanical
Dalbergia Elaeocarpus Shorea

Standard Trade Name Rosewood Rubberwood Rudrak S&d Sal Salai Sandan Satinwood Semul Sianahor (Kayea) Silver Oak Siris Sissoo Suhabul Sundri Talura Taprie Siris Tali Thingan Thitmin Toon Uriam Vellapine White Bombwe White Cedar White Chuglam White Dhup Willow Yew Yon Siris

Name
latifolia

Abbreviated

Symbol

ROS RUB RUD SSI SAL SAA SAD SAT SEM SIA SOA SIR SIS SUE% SUN TSI

Hevea brasiliensis

spp.

Albizia procera robusta dalbergioides swietenia Boswellia serrata Ougeinia Chloroxylon Bembax ceiba Mesua assamica

(Syn. Kayea assamica)
Grevillea Dalbergia Leucaena Heritiera Shorea robusta sissoo leucocephala Albizia chinensis

spp.
talura polyanthum merifolia

Albizia spp. Palaquium Podocarpus Cedrela BischoJa Hopea odorata toona javanica

TAL THI

Vateria indica Terminalia procera Dysoxylum malabaricum Terminalia Canarium Salix spp. Taxus baccata Anogeissus acuminata bialata (sapwood)

WE30 WCE WCH WDH

spp.

YON

8

IS 7308 : 1999 ANNEX B ( Clause 5 )
IMPORTEDTIMBERS

Sl No. (1) 1. 2.

Standard Trade Name (2) Abura African Padauk Afrormosia Alan Batu Amoora Balau (Selangan Batu) $

Botanical Name (3)
Mitragyna stipulosa Pterocarpus Afrormosia soya&i angolensis

Abbreviated Symbols (4) -\BU APA AFR ABA AM0 BLU

Country from Where Imported (5) A A A M PNG M

3 _
4. 5. 6.

Shorea albida Amoora cucullata Shorea atrinervosa,S. foxworthyi S.glauca,S. laevis,S. materialis. S. maxwelliana,S. submontana and S. sum.atrana Calophyllum bijlorum, Ccalaba, C. canum, C. coriaceum, C. depressinervosum, C..ferrugineum. C. inophyllode,C. inophyllum, C. macrocarpum, C. pulcherrimum, C. sclerophyllum, C. symingtonianum, C. tetrapterum and C. wallichianum Bischofia javanica Newtonia glandulifera and piptadeniastrum africanum Shorea argentlfolia, S. curtisii, S. ovata, S.pauf$lora, and S. plutyclados Coelostegia borneensis, C. gtifithii, Durio carirzatus, D. grand$Iorus, D. graveolens. D. lowianus,D. malaccensis, D. oxleyanus. D. singaporensis, D. Wyatt-smithii, D. zibethinus, Neesia altissinm, N. Kostermansiana and N. mala;~ana ancl N. synandra Chlorophonr excelsa

7.

Bintangor

BIN

M

8.
9.

Cedar Java Dahoma

CJA DAH

PNG A

10.

Dark-red Meranti $

DME

M

1 1.

Durian $

DUR

M

12. 13.

lroko Kapur

IRO KAU

A M

Dryobalonops aromatica. D. beccarii,D. keithii, D. lanceolata, D. oblognifolia and D. rappa Koompassia malaccensis

14. t 5.

Kempas Keruing$

KEM KER

M M

Dipterocarpus apterus, D. baudii, D. churtaceus, D. concavus, D. confertus, D. cornutus,D. costatus,D. costulatus, D. crinitus, D. dyeri, D. gracilis. D. grand$orus, D. kerrii, D. kunstleri, D.lowii, D. obtus[folius, D. rotundifolius, D. sublamellatus, and D. verrucosus Shorea das\phylla,S. tzelnsleyana, S. johoren&S. lepidota, S. leprosulu,S. ovalis, S. palembanica,S. parvlfolia, und S. teysmanniana Hopea beccuriana H. d?obaluH. gluucescens,

16.

Light-red Meranti $

LME

M

17.

Merawan $

MER

M

noides, H. dyeri, H. ferruginea,

H. grifSithii,H. latlfolia, H. mengarawan.H. montana, H. myrtifolia, H. netvosa, H. odorata, H. pubescens, H. sangal, H. sublanceolata, and H. sulcata

9

IS 7308 : 1999
Sl No. (1) 18. Standard `lkade Name (2) Merbatu Botanical Name (3
Maranthes corymhosa, Parinari costata, k? elmeri, P. oblongifolia, P rigida, and i? rubiginosa Intsia bijuga and I. palembanica Anisoptera costata, A. curtisii A. laevis, A. marginata, A. megistocarpa, and A. scaphuh Ganua curtisii,G. kingiana, G.motleyana, Palaquium clarkeanum, Pgutta, P hexandrum, I! hispidum, P impressinervi urn, I? maingayi,P microphyllum, I? obovatum, P oxleyanum, t? regina-montium,P rostratum P semaram, I? xanthochymum, Payena dasphylla, P lanceolata, F! maingayi, and P obscura Planchonella maingayi and Pouteria malaccensis Aucocumea klaineana Shorea collina, S. guiso. S. kunstleri, and S. ochrophloia Cotylelobium malayanum, C. melanoxylon, Vatica bella, V cuspidata, V flavida, V havilandii, V heteroptera, V lowii, V maingayi, V mangachapoi, K nitens, and K scortechinii Entandophragnta Terminalia brassii Terminalia katikii,?: macadamii T. oreadum,T sepicans, and T. solomonensis Terminalia archboldiana, T complanata,T longespicata Terminalia canaliculata, Tcatapha, I: eddowesii, 7: impediens, T. kaernbachii, 7: microcarpa, T. morobensis and T. rubiginosa Terminalia megalocarpa, 7: steenisiana,T calamansanai Koompassia excelsa Entandophragma Vitex cofassus Shorea agamii, S. assamica, S. bracteolata, S. dealbata, S. henryana,S. hypochra, S. lamellata,S. resinosa, and S. roxburghii Shorea dolichocarpa S. faguetiana, S. gibbosa, S. hopeifolia, S. longiqerma, S. maxima, and S. multiflora utile cylindricum

Abbreviated Symbols (4) MEB

Country from Where imported (5) M

19. 20.

Merbau (Kwila) Mersawa

MRB MEA

M,PNG M

21.

Nyatoh $

NYA

M

22. 23. 24. 25.

Nyatoh Kuning Okoume Red Balau Resak $

NKU OK0 RBA RES

M A M M

26. 27. 28.

Sapele Terminalia Brown Terminalia Pale Brown Group Terminalia Pale Yellow Group Terminalia Red Brown Group

SAP TBR TPB

A PNG PNG

29.

TPY

PNG

30.

TRB

PNG

31

TerminaliaYellow Brown group Tualang Utile Vitex White Meranti

TYB
TUA

PNG

32. 33. 34. 35.

M
A PNG M

UT1 VIT WME

36.

Yellow Meranti

YME

M

A $

= Africa, M = Malaysia, PNG = Papua New Guinea = Actual species of timber which are marked under this trade name are many more. But here, only major species have been mentioned.

10

IS 7308 : 1999

ANNEX C ( Foreword )
COMMITTEE COMF'OSITION Timber Sectional Committee, CED 9
Chairman SHl*lS. SHYAM ,$UNI)EII 12989/D, 12th Main. Hal II Stage, Bangalore 660008

Members
SHRI

Representing

A. K. ANANTHANARAYANA &iv B.S. KAMAI.A (Abemute)

Institute

of Wood Science

and Technology,

Bangalore

SHRIAN~AUARWAI. SHRI H. C. PANT (Alternate) SI~KI S. M. AUARWAI. SHKI B. 8. GAIW (Altemtrfe)

Ministry

of Defence,

Directorate

of Standardization,

New Delhi

WIMCO

Ltd. New Delhi

SHRI

A. K. BANSAI. SHRI K. DAMOUARAN (Akwzufe)

Indian Plywood

Industries

Research

and Training

Institute,

Bangalore

SMKI G. P.`BAI)oI.A

Forest

Department,

Government

of Madhya

Pradesh,

Bhopal

SHRIA. K. CH,Wlnl?~ln: Stun 0. P. SHARMA(Alternnte)

Directorate

General

of Technical

Development,

New Delhi

Forest

Department,

Government

of Uttar Pradesh,

Lucknow

CHII~I: CONWRV.WOI< 01:Fo~~:srs CONSIXVATOROI: FOREXS(Altemare) Ctiini: CONSlXV~mK
01:

Himachal

Pradesh

Forest

Department,

Simla

FOR~WS(GENERAL.)

Forest Ministry

Department,

Government New Delhi

of Karnnataka,

Bangalore

DIRI:CI.OR (TRACK) JOINI. DIIWWR, CE (TM) (Alternrrtrj

of Railways.

Forest
DIWIY DII~IL-IOR OF NAVAL AICHITIXXI VIII: ASSWANI`Diiuicroi~ 01,NAVAI. AtxWr1:c'rUIII: (Altemute)

Research

Institute,

Dehra Dun

Naval Headquarters,

New Delhi

SHRIEI<AIW SHRIS. K. CHAKRAIXXTI (Altemcrte)
Da R. GNANAHARAN

The Karnataka

State Forest

Industries

Corporation

Limited,

Bangalore

Kernla Forest Research Ministry of Environment

Institute,

Peechi New Delhi

and Forests,

SHRID. B. JAIN SHRIDAI<IJAI<A SIN(~H (Alremcrte)
SClKl D. K.

Directorate

General

of Supplies

and Disposals,

New Delhi

KANUUO SHICI B. K. MANIIAI,(Altemute)

National

Test House.

Calcutta

SHKIS. KVMAR SHIP S. C. MAI.HOIRA(Alfemcrfe)

Andaman

Chamber

of Commerce

and Industry,

Port Blair

(Continuted

on page

I?)

11

IS 7308 : 1999 ~Contrnued,frorn puge1I)
Member.s Reptzwntiq

SHlll K. S. Lhu1.Y SHr<l P. T. S. MWWN (nltemrrre) SHICI B. A. M,WHI:~S
SHIU

Indian

Plywood

Manufacturing

Co Ltd. Mumbai

Forest Department. Directorate
(:4lt~mcrle)

Andaman

and Nlcobar New Delhi

Islands,

Port Blair

A. MUKHI>RJI:I.
SHKI A. K. AG~~RWU.

of Standardization,

DR A. N. NAYI:I<

In personal

capacity

(C-59 Inrlrrpurr, Development

NewI Delhi 110012) Ltd. Patnn

Bihar State Forest

Corporation

Federation

of Indian

Plywood

and Panel Industry.

New Delhi

SHI<I S. S. KAIPUI

Convener, Timber Terminology and Classification Subcommittee CED 9.1; Timber Testing Subcommittee, CED 9:9; and Timber Conversion and Grading Subcommittee. CED 9: IO Engineer-in-Chief's Branch. New Delhi

SHIU

B. B. SHAMHAKKAK SW A. K. A~;ARw.~I. (Alrernare)

SHRI s. N. SHARMA

Convenci-.

Timber

Seasoning

and Treatment

Subcommittee. Division. Dehra

CED 9:3 Dun

SHRIK. S: SHUKIJ, Sm<I N. M.
Whl.l:CHA PIIAKASH

Forest Research Directorate
(Altetmte)

Institute.

Forest Products

General

of Civil Aviation,

New Delhi

SHUI ANANI)

SKI

VINOI)

KLIMAR,

Director

General.

BIS (E.r-nJficio

Member)

Director

(Civ Engg)

Merlli,el.-Sec.rettrr?
SHI~I T H. NWAYAW.X

Joint Director

(Civ Engg). BIS

12

1s730s

: 1999

Timber Conversion and Grading Subcommittee, CED 9:10
Converrer SHI:I S. S. Rwr-n Mmhs-r.s
SHkI ~. K. MAhTHW\RAYkV.4 Representing

Forest

Research

Insf:tute, Dehm Dun

lnstmue of Wood Science

.md Techrrology, Bmrgalore

SM!B S

Km!.%

m{ A[rerwre)

SHRIS. P. B,\ix)Ni
SHW ]. L. BAXIAX,.4WFWY

Forest

Resemh

lcs!itute. Dehm Dnn and Telegraphs, New Delhi

lXrectomreo iPosts

c!il!'k c>Nsk.R~,\lvRr)l CHIEF Aim! %JS,AL

l%rc's!x CWWFOAmR or FORI,\TS (Alrernufe)

Agriculture Forests and Co-c,pcmliun Department. Govtxnmenr of Giljara{

Fores~

Department,

Govenmen!

of Him~chal Pradesh, Si,mIa

CHRV C:)WI

IWAIUR [)i f%KIWS

Forew f)epiwtment,

tlrvernmetx

of West Rcngal, Csl.cutta

C( ,NS:.RVArOR OF F-IRI:SrS (~[f?rtldtf)

Indian Plywood Indus:nes Research and Train!ng Inst:trzte. Bangtilorc Minisiry of Railways. New Delhi

Stir<lG. L. DUA St{l<lIv? A. AzIm" (Altemstc}

RrLKSl Elccwficauon

Corporatimr Ltd, New Delh:

Kerala Forest Research U.P. Forest Corporation.

Inst!lu?e. Peechi Lucknow

M Ik,

%(;lwi 11!1:1-1."1'(11(
(A lit?rnf.lte)

H]mach:d Pradesh State Forest Corporation.

Stmla

EYW'(~ 1['.1; DIUI'<TOR

Direcroraleof

Standardization.

New Delhl

.*SCU Kickson Ltd. Colcrstta

Fcrest Research hssdtute. Debra Dnrr

.SIIIJ.I

F. C. SSIAP.MA SNr+i N. M.W,\lE:HA(AtYen!c:fej

Directorate General of Civil Aviation. N'ew Delhi

Cnrrrrollerate of Qntlity

.Nsomnce.

Kmrpur Mumbtii

Bombay Timber Merchants Association,

Sl{x!N.K

ul~.,ww)?

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposal, New Del~ Forest Resetarch Instihtte, Debra Dun

(Continued from second cover)

This standard was first published in 1974. In this revision defect values for different defects have been revised and then evaluation has hem brought In line with 1S 3364 (Part 1): 1976 `Methods o; measurement and evaluation of defects in timber: Part 1 Logs (first revision)'. `Based on the experience gained, the list of species of timber given in Annex A has been updated. Further the foreign timber species m use in India have also been included. This standard contains clauses 7.1 and 8,6.3 which permit the purchaser to use his option for selection to suit h}s requirements at the time of placing orders. The composition Annex C. of the technical commiltee responsible for [he formulation of [his standard is given at

For the purpose of deciding whether a partwular requwement of this standard is complied with, the finai >a}uel observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be. rounded off in accordance vwth IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value shguld he the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Bureau of Indian Standards
Smtdardi Act, 1986 to promote BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of hdhn harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright B?S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BE3. This doea not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade ctesigrrotions. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need flrises on the basis of comments. S~lndmds ore also reviewed periodically; Qstandard along wilh amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicotessthat r-mchanges art? needed; if tie review indicWes that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latestissuc of `INS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Addition..'. This Indian Standard lm.sbeen developed from Dot: No. CED 9 (5652). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STAFJDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhawm, 9 Bahadur Shah Zr&r Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offimxx -. "wrtraf Eastern Northern
Southern

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to ail offices) Telephone 3237617,3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2350216,2350442 { 2351519,2352315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

: Manak Bhavan, 9 BahadurShahZafar?+farg NEW DELHI 11(XXM : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VfI M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCU'ITA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022
:

C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, C!3ENNAI 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALGRE. BHGPAL BHUBANESI+WAR COIMBATORE. FARfDABAD. @L%ZIABAD. GUWAHATf. HYDERABAD, JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKN(?W. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM,
q t Silnco Riming Pri@ed Rcu, Delhi, ha

