( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS:11606-1986

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF CAST IRON PIPES AND FITTINGS
Methods of Sampling Sectional Committee, SMDC 4
Chairman
DR K. G. RAMAMURTHY

Representing Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta

Members Dr K. G. Ramamurthy ) SHRI R. K. ABROL Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur SHRI K. J. SINC+HARORA ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd, Rourkela SHRI S. K. BAUCRI Steel Authority of India Ltd, Durgapur SHRI J. BA\NERJEE SHRI S. S. BISWAS ( AZtcfaatr ) Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI M. G. BHADE SHRI H. L. CHADHA ( Altrrnatr ) Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bhilai SHRI M. B. BHADURI SHRI M. L. GUPTA ( Alt6fnate ) DR M. M. CHAKRABORTY The Indian Iron 8s Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur SHRI PRABHAT DHAR ( Alternat ) Government of India Mint ( Ministry of Finance ) SHRI A. W. C~AWATHE CHEMIST & METALLURQIST Ministry of Railways, Lucknow Ferro Alloys Corporation Ltd, Shreeramnagar SHRI C. N. HARB~AN Italab Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. S. HONAVAR SFTRI M. V. DHABOLKAR ( Alternat ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI V. B. KHANNA New Delhi Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI C. N. KOYAL SHRI C. S. SASTRI ( Alternate ) Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur SHRI K. S. MAHAPATRA SHRI U. N. SARKAR ( Alternat ) Mitra S.K. Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. N. M~TRA SHRI R. N. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Therapeutics Chemical Research Corporation, SHRI B. R. PATEL Bombay SHRI A. Y. PITRE ( AZtcrnatr) Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, DR PREM NARAIN New Delhi DR K. G. ANEJA ( Aksfnate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI M. RAI Essen & Co, Bangalore DR J. RAJARAM SHRI K. N. GURURAJACHAR ( Altcfnats ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1986 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copvright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.
SHRI R. J. PANDEY ( Altsrnata

to

IS:11606-1986
( Continued frompage 1 ) Members Representing

DR M. RANQARAO Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi DR B. R. L. Row Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur SRRI A. K. BAJAJ ( Alternate ) SHRI P. M. SENGUPTA Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry Defence ) SRRI T. K. BHATTACHARJEE ( Alternate 1 SHRI B. D. SINGH ' Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bokaro SARI R. P. SIN~H ( Alternate ) DR A. K. YOGI Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi SHRI G. W. DBTEY, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&k Member ) Director ( Stat ) Secretary SHRI N. SANKAR Joint Director ( Stat ), IS1

of

Sampling of Iron and Steel Castings Subcommittee,
Members

SMDC

4 : 6

Jessop and Co, Calcutta SHR~ C. L. BANERJEE Mukand Iron and Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SRRI Z. M. BHATE SHRI S. RAMASWAMY ( Alternate ) Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur SHRI S. C. CBAKRABORTY SHRI A. K. PAL ( Alternate I ) SHRI D. SINGH ( Alternate II ) Bhartia Electric Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta PROF P. R. DHAR Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bhilai SHRI M. M. GARGA SHRI A. S. KHOKAR ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Haridwar SHRI S. K. GUPTA Steelcast Bhavnagar Pvt Ltd, Bhavnagar SHRI T. KUM~R R.M. Engineering Works, Ahmadabad SHRI S. MAITRA SHRI T. G. LALLCHANDANI ( Altcrnatt ) Jndian Malleable Castings Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. P. MUKHERJEE Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SRRI R. C. PRASAD SHRI R. B. SINGH ( Alternate ) Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation SHRI C. S. RAY Durgapur SENIOR MECHANICAL ENGINEER Chittaranjan Locomotive Works, Chittaranjan Ennore Foundries Ltd, Madras SHRI R. VAIDY~NATHAN SHRI C. RAJ~GOP~L ( Alternate )

Ltd,

IS : 11606- 1986

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF CAST IRON PIPES AND FITTINGS

0,

FOREWORD
Standards Instituby the Methods of by the Structural

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian tion on 14 March 1986, after the draft finalized Sampling Sectional Committee had been approved and Metals Division Council.

0.2 Cast iron pipes and fittings are extensively used in sanitation, water supply, gas supply and waste disposal. Sand cast iron spigot and socket pipes along with fittings are widely used as soil and waste pipes with suitable arrangements to obtain tight joints between successive components in the pipeline. Vertically cast iron pressure pipes and centrifugally cast (spun) iron pressure pipes are used for carrying water, gas and sewage. There has been a long felt need to formulate standard methods of sampling of these products for acceptance purposes. 0.3 Mere inspection of finished products will not improve the quality but proper quality control during the process of manufacture would substantially reduce the quality fluctuations of the ultimate product. For effective corrective action, Statistical Quality Control techniques help in arriving at correct and prompt decisions. 0.4 For guidelines products, reference in organizing a system for assuring may be made to IS : 10201-1982". call the quality for of

0.5 This standard contains clauses 4.0 and 4.2 which between the purchaser and supplier.

agreement

0.6 In reporting the results of a test or analysis, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960t.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the methods of sampling and criteria for conformity of cast iron pipes and fittings when they are inspected for It also recommends certain minimum acceptance in the form of a lot. level of process inspection.
*Manual on quality assurance systems. tRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

IS t 11606-1986 1.2 It does not cover sampling methods for special pipes such as those used in petroleum industry.

types

of cast

iron

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Lot - A quantity of items submitted for inspection normally manufactured by one producer under conditions that are presumed uniform. 2.2 Lot Inspection - Any inspection of lot carried its quality and take corresponding action. out to determine

2.3 Sample - One or more items or a portion taken from a population intended to provide information on the population and to serve as a basis for decision on the population or on the process used for producing it. 2.4 Random Sampling - A procedure of selection in which the chance for the inclusion of any item in the sample is predetermined. 2.5 Sample 2.6 Defect requirements. 2.7 Defective
Size -

Number of items in a sample. of an item with any of the specified

Non-conformity -

An item containing one or more defects. defective of the pro-

2.8 Process Average - The average percentage ducts submitted by the producer for inspection.

2.9 Acceptance Quality Level (AQL) - The maximum percent defective which for the purpose of sampling inspection can be considered as a satisfactory process average. 2.10 Accelitance Number (a) - The maximum of defectives in a sample for acceptance of the lot. 3. PROCESS INSPECTION permissible number

3.1 The object of inspecting and testing cast iron pipes and fittings by the purchaser is to ensure their conformity to the specification requirements whereas inspection done by the manufacturer during production is to ensure conformity to relevant specifications as also to maintain better control over the process. Data from process inspection conducted at various stages of the process must provide an accurate reflection of the status and conditions of different operations of the manufacturing process. 3.2 Raw Material and Accessories - Inspection procedures for incoming raw materials like pig iron, bentonite, silica sand, coal dust, inoculants, etc, should be formulated and inspections carried out on 4

IS:11606

- 1986

each consignment of raw materials to monitor the quality continuously. Patterns and dies should be checked periodically for dimensional conformity to drawings. 3.3 Recommended Process Inspection Schedule - Cast iron pipes are manufactured by different processes depending on requirements and end use. Hence it is difficult to stipulate a single process inspection procedure which will be suitable for all the processes. However, since A number of characteristics are common to all of them, a certain minimum frequency of inspection and testing can be recommended for the products as detailed in Table 1. For mechanical tests, sufficient number of test pieces should be prepared to provide for retesting in case the, necessity arises. The preparation of test bars shall be in accordance with the requirements given in respective specifications.
TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION TESTING FOR PROCESS CONTROL FREQUENCY (3) One test from every melt; in case of continuous melting one for every 50 tonnes or part thereof Every 4 hours of production or every 4 tonnes of finished product, whichever is larger in quantity irrespective of sizes For malleable cast iron pipe fittings, three test bars from each batch of items heat treated together in one annealing chamber shall be subjected to tensile test. These test bars shall be from three different heating zones ( far end, middle and fore end ) of the annealing furnace iii) Ring test In case of pipes of centrifugal castings in metal moulds, ring test also to be carried out with the same frequency as tensile test Same frequency test as tensile test Only for malleable cast iron pipe fittings as per IS 1879 ( Parts 1 to 10 )-1975* ). ( Continued) One sample from each category and from each beat treatment batch AND REMARKS (4) Wherever ble applica-

SL NO. (1) i)

CHARACTERISTIC (2) Chemical composition

ii)

Tensile

test

iv) v)

Hardness test Compression

:

*Specification

for malleable

cast iron pipe fittings (Jirst r&ion

5

IS :11606-1986
TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION TESTING FOR PROCESS CONTROL - Cod
FREQUENCY

AND

SL
No. (1) vi)

CHARACTERISTIC

REMARKS

(2)

(3)

(4)

Surface defects

vii)

Dimensional characteristics a) Pipes b) Fittings Straightness of pipes Mass of pipes/fittings a) Hydraulic test b) Repeat hydraulic test Hammer test Coating test Galvanizing

100 percent inspection at various Various categories of defects and the stages of production percentage rejection to be noted at stripping machining and final inspection 100 percent inspection 100 percent inspection with gauges; 10 percent fittings for intricate dimensional measurements 100 percent inspection 10 percent of finished items 100 percent testing A;$;;,IS : 1879 ( Parts 1 to 10 )- Only for m?lleable cast Iron pipe fittings 100 percent testing only for pipes Once a day for one coating formulation Wherever applica3 samples per shift of 8 hours
ble

viii) ix) x)

xi) xii) xiii)

*Specification for malleable cast iron pipe fittings ( jirstr&ion ). the number of pipes/fittings rejected 3.4 At every stage of inspection, Such data may be should be noted along with the cause for rejection. collected for each lot or batch and successive rejection reports should from the basis for investigation into the shortfalls in the process. The rejection reports should also be made available if required, to the purchaser along with the test data of the accepted material under process. 4. LOT INSPECTION

4.0 In case adequate

and satisfactory system of quality control has been maintained, the resulting data and information as given in 3.4may be made available to the purchaser along with the pipes/fittings supplied to When it is not possible enable him to judge the acceptability of the lot. to make such information available to the purchaser or when the purchaser so desires, the procedure laid down in the following clauses shall be followed for determining the conformity of the lot of pipes/fittings to the requirements of relevant specifications. 6

IS : 11606- 1986
In a consignment all pipes/fittings of the same class, type and dimensions produced by a single manufacturing unit shall constitute a lot of not more than 1 000 items. Each lot shall be inspected separately for ascertaining its conformity to the requirements of the relevant specification. In case of fittings, a lot may consist of items of nominal dimensions differing by not more than 25 mm; the type of fitting being the same. 4.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser, each and every item shall be inspected for surface defects, finish and other details such as position of sockets, flanges, threads, collars and Any pipe/fitting failing in one or more of the visual access doors. characteristics shall be deemed defective and accordingly rejected. If some requirements are optional and are subject to agreement between the purchaser and the supplier, these shall be decided prior to inspection. 4.3 The lot which has been found satisfactory in respect of visual characteristics shall be tested for dimensional requirements, weight and straightness. The number of items to be selected from the lot for checking the above requirements depends on the size of the lot and shall be as given in Table 2 in case of pipes only. These items shall be selected at random from the lot by using suitable random number table as given in IS : 4905-1968" or by any other procedure which ensures randomness.
TABLE 2 SCALE OF SAMPLING DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS,
LOT SIZE

4.1 Lot -

AND CRITERIA FOR ACCEPTANCE FOR MASS AND STRAIGHTNESS OF PIPES
SAMPLE

SIZE

ACCEPTANCE

No.

(1) up to 50 51 to 100 101 to 150 151 to 300 301 and above
NOTE -The

(2) 8 13 20 32 50 AQL for this plan is approximately

(3) 0 1 1 2 3 2'5 percent.

associated

4.3.1 Each of the items selected according to 4.3 shall be inspected for dimensional requirement, mass and straightness ( wherever applicable ). Any item failing to meet one or more of the above requirements shall be termed defective. If the number of defectives found in the sample is less than or equal to acceptance number given in co1 3 of Table 2, the lot shall be deemed as conforming to the requirements specified under Otherwise, the lot shall be rejected or subjected to 100 perthis clause. cent inspection for the relevant requirements. _.__-__
*Methods for random sampling.

7

IS:11606 -1986
requirements of pipes/fittings shall then be tested for physical characteristics like tensile strength and hardness. For this purpose, the number of tests for each of the physical characteristics shall be at the rate of one per 4 tonnes of cast iron pipes/fittings subject to a minimum of 2 and a maximum of 10 tests. The test bars/pieces shall be supplied by the manufacturer taking care that they are made from the same material and batch to which the products belong. If necessary, test pieces may also be cut from finished pipes or fittings. The lot shall be accepted for physical characteristics if all the test results conform to the requirements given in relevant specifications. 4.5 Each pipe and fitting shall be subjected to hydraulic test at the manufacturer's premises with prior arrangement. For coating test, two samples from each lot shall be taken at random and subjected to appropriate test. These samples shall meet the coating requirements. 4.6 Samples/test bars selected for various tests shall bear proper identification marks and shall be preserved till the final decision on the lot is taken.

4.4The lot found conforming in respect of dimensional

