IS 8780:2004

13g-m?ifam

Indian Standard NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING OF STEEL CASTINGS -- CODE OF PRACTICE ( First Revision)

lCS 77.040.20

0 BIS 2004

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 Seplember 2004
Price Group 3

Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21

1'OREWORD"

This Indian Standard ( First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by tbc Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division
coLlllc il.

["hestanciarci was first publisiled in 1978 whiie reviewing this standard in the light of experience gained during tilcse years. Tile Committee feit to revise tilis standard, while revising this standard following modifications have been made: a) Scope has been modified.

i~) Reference clause has been incorporated in this revision. c)
CIILISC for safety precaution has been introduced for the personnei who are invoived in the radiographic testing. For this purpose, reference shali be made to the following Atomic Energy Regulatory Board ( AERB ) guides:

1) SG/IN - 1 Radiological safety in enclosed radiography installation, and 2) d) SG/IN-2 Radiological safety in open fieid radiography.

Clause for personnei requirements has been incorporated.

For tile purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final vaiue observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Ruies for rounding off numericai vaiues ( revi.$ed)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 8780:2004

Indian Standard NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING OF STEEL CASTINGS -- CODE OF PRACTICE ( First Revision)
1 SCOPE

IS No,
13805:2004

Title

This standard descr,jbes requirements and methods for non-destructive testing of steel castings. These non-destructive testing methods are intended to detect surface and internal discontinuities in castings. They include visual testing, magnetic particle testing, liquid penetrant testing, radiographic testing and ultrasonic testing. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below:
IS No, Title

General standard for qualification and certification of NDT personnel

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 1S2417, IS 2478, IS 2953 and IS 3415 shall apply, in addition to the following. 3.1 Defect -- A flaw ( imperfection or unintentional discontinuity ) of such size, orientation, location or properties as to be rejectable. 3.2 Discontinuity -- A lack of continuity of cohesion, an interruption in the normal physical structure of material or a product. 3.3 Flaw -- An imperfection or unintentional discontinuity which is detectable by a non-destructive testing. 3.4 Imperfection -- A condition of being imperfect, a departure of a quality characteristic from its intended condition. 3.5 Indication -- The response or evidence from the application of a non-destructive testing. 4 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 4.1 Methods used may involve hazardous materials, operations and equipment. It is the responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appropriate health and safety precautions. 4.2 When performing radiography with X-rays or gamma rays adequate precautions are taken to protect the radiographer and other personnel in the vicinity. For details about radiation protection, reference may be made to Atomic Energy Regulatory Board SG/lN- 1 and Atomic Energy Regulatory Board SGIN2. 5 PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS Personnel performing non-destructive testing and evaluation shall be qualified in respective methods and for appropriate levels in accordance with the requirements of IS 13805 or any other equivalent certification schemes. 1

2417:2003

Glossary of terms ultrasonic testing
revision )

relating to ( second

2478:1991

Glossary industrial
revision )

of terms relating to radiography ( second

2595:1978 2953:1985

Code of practice for radiographic testing (first revision ) Glossary of terms used for interpretation of welds and castings radiographs (,first revision ) Glossary of terms used in magnetic particle flaw detection ( second
revision )

3415:1998

3657: 1978 3658:1999 3703: 1980 7666:1988

Radiographic image quality indicators (first revision ) Code of practice for liquid penetrant flaw detection ( second revision) Code of practice for magnetic particle flow detection (first revision ) Ultrasonic examination of ferritic castings of carbon and low alloy steel -- Recommended procedure
(first revision )

IS 8780:2004 6 APPLICABLE TEST METHODS

7.3 Stage of Examination 7.3.1 Examination
of Cast Components

All castings shall be subjected to visual examination at various stages of manufacture to detect any surface defect. In addition to this any one or more of the following method(s) as applicable maybe carried out with the mutual agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer.
6.1 Magnetic Particle Testing

Initial testing shall be carried out after the casting has been fettled and cleaned. 7.3.2 Examination
Repair after Defect Removal and Weld

This is a surface and subsurface flaw detection method which may be used for ferromagnetic steel castings. 6.2 Liquid Penetrant
Testing

Visual examination shall be carried out after defect removal to make sure that previously revealed defect is removed completely. The final examination shall be carried out after completion of welding and preferably afier heat treatment, if any. 7.4 Evaluation All results shall be evaluated in terms of relevant acceptance standard.
7.5 Documentation

This is a method for detection of flaws open to surface and can be applied on all types of castings. 6.3 Radiographic Testing

This method may be applied to steel castings for detection of surface and internal flaws and has the advantage of being able to provide a permanent record on films.
6.4 Ultrasonic Testing

The date of examination, the examination procedure used and results shall be documented and certified. The illuminators, instruments, tools, equipments, etc, used shall be identified in the report. 8 MAGNETIC
8.1 Introduction PARTICLE TESTING

This method is generally applied for steel castings of suitable shape and sizes for the detection of internal flaws and has the advantage that it may be applied to large thickness of material. 7 VISUAL EXAMINATION 7.1 Introduction This section deals with the visual examination of all types of steel castings. Surface testing shall be carried out at specific stages during the processing of the castings. 7.2 Equipment and Procedure 7.2.1 Direct Visual Testing

This section deals with the magnetic particle testing method of surface/sub surface flaw detection in the ferromagnetic steel castings. Finely divided magnetic particles are applied to the surface of the castings which has been suitably magnetized. The particles are attached to regions of magnetic flux leakage associated with defects and discontinuities, thus producing indications which are observed visually. The magnetic particles are applied either as dry powder or in a wet suspension in liquid medium. The testing shall be carried out as per IS 3703. 8.2 Surface Preparation
8.2.1 In general, satisfactory results maybe obtained

Direct visual examination may usually be made when access is sufficient to place the eye within 60 cm of the surface to be examined and at an angle not less than 30� to the surface to be examined. Mirror may be used to improve the angle of vision and aids such as a magnifying lens may be used to assist testing. The illumination on the surface is required to be not less than 500 lUX. 7.2.2 Remote
Visual Examination

when the surface is in as cast condition, free flom sand and dirt. However, in some cases, surface preparation by grinding or machining may be necessary when surface irregularities would otherwise mask the indication from discontinuities. All sharp edges and corners shall be ground to smooth curved surface.
8.2.2 If magnetic particles do not give good contrast

on the casting surface, a thin coating of white paint may be applied to the surface under test. 8.3 Testing Procedure The entire casting to be tested shall be magnetized and separately examined in two mutually perpendicular directions.
8.3.1 2

Remote visual examination may use visual aids such as mirrors, telescopes, borescope, fiberscope, videoscope or other suitable instruments and shall have a resolution capability at least equivalent to that of direct observation.

IS 8780:2004 8.4 Non Relevant Indications Non relevant indications are caused by distortion of magnetic field resulting from magnetic writing, cold working, hard and soft spots, boundaries of heat effected zone, abrupt change in section, etc. Care shall be taken to identify and eliminate them as they may mask the actual defect.
NOTE -- Casting which exhibit significant residual

should be dry and free from any dirt, grease, lint, scale, oil or any extraneous matter that would obscure surface opening or otherwise interfere with the testing. 9.2.2' Typical cleaning agents which may be used are detergents, organic solvents, descaling solutions and paint removers. 9.3 Examination

magnetismshould be demagnetizedon completion of
test when specified by the purchaser. 8.5 Evaluation

All the indications shall be evaluated with respect to the acceptance/rejection criteria for their relevency as a flaw, indications related to flaws shall be evaluated for the type and extent of flaw. 8.6 Documentation Report for test carried out shall include area examined, magnetization technique, type of magnetic particles used and its application, value of magnetizing current, surface preparation, demagnetization details and results. 9 LIQUID PENETRANT 9.1 Introduction This section deals with the liquid penetrant testing method of surface flaw detection of all types of steel castings. The liquid is applied to the clean and dry surface of casting to detect discontinuities, which are open to the surface. Sufilcient time is allowed for the penetrant to remain on the surface during which it penetrates in all the discontinuities. Excess pentrant on the surface is removed without removing the penetrant, which gets entrapped into the discontinuities. A thin coat of developer, which acts as a blotter is then applied to the surface. The blotting action of developer draws the penetrant from the discontinuity and the penetrant appears as an indication on the surface ( see also IS 3658 ). 9.2 Surface Preparation In general, satisfactory results maybe obtained when the surface is in as cast condition, in case of investment casting, centrifugal casting and die casting. In some cases, however, surface preparation by grinding or machining may be necessary when surface irregularities would otherwise mask the indications of discontinuities. NOTE-- Blastingwith shot or dull sand, rotofinishing,
buffing, wire brushing or machining with dull tools may be used with caution as they may block the discontinuities at the surface. 9.2.1 The surface to be tested and any adjacent area

Itis a good practice to observe the surface during the application of the developer in order to detect the nature of certain indications which might tend to bleed out profusely. Final interpretation, however, shall be made after allowing the penetrant to bleed out for a period not less than the specified developing time.

9.4 Evaluation Indications, if any, shall be evaluated for acceptance/ rejection, based on the applicable standards. 9.5 Post Cleaning Casting shall be properly cleaned using a cleaning agent to remove any trace of developer/penetrant. 9.6 Documentation Report of test carried out shall include type of penetrant, method, area examined and results.
10 RADIOGRAPHIC 10.1 Introduction

TESTING

TESTING

This section deals with radiographic testing of castings for discontinuities with the use of radiographic film as the recording medium and X-ray and/or gamma rays as source of radiation. Other fimless recording may also be used, with mutual agreement, provided the sensitivity levels are met. Radiographic testing shall be carried out as per IS 2595. 10.2 Surface Preparation Castings should be fettled and loose scale and excessive roughness should be removed. Where local grinding is necessary, care should be taken to preserve the natural profile of the castings. A good as-cast surface is adequate. 10.3 Identification Each section of the casting radiographed should have suitable symbols affixed to identify the casting and the area of the casting under testing. The lead letters or numerals should in general be placed on the surface facing the source of radiation. Where this is not possible, they may be placed on the film side of the casting. 3

1S 8780:2004
10.4 Image Quality Indicators

In order to ascertain the quality of radiographs, image quality indicators ( IQIs ) shall be used as described
below:

10.6.3 Radiographs and/or Digitized of Film less Radiography 10.6.4 Interpretation
11 ULTRASONIC Record

Image in Case

FLAW DETECTION

a) b)

Any one or two types of IQIs described in IS 365'7may be used. If the zone covered in radiography includes more than one section thicknesses, one IQI for every thickness shall be placed. If the casting surface is smooth, the wire type IQI or step-hole type can be directly placed on the casting. If step-hole type IQI is employed, it shall be placed on a block of identical material, having same thickness as the area being radiographed. This block shall be kept directly on the film, just by the side of casting. This method shall be adopted, if the surface roughness of the casting is likely to interfere with the IQI image. Unless specified otherwise, 2 percent sensitivity will be achieved, which has the following meaning: 1) For step-hole type IQI, image of the step and the hole in the same step shall be seen. The step thickness shall be 2 percent of the section thickness being radiographed. If the Table 2 in IS 3657 does not have a step of required thickness, next higher step can be accepted. 2) For wire type IQI, the wire diameter shall be 2 percent of the job thickness. If the Table 1 in IS 3657 does not have a wire of required diameter, next higher diameter can be accepted. For strip-hole IQI, the thickness of the strip shall be 2 percent of the job thickness. The hole shall be visible. If IQI of required thickness is not available, next higher step can be accepted.

11.1 Introduction

c)

This section deals with the ultrasonic testing and wall thickness measurements of steel castings. Usually, normal beam technique is used for flaw detection in casting.
11.1.1 Casting Condition

Ultrasonic testing shall be carried out on the casting afier grain refining heat treabnent and prior to machining of those areas which could interfere with testing.
11.1.2 Test Condition

d)

To assure complete coverage each pass of the search unit shall overlap by at least 10 percent of the width/ diameter of the transducer.
11.2 Testing Procedure

Ultrasonic testing of ferritic steel castings should be carried out in accordance with IS 7666. 11.2.1 Selection
of Testing Technique

Selection of the testing technique depends upon the following factors: a) Type, orientation, position and incidence of defects likely to be encountered in the casting under consideration; Thickness and profile of the section; and Metallurgical condition.

b) c)

11.2.2 Test Frequency For all ultrasonic examinations, the highest frequency compatible with the size, metallurgical condition and thickens of the casting should be used. Normally test frequencies in the range of 0.5 MHz to 2 MHz are adequate. However, the optimum frequency compatible with the size, metallurgical condition and thickness of the casting shall be used.
11.2.3 Procedure

3)

10,5 Evaluation

Reference radiographs illustrating grades of various casting discontinuities shall be used to help establish acceptance criteria during interpretation of radiographs.
10.6 Documents

The following radiographic records shall be maintained as a minimum.
10.6.1 Radiographic Documentation Out Standard Shooting Sketch f

10.6.2
Carried

on Repair

by Welding

All parts of the casting surface where a contact probe may be used, should be tested, irrespective of casting geometry of whether a back wall signal is obtained for use as a reference. A longitudinal wave probe of a frequency of 2 MHz should normally be used but should be augmented a necessary by angle beam. When examining areas which have to be machined, a double crystal probe should be used to 4

IS 8780:2004 minimize dead zone problems. This type of probe should be used for the examination of thin sections.

Where large areas have to be covered, a probe giving a beam of larger diameter should be used for an initial search for defects. A more critical examination of suspected area, if any, shall be made. It should be noted that crystals of each twin-crystal probe have their angle of incidence and so its own range of testing depth and dead-zone. An angle beam probe is useful when assessing defect size and type, for examination under difficult geometric conditions and for the detection of unfavorable oriented defects.
11.3 Wall Thickness Measurement

compatible with the material under examination should be used. Using this procedure, the accuracy of the measurement shall be about 2 percent to 5 percent of the section thickness, but shall depend upon two main factors, that is the surface roughness and whether or not the surface are parallel.
11.4 Evaluation

The results of the test shall be evaluated with respect to the acceptance criteria, for their relevance as a flaw.
11.5 Documents

Using the pulse echo-technique longitudinal wave probes may be used for thickness measurement of casting by directly calibrating the time base scale against parallel surfaces of the same casting having a known thickness. For this application, the highest frequency

The manufacturer's report shall contain the examination frequency, type of instrument, reference block, type of search unit, couplant, location, size and echo amplitude of defects and a sketch showing the location of all indications and areas not inspected due to geometric configuration.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau qf India}? ,Y[andurdy Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and
attending to connected matters in the country,

Copyright 131Shas the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any for-m withootthe prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, inthe course ofirnplementing
the standard, of necessary to copyright be addressed Review details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations, to [be Director (Publications), BIS. Enquiries relating

of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards asthe need arises on the basis of comments. Stanciards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when sLlchreview indicates that no changes are
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards shouid ascer~ain that they are in possession of the !atest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `131S Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MTD21 (4242). Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

Amendments Amend No.

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Website: www.bis. org. in Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Mar-g Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { ~6092~5 2254 1216,2254 1442 { ?254 2519,22542315 ~ 28329295,28327858 ~ 28327891,28327892

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 11OOO2

Eastern Northern Southern: Western

: l/14C. I.T. Scheme VI IM, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH C. I. T. Campus, lV Cross Road, CHENNAI 160022 600113

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBA1400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHAT1. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. R.AJKOT. THIRUVANANH-IAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. --Prlnkd HI Ne\v India I'nntlng Press, Kl]urja, India

