NAT Alan IS 17182 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ved -X Aada & area UT HARTE 
GELE SAT ATTA 


X-ray Diffraction Based Residual 
Stress Measurements 


ICS 77.040.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2020 Price Group 2 


Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive 
Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard applies for obtaining the residual stress measurement by employing X-ray diffraction method based 
on “Bragg's law”. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17182 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


X-RAY DIFFRACTION BASED RESIDUAL 
STRESS MEASUREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the procedure to be followed 
for measuring residual stresses present on surfaces 
of polycrystalline metallic components by using 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique. This procedure is 
intended for use along with the procedures mentioned 
in manuals provided by the manufacturers of X-ray 
diffraction systems. 


2 PRINCIPLE OF TEST 


X-ray diffraction based stress measurements related to 
the measurement of elastic lattice strains using X-rays. 
The stresses present in the material induce changes in 
the spacing of the lattice planes from their stress free 
value to a new value that corresponds to the magnitude 
of the applied or residual stress. Hence, the basic law 
governing the measurement of spacing of lattice planes 
is the Bragg’s law which is given by: 


Nx = 2d, Sind, 


hkl 
where, 
X= X-ray wavelength, 
d,,, 7 lattice spacing of crystal planes (h,k,I), 
and 


20= diffraction angle. 


The stress measurements here relate to the changes in 
the distance between certain lattice planes (hkl) which 
diffract meeting the diffraction criteria. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Residual Stresses — Residual stresses can be 
defined as those stresses that remain in a material or 
body after manufacture and processing in the absence 
of external forces or thermal gradients. 


3.2 y — The angle between the diffraction vector and 
the normal to the surface of the component, where 
diffraction vector is the normal to the plane whose 
d-spacing is under investigation. 


3.3 E,,,— Elastic modulus of the material for the 
crystallographic direction normal to the lattice planes 
in which the strain is measured as specified by the 
Miller indices (Akl). 


4 MEASUREMENT PRINCIPLE 


The brief description of fundamental relation between 
lattice spacing and stress in the specimen surface is given 
below. Figure 1 depicts the pictorial representation of 
the angles and principle stresses for plane stress elastic 
model. The XRD based stress measurement is confined 
to the surface of the sample. In the exposed surface 
layer, a condition of plane stress is assumed to exist. 
That is, distribution of stresses described by principal 
stresses o, and o, in the plane of the surface, and no 
stress is assumed perpendicular to the surface, o,=0. 
However, a strain component perpendicular to the 
surface e, exists as a result of the Poisson’s ratio (v), 
contractions caused by the two principal stresses. 


Fic. 1 PLANE Stress ELASTIC MODEL 


The expression of strain (£,,,) in the sample surface at 
an angle ® from the principle stress o, is given by: 


Ey = Eo, sin PJ +0 =- O 


Angle ‘®’ denotes the angle between one of the 
principal stress axes and the projection of the measured 
strain direction on the specimen surface. Angle “y” 
is the angle between specimen normal and direction 
of strain measurement. E is Young’s modulus, v is 
Poisson’s ratio. 


Equation | relates the surface stress O, in any direction 
defined by the angle 9, to the strain, €,,,, in the direction 
(®,y) and the principal stresses in the surface. If d,,, is 
the spacing between the lattice planes measured in the 
direction defined by ® and y, the strain (¢,,,) can be 


IS 17182 : 2020 


expressed in terms of changes in the linear dimensions 
of the crystal lattice: 


Epy = = - (2) 


Where, d, is the stress free lattice spacing. From 
equations | and 2, we can write: 


doy — d, _ 
dy 


am 00 sin? FJ- Š p (O, +0,)] 


-= (3) 


where the elastic constants = Faun and (E m are 


the values for the ee normal 
to the lattice planes in which the strain is measured as 
specified by the Miller indices (hkl). 


The lattice spacing for any direction, then, is: 


l+v ; v 
doy = [Cp uod Isin“ Y= [po 


d,(o,+0,)]+d, - (4) 


Equation 4 describes the fundamental relation between 
lattice spacing and the biaxial stresses in the surface of 
the sample. The lattice spacing is a linear function of 
the sin’. The intercept of the plot (d against.sin*P) at 
sin’? = 0 is: 


v 
doo = d, = (po dy (CA + o) = 


a[l- (Daan (a, +0,) = (5) 


which equals the unstressed lattice spacing, d,, minus 
the Poisson’s ratio contraction caused by the sum of 
the principal stresses. The slope of the plot (d against. 
sin*P) is given by 


des A 


+v 
Osin? Y “F Een F040 ~ ©) 
which can be solved for the stress o: 
od 
O, = = das oe an = P = (7) 


ôd . f . 
where, —— is the slope of the plot d against sin? Y. 
Y 


Negative and positive slopes correspond to compressive 
and tensile stress respectively and the slope can be used 
to estimate O, This equation is a form of traditional 
X-ray diffraction based residual stress equation. It 
predicts a linear variation of d against sin’y. The stress 


in the o, direction may be obtained directly from the 
slope of a least square line fitted to experimental data 
measured at various w. If the elastic constants E, v 
and the unstressed plane spacing d, are known. This 
procedure is known as sin*y technique since it utilizes 
multiple y - tilts. 


5 X-RAY DIFFRACTION BASED RESIDUAL 
STRESS MEASUREMENT SYSTEM 


The XRD based residual stress measurement system 
available with the user may be installed and operated 
as per the operating manual provided by the supplier. 
The equipment should have facility to make multiple 
y angle measurements of the peak position. As the 
instruments used for stress measurements generally 
have a limited 20 range in the high angle region (for 
example 20 between 120 to 170°), suitable X-ray target 
material which would decide the X-ray wavelength 
and suitable crystal plane which would diffract in this 
angular range should be chosen. 


6 TEST PROCEDURE 


6.1 Reference Standards 


6.1.1 Peak 20 Verification 


The goniometer”s alignment can be verified using a 
stress free sample, such as a well annealed powder of 
lanthanum hexaboride or silicon or a quartz block. The 
diffractometer scans the output to define the position 
of the peaks which can be compared to known peaks 
on the JCPDS from the well-established database. 
The closeness of the results defines the instrument 
alignment. 


6.1.2 Material Constants 


The elastic constants (1 + v/E)p,, and (v/E) pup of the 
material under investigation should be obtained from 
the well-established literature. 


6.2 Preparation 


6.2.1 Sample Preparation 


Sample must be clean enough to get maximum 
reflection. Paints and other coating layers present on 
the location of test sample must be cleaned using proper 
solvents, such as acetone. If the above procedures do 
not give sufficient intensity from the material surface 
under examination, electro polishing has to be carried 
out using suitable chemicals. 


6.2.2 Target Selection 


Proper selection of wavelength should be done 
depending on the material to be examined by choosing 
the appropriate X-ray target so that the diffracted beam 
is measured within the 20 range of the instrument for a 
specific (h, k, 1) plane. Use K, filter if K, radiation is to 
be used for the particular material under investigation. 


The elastic constants for the plane which is diffracting 
in the angular range of the instrument based on the 
wavelength of the radiation should be determined as 
per 6.1. 


6.2.3 Sample Alignment 


The sample location is aligned such that the axis of 
the X-ray source and the detector matches with the 
top surface of the sample. Adjust the height of the 
goniometer with repect to the sample by operating the 
respective control switches. Make sure that the detector 
and the source are aligned along the required direction 
of the stress measurement. 


6.3 Test Scan and Fixing the Parameters 


Using the necessary software a test scan is run for any 
material. From the diffractogram obtained, the scan 
range, step width and dwell time are optimized and may 
be used for making the actual multiple y scans. After 
deciding the above parameters, X-ray tube details, 
current at the target, and y angles at which measurement 
should be carried out are fed into the automated system 
(software) provided by the manufacturer of the residual 
stress measurement system available with the user. 


The operating voltage and current should be chosen 
appropriately to get well defined peaks from the planes 
which are being analysed. Normally, the operating 
voltage is fixed or at least above 20 kV. The X-ray 
intensity is normally recorded using a crystal detector 
making point by point measurements in the 20 range 
or using a position sensitive detector which acquires 
data in the 20 range simultaneously. It is conventional 
to acquire data over a 20 range which is at least 5 times 
more than the full width at half maximum of the XRD 
peak of the selected (h, k, 1) plane. 


6.4 Method of Testing 


After ensuring the alignment and software setup, switch 
on the X-ray system for carrying out residual stress 


IS 17182 : 2020 


measurements. The software acquires the intensity data 
over the 20 range as specified and at different y angles 
of the goniometer. The peak locations are determined 
for each y angle using dedicated algorithms for peak 
determination present in the software. 


Analysis of the data acquired is to be carried out for 
finding out the residual stress value. After proper 
smoothing, background corrections and considering 
errors in the measurement, a plot between sin’y against 
d is made and the slope is calculated. The d, obtained 
from the peak value at y = 0 and the slope is substituted 
equation — (7), for obtaining the residual stress at the 
measured location. 


The experiment is repeated at the same location for 
repeatability of the results. The experiment is carried 
out on different locations of the sample as per the 
requirements of the user. 


7 ACCEPTANCE STANDARD 


The recording criteria and acceptance standard shall 
be subject to agreement between the contracting 
parties. 


8 REPORTING OF TEST RESULTS 
The test report of residual stress at a given location 
shall contain the following information: 
a) X-ray target used, operating voltage and current; 
b) Details of material under investigation; 
c) The stress constant used for the material under 
investigation; 
d) Scan location and direction of measurement; 
e) 20 peak determined in degrees; 
f) Plot of sin’y versus 20 or d; 
g) Residual stress in MPa with reliability; and 


h) Personnel performing the examination and their 
qualifications and signatures. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (5271). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


