1s0 10310:1995
$77mwm -

IS

14921:2001

Tl=T

?lwiiwl am

wlm'r Tlwfm (i

`I

* %ihla

*

hxfian

standard

NEUROSURGICAL IMPLANTS -- MARKING AND PACKAGING OF IMPLANTABLE NEURAL STIMULATORS

Ics

11.040.40

@ BIS 2001

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

IN DIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

July 2001

Price Group

3

Neurosurgery Instruments Sectional Committee, MHD 7

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 10310:1995 `Neurosurgical implants -- Marking and packaging of implantable neural stimulators' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of Neurosurgery Instruments Sectional Committee and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. The objective of this standard is to ensure that the neural stimulator (including implant pulse generators and implant radio frequency receivers) or component thereof is adequately packaged and that the device and packaging are Iabelled with sufficient information. This information needs to be readily available to the clinician and patient so as to facilitate decision-making on such matters as the choice of device, the methods of implantation, adjustment and fault diagnosis, and convey user precautions. it is recommended that implantable neural stimulators and components are manufactured in accordance with the ISO 9000 series of Quality System Standards and under international or national good manufacturing practices where these exist. The text of above mentioned ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14921:2001 1s0 10310:1995

/ndian Standard

NEUROSURGICAL IMPLANTS -- MARKING AND PACKAGING OF IMPLANTABLE NEURAL STIMULATORS

1

Scope

This International Standard specifies requirements for marking, Iabelling, packaging and accompanying documentation for implantable neural stimulators intended for stimulation of the nervous system (brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves and adjacent structures). It also covers implanted or external ancillary components, including the external control and programming equipment used for the activation or adjustment of neural stimulators. This International Standard does not specify indications or contraindications for the use of implantable neural stimulators; nor does it specify testing or the range of normal operating variable parameters. It does, however, require that information on these matters be included in the documentation accompanying each implant pulse generator, implant RF receiver or RF transmitter for use by a clinician for treating a specific patient.

2.3 programmer; controller: External device for controlling or adjusting the parameters of a neural stimulator system. 2.4 implant RF receive~ Implantable device, without its own power source, that can generate pulses to stimulate the nervous system using radiofrequency (RF) power transmitted to it by a transmitter and antenna. 2.5 transmitter; driver box: Portable container, having pulse generating and modulating circuits for controlling implant RF receivers.
The transmitter usually contains a power source. It may also contain the antenna. There may be some useraccessible controls and some internally adjustable controls.

NOTE 1

2.6 antenna: Transmitting coil or loop intended the activation of implant RF receivers,

for

NOTE 2 The antenna is generally intc.nded to be placed on, or near, the skin, near the implanted RF receiver.

2

Definitions
Standard, the

For the purposes of this International following definitions apply.

2.7 cable Insulated connect a transmitter body, with or without both ends.
NOTE 3 A cable conductor.

wire or conductor intended to to an antenna, external to the an integral connector at one or

may contain

more

than one wire

or

2.1 neural stimulato~ Device for electrically stimulating the nervous system (brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves and adjacent structures), comprising a pulse generator and all ancillary components, implanted or external, to the body, necessary for its function and control. 2.2 implant pulse generator: Implantable device, containing its own power source, that can generate the nervous system electrical pulses to stimulate
continuously or intermittently.

2.8 implant lead [extension]: Insulated wire or conductor intended to be implanted and to connect an implant pulse generator or RF receiver to stimulation electrodes, with or without an integral connector at one or both ends. 2.9 connecto~ Separate implantable component intended to make electrical connections between implantable components.

1

IS 14921:2001 1s0 10310:1995

2.10 adapter: Component that allows the interconnection of otherwise electrically or physically incompatible components. 2.11 (stimulation) electrode Electricaliy conducting part(s) [usually the termination of an implant lead(s)] which is designated to form an interface with nervous tissue or body fluid and which carries the electrical stimulation current. 2.12 unit pack Pack containing a single unit or kit. a number of

The multiple pack should protect the contents normal handling, transit and storage.

during

5
5.1

Package
General

marking

The markings should be readily readable, should remain legible after normal handling, transit and storage, and should not adversely affect the contents. 5.2 Uhit packs infor-

2.13 multiple pack Pack containing unit packs.

3
3.1

Device

identification

The unit pack shall bear at least the following mation: a) description of the contents the model designation(s); name and address supplier; of the and quantity,

including

Marking b)

The implant pulse generator, implant RF receivers, programmers and transmitters shall be permanently marked with the following information: a) b) c) name and/or identifying model designation; mark of the manufacturer;

manufacturer

and/or

c)

serial number(s) (preceded by either "serial number" or "SN") and/or lot number(s) as appropriate of the contents; date of manufacture (month/year), preceded by" , "exp"; if appropriate, ile, a warning the word statement or expiration by, for example, date "use

d) serial number 5.2 C). or lot number as described in

3.2

Non-invasive

identification

e)

"STERILE" or if nonsterto that effect;

Each implant pulse generator and implant RF receiver shall have a means of identifying the manufacturer and the model designation of the device noninvasively after implantation.

f)

designation on the actual sterile pack that it is the sterile pack; the method of sterilization, the words if appropriate; "for single use" or

g) h)

4
4.1

Packaging
Unit packs

if appropriate, equivalent;

i)

written or pictorial unit pack; the acceptable port.

instructions

for opening

the

Each complete neural stimulator and/or separate component(s) shall be packaged in a unit pack. Each unit pack shall be supplied with one copy of the relevant accompanying documentation specified in clause 6. In order to gain access to the accompanying documentation, it shall not be necessary to penetrate the package layer that maintains the sterility of devices supplied in the sterile condition. 4.2 Multiple packs

j)

conditions

of storage

and trans-

5.3

Multiple

packs
in-

The multiple formation: a)

pack shall bear at least the following

the name and address of the manufacturer supplier;

and/or

One or more unit packs may be packaged in a multiple pack.

b)

the number of unit packs and a description cluding model designation) of the contents;

(in-

2

1s0 10310:

Is 14921:2001 1*

c)

the acceptable conditionsof storageltransport.

-- identity of the patient, -- date of implantation, -- name and address of the centre at which

6
6.1

Accompanying documentation
I

General

the device was implanted,

Each separate piece of accompanyingdocumentation

-- a warning regarding MRI examinations, -- recommended
procedures curity gates and systems. regarding se-

shall include
a) the name and address of the manufacturer and/

or supplier; b) the year of issue of'the document. 6.2 Implantable components

c) If appropriate, details of the generic composition of any pharmacologically active coating material (e.g. antibiotic) and/or leachable material.

d) Information

Each unit pack containing an lmplantable component shall be supplied with the appropriate accompanying documentation specified in 6.2.1 and/or 6.2.2. 6.2.1 Implant pulse generators and implant RF receivers a) Registration document at least in duplicate bearing the following:

specific to the type of component contained in the unit pack, giving the range of values forj parameters and the value as shipped, where appropriate. 1) implant pulse generatom:

-- model designation, -- model
designation(s) programmer(s), if any. expressed of appropriate

1) instruction

that returned to the implantation of retained in the

one copy of the document be manufacturer or supplier after the device and the other copy patient's record;

-- pulse amplitude, -- pulse

in volts, in hertz or

frequency, expressed pulses per reciprocal second, pulse waveform, phasic or blphasic, expressed

2)

space for the following:

.

as

mono-

-- model designation

of the device and device name or description,

-- pulse duration,
or microseconds,

expressed

in milliseconds

-- serial number or lot number of the device,
-- identity of the patient,

-- cycle-on

and cycle-off times for devices that are intended to stimulate cyclically, times,

-- date of implantation, -- name and address of the centre at which the device was implanted. b) One copy of an identification the following: card bearing at least

-- ramp-up and ramp-down -- expected
device use at a specified

longevity at continuous or nominal output, or

-- if applicable,
renewing

instructions for recharging the power source,

1) instruction
patient; 2)

that the card be retained

by the

-- means of external

space for the following: -- model vice, designation and name of the de-

adjustment of the implant pulse generator, if any, or a statemeans of external ment that no adjustment are provided, nonsterile, a recommended sterilizing the implant pulse

-- if supplied
method of

-- serial number or lot number

of the device,

3

Is 14921:2001 1s0 10310:1995

generator, and the maximum number of sterilizing cycles; 2) implant RF receivers:

permitted

-- device int6nded
connection,

to connect

or to enable

-- overall

-- model designation, -- carrier frequency, or megahertz, expressed in kilohertz

length expressed in centimetres, and outside diameter (where appropriate) expressed in millimetres, nonsterile, a recommended method of sterilizing the connector or adapter, and the maximum permitted number of sterilizing cycles;

-- if supplied

-- pulse waveform and its amplitude, expressed in volts, as shipped and adjustable range and at maximum adjustable output, where appro@ate; -- model designation(s) transmitter(s), -- the model designation(s) antenna(s), of the appropriate

3)

electrodes:

-- construction -- diagram
of the appropriate

material(s), dimensioned

of the electrode(s), in millimetres,

-- for electrodes

-- if supplied nonsterile, a recommended method of sterilizing the implant RF receiver, and the maximum permitted number of sterilizing cycles.

that are detachable from the implant lead, connector system(s) or the model designation(s) of the implant lead(s) to which they are intended to be connected,

-- if supplied

nonsterile, a recommended method of sterilizing the electrode, and the maximum permitted number of sterilizing cycles.

6.2.2 a)

Other implantable components
details of the generic composition material

If applicable,
of any

pharmacologically

active

coating

6.3

Non-implantable

components

(e.g. antibiotic) and/or leachable material. b)

Information specific to the type of component contained in the unit pack, giving the range of
values for parameters where appropriate: 1) implant lead(s): and the values as shipped,

Each unit pack containing a non-implantable component shall bear, or contain in a technical information sheet, at least the following information specific to the component, giving the range of values for, and the method of adjustment of each parameter, where applicable.

-- model designation, -- device(s) with compatible, which the implant lead is

6.3.1 a) b) c)

Programmers

model designation; mode of operation (i.e., magnetic, RF, etc.); im-

-- overall length expressed in centimetres, and outside diameter (where appropriate) expressed in millimetres, -- if supplied nonsterile, a recommended method of sterilizing the implant lead and the maximum permitted number of sterilizing cycles; 2) connectors and adapters:

the model designation(s) plant pulse generator(s); if applicable, instructions ing the power source; the function

of the appropriate

d)

for recharging

or renew-

e)

and range of any controls.

6.3.2 a)

Transmitters

-- model designation,

model designation;

IS 14921:2001

1s0 10310:1995

b)

model designation(s) of the appropriate and whether integral or separate; model designation(s) RF receiver(s); the function

antenna(s)

This document should be se~arate from, and adrequired by this ditional to, all other documentation International Standard.

c)

of the appropriate

implant

d) e)

and range of all controls; at continuous use at a

6.5

Information

for clinician

expected battev longevity typical or nominal output;

f)

type of battery required (where applicable). Antennas

Each unit pack shall contain information on, and instructions for I]se of the neural stimulator or component, and which gives at least the following information:

6.3.3 a) b)

a) indications and contraindications
neural stimulator or component;

for the use of the

model designation;

b) recommended
model designation(s) t "9nsmitter(s); model designation(s) model designation(s) RF receiver(s); of the appropriate ing and general cedures;

method for pre-implantation guidelines for implantation

testpro-

c) d)

of the appropriate of the appropriate

cable(s); implant

c) recommended

method ing of the system;

for post-implantation

test-

d) recommended

method for using the programmer to set or adjust the implant pulse generator; recommended method for adjusting the implant RF receiver and/or transmitter, stating which adjustments may be made by the patient and which should be made by the clinician; block diagram of the electrical circuit of the neural stimulator; diagram showing the shape(s) of the current pulses delivered by the neural stimulator when using the recommended electrode configuration; flow diagram diagnosis; description cation. or recommended method for fault

e)

recommended method for applying and removing the antenna from the skin where applicable. Cables

e)

6.3.4 a) b)

model designation;

f)
model designations of the devices with which the cable is intended to be connected; 9) c) 6.4 overall length expressed Information in centimetres.

for patient h)

Each unit pack containing a device having controls whereby adjustments can be made by the patient shall be supplied with documentation that provides information on the adjustments.

i)

of the means of non-invasive

identifi-

5

IS 14921:2001 1s0 10310:1995

Annex A
(informative)

Ratibnale
A. 1 General Clause 1 Scope Implantable neural stimulators include all neural tissue as listed, including the central and peripheral nervous tissue.

This International Standard is concerned with the safety-in-use of implantable neural stimulators. The appropriate marking and Iabelling of these devices provide useful and important information to the physician, surgeon and patient. Clinically irrelevant information and requirements are not included in this Standard. The prime rationale for the requirements of this International Standard is the clinical significance of the information to the user. This Stand&d is written in a broad manner which includes current state-ofthe-art technology and knowledge. However, it should not limit futu're innovation while still maintaining adequate physician and patient safety and knowledge.

Subclauaa 4.1 A unit pack may contain more than one component (e.g. tunneling tool and accessories) as a "kit", The definition of unit pack allows a single unit or kit. A kit may contain multiple components.

Subclause 6.2.2 b) 2) The outside diameter of connectors and adapters may be irregular. Thus, the outside diameter measurement is only important when applicable.

A.2

Rationale

for specific clauses

The following are rationale for specific clauses in this International Standard, with clause numbers parallel to those in the body of the document.

Bureau of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes; type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be, addressed, to the Director (Publication), BIS
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendment or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and' Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. MHD 7 ( 2734).
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NewDelhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617,3233841 3378499,3378561 3378626,3379120
{

{

603843 602025 2350216,2350442 { 2351519,2352315 8329295, 8327858 { 8327891,8327892

