WaT Wah IS 14520 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Ae SINT — Weert 
Wat TAT Wa ASI THT 
A-a — feonfrdst 


( Yee Fria ) 


Fish Industry — Operational 
Cleanliness and Layout of 
Market — Guidelines 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.120.30 


© BIS 2018 


Rds AM equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e "TT WH, 9 Seg VHC AM, € f«eef-110002 
vum MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2018 Price Group 5 


Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Divisional 
Council. 


Itis essential that fish, fresh and processed, offered for human consumption is free from pathogenic micro-organisms 
and toxic substances. Like in other food industries, cleaning is one ofthe most important operations in fish industry. 
In normal cleaning operations, scrubbing and hosing with cold water or hot water is suitable to remove the surface 
dirt. However, where slime is present, as is usual in fish processing establishments, hot water may not remove the 
slime completely while cold water, though effective in removal of slime, may not be successful in complete removal 
of bacteria. In such cases, additional treatments become necessary to ensure proper hygienic conditions. 


Besides observing hygienic precautions by proper sanitation to avoid microbial contamination and spoilage, it 1s 
also necessary for this purpose to chill the fish as soon as it is caught and maintain a sufficiently low temperature 
in fish markets and stalls. 


IS 14520 was first published in 1998 amalgamating three separate standards on fish industry recommendations, 
namely, IS 5735 : 1970 ‘Recommendations for maintenance of cleanliness in fish industry’, IS 7581 : 1971 “Basic 
requirements for fresh fish stalls’ and IS 8082 : 1976 ‘Basic requirements for a fish market’. While reviewing these 
standards, it was decided to amalgamate them into one comprehensive standard. Consequently, IS 14520 : 1998 
superseded IS 5735 : 1970, IS 7581 : 1971 and IS 8082 : 1976. 


The revision of this standard has been undertaken to update the requirements for fish market by incorporating 
guidelines published by National Fisheries Development Board, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture in ‘Manual for Management and Maintenance of Hygienic Fish Markets’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard 1s complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14520 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


FISH INDUSTRY — OPERATIONAL CLEANLINESS AND 
LAYOUT OF MARKET — GUIDELINES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the guidelines for operational 
cleanliness and layout of market for the fish industry. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
249] : 2013 Food hygiene — General 
principles — Code of practice 
(third revision) 
7313 : 1974 Glossary of important fish species 
of India 
10500 : 2012 Drinking water — Specification 


(second revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Fish — Includes marine and fresh water fish and 
all other aquatic foods like shell fish and other marine 
invertebrates of edible nature (see IS 7313). 


3.2 Cleaning Agents (Hereafter Referred to as 
Detergents) — Simple substance or mixture used in 
conjunction with water to assist cleaning. 


3.3 Soil — Fish and food residues, dirt, dust, grease, 
oil, etc, which have to be removed from the surfaces of 
the containers, plants and premises during cleaning. 


3.4 Fish Market — An authorized place where fish is 
handled and sold for human consumption. 


4 TYPES OF SOIL IN FISH INDUSTRY 


The soil to be removed from equipment and other 
surfaces may be one or a combination of the 
following: 


a) Wet fish, slime, blood, gut, gut-contents, 
scales, stain, head portions and oil; 

b) Air dried fish residues; and 

c) Cooked and hardened fish residues. 


5 SURFACES TO BE CLEANED 


5.1 In fishing and fish-processing industries, different 
types of surfaces are required to be cleaned, namely, 
wooden decks and fish holds in small wooden trawlers; 
steel floors in steel trawlers; and cemented and tiled 
floors in processing units. A few of the wide range of 
articles that require regular cleaning are utensils made 
of aluminium, galvanized-iron sheets, stainless steel, 
polythene or any other suitable material; tables made 
of wood and lined with aluminium or stainless steel; 
wooden boxes; cane baskets; etc. 


5.2 Selection of Utensils 


Desired efficiency of any cleaning operation can be 
achieved only if the utensils have a clean and smooth 
surface without any crevices. As cane/bamboo baskets 
and wood have a tendency to absorb slime and thereby 
cultivating a large number of microorganisms, they should 
not be used as far as possible in fish processing industry. 
In unavoidable cases like fish hold, boat deck, etc, the 
wood may be used. The metal selected for the fabrication 
utensils should have resistance to the action of detergents 
and disinfectants used in the cleaning operation. Stainless 
steel utensils are recommended for the purpose. 


6 DETERGENTS AND DETERGENCY 


6.1 Outline of the Cleaning Process 
Wet cleaning processes in fish industry comprise: 


a) wetting of the soiled surface; 


b) removal of soil from the surface in a dissolved 
or dispersed form. Mechanical action assists 
this process, and hot detergent solution is often 
advantageous; and 

c) removal of the last traces of the detergent and 
soil by adequate rinsing with clean water. 

NOTE — Soil which has been allowed to dry out or has become 
baked is particularly resistant to removal. If cuticles have to be 


left even for an hour before thorough cleaning it is worth leaving 
them to soak in water or detergent solution. 


6.2 Classification of Detergents 


Detergents in general are of three types, namely, acidic, 
alkaline and neutral. Synthetic detergents, increasingly used 
by the industry because of their neutral character and non- 
detrimental value towards metals, should be preferred. For 
specific purposes such as removal of slime from the 


IS 14520 : 2018 


surfaces of utensils and equipment with which fish comes 
in direct contact, alkaline detergents may be used. 


6.3 Handling and Use of Detergents 
6.3.1 Storage 


Detergents should be stored in covered containers in a 
cool and dry place. 


6.3.2 Measurement 


Detergents should be carefully measured or weighed 
while preparing their solutions. Careless measuring may 
lead to waste, ineffective cleaning or damage to the plant. 


6.3.3 Instructions for Use 


Detailed instructions for the use of detergents and the 
frequency of cleaning including any necessary precautions 
to be observed should be given to the operators. 


6.4 Handling and Use of Disinfectants 


6.4.1 Use of disinfectants is necessary as the detergents 
alone may not be capable of bringing down the bacterial 
load on the surfaces of utensils and equipments to any 
appreciable extent. Chlorine disinfectants are widely 
used for this purpose. Chlorine is available in two forms, 
that is, calcium hypochlorite (solid) (bleaching powder) 
and sodium hypochlorite (liquid). 


6.4.2. Precautions for Storage 


Chlorine present in both the forms — solid and liquid 
— is unstable and is easily lost in the presence of the 
light and high temperature. It should be kept in amber- 
coloured bottles in a cool and dry place. 
NOTE — Hypochlorite compounds should not be mixed with 
acidic compounds since dangerous fumes are produced when 


this is done. Prolonged contact of these substances with the skin 
should be avoided. 


7 CLEANING OPERATION 
7.0 General 


Fish residues in wet condition should be removed by 
hosing with cold water. If hardened, they are very 
difficult to clean and the use of scrapers and scrubbers 
may become unavoidable. Frequent cleaning and hosing 
should be restored in order to avoid more prolonged 
and drastic methods. Wooden and other porous surfaces 
may readily become sodden with fish slime and may 
create serious problems of cleaning at later stages. The 
surface to be cleaned should first of all be scrubbed 
with a brush in order to remove solid organic matter, 
then flushed with potable water and subsequently 
scrubbed with a detergent. The excess of detergent may, 
then, be washed off and the disinfectant at the required 
concentration (wooden surfaces — 1 000 mg/kg 
minimum, floor — 500 mg/kg, other surfaces — 
1 000 mg/kg) may be applied for a contact period of 
15 min followed by final washing with potable water. 


NOTE — In the case of movable utensils like basins, trays, 
tubes, baskets, knives, scissors, etc, it will b e 
preferable to dip them in detergent and disinfectant solutions 
rather than mere cleaning with the respective solutions. 


7.1 Mechanical Cleaning 


Mechanical cleaning makes the job easier. Depending 
upon the type of cleaning, vacuum cleaning, scrubbing 
or high pressure cleaning may be adopted. 


7.1.1 Vacuum Cleaners 


The vacuum cleaners are of great use in fish meal plants 
to prevent accumulation of solid meal particles which 
may act as centres for insect infestation or harbouring 
of micro-organisms. They are also useful in cleaning 
roof girders and trusses. 


7.1.2 Scrubbers 


Scrubber may be used for cleaning floors. They consist 
of a rotating brush or brushes kept in contact with the 
floor by the weight of the machine or manually. The 
detergent solution may be delivered at the point where 
the brushes are operating. 


7.1.3 Pressure Cleaners 


Pressure cleaners are of great use in cleaning equipment, 
such as filleting, grading or skinning machine so that 
the spray may be directed to the inaccessible parts of 
the equipment. They are also useful in washing ice 
boxes, wagons, and vans used for transporting fish. 


7.1.4 Automatic Chlorination 


Automatic chlorinators may be fitted to the process 
water system to ensure perfect and uninterrupted 
chlorination of the water supply. 


7.2 Fishing Boats 


The boat deck, fish hold and the utensils used in the vessel 
should be scrubbed with a neutral detergent, such as 
sodium salt of higher sulphonated fatty alcohols 
(0.5 percent). After washing off the excess detergent, 
disinfectant like sodium hypochlorite may be applied at 
the rate of 1 000 mg/kg for wooden surfaces and 
100 mg/kg for metallic surfaces with a minimum contact 
time of 15 min. A dose of 100 mg/kg may be given to the 
baskets which are used in some smaller type of trawlers. 
For fishing vessels at sea, normally sea water is used for 
washing the deck and fish-room after treatment with 
detergents and disinfectants. There is no particular 
objection to using sea water provided that the water is 
drawn from the open sea, since near shore water is often 
polluted with sewage and other faecal matter. 


7.3 Fish Harbour 


Polluted water should not be used for washing purposes; 
only potable water approved by the local authority 


should be used. Cleaning procedures and the 
concentrations ofthe detergent and disinfectants should 
be similar to those described under 7.2. Drains and 
gutters may be washed off first, followed by sprinkling 
of bleaching powder. 


7.4 Vehicles for Transport 


These vehicles often develop fish smell which is difficult 
to remove by mere hosing with water. The internal 
surface has to be hosed with water after removal of the 
solid particles laying here and there. Thereafter, the 
surface has to be cleaned with a detergent followed by 
spraying of sodium hypochlorite (100 mg/kg) and final 
hosing with water. In case where the wagons have to 
be used for carrying fruits, vegetables, butter, milk, etc, 
in the downward trip, spraying with 0.1 percent sodium 
thiosulphate solution or any other approved anti- 
chlorine solution followed by hosing with cold water is 
recommended. 


7.5 Primary Process Centres, Fish Meal Plants, 
Freezing and Canning Factories 


Washing ofthe utensils and equipment is similar to those 
described under 7.2. The floor may be washed with a 
higher concentration of chlorine after treatment with 
the detergent. 


8 FISH MARKET 


8.1 Location 


8.1.1 Fish markets should preferably be located at places 
away from vegetable, meat or other food markets. A 
prerequisite should be that main services, such as 
potable water, electricity and proper hygienic sewage 
disposal facilities are available. 


8.1.2 The area should be elevated than the rest to 
facilitate water drainage. The area should not be 
environmentally polluted and should have minimum 
industrial activities, which otherwise have the potential 
to contaminate the fish. The area selected should not 
be prone to infestation of pests. The area should be 
easily accessible for vehicles and public. It is very 
important to provide facilities for ease of transportation 
of fish towards the market and outwards in minimum 
possible time. Area selected should have facilities for 
effective removal of solid and liquid wastes. 


8.1.3 It is recommended that fish markets should deal 
solely with the sale of fish and not with any other food 
or food products. The mixed shops purveying meats, 
marine foods and vegetables shall be discouraged. 


8.2 Premises 


8.2.1 The design of the premises should be in such a 
way that bad handling practices are eliminated. Due 
regard should be given to make the system as user 
friendly as possible. The system designed should be 


IS 14520 : 2018 


logical, easy to understand, easy to clean and maintain. 
The fish market should be free from animals and birds. 


8.2.2 There should be a separate area for unloading 
and loading of fish from vehicles. Ideally, fish should 
be traded on raised platform with provisions for potable 
water and ice. In general, it is better to have separate 
fish cutting place, to avoid cross contamination and easy 
collection of waste. However, local practice must be 
considered while designing the market. 


8.2.3 Ample space should be provided for parking of 
transport and customers vehicles. Fish markets should 
have a compound with two gates for entry and exit. It 
must contain security booth adjacent to entry gate and 
cattle grid/cow trap at both gates to prevent entry of 
animals. A board indicating the do's and don'ts in the 
market should be installed near the entrance and such 
other places. Boards/flexes indicating the importance 
of icing, hygienic handling, and health benefits of fish 
consumption have to be placed at appropriate places. 


8.3 Layout 


A recommended layout of the fish markets is given in 
Fig. 1. 


8.4 Fish Handling 


The place where the fish is unloaded from the trucks should 
be an elevated platform with proper slope for easy draining 
of water. The unloading area should be covered by netting 
so that access to birds and other pests are prevented. The 
fish should be unloaded into plastic containers, properly 
iced and stored in cold room till it is ready for vending. 
The fish unloading area should have access to potable water 
and ice. Similarly, auction hall should have sufficient light, 
ventilation, water supply and drainage facility. Fishes in 
crates must be placed on platforms during auction. Fish 
should never be directly placed on floor or platform. 
Sufficient care must be taken for gentle handling of fish. 


8.5 Internal Structures 


8.5.1 Structures within fish market establishments 
should be built with durable materials and must be easy 
to maintain, clean and disinfect. The material used for 
construction should be resistant to thorough cleaning, 
corrosion and microbial build up. 


8.5.2 The entire marketing area should be made fly 
proof. This can be achieved by providing fly proof 
netting in all windows, exhaust vents and all openings. 
The doors should be self closing and a powerful air 
curtain should be provided at all entrances. The netting 
should be made up of fiber glass, which facilitates 
cleaning and prevents breaking. 


8.5.3 The surfaces of walls, partitions and floors should 
be made of non-toxic impervious materials. 


IS 14520 : 2018 


2 - Gutting Table 


Ww 
E: 
[^] 
o 
« 
n 


8.00m 


FRONT ELEVATION 


AC SHEET ROOFING 
OVER - STEEL TRUSSES 
SUPPORTED ON 
COLUMNS 


FALSE CEILING WITH 
AC PLAN SHEETS 


FOUNDATION 


VIEW ONL’ ACCORDING RACK TO STORE 
f " TO SOIL CARTONS, etc. 
40X100mm THICK 
MOSAIC FLOORING Eta iie M 
2.10m HIGH CERAMIC : 
TILE PAVING AUTOMATIC DOOR GLOSER 
SECTION X-X 
(VIEW ONLY) 
1 - Wash Basin 3 - Sales Counter 5 - Weighing Machine 


4- Freazar Cabinet 6 - Wash Tub 


All dimensions in millimetres excepting box expressed in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 LAYOUT oF A FISH MARKET 


4 


8.5.4 Walls and partitions should have a smooth surface. 
The walls should be laid with glazed tiles up to a height 
of 6-7 feet. The use of guard rails is advisable to 
minimize the impact, when trolleys and other heavy 
loads impact on walls. 


8.5.5 Floors should be constructed with anti-skid 
industrial grade tiles and should have good slope to 
prevent water logging. 


8.5.6 Provisions for adequate drainage, which are 
covered with non-corrosive, removable lids and the 
drainage exit should be provided with mesh and water 
trap to prevent access of pests. 


8.5.7 Wall to ceiling and wall to floor junctions should 
be coved to facilitate cleaning. Corners of walls 
susceptible to impact damage should be protected by 
guard rails. 


8.5.8 Windows should be easy to clean, be constructed 
to minimize the buildup of dirt and where necessary, be 
fitted with removable and cleanable insect-proof 
screens. 


8.5.9 Adequate numbers of exhaust fans fitted with 
insect proof nettings should be provided. Providing 
adequate numbers of exhaust fan is highly essential 
for maintaining air quality as well as temperature 
inside the market. Sufficient numbers of exhaust fans 
should be oriented to push in the air in addition to 
exhausting. 


8.5.10 Doors should have smooth, non-absorbent 
surfaces, and be easy to clean and self closing type. 
Doors should be wide enough to prevent congestion, 
should be always kept closed. If possible plastic curtain 
strips, heavy enough not to be blown to sides must hang 
over the door way to prevent access to insects and birds 
and to maintain temperature control. Air curtains can 
also be used. 


8.5.11 The ground in front ofthe fish market building 
must have concrete floor or pavement with concrete 
blocks. Synthetic, hard carpets at the entry point will 
reduce the possible entry of sand and mud to fish 
market. If possible, a foot-dip can be provided at the 
entry point. 


8.5.12 All doors, windows, ventilators, exhaust vents 
should be closely fitted so that there is no opening 
between them and the walls. This will prevent entry of 
pests to the market. 


8.5.13 Lighting 


Good artificial lighting should be provided as close to 
natural day light as possible. All lights should be 
protected by suitable diffusers or covers to prevent 
contamination of fish by broken glass. 


IS 14520 : 2018 


8.6 Fish Vending Tables/ Platforms 


8.6.1 Fish vending tables/platforms should be provided 
for display and sale of fish. The working surfaces that 
come into direct contact with fish should be in sound 
condition, durable and easy to clean, maintain and 
disinfect. They should be made of smooth, non- 
absorbent materials, and must be inert to the food, to 
detergents and disinfectants under normal operating 
conditions. 


8.6.2 Tables/platforms should be provided with taps, 
to give potable water within the reach. 


8.6.3 Vending area should have sufficient space for 
display, store and clean the fish and area for the storage 
of ice box, utensils, knives, weighing balance etc. 


8.6.4 Provision to store waste also has to be provided 
in each vending table/platform where fish dressing is 
done by the fish trader. 


8.6.5 A minimum 8-10 feet wide passage should be 
provided to facilitate easy movement of customers. 


8.6.6 A separate area for the cutting and cleaning of 
fish is recommended subject to local practices. 


8.6.7 Fish displayed must be fresh, clean and free from 
dirt. Ample ice should be mixed with fish (1:1) so that 
the fish 1s cooled and will be preserved hygienically. 
Fish should be displayed on crates with ice. 


8.6.8 There should be a drain tube from the vending 
table/platform to the drain so that water from the 
vending table/platform will not splash in the ground 
and will form a source of contamination and 
inconvenience. Fish trading table/platforms have to be 
provided with ridge all around to prevent spilling of 
water. It must have proper slope towards drain tube 
for easy flow of water. However, small level area has 
to be provided in the platform/table for placing 
weighing balance. 


8.6.9 Water proof electric supply points should be 
arranged for each table/platform taking due care of 
possible electric mishaps owing to presence of water. 


8.7 Provision of Potable Water 


8.7.1 Provision for adequate supply of water should be 
ensured. It is recommended to have dedicated water 
supply source, besides municipal water supply, to ensure 
24 h water supply to fish market. Water, if taken from 
bore well or other sources, should be treated and 
properly disinfected. The final water quality should 
conform to IS 10500. 


8.7.2 The treated water should be stored in an 
underground sump and to be pumped into an overhead 
tank whenever needed. The tanks should be paved with 


IS 14520 : 2018 


white or light coloured glazed tiles and protected from 
contamination. The manholes should be properly 
secured to prevent access of pests. 


8.7.3 The treated water should be distributed using 
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) pipes of adequate dimensions. 
The taps should be self closing. All the taps should be 
provided with non-return valves to prevent 
contamination. 


8.7.4 The water treatment equipment and water storage 
units should be cleaned and disinfected regularly at least 
once in a week. 


8.8 Provision of Ice 


8.8.1 A flake ice machine of sufficient capacity should 
be installed inside the market. If flake ice machine is 
not feasible, block ice can be used. Block ice should be 
made from potable water which conforms to IS 10500. 
A stainless steel ice crusher has to be provided to crush 
the 1ce blocks. 


8.8.2 Ice blocks should be transported using trolleys 
and dragging it through the floor should not be 
permitted. 


8.8.3 Flake ice or crushed ice should be stored in 
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) containers/crates and should 
be transported in trolleys. 


8.9 Fish Holding Crates 


8.9.1 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) crates of sufficient 
quantity should be made available to vendors and fish 
transporters to transport and store fish. 


8.9.2 No bamboo or other types of baskets should be 
allowed to store the fish. 


8.9.3 Outside crates or baskets should not be allowed 
inside the market. 


8.9.4 There should be an area demarcated for cleaning, 
disinfecting and storing of crates. It is desirable to 
provide a small tank to dip and wash the crates each 
time after use. 


8.9.5 It is ideal to use crates of one colour (preferably 
‘blue’) for storing fresh fish and crates of another colour 
(preferably ‘red’ or ‘yellow’) for waste disposal. 


8.10 Toilets 


8.10.1 Sufficient numbers of toilets with adequate water 
supply — separate for gents and ladies, should be 
constructed within the fish market complex. At the 
entry/exit point of toilets, a foot-dip with synthetic mat 
should be provided to prevent transmission of 
pathogenic microbes to fish market area. 


8.10.2 Toilets should have wash basin with hand 


washing soaps. Hand washing should be mandatory 
after using toilets. 


8.10.3 Toilets should have separate water storage tank, 
sufficient lights, exhaust fans etc. Bigger toilet blocks 
may have toilet fee collection area, storage for cleaning 
equipments, detergents and disinfectants. 


8.11 Other Items 


8.11.1 Manual trolleys (hydraulic) in sufficient numbers 
should be provided for transportation inside the market. 


8.11.2 An insulated store house/chill room of sufficient 
capacity should be provided to store the unsold fish 
and fish landed during off market hours. 


8.11.3 A wash tub for washing of fish before storage in 
the store house/chill room shall also be provided 
adjacent to the latter. 


8.11.4 A silent diesel generator is desirable. 


8.11.5 Fly incinerator/fly catcher should be installed at 
appropriate places in fish trading and fish cutting area. 


8.11.6 In the bigger fish markets, a rest room/change 
room can be provided with locker facility to store their 
dress and other materials. 


8.11.7 First-aid and fire-fighting systems should be 
established. 


8.11.8 Drinking water should be made available at 
appropriate places. 


8.11.9 Weighing balances (100 kg capacity) should be 
provided at auction halls. 


8.11.10 AII the fish traders may be advised to use 
electronic weighing balances for accurate measurement. 


8.11.11 An office room with telephone, fax, computer 
and printer facility may be arranged for supervisor/ 
manager. A telephone connection may be provided at 
the gate for security person. Coin operated telephone 
instrument can be arranged within the market complex. 


8.12 Tools Used in Cleaning and Cutting 


The implements used for cutting and cleaning of fish 
should be made of non-corrosive materials and should 
be cleaned in chlorinated water before and after use. 
All the tools should be cleaned, wiped dry and stored 
in a dry area after the day's work is over. The tools 
which are broken, non-repairable should be discarded 
and should not be used inside the market. 


8.13 Containers for Waste 


8.13.1 Containers for wastes and other non-edible 
substance, should be specifically identifiable, suitably 
constructed and, where appropriate, made of 
impervious material. 


8.13.2 The waste in the containers should be iced to 
prevent purification and smell. 


8.14 Effluent Treatment System 


8.14.1 An efficient effluent treatment system should be 
installed in the premises to treat the water and other 
wastes generated in the market. 


8.14.2 No waste should go out without proper 
treatment. 


8.14.3 The effluent generated should confirm to the 
local pollution control norms. 


8.14.4 Provision to treat solid waste by installing a silage 
plant is highly recommended. 


8.15 Cleaning of Fish Markets 


8.15.1 Adequate facilities, suitably designate manpower 
should be provided for cleaning fish, utensils and 
market. Cleaning should remove fish wastes and dirt 
which may be a source of contamination. 


8.15.2 A compressor with jet cleaning facility, mounted 
on wheel should be provided for efficient cleaning. 


8.15.3 Cleaning chemicals like hypochlorite, should be 
handled and used carefully and in accordance with 
manufacturers! instructions and stored separate from 
food, in clearly identified containers to avoid the risk 
of contaminating food. 


8.15.4 Schedule of Cleaning 


Cleaning should be carried out before the market activity 
starts and a final cleaning after the market closes. But a 
habit of cleaning as and when waste accumulates should 
be developed and practiced. Minimum cleaning 
schedules suggested are given in Table 1. 


IS 14520 : 2018 


8.15.5 General cleaning procedures will involve: 


a) Removing solid debris from surfaces. 

b) Rinsing with water followed by applying a 
detergent solution to loosen soil and bacterial 
film. 


c) Rinsing with water to remove loosened dirt 
and residues of detergent. 


d) Disinfection with chlorinated water (100-200 
ppm) with 5 - 10 min contact time. 


e) Cleaning and disinfection programmes should 
ensure that all parts of the establishment are 
appropriately clean. 


8.15.6 Cleaning and disinfection programmes should 
be continually and effectively monitored for their 
suitability and effectiveness. A record of clearing and 
supervision should be maintained. 


8.16 Chemicals and Disinfectants 


8.16.1 For effective disinfection, only food grade 
chemicals have to be used. Phenolic compounds, should 
not be used in markets at any cost. The most common 
chemical, which is safe and could be used in the fish 
markets, is chlorine in the form of hypochlorite. The 
concentration of disinfectant (chlorine) varies 
according to the place where it is applied. The 
recommneded levels of available chlorine content are 
given in Table 2. 


8.16.2 The direct and indirect contact surfaces should 
be cleaned as per the cleaning procedure before and 
after each shift of production. The best cleaning 
procedure will be wetting with water, removing all solid 
wastes, application of a non-ionic detergent by 
scrubbing with the help ofa clean brush, washing with 
potable water, sanitizing with chlorine water containing 
50 ppm chlorine for 30 min and finally washing with 
potable water. Cleaning of all contact and indirect 


Table 1 Suggested Minimum Cleaning Schedules 
(Clause 8.15.4) 


Area/Facility 
a) (2) 
1) Fish trading area, passage, auction hall, 
unloading area 
i) Cutting area 


Frequency of Cleaning 


(3) 


Minimum twice a day at the beginning and end of trading/auction. 


Minimum twice a day at the beginning and end of trading. However, the solid 


waste must be removed once in 2-4 h depending upon waste generation. 


iii) Parking area 
iv) Internal roads, outside drainage 
v) Internal passage and internal drainage 
vi) Chilled storage 
vii) Toilets 


Minimum once in a day 
Minimum once in a day 
Minimum once in a day 
Minimum once in a day 
At least 4 times a day (0600 h, 1000 h, 1400 h and 1800 h). The frequency of 


cleaning may be increased depending upon the usage. 


vii) Cleaning of cutting equipments 


ix) Water sump, overhead tank 


At frequent intervals depending on usage and final cleaning and disinfection at the 
end of the day. 


At least once in a month. 


IS 14520 : 2018 


Table 2 Recommended Levels of Available Chlorine Content 
(Clause 8.16.1) 


SI Purpose 
No. 


a) (2) 
i) Process water and ice production 
ii Hand dip water 
ii) Foot dips water 
iv) X Water for sanitation of Utensils, trading table, 
fish cutting equipments etc 


v) Water for sanitation of floor and wall 
vi) | Water for sanitation of drain 


contact surfaces will prevent bacterial build up and 
contamination of the food handled. 


8.16.3 The food contact surfaces should not be 
contaminated with inedible materials like lubricants, 
detergents and other chemicals. This is very essential 
to ensure safety of the food handled in the fish market. 
This can be achieved by adhering to following 
procedures: 


a) Separate storage areas for sanitizers. 


b) Approved procedure for use of chemicals and 
display of the same in areas of use. 


c) Use only food grade chemicals or chemicals 
approved competent authority. 

d) Chemicals to be used only by trained and 
authorized personnel. 


There should not be any provision for the storage or 
use of any type of toxic or poisonous chemicals in fish 
vending area even for pest control. When there is an 
unusual fly population in food handling areas the only 
permitted procedure is fumigation with formaldehyde 
followed by defumigation with ammonia. 


8.17 Personnel Hygiene Facilities and Toilets 


8.17.1 People who do not maintain an appropriate 
degree of personal cleanliness, who have certain illness 
or conditions or who behave inappropriately, can 
contaminate food and transmit illness to consumers. All 
personnel engaged in selling and handling of fish should 
be free from communicable diseases and practice high 
level of personal hygiene. 


8.17.2 Fish handlers suspected, to be suffering from, 
or to be a carrier of a disease or illness likely to be 
transmitted through food, should not be allowed to enter 
any fish/fish products handling area if there is a 
likelihood of their contaminating food. 


8.17.3 The fish handlers suffering from the diseases 
like jaundice, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, sore throat 
with fever, visibly infected skin lesions (boils, cuts, 
etc), discharges from the ear, eye or nose etc, should 
not be allowed to sell or handle fish inside the 
market. 


Recommended Levels of Available Chlorine Content 


(3) 
<5 ppm (< 5 mg/l) 
< 20 ppm (< 20 mg/l) 
100-200 ppm (100-200 mg/l) 
100 ppm (100 mg/l) 


100-200 ppm (100-200 mg/l) 
250-500 ppm (250-500 mg/l) 


8.17.4 Facilities should be made available to ensure 
that an appropriate degree of personal hygiene is 
maintained and to avoid contaminating food. Such 
facilities should include: 


a) Adequate means for washing and drying 
hands, including foot operated wash basins 
supplied with potable water. 

b) Adequate number of hygienically designed 
toilets. 


c) Adequate changing facilities for personnel. 


8.17.4.1 These facilities should be suitably located and 
designated. Personnel should always wash their hands 
at the start of fish handling activities and 1mmediately 
after using the toilet and after handling raw fish or any 
contaminated material. 


8.18 Dress Code 


There should be proper isolation of workers body in 
such a way that directly or indirectly body of workers 
does not come into contact with the food or food 
contact surfaces. This is effectively done by providing 
clean uniforms including gum boots, head cover and 
face masks. 


8.19 Personal Behaviour 


8.19.1 Chewing tobacco, smoking and spitting is 
strictly prohibited inside the market. People engaged 
in fish/fish product handling activities should 
refrain from behaviour which could result in 
contamination of food, like smoking, spitting, 
eating, chewing pan, sneezing or coughing over 
unprotected food. They should not wear any 
ornaments, watches etc. 


8.20 Waste Management 


8.20.1 Suitable provision must be made for the removal 
and storage of waste. Waste must not be allowed to 
accumulate in fish handling, fish storage, and other 
working areas and the adjoining environment except 
so far as is unavoidable for the proper functioning of 
the business. Waste stores must be kept appropriately 
clean and iced. 


8.20.2 The possibility of trimming and cleaning of fish 
to be done separately should be explored. This will help 
in easy segregation of solid fish waste. The solid wastes 
should be segregated and removed. 


8.20.3 The liquid waste should be collected and fed 
into an effluent treatment plan before it is discharged 
to the public sewerage. 


8.21 Management of Stink 


Stink of fish basically occurs due to improper handling 
of fish. The stink means the fish has started spoiling. 
Hence the first and foremost thing to do for prevention 
of stinking 1s not to let the fish spoil and to store the 
cleaned fish under ice at a temperature below 40?C. 
Adequate icing will keep the fresh fish free from stink. 
The mucus and other biological particles from the fish, 
if not removed immediately during washing will also 
cause stink. Hence, care should be taken to remove the 
waste as often as possible. The waste should be kept 
under ice before it is used for making silage or manure. 
Proper handling and storage of the fish and adherence 
to the cleaning schedule using disinfectants 1s necessary 
to prevent stink. 


8.22 Maintenance Schedule for the Taps, Electric 
Items, etc 


8.22.1 All the mechanical implements in the market 
should be always maintained and kept in working 
condition. 


8.22.2 The taps should be checked for leaks and 
breakages every day and should be repaired after the 
day's business is over. 


8.22.3 The overhead tank and sump for water collection 
should be checked for cleanliness at least once in a week. 


8.22.4 The tanks should be cleaned and sanitized at 
least once in 3 months. All the non- return valves and 
tubes should be regularly checked for leakages and 
breakages. 


8.22.5 Motor pumps used for lifting water should be 
checked every day. The water treatment devices like 
sand filter, carbon filter should be checked daily and 
backwashed once in a month. 


8.22.6 All the lightings and switches should be checked 
for its operation daily and replaced if found defective. 


8.22.7 The weighing balances should be calibrated at 
least once in six months. 


8.22.8 The chill room and flake ice making machine 
also should be checked for refrigerant leaks and kept in 
good condition. It is desirable to have annual 
maintenance contract and proper insurance against fire 
and other hazards. 


IS 14520 : 2018 


8.23 Pest Control Systems 


8.23.1 Pest infestations can occur where there are 
breeding sites and a supply of food for the promotion 
of pests. Good hygiene practices should be employed 
to avoid creating an environment conducive to pests. 


8.23.2 Good sanitation, inspection of incoming 
materials and good monitoring can minimize the 
likelihood of infestation and there by limit the need for 
pesticides. Periodic drives to kill and eliminate the pest 
infection should be undertaken. 


8.24 Training 


8.24.1 AII personnel handling fish in the markets should 
be trained in all aspects of food safety and hygienic fish 
handling practices. Such programmes should enable 
them to understand the importance of food hygiene and 
its importance in controlling foodborne illness. The 
training/awareness should include: 


a) Necessity of hygienic fish markets; 

b) Personal hygiene; 

c) Role of responsibility of stakeholders; 

d) Health benefits of fish consumption; 

e) Hygienic handling of fish; 

f) Spoilage of fish and its prevention; 

g) Ideal practices in fish sale, fish dressing and 
storage; 

h) Use ofchilled storage; 

jJ) Waste disposal; and 

k) Do’s and don’ts in the fish market. 


8.24.2 All personnel should be aware of their role and 
responsibility in protecting fish from contamination or 
deterioration. They should be trained in aspects such 
as the nature of the food, in particular its ability to 
sustain growth of pathogenic or spoilage micro- 
organisms, the manner in which the fish is handled and 
processed, including the probability of contamination 
and the conditions under which the fish will be stored, 
good hygienic practices and its importance in food safety 
etc. 


8.24.3 A refresher training course may be arranged two 
months after first training. 


9 FRESH FISH STALLS 


9.1 Location 


Fresh fish retail stalls should ensure liberal supply of 
water, sewage disposal facilities and power supply. They 
should be preferably located at places away from 
vegetables or other foods. It should also be away from 
meat and poultry since fish are more perishable and 
pick up infection. 


IS 14520 : 2018 


9.2 Sections 


9.2.1 Fish Storage 
(3 m x 4 m x 4m) 


and Receiving Room 


Fish received in boxes should be emptied immediately 
and chilled to a temperature around 5?C. The boxes 
should be cleaned immediately for re-use, if necessary. 
Surplus fish as also fish left over after sales should be 
stored in refrigerator or ice chests. This room may also 
serve for storage of ice. 


9.2.2 Fish Dressing Room (3 m x 3 m x 4 m) 


9.2.2.1 Fish exhibited for sale shall be washed 
thoroughly in water and freed from viscera and gills, if 
received whole, on cutting boards of hard wood. 
Washing vats should be coated by linseed oil paint. After 
washing, the dressed fish may be sold as such or cut 
into steaks or fillets as required. 


9.2.2.2 Cutting knives of stainless steel blades with 
sanitary holders shall be employed for dressing of fish. 
Cutlery and equipment should be sterilized by dipping 
in hot water (76 °C) for 15 min or in water containing 
50 mg/kg of chlorine for 2 min. All equipment should 
be washed within 2 h of use apart from daily washing 
while commencing and closing of sales. 


9.2.3 Fish Sales Counter (2 m x 3 m x 4 m) 


9.2.3.1 Fish shall be sold in closed glass cabinets and 
flies should be prevented by pesticides strips or other 
effective means unless the stall is completely screened 
from flies by wire gauze windows of 2 mm size. 


9.2.3.2 Fish may be exhibited on benches of rust-proof 
material or wood lacquered white at least 50 cm above 
the floor level. Fish shall not be piled in heaps and 
bruising of fish should be avoided at all stages. Fish 
sold as fillets shall be covered in water-proof paper. 


10 


Fish shall be chilled from the time of receipt till sale to 
a temperature of 5°C with the help of ice and iced water. 


9.2.4 Covered Passage for Customers (1.5 m Wide) 


Covered passage before sales counter should be 
protected from rain and sun. 


9.3 Dimensions 


It is recommended that the four sections should have 
the dimensions as given in 9.2 for stalls with medium 
fish handling capacity per day, that is, 300 to 500 kg. 


9.4 Constructional Requirements 


9.4.1 In case walls do not have tiles, they should receive 
water impermeable, non-flaking coating, white vermin- 
proofoil paint finish. Non-washable ordinary distempers 
shall not be used. All joints with walls and other surfaces 
should be smooth and rounded for easy washing. Roof 
should be of cement or white-washed plaster. 


9.4.2 Floor 


Floor should be water impermeable and capable of easy 
washing, built of cement, granite, asphalt or smooth 
hard rubber concrete and free from cracks, joints and 
open drains. A slope of 1:50 towards the drain 1s 
recommended. Actual contact of fish with flooring 
should be avoided and fish should always be placed on 
glass/metal/clean wooden surface. 


9.4.3 Illumination of fish retail shops should be in the 
range of 10 to 15 lumens; fish should not be exposed 
to the sun. 


9.5 Employee Hygiene 


Employees in fish retail stalls shall observe hygienic 
conditions as given in IS 2491. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 12 (2471). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


