( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS:2304-I962

Indian -Standard
PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION AND TESTING OF LIGHT METALS (ALUMINIUM AND MAGNESIUM) AND THEIR ALLOY INGOTS AND CASTINGS FOR AIRCRAFT PURPOSES
Light

Metals
Chnirmnn

and Their

Alloys Sectional

Committee,

SMDC

10

Reprcscnting
The Aluminium Cf&lcutta The Aluminium Corporation of India `Ltd

Sxsr K. K. BH~~IN
Mtmbcrr SHRI V. D. A~A~WAL DB N. ANJ~EYULU

,

Corporation

of

India

Ltd.,

'

Defence Research & Development Organization ( Ministry .of l&fence ) sa~1P.K. CHATTEBJEE (&htau&) The Aluminium Manufacturing Co Ltd., Calcutta &IEI~TANTGENEIULMANAQEB Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), National DR A. B. CEATTEIUEA Jamshedpur CHEXIET & METALLUROUIT, RE- Ministry of R8ilW8ys ~EABCH, DES~ONS& STAFZDABD~ OBOMTIZATION, CEITTABANJU CHEMJET& METTAI,LUB~I~T, SOUTH EA~TEBN RAILWAY, KHABAC+~B ( .&emtt ) DEPUTY DIRECTOB OF INBPEC- Inzpection Wing, Directorate Glenera of Supplies & Disposals (Ministry of Economic & Defence TION (NET) Co-ordination Government Test House, Calcutta DEPUTY DIBECTOB ( X-RAY ) Sam Or KHO~LA Electrical Menufscturing Co Ltd , Calauttcr SxBI0.P. M~T~~~(Altc+nate) Dire&orate of Teohnical Services, Air HeadquarDB M. L. MEETA ter% New Delhi SHBI D. D. CEOWDEUBY ( AZi?arna&) SRBI K. P. K. MENON Nevsl Chemical & Metellurgical Lhorato~ ( Navel Heedquartem ), Born&y Sasr U. G. K. MENON ( Allmnatc ) SEBI B. K. MUBTHY Indinn Aluminium Co Ltd , Cslcutte SHBI R. K, ClfABI ( Alternab )

Calcutta

iiuDiA~
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR %4ARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DBLHI I10002 -

Is:`wo4-1962
( Continrt?dffo?n

popage 1)
Repreeedng Ordnance Directorate Gene1-81 of ( Ministry of Defence ), Celcutta Factories

Membc+% SRRI G. NA~AEIMEAN SHBI D. Y. MO~BE ( Altermte

)
Non-Ferrous Indian Association, C8lCUtt8 -Development. Industry
)

SHRI M. K. Rno
SUB1 C. f_%lATTESJI ( ~h%l~ SHEI C. J. SHAE Da P. DAYAL ( Alternote ) SHBI HIMCEAIU~ K. SHAH SRBI P. K. AYBAXI (Alternate SHBI M. B. SEAXXAR SHRI M. K. TEO?~A~ ( Akrmfe SHRI 0. 6. WARBIEB SHRI B. S. KBISHNAMACHAR Deputy Director ( S&M )

Met818 of

~8nLlf8ct~UXJm' Commerce &

Wing,

Minietry

Jeewsnlal ( 1929) Ltd ., Calcutta

)

Hindustan Aircraft Ltd , Bangalore ) Alcan Asia Ltd , Calcutt.8 Director, IS1 ( Ex.oficio Member )

secretafy SHPJ S. L. BALI Extra Assistant Director ( S&M ), IS1 Subcommittee for Light

for Aircraft
Convener DE N. ANJAXIZYULU Members SHRI K. K. BHASII

Metals and Their Alloys Purposes, SMDC 10 : 2
Organization

Defence Reeearch & Development ( Ministq of Defence )

The Aluminium Corporation of India Ltd , Celcutta SRBI V. D. A~ABWAL ( Alternate ) Aircraft Manufacturing Depot ( Ministn, of CHIEF EN~IN-EER Defence ), Kanpur CHIEF INSPECTOR ( Alternote ) Civil Aviation Department ( Ministry of Transport 8mc1 II. J. GTJRMHNEY and Communieatioua ), New Delhi SH~I K. B. GANEUN ( Alternate ) Iudi8u Alumiuium co Ltd , tilCUtt8 SHBI B. K. MUBTEY Hindus&n +rcr+t Ltd. Bengolore Soar M. B. SEANKEB

2

IS:-2304-1962 CONTENTS
0.
1. FOREWORD SCOPE ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. . PAGE z

'2. TERMINOL~CY 3. QUALI~ OF MATERIAL 4. CHEMICAL COWPOSITION :. 7: it 10. Il.

... ... .. . ... ... ... ... . .. ... :.. ... TEST SAMPLESFOR CHEMICAL ANALYSIS .., .,. PRODUCTIONOF PRWURE DIE CATTINGS DIMENSIONAL TOLERANCES - CAST MATERIAL OTHER THAN ... ... ... ... INGoTS ,.. .., ... ... FREEDOM FROM DEFECTS,... ... ... PREPARATIONOF TENSILE TEST SAMPLES .., ... ,.. ... TENSILE TEsT . . . .*. IDE~IFICATION 0~ ING~S ... ... ... ... ...

PART I

GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS

: 6 6 7 7 7 7 ;

PART

II

APPROVED

PART Ill CASTINGS MADE FROM APPROVED INGOTS ( Except Aluminium-Silicon Alloys Subject to Modification ) 16. ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS ... 17. PREPARATIONOF TENSILE TEST SAMPLES ... 18. HEAT-TREATED CASTINGS . . .
19. RE-TEST PROCEDURES ... .. . 15. MANUFACTURE . . . ... ... ... . .. ... ... ...

12. ANALYTEAL REQUIREMENTS 13. PREPARATIONOF TENSILE TEST 14. RE-TEST PROCEDURES . . .

INGOTS

... SAMPLES ...

... . ..

...

... ... ...

12
12
12

`.,. ... .,. . .. .. .

13 13 13
::

PART IV CASTINGS NOT MADE FROM APPROVED INGOTS ( Except Aluminium-Silicon Alloys Subject to Modification ) . . . 15 . .. 20. ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS .. . ... . . . 15 21. PREPARATIONOF TENSILE TEST SAMPLES .. . ... 22. HEAT-TREATED CATTINGS
23. RE-TEST PROCEDURES ... 1:: ... ... ::

PART V SUBJECT

ALUMINIUM-SILICON TO MODIFICATION FROM APPROVED

ALLOY CASTINGS TREATMENT, MADE INGOTS
... 1:: ... . .. .*. ... ... :: I6 17

24.
25.
26. 27.

MAN~JFACTURE .. . ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS PREPARATIONOF TENSILE TEST RE-TEST PROCEDURES ...

... ... SAMPLES ...

30.

PART VI ALUMINIUWSILICON ALLOY CASTINGS SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION TREATMENT, NOT MADE FROM APPROVED INGOTS .., 28. ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS . . . 18 1:: . . . 18 29. PREPARATIONOF TENSILE TEST SA~~PLES
RE-TEST PROCEDURES .., ... ... ... 3

19

x$3:2304-1962

Indian Standard
PROCEDURE .FOR INSPECTION AND TESTING OF LIGHT METALS (ALUMINIUM AND MAGNESIUM) AND -THEIR ALLOY INGOTS AND CASTINGS FOR AIRCRAFT PURPOSES
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 December 1962, after the draft finalized by the Light Metals and Their Alloys Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 As indigenous raw materials for aircraft production have assumed great importance and the production of aircraft in the country has already commenced, Light Metals and Their Alloys Sectional Committee decided to formulate this specification which will help in ensuring the quality of aircraft materials. 0.3 Taking intd consideration the views of producers, consumers and testing authorities, the Sectional Committeeresponsible for the preparation of this standard felt that it should be related to the manufacturing and trade practices followed in the country in this field. Furthermore, due weightage had to be given to the need for international co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. These considerations led the Sectional Committee. to derive assistance from B.S. 2L.101 : 1959 Inspection and Testing Procedure for Aircraft Material, Aluminium-Base and Magnesium-Base Ingots and Castings issued by the British Standards Institution. 0.4 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this specification, it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard. 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on aluminium and its alloys for aircraft purposes. Other standards in this series are: *IS : 23-1959 SPECIFICATION FOR 99 PERCENT PRIMARY ALUMINIUM NOTCXED BARS AND INGOTS FOR REMELTING FOR AIRCRAFT PURPOSES ( Revised ) tIS : 30-1953 SPECIFICATION FOR ALUMINIUM-COATEDHIGH-TENSILE ALUMINIUMANNOY SHEETS AND COOLS FOR AIRCRAFTPURPOSES _ _*_Since revised. t!3nce w&drawn. 4

IS:2304-1962
`*IS : 202-1960 SPECIFICATION FOR ALUMINIUIU ALLOY CASTINOS FOR AIRCRAFT PURPOSES ( Revised) `flS: INGOTS AND

1847-1961 SPECIFICATION FOR 99*7 PERCENTPRIMARYALUMINIUM NOTCHED BARSAND INGOTS FORREMELTING FORAIRCRAFTPURPOSES and

0.6 Metric system has been adopted in India and all quantities dimensions in this standard have been given in this system.

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard. is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values ( Revised ). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should _ be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 0.8 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions relating to inspection and testing of the material, and it does not include all the necessary provisions of a contract.

1. SC6PE 1.1 This standard covers the general inspection and testing requirements for aircraft quality light metal ingots and their alloy ingots for r-e-melting purposes and castings.

PART 2. TERtiINOLOGY

I

GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS

2.0 For the purpose of this standard,-the folloiving definitions shall apply. 2.1 cast A ` Cast ' shall be defined as one of the following:

a) The product of one furnace melt; b) The ,product of one crucible'melt; c) The product of a number of crucible or furnace melts mixed prior to castings; d) The amount of metal tapped from the furnace without any further addition having been made, when a continuous melting process is employed for the production of ingots; and e) The amount of metal which may be represented by one tensile test sample when die castings are produced from continuously fed melting units. sulcc c . ;&e. ki%?&vn and ruperkded by `IS : 2%

IS : 2304 - 1962
This term shall be interpreted in the manner directed by the Indian Air-Worthiness Authority, if the material is intended for aircraft purposes. In other cases, ` Insfidctor ' shall mean a person or persons expressly authorized in writing by the purchaser to act on his behalf for inspection of the material. 2.3 Approved Scrap - Scrap which arises from the ingot maker's own production to the relevant Indian Standard, or from the founder's own production from approved ingots, and which is segregated and identified to the satisfaction of the inspector. It may include headers, runners and heavy fettling scrap, but shall exclude all small particles. 2.4 Approved Jngots - The term ` approved or magnesium alloy ingots which have been relevant clauses of the material specification and mechanical test requirements. 3. QUALITY ingots ' denotes aluminium proved to comply with the regarding both analytical

2.2 Inspector -

OF MATERIAL
shall conform to the relevant specification.

3.1 The material

3.2 Apart from the requirements given in this standard, the specific requirements as specified in the relevant material specifications shall also be complied with. 4. CHEMICAL

COMPOSITION

shall comply with

4.1 The chemical
the relevant 5. TEST

composition specification.

of the ingots and castings

SAMPLES

FOR CHEMICAL

ANALYSIS

5.1 Except when otherwise provided in the specification, from each cast, as defined in 2, an analytical sample or samples shall be prepared and suitably marked so ensure identification. Unless special samples for spectroscopy are made, the chill samples shall be prepared as prescribed in IS : 1817-1961 Methods of Sampling Non-Ferrous Metals for Chemical Analysis. All samples, including the residues of the analysis, shall be retained *by the ingot maker or the founder for at least one month after preparation.
5.2 Sand-Castings - Sample or samples shall be taken from the melt after stirring and immediately prior to pouring. 5.3 Gravity and Pressure Die Castings - The sample taken towards or at the end of the pouring: 6 or samples shall be

IS:=-1962 6. PRODUCTION OF PRESSURE DIE C&3TINGS 6.1 IJnless otherwise authorized
by the inspector, pressure die castings, other than those made by the cold chamber process, shall `be produced from approved ingots only. .

6.2 For die casting purposes, use of direct scrap shall not be permitted. However, scrap for production of ingots may be permitted. 7. DIMENSIONAL

THAN INGOTS

TOLERANCES - CAST

MATERIAL

OTHER

7.1 The thickness of castings where not machined shall be not less .than the nominal thickness and shall not exceed it by more than 10 percent; unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. The castings shall be capable of being machined, where required, to the finished dimensions without leaving evidence of the cast surface. 8. FREEDOM FROM DEFECTS 8.1 Ingots 8.1.1 The impurities.
8.2 Castings ingots shall be free from dross, slag or other harmful

8.2.1 The castings shall be clean and sound. They shall be capable of being machined satisfactorily and of taking a good finish. 8.2.2 Defective castings shall be repaired only with the prior consent of the inspector and. subject to the conditions laid down by the inspecting authority. Each repair or weld shall be encircled with a ring of white paint prior to submission for final inspection.
8.2.3 Any casting may. be rejected for faults of manufacture, defects or incorrectness of the specified dimensions, whether discovered during inspection or subsequently during, machining, notwithstanding that the casting had been passed previously as conforming. to the chemical composition and mechanical test requirements of the specification. 9. PREPARATION OF TENSILE TEST SAMPLES

.

9.1 Except as provided in Part II the metal for the test samples shall be
taken from the crucible or ladle from which the ingots or castings arecast and shall not be subjected to re-fluxing or to any treatment other than adjustment of the temperature to that suitable for pouring.

NOTE -When e molten ample to represent ingots is taken from a cast of magnesium base alloy that has been graiu refined by zirconium, the manufactuw# shall be permitted to add further zirconium to the sample.

7

KS:2304-l%2
9.2 Except as provided in93 and 9.4 test samples shall be `cast in sand moulds which shall have internal dimensions of one of the forms A `or B shown in Fig. 1. The mould may be inclined at an angle of approximately 30" from the vertical at the commencement of pouring and the metal shall be poured into the top of the mould. The sand of the mould shall be rammed into any convenient container ( such as a steel tube) so that the portion of the bar tapering from 25 mm to 24 mm is separated from the container walls by not less than 25 mm of sand.
-The temperature of the mould immediately prior to casting shall be NOTE between loo and WC.

'

Alternatively, at the option of the manufacturer, and where permitted by the relevant specification, the test samples may be produced in a sand mould giving the form C shown in Fig 2.
9.3

9.4 Altnnativelyj at the option of the manufacturer, test samples to represent gravity and pressure die castings may be cast in a drill mould giving one of the forms A, B, D or E as shown in Fig. I,3 and 4, respectively.
NOTE-By agreement between the ingot maker and the founder, chill cast test bare may be ~4 to represent ingots to be uned only for the production of gravity or p&sum die csetinge. 9.5

The test samples shall not be mechanically tested.

worked before they are

10. TENSILE

TEST and tested in accordance with the of the

10.1 Test ,pieces shall be machined relevant Indian Standard.

10.2 The test values obtained shall comply with the requirements relevant specification.

11. IDENTIFICATION OF INGOTS

,_

11.1 Each aiuminium alloy ingot 5 kg in weight and over and each magnesium alloy ingot 2.5 kg in weight and over, passed by the inspector, shall be identified by the mark of the inspector and such other marking as shall ensure full identitication of the material. 11.1.1All aluminium alloy ingots under 5 kg in weight, passed by the inspector, shall be marked in accordance with 11.1 or shall be made into bundles and the necessary marks stamped on a metal lable securely attached to each bundle. 11.2Each ahuninium alloy casting 2.5 kg in weight and over, and. each magnesium alloy casting l-5 kg in weight and over, passed by the inspector, shall be identified by the mark of the inspector and such other marking as shall ensure full identification.

a

I

K

I
9
9

IS : 2304 - 1962

IS:2304-1962

l-t-25

Ln.~&180
Form D

ill12 L-25
)

32 .

( All dimeneione in millimetree
FIG. 3 CHILL-CAIST TEST BAR

38 t

\I&
Form E

I

( All dimensions

in &llimetrea

j

FICA 4 CHILL-CAET TEWE BAB

11.2.1 All aluminium castings under 2-5 kg in weight and all magnesium alloy castings under 1.5 kg in weight, p&ed by the inspector, shall be

11,

IS:23@4-1962 stamped in accordance with 0.2 or shall be made into bundles and the necessary marks stamped on a metal lable securely attached to each bundle. .
NOTE -The m8rkt3 shall be applied detriment to the oesting. in Buch a m8nner aa will awee no

, PART t t . APPROVED 12. ANALYTICAL REQUIREMRNTS tNGOTS

l2.1 The chemical composition of the ingots shall comply with the composition specified in the relevant specification or, failing such provision, with the stipulations of the specification for the castings for which the ingots are required. 12.2 The manufacturer shall supply to the inspector, in respect of every cast, the results of analysis for the specified elements. 13. PREPARATION OF TRNSILR TEST SAMPLRS

13.1 A sample from each cast of alloy shall be cast in accordance with Part I or shall be similarly prepared from re-melted ingots and, where appropriate, shall be heat-treated in accordance with the relevant The test piece machined from this sample specification requirements. shall comply with the tensile test required by the specification.
NOTE -When a molten sample to represent ingota is taken from e cut of magnesium base alloy that hee been grain relkad by zirconium, the manufa.&urer shall be permitted to add fbrther zirconium to the sample.

14. RE4XST

PROCEUURRS

14.1 If any test piece fails to comply with the specified tensile test, the inspector shall adopt one or both of the following procedures, as requested by the manufacturer:

a) Should any one of the test pieces first selected fail to pass the test,

two further samples shall be selected for testing in respect of each failure. Should the test pieces from both these additional samples pass, the material represented by the test samples shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of the test. Should the test pieces from either of these additional samples fail, the material represented by the test samples shall be liable to rejection. ed ( once only ) and re-tested.

b) With heat-treated alloys, allow the t.est samples to be re-heat-treat-

PART

111 CASTINGS

MADE

PROM

APPROVED

INGOTS

( Except Alumlnium-Silicon

Alloys Subject to Modification )

Nom - The tensile values specified in particular @ecifkatione me intended 88 e test of quality of the material only aud m*y not always be realized in certain portiane of castings.
l5.

MANUFACTURE

15.1 Thecastings shall IX made from approved ingots complying with Part II. Except as provided in 6 approved scrap may be added to the melt at the disc%tion of the manufacturer.
16. ANUYTICAL

REQUIRIZMENTS

shall supply to the inspector the results of analysis for the specified elements of not less than 5 percent of the casts of each. alloy, The number of analyses shall be subject to a normal maximum of one for each alloy cast during each shift or two for each alloy cast during each day ( 24 hours ), whichever is less, and to a minimum of one analysis per alloy per week. 16.2 The number of analyses req`uired may be increased by the inspector if he is not satisfied with the conditions of manufacture.

16.1 The manufacturer

17. PREPARATION OF TENSILE TEST SAMPLES 17.1 When a'single cast of less than 225 kg is employed, at least one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent the cast ( heat-treated in one hatch )*.
17.2 When a series of casts of the same alloy each less than 225. kg is employed, at least one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent castings (heat-treated in one batch)* from each 225 kg of metal poured, or, at the option of the manufacturer, each 90 kg of fettled castings ( heattreated in one batch )*. 17.3 When one more casts of 225 kg or over are employed, at least one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent each cast (heat-treated in one batch )*. 17.4 At least one tensile test sample shall he cast for each alloy and tested to represent each day's production of castings. 17.5 If so desired, in the case of special castings, the purchaser may specify. at the time of ordering, that one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent each casting. *The words in parenthesis are applicebie to heiretreeted eaetinge only, 13

.

IS:2304-l%2

18. HEAT-TREATED CASTINGS 18.1 Castings shall be heat-treated in accordance with the relevant Unless otherwise authorized by the inspector specification requirements. each batch of castingsshall be heat-treated together with its related test samples provided. 19. RETEST PROCEDURES
19.1 If any test piece fails to comply with the specified tensile test, the `inspector shall adopt one or both of the following procedures, as requested by the manufacturer: a) Should any one of the test pieces first selected fail to pass the test, two further samples shall be selected for testing in respect of each Should the test pieces from both these additional samples failure. pass, the material represented by the test samples shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of the test. Should the test pieces from either of these additional samples fail, the material represented by the test samples shall be liable to rejection. b) With heat-treated alloys, allow the casting or castings to be re-heattreated ( once only ) in accordance with 18, and re-tested in accordance with 19. 19.2 If both the additional samples tested under 19.1( a ) fail to comply with the specified requirements, the following further re-test procedure shall be applied at the request of the manufacturer and with the consent of the purchaser and inspector: Test pieces shall be machined from an agreed number of castings. The form, size and location of the test pieces, and the minimum mechanical test values to be obtained from them shall be agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. If all the test pieces cut from the selected castings comply with the agreed mechanical test requirements, the castings shall be accepted.

PART IV CASTINGS

NOT

MADE
Alloys

FROM APPROVED

INGOTS
) _

( Except Aluminium-Silicon

Subject to Modification

NOTE..- The tensile valuea specified in particular epeeificationa are intended aa a test of quality of the materiel only and may not always be realized in certain portion6 of castings.

14

IS : 2304 - 1962 20. ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS 20.1 Except as provided in 20.2,. the manufacturer shall supply to the inspector the analysis of each cast for the specified elements.
20.2 Where the castings are made wholly from ingots released as complying with 12 ( including scrap from such ingots ), the manufacturer shall supply to the inspector the results of analyses for the specified elements of not less than 5 percent of the casts of each alloy. The number of analyses shall be subject to a normal maximum of one for eac_h alloy cast during each shift or two for each alloy cast during each day ( 24 hours ) whichever is the less, and to a minimum of one analysis per alloy per week. 20.3 The number of analyses required may be increased if he is not satisfied with the conditions of manufacture. by the inspector

21. PREPARATION OF TENSILE TEST SAMPLES 21.1 At least one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent cast ( heat-treated in one batch )*.
each

21.2 At least one tensile test sample shall be east and tested to represent each day's production of castings of each alloy. 21.3 If so desired, in the case of special castings, the purchaser may specify at the time of ordering that one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent each casting. 22. HEAT-TREATED CASTINGS

22.1 Castings' shall be heat-treated in accordance with the relevant specification requirements. Unless otherwise authorized by the inspector, each batch of castings shall be heat-treated together with its related sample( s ) provided in accordance with the requirements of 21. 23. RE-TEST PROCEDURES

23.1 If any test piece fails to comply with the specified tensile test, the inspector shall adopt one or both of the following procedures as requested by the manufacturer: a) Should any one of the test pieces first selected fail to pass the' test, two further samples shall be selected for testing in respect of each failure. Should the test pieces from both these additional samples pass, the material represented by the test samples shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of the `test. Should the test pieces from either of these additional samples fail, the material represented by the test samples shall be liable to rejection. * The words in parenthesis are applicable to h&t-treated 15
castings only.

IS:2304-1962
b) With heat treated alloys, allow the casting or castings to be reTheattreated ( once only ) in accordance with 22, and re-tested in accordance with 23. 23.2 If both the additional samples tested in 23.1(a) fail to comply with the specified requirements, the following further &-test rocedure shall be applied at the requests of the manufacturer and with t Ke consent of the purchaser and the inspector: Test pieces shall be machined from an agreed number of castings. The form, size, and location of the test pieces, and the minimum mechanical test values to be obtained from them shall be agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. If all the test pieces cut from the selected castings comply with the agreed mechanical test requirements, the castings represented shall be accepted. . PART V ALUMINIUM-SILICON SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION FROM APPROVED ALLOY CASTINGS TREATMENT, MADE INGOTS

NOTE - The tensile values specified in particular specifications are intended a~1 a test of quality of the msterial only and may not always be realized in cart&n portions of cestinga.

24. MANUFACTURE

24.1 The castings shall be made from approved ingots complying with Part II. Except as provided in 6, approved scrap may be added to the melt at the discretion of the manufacturer. 25. ANALYMCAL. REQUIREMENTS 25.1 The manufacturer
shall supply to the inspector the results of analysis for the specified elements of not less than 5 percent of the casts of each alloy. The number of analyses shall be subject to a normal maximum of one for each alloy cast during each shift or two for each alloy cast during each day ( 24 hours ), whichever is the less, and to a minimum of one analysis per alloy per week. 25.2 The number of analyses required may be increased by the inspector if he is not satisfied with the conditions of manufacture.

26. PREPARATION OF TENSILE TEST SAMPLES
26.1 The test samples to be provided, as specified below, shall be cast immediately prior to any re-modification of the alloy or, if re-modification is not carried out, they shall be cast after the last casting has been poured. Where test samples are taken to represent a single casting they may be 16

xs:2364-1962 poured first. The metal for the test samples shall be taken from the crucible in which the metal is melted or the ladle from which the castings are poured and shall not be subjected to re-fluxing, further re-modification or to any heat-treatment other than adjustment of the temperature to that suitable for pouring. 26.2 When a single cast of less than 225 kg is employed, at least one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent the cast (heat-treated in one batch)*. 26.3 When a series of casts of the same alloy each less than 225 kg is employed, at least one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent castings ( heat-treated in one batch)* from each 225 kg of metal poured or, at the option of the manufacturer, each 90 kg of of fettled castings ( heattreated in one batch )*. 26.4 When one or more casts of 225 kg or over are employed, at least one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent each cast (heat-treated in one batch )*.
to

26.5 At least one tensile test sample shall be cast for each alloy and tested represent each day's production of castings.

26.6 If so desired, in the case of special castings, the purchaser may specify at the time of ordering that one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent each casting. 27. RETEST PROCEDURES

27.1 If any test piece fails to comply with the specified tensile test, the inspector shall adopt one or both of the following procedures, as requested by the manufacturer: a) Should any one of the test pieces first selected fail to pass the test, two further samples shall be selected for testing in respect of each failure. Should the test pieces from both these additional samples pass, the material represented by the test samples shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of the test. Should the test pieces from either of these additional samples fail, the material represented by the. test samples shall be liable to rejection. b) With heat-treated alloys, allow the casting or castings to be re-heattreated ( once only ) and re-tested. 27.2 If both the additional samples tested under 27.1 ( a ) fail to comply with the specified requirements, the following further re-test procedure_
*The words in parenthesie are applicable to hat-treated castings only.

.

17

IS:2304-1963
shall be applied at the-request of ths manufacturer and with the consent of the purchaserand the inspector: Test pieces shall be machined from an agreed number of castings. The form, size and location of the test pieces, and the minimum mechanical test values to be obtained from them shall be agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. If all the test pieces cut from the selected castings comply with the agreed mechanical test reqrirements, the castings represented shall be accepted. PART VI ALUMINIUM-SILICON ALLOY SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION TREATMENT, . FROM APPROVED INGOTS CASTINGS NOT MADE

NOTE - The ten&le v&m epwified in pmticuIar epeci&ations are intended &B a t&t of quality of the materid only and may not always be realizsd in certain portions of castinga.

28.

ANALYTICAL

REQWREMENTS

28.1 Except as provided in 28.2 the manufacturer shall supply to the inspector the analysis of each cast for the specified elements. 28.2 Where the castings are made wholly from ingots released as complying with 12 ( including scrap from such ingots ), the manufacturer shall supply to the inspector the results of analysis for the specified elements The number of anaof not less than 5 percent the casts of each alloy. lyses shall be subject to a normal maximum of one for each alloy cast during each shift or two for each alloy cast during each day ( 24 hours ), whichever is the less, and to a minimum of one analysis per alloy per week.

of

28.3 The number of analyses r uired may be increased by the inspector if he is not satisfied with the con % `tions of manufacture. 29. PREPARATION OF TENSILE TEST SAMPLES

29.1 The test samples to be provided, as specified below, shall be cast immediately prior to any re-modification of the alloy or, if re-modification is not carried out, they shall be cast after the last casting has been poured. When test samples are taken to represent a single casting they may be poured first. The metal for the test samples shall be taken from the crucible in which the metal is melted or the ladle from which the castings are poured and shall not be subjected to re-fluxing, further re-modification or to any heat-treatment other than adjustment of the temperature to that suitable for pouring. 18

IS:2304-l%2 29.2 At least one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent cast modifiedin one operation ( heat-treated in one batch )*.
each

29.3 At least one tensile test sample shall be cast and tested to represent each day's production of castings of each alloy. 29.4 If so desired, in the case of special castings, the purchaser may specify at the time of ordering, that one test sample shall be cast and tested to represent each casting. 30. RR-TEST PROCRDURES

30.1 If any test piece fails to comply with the specified tensile test, the
inspector shall adopt one or both of the following procedures, as requested by the manufacturer:

a) Should any one of the test pieces first selected fail to pass the test, two further samples shall be selected for testing in respect of each Should the test pieces from both these additional samples failure. pass, the material represented by the test samples shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of the test. Should the test pieces from either of these additional samples fail, the material represented by the test samples shall be liable to rejection. I,) With heat-treated alloys, allow the casting or castings to be re-heattreated ( once only ) and re-tested. 30.2 If both the additional samples tested under 30.1( a) fail to comply with the specified requirements, the following further re-test procedure shall be applied`at the request of the manufacturer and with the consent of the purchaser and the inspector: Test pieces shall be machined from an agreed number of castings. The form, size and location of-the test pieces, and the minimum mechanical test values to be obtained from them shall be agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. If all the test pieces cut from the selected castings comply with the agreed mechanical test requirements, the castings represented shall ,be accepted.

.

*The worda in psmnthc& am applicable to heat-treded otdinga only.

19

