**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9329 (1987): Speculum, Eye, Clark's Pattern (Modified) 
[MHD 5: Ophthalmic Instruments and Appliances] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 61 5*471 : 681 '784-84 : 61 77-072M 



IS: 9329 -1987 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 1997) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPECULUM, EYE, CLARK'S PATTERN (MODIFIED) 

( First Revision ) 



1, Scope — Covers dimensional and other requirements for Clark's pattern (modified) eye speculum. 

2. Shape and Dimensions — As shown in Fig. 1. 



SPRING 





KNURLED 




DIA 5-5 
DIA 1-75 



ENLARGED 
SECTION YY 




DIA 7 



DIA 1-5 



ENLARGED 
SECTION XX 

All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 SPECULUM, EYE, CLARK'S PATTERN (MODIFIED) 

2.1 The tolerance on dimensions of working ends shall conform to 'fine' class of deviation and the 
tolerance on remaining dimensions shall conform to 'medium' class of deviation of IS : 2102 (Part 1)- 
1980 'General tolerances for dimensions and form and position : Part 1 General tolerances for linear 
and angular dimensions ( second revision)'. 

3. Materials 

3.1 Speculum— Shall conform to designation 30Cr1 3 or 40Cr1 3 of IS: 6603-1972 'Specification for 
stainless steel bars and flats'. 

3.2 Spring Wire — Suitable non-corrosive material. 

4. Requirements 

4.1 The speculum shall be finished smooth and shall be free from all defects like burrs, pits, cracks, 
feathers, nicks and waviness when examined under 25 X magnification. All surface shall be free from 
burrs, crevices and grinding marks. 



Adopted 27 January 1987 



© August 1987, BIS 



Qr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 9329 -1987 

4.1.1 The instrument shall be supplied free from residual scales, acid, grease, grinding and polishing 
material. Compliance with these requirements shall be checked under 2 X magnification. 

4.2 The edges shall be even and rounded off, 

4.3 The movement of the arms of the speculum shall be smooth. 

5. Passivation and Final Treatment— The instruments shall be treated by a suitable passivation 
process. 

Note — Examples of methods of passivation are by electropolishing or by treating with 10 percent (v/v) nitric acid 
solution for not less than 30 min at a temperature of not less than 1 0X and not exceeding 60X. The instruments 
should then be rinsed in water and dried in hot air. 

6. Surface Finish — The surface finish shall be one of or a combination of the following : 

a) mirror polished; 

b) reflection-reducing, for example, satin finish, matt black finish; and 

c) an applied surface coating, for example, for insulation purposes. 

Note 1 — The satin finish should be effected by an appropriate procedure such as grinding, brushing, electropoli- 
shing and, in addition, satin finishing (glass beading or satin brushing). The finish should be uniform and smooth and 
it should reduce glare. 

Note 2 — Instruments of mirror finish should be adequately ground to remove all surface imperfections and 
polished to remove grinding marks, resulting in a mirror finish. The mirror finish should be effected by an appropriate 
procedure, such as polishing, brushing, electropotishing, and mirror buffing. 

7. Performance Test— The load required to close the speculum shall be 0'6 N (60 gf approximate). 

8. Sampling and Criteria for Conformity — A suitable sampling scheme and criteria for acceptance 
is given in Appendix A. 

9. Marking — Each speculum shall be marked with the manufacturer's name, initials or recognized 
trade-mark and the country of manufacture. 

9.1 Certification Marking— Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 

10. Packing — As agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 8 ) 
SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

A-1. Lot — In any consignment all the instruments produced from the same material under similar 
conditions shall constitute a lot. 

A-2. The number of instruments to be selected from each lot shall depend upon the size of the lot and 
shall be in accordance with co! 1 and 2 of Table 1 . 

TABLE 1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 
Lot Size Sample Size 

(1) (2) 

Up to 15 2 

16 to 50 3 

51 to 150 5 

151 and above 8 

A-2.1 These instruments shall be selected from the lot at random and in order to ensure the randomness 
of selecto,procedure given in IS : 4905-1 968 'Methods of random sampling' may be followed 



IS : 9329 -1987 

A-3. Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity — All the instruments selected at random 
in accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1 shall be tested for shape and dimensions, material, 
requirements, passivation, surface finish and performance test. The instrument shall be considered as 
defective, if it fails to meet any one of these requirements. A lot shall be considered as conforming 
to these requirements if none of the instruments in the sample is found to be defective in any of these 
tests. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first prepared in 1979. The present revision has been taken up to include 
certain modifications in order to bring the specification in line with the modern manufacturing 
practices. Accordingly, the tolerance clause covering the reference of concerned Indian Standard, 
material and requirements have been modified. Clauses on surface finish, passivation and final 
treatment and sampling plan have been added. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



