( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

SEMICONDUCTORDEVICES-INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART 3 DIGITAL INTEGRATED Section CIRCUITS MEASURING METHODS 3 Dynamic Measurements

UDC

621.3.049.77~037.37

: 621.31763

Q

BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002 Price Group 9

BHAVAN,

June 1993

Semiconductor

Devices and Integrated

Circuits Sectional Committee,

LTD 010

CONTENTS
Page
1. SCOPE ... ... ,_. ... ... .. . .. . ... . .. ... ... ... 1 1 1 1 1 1

2. REFERENCES 3. TERMINOLOGY

4. LETTERSYMBOLS .., ... UNDER DYNAMIC CONDITIONS(1) 5. TOTAL CURRENTDRAWN FROM THB POWER SUPPLIES 6. POWER SUPPLIEDTHROUGH THE CLOCK LINE (2) (6), (11) 7. INPUT AND OUTPUT IMPBDANCBS 8. TIMES CHARACTERIZINGTHE CIRCUIT 9. SWITCHING FRBQUBNCYok A SBQUBNTIALCIRCUIT (10)
... . .. ... .__ ... .. . ... .

3 7 21

FOREWGRD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electranits and Telecommunication Division Council. This standard ( Part 3/Set 3 ) is one of a series of standards on Integrated Circuits. Part 3 covers the measuring methods of digital integrated circuits, and this Section 3 covers dynamic measurements. Other section of this part are : Section 1 General Section 2 Static characteristics Section 3 Dynamic measurements This standard is based on IEC Pub 748-2, `Semiconductor devices, Integrated Circuits Integrated Circuits', issued by International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). Part 2 : Digital

Tn reportmg the results of measurements made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993

Indian Standard

SEMICONDUCTORDEVICES-INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART 3 DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS -MEASURING METHODS Section 3 Dynamic 1 SCOI'E Measurements

This standard ( Part 3/Set 3 ) covers the dynamic measurements for Digital Integrated Clrcuits. 2 REFERENCES The lndian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. Title

works(s) shall be as specified. The input pulse waveform(s) shall be as specified. The impedance of capacitor C shall be low over the measurement frequency range. The ammeter shall be a suitable instrument to measure the mean total current. d) Precautions to be Observed
No special precautions

are required.

Electrotechnical vocabulary: 1885 ( Part 7/Set 5 ) : Part 7 Semiconductor devices, 197 I Section 5 Integrated circuits and microelectronics 3715 Letter symbols for semicon(Part 1 ) : 1971 ductor devices: Part 1 General Semiconductor devices 12970 circuits: Part I ( Part I ) : 1990 Integrated General 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of thts standard, the terms and definitions given in TS 1885 ( Part 71%~ 5) : 1971 and provisions of 3 of IS 12970 ( Part 1 ) : 1990 shall be applicable. 4 LETTEK SYMBOLS For the purpose of this standard, the letter symbols given in IS 3715 ( Part 1 ) : 1971 shall be applicable. 5 TOTAL CURRENT DRAWN FROM THE POWER SUPPLIES UNDER DYNAMIC CONDITIONS (1) a) Purpose This method is intended to measure the total current drawn by the integrated circuit from the power supply versus operating frequency. This method is restrlcted to repetitive input signals. b) Circuit Diagram ( se2 Fig. 1) c) Circuit Description und Requirements The input driving network(s) the conditions at other inputs and the output loading net1

e) Measurement Procedure The temperature is set to the specified value. The integrated circuit is connected to the circuit of measurement the supply voltage(s), the input signal(s) and the conditions at the other inputs shall be set to the specified values; the supply current shall be measured over the measurement frequency range. f) Specified Conditions
-

--

Ambient or reference -- point temperature, Supply voltage(s), Characteristics of input driving network(s) and output loading network(s), Input pulse conditions, amplitude, width, rise time, fall time, duty cycle ( 50 percent, unless otherwise specified ), repetition frequency range, interrelationships between different pulses, where appropriate, and Conditions at other inputs. THROUGH THE

6 POWER SUPPLIED CLOCK LINE (2) a) Purpose

This method is intended to measure the power required to drive the circuit through clock line (s).

IS 12970( Part' 3/&x 3 ) : 1993

j
L

POWERSUPPLY

]
1
I

I
,i @

L___--__-_;
OUT PUT LOADING NET WORK(S)

, I 1

IN PUT DRIVING NET WORK 6)

CIRCUIT BEING MEASURED

C

FIG. 1 CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENTok TOTAL CURRENT DRAWN FROM THB POWBR SUPPLIES UNDER DYNAMIC CONDITIONS

b) Circuit Diagram ( see Fig. 2 ) c> Circuit Description and Requirements The clock input driving network,
the conditions at other inputs and the output loading

input driving

net\voi-k are given

in Fig. 3 and

Fig. 4. The impedance of capacitor C shall be low at the measurement frequency. The capacitance C, and C3 include the stray capacitance of the test fixture and shall be as specified. The clock pulse waveform at the output of the clock input driving network shall be as specified. The oscilloscope is used to verify this condition. Switch S is used to isolate the circuit being measured so that two measurements of the power consumed by the clock input driving network can be made. The ammeter shall be

network shall be specified. The clock input driving network and its power supply shall be capable of supplying all the power required to drive the low clock input. This network acts as a power convertor and shall have a low residual power consumption. The output impedance of the clock input driving network shall be low enough so that the loading of the circuit being measured does not affect the output waveform of the clock input driving network. Examples of suitable clock

1
CLOCK IN PUT DRIVING NET WORK

I

I

1
I

OUT PUT LOADING NET M)RK

I

FIG. 2 CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENT OF POWER SUPPLIBD THROUGH THE CLOCK LINE
2 .

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993 a suitable instrument to measure the mean total current drawn by the clock input driving network. The voltmeter shall be a suitable instrument to measure the voltage at the output terminal of the power supply. If two or more clock pulses are required, the interrela; tionships between these pulses shall be as specified, and the measurements shall be performed for each of the clock lines separately. d) Precautions to be Observed No special precautions are required.
e) Measurement Procedure

width, rise time, - fall time, - duty cycle (50 percent unless otherwise specified ), - repetition frequency range; - Interrelationships between different pulses, where appropriate; - Values for C1 and C,; and - Conditions at other inputs. 7 INPUT AND OUTPUT IMPEDANCES (6), (11J 7.1 Current Measurement : Input ahd Output C apacitances for Large-Signal Operation (6) a) Purpose To measure under large-signal conditions the input capacitance or output capacitance of a digital integrated circuit under specified conditions.
NOTE -This method may be
not suitable for measuring the input capacitance or output capacitance of an integrated circuit that has a very LOW input or output parallel resistance.

-

The temperature is set to the specified value. The integrated circuit is connected to the measurement of circuit, the supply voltages and conditions at the other inputs shall be set to the soecified values. The clock input driving network and the pulse generator hre adjusted to give the desired pulse. The oscilloscope is used to verify the pulse waveform. With switch S opened, the d.c. current I, flowing into t-he clock input driving network is measured. Then the switch S is closed and current I2 is measured. The power required to drive the circuit being measured is then calculated by :

?A4
FIG. 3 CLOCK INPUT DRIVING NETWORK

FIG.~

CLOCK INPUTDRIVING

NBTWORK

b) Circuit Diagram ( see Fig. 5 ) c) Circuit Description and Requirements The method consists of the selection of a capacitor which gives the same current peak response to a voltage waveform as the input ( output ) capacitance of the integrated circuit being measured. The pulse generator provides the required switching waveform. The peak current I* as shown in Fig. 6 is measured by the current measuring device. The transition time of the driving pulse
3

f) SpeciJed Conditions - Ambient or reference-point temperature; - Supply voltages ( including V ); - Characteristics of clock input driving network and output loading network; - Clock pulse conditions : - amplitude,

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993

1 POWERSUPPLV

1

,
I

IN PUT DRIVING NET WORK

.

+x JO-

-

INTEGRATED CIRCUIT BEING MEASURED

FIG. 5 CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENT OF INPUT AND OUTPUT IMPEDANCES
I t

by more than 5 percent. The input impedance of the current measuring device shall be low compared with the input ( output ) impedance of the circuit being measured. d) Precautions to be Observed No special precautions are required. e) Measurement Procedure The temperature is set to the specified value The integrated circuit is connected into the measurement circuit and the power supply voltage(s) are set to the specified values. The control voltage and conditions at other terminals are set to the specified values. The driving pulse is applied to the test terminal and set to the specified amplitude. The value of the peak current 1~ as shown in Fig. 6 is measured. The integrated circuit is removed from the measurement circuit. The value of the capacitor which gives the same value of the peak current IA is determined by substitution. f ) Speci$ed Conditions - Ambient or reference-point temperature; - Supply voltage(s); - Driving pulse conditions at the test terminal; - amplitude, - width, - rise time, - fall time, - repetition frequency; and - Conditions at other terminals. 4 t

, t

FIG. 6 MEASUREDCURRENT.WAVBFORM applied to the integrated sured shall be less than: .( Clni,V) ( Imsx ) where c mln = minimum expected value capacitance to be measured
V = specified

circuit being mea-

of

the

voltage driving pulse

amplitude

of the

I max = maximum specified value of the direct

current into the terminal under test

The output impedance of the input driving network shall be low enough such that, within the range of capacitance to be measured, a 2 to 1 variation in the capacitance applied at the test terminal does not change the transition time as seen at the test terminal

IS 12970 (Part 3jSec 3 ) : 1993 7.2 Voltage Measurement : Equivalent Input and Output Capacitances, Equivalent Input and Output Resistance (11) Two methods of measurement
RI, C, and R, shall be as short as possible and of the same length, in order to keep undesired inductances low, or at least approximately equal.

may be used : voltage meabridge

One based on a large-signal surement method, Tmyt;;ier

d) Precautious to be observed In order to avoid overlapping of the pulse response ( of the integrated circuit ) with the transmitted pulse, twice the propagation time of Ls -+ L5 t or L4 + L6 ) shall be considerably longer than the rise time or fall time of the pulse at point A. e) Measurement procedure

-

based on a small-signal

NOTES 1 Perference method. shall be given to the large-signal the

2 When stating values of these method used shall be specified.

characteristics,

7.2.1 Large Signal Method a) Purpose To measure the equivalent input capacitance and equivalent output capacitance and/or the equivalent input resistance and equivalent output resistance of a digital integrated circuit when switched from one defined level to another, under specified conditions.
NOTE - Measurement of the eauivalent innut capacitance or equivalent output- capacitancd is still possible if the integrated circuit has an input or output ( respectively ) resistance comparable with or less than the characteristic impedance of the line used for this measurement. Only a very low input resistance or output resistance will shunt the input or output capacitance, so that no measurement of capacitance is possible. In this case, however, capacitance is of no importance in practical applications and its measurement is replaced by the measurement of resistance.

The temperature is set to the specified value. The pulse generator, the input driving network and the oscilloscope are connected to the line network L, through L6 as shown in Fig. 7. The specified voltage amplitude and rise or fall times of the input pulse are set by means of the input driving network. The pulse frequency is chosen so that the distances, expressed in times, between two successive rising or falling edges are not in an integral proportion with the propagation times of the lines L1 + Lj or LI + L6, respectively. With the aid of resistors R, and R, and capacitors C, and Cz, the measurement circuit is balanced so that both oscilloscope traces coincide. R, and R2 should be set to a relatively high value ( for example, with TTL Circuits, approximately 5 k ) and Cl and C, to the lowest possible value ( for example approximately 1 pF to 2 pF ). The integrated circuit is then connected to the line L5 causing a reflection whereby one of the two oscilloscope traces is moved out of coincidence with the other one. By changing R, and Cp, coincidence is re-established. The change C, or R, is the equivalent capacitance or equivalent resistance, respectively. f) SpecQied conditions Ambient or reference-point temperatur e; - Supply voltages and conditions at other terminals; - Input pulse conditions: - amplitude above and below a specified reference level, - width, - rise time, - fall time, ' - repetition frequency; - Direction of transition between the defined levels; and - Values of resistors RI and Re.
. 5 -

b) Circuit diagram ( see Fig. `7 ) c) Circuit description and requirements The pulse generator provides the required switching waveform. The transition time shall be approximately equal to that of the integrated circuit being measured. The oscilloscope shall be capable of measuring the pulse parameters and the variation caused by the circuit being measured. It is necessary to have the length of L1 equal to the length of L2, the length of LB equal to zhe length of L4, and the length of L5 equal to the length of Lg. The length of L5 shall be approximately equal to that of L4. The lengths of the transmission lines L] and Ls. shall be considerably longer than those of the other lines. The reason is to avoid overlapping of reflections occurring at point A ( Fig. 7 ) with those caused by the circuit being measured. The characteristic impedance of the lines L1 to L6 shall be equal and the T-junctions oscilloscope inputs and matched to them. The connecting wires of

POWER SUPPLV

.LOSCOPE

MATCUED T-JUNCTION

A/:
FIG. 7 CIRCUIT FORMBASURBMBNT OF EQUIVALBNT INPUT CAPACITANCE OR EQUIVALENT OUTPUT CAPACITANCE AND/OREQUIVALENT INPUT OR OUTPUT RBSISTANCE OF AN INTEGRATED CIRCUIT

FIG. 8 NON-COINCIDING TRACBSDUE TO DISTURBANCE OF THBBALANCEBY MEANS OF THBCIRCUIT BBING MBASURED( DOTTBDLINES SHOW RE-ESTABLISHMBNT OF THEBALANCEBY MEANS OF R, AND C2 )

7.2.2 Bridge Method ( Small-Signal ) a) Purpose To measure the input or the output capacitance of an integrated circuit, under specified small-signal conditions.

b) Circuit diagram
See Fig. 9. c) Circuit description and requirements

The r. f. bridge shall have iow internal d. c. resistance and shall be capable of carrying

ZS 12970 ( Part 3/&c

3 ) : 1993

*

/:

FIG. 9 CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENT OF INPUT OR OUTPUT CAPACITANCE OF AN INTEGRATEDCIRCUIT the required d. c. current of the input or output being measured without affecting the accuracy of measurement. Alternatively, other methods of biasing the circuit may be used. Small-signal conditions of measurement shall apply. Capacitor C shall present a short-circuit at the measurement of frequency which shall be 1 MHZ, unless otherwise specified. d) Precautions to be observed No special precautions are required. e) Measurement procedure The temperature is set to the specified value and checked immediately before and after the measurement. The r. f. bridge is balanced with the integrated circuit removed from the measuring circuit, the input voltage is set to the specified value. The integrated circuit is inserted into the measuring circuit, the input voltage is checked and the r. f. bridge is again balanced. The capacitance of the input or output is measured as the difference between the two readings of the r. f. bridge. f) Specified conditions Ambient or reference-point ture, Input voltage, temperaSupply voltage, Measurement frequency from 1 MHz ), and Conditions ( if different

at other terminals.

8 TIMES CHARACTERIZING THE CIRCUIT 8.1 propagation Timea 131, 171 8.1.1 Bipolar Circuits [ 31 a) Introduction The method described beIow is applicable to combinatorial and sequential digital circuits of the bipolar type, with the exception of high-speed circuits which for interconnection require matched transmission lines and specific terminations. b) Purpose This method gives values of the propagation times for inverting and non-inverting circuits when their inputs and outputs are loaded with specified integrated circuits or their equivalent .
c) Circuit diagram See Fig. 10. d) Circuit description and requirements

The integrated circuits which are used for the input driving circuit and the input and
7

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993

I
I
DIGITAL DRIVING CIRCUIT

POWER

SUPPLY

I

I
INTEGRATED CIRCUIT BEING MEASURED

I
DIGITAL LOADING CIRCUIT

( M-1 1 DIGIO;L,CK;iTS LOADING CIRCUITS

I

I
0%

04

DUAL-TRACE OsClLLObCOPE

FIG. 10

CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENT OF PROPAGATIONTIMES

output loading ctrcuits shall have characteristics representative of the integrated circuits intended to be normally connected to the integrated circuit being measured. The number of loading circuits driven in parallel by both the driving circuit (M) and the integrated circuit being measured (N) shall be stated, and preferably chosen in order to present the worst case for each of the two times to be measured. Circuits used for the input and output loading circuits shall have passed the specification requirements for all other characteristics, including the delay and transition time measurements made using the methods of 8.2. The input and output loading circuits may be replaced by equivalent networks provided such equivalents can be demonstrated. The input impedances of the oscilloscope shall be high compared to the input and output impedance of the integrated circuit being measured. If necessary, an equivalent time measuring instrument may be used in place of the oscilloscope. `The input and output capacitance C, and Co shall include all stray capacitances associated with the mounting jigs, test fixtures and measuring instruments, but shall exclude

parasitic capacitances of the integrated circuit being measured and of the input and output loading circuits, when the length of connections may give rise to inductive effects, the detail of the wiring configuration must be given. There shall be no significant differential delay in the oscilloscope. e) Measurement procedure The propagation times are measured directly from the waveforms displayed on the oscilloscope as shown for example in Fig. 11. f) Specified conditions
-- Ambient

or reference-point

tempera-

ture; Supply voltage(s); Types of input driving circuit and input and output loading circuits, or circuit configuration and component values of the equivalent loading networks; Input pulse conditions: - values of high and low voltage levels, within the H-range and L-range, respectively, - width, .

-

IS 12970 ( Part 3;Sec 3 ) : 1993

INPUT

1

I 1 I I -____---_c_ I I I 1/ ILA)

I I I 1/,HB OUTPUT L/ILA -i I c, tPHL-4 I I __--I I 1 I _-_-_-_c-

1/Z{

hB

+

I I I c, t PLH -4 I

FOR MEASURBMBNT OF PROPAGATION TIME FIG. 11 WAVEFORMS ( APPLIESTO AN INVBRTINGUNIT BY WAY OF ILLUSTRATION )

- rise time,? - fall time, - repetition frequency; - Conditions at other terminals; - Capacitances Cr and C,; and -. Values of M and N. 8.1.2 MOS Circuits (7) a) Purpose To measure the propagation times of MOS integrated circuits when the output configuration changes from the defined high level to the defined low level, or the reverse, under specified input driving and output loading conditions. The method is applicable to any circuit where a change of an output configuration is produced by a specified signal applied to a specified input terminal.
NOTE - This method is also applicable to measwe the transition times of MOS integrated circuits.

input impedance of the oscilloscope shall be high compared to the input and output impedances of the integrated circuit being measured. An equivalent time measuring instrument may be used in place of the oscilloscope. There shall be no significant differential delay in the oscilloscope; The load capacitance shall include all stray capacitances associated with the test mount and measuring instruments, but shall exclude parasitic capacitance of the integrated circuit being measured. Where the length of connections may give rise to inductive effects, the details of the wiring configuration must be given. d) Measurement procedure The propagation times are measured directly from the waveforms displayed on the oscilloscope, an example is shown in Fig. 14a and 14b. These figures apply to an inverting unit only, by way of illustration. e) Specified conditions Ambient or reference-point temperature; - Supply voltage(s); - Configuration and component values of the output loading network, including stray capacitances; - Input pulse conditions: - values of high and low voltage levels within the H-range and L-range respectively, 9
-

b) Circuit diagram See Fig. 12. c) Circuit description and requirbnents The pulse generator shall have the capability of delivering a pulse with specified rise and fall times. The input pulse waveform and terminating resistor R shall be as specified. The output loading network shall be established by means of passive linear components (see Fig. 13a and 13b for example ). The

IS 12970 ( Part 3ISec 3 ) : 1993
1 POWERSUPPLY 1

INTEGRATED MEASURED

OUTPUT LOADING NET WORK

FIG. 12

CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENTOF PROPAGATIONTIMES OE MOS INTEGRATEDCIRCUIT

i

I

C

13a FIG. 13

13b

EXAMPLESOF OUTPUT LOADING NETWORKS

OUTPUT

INPUT

INPUT
__r*tPHL

OUTPU
fPLti&

14b 14a FIG. 14 WAVEFORMSFOR MBASURBMENT OF PROPAGAYION TIME

( APPLY TO AN INVERTING UNIT ONLY BY WAY OF ILLUSTRATION)

.

10

IS 12970 (Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993 width, rise time, fall time, repetition frequency; - Value of terminating resistance R; - Conditions at other terminals; and - Value of voltage V,. 8.2 Delay and Transition Times (4), (5) 8.2.1 Bipolar Circuits (4)
a) Introduction -

f) Specljied conditions
-

Ambient ture;

or reference-point

tempera-

-

Supply voltage(s) ; Configuration and component values of the output network where required and of the output loading network; Input pulse conditions: - values of high and levels ( see Fig. 16 ), - width, - rise time, - fall time, - repetition frequency; C, and Co. low voltage

-

The method described below is applicable to combinatorial and sequential digital circuits of the bipolar type, with the exception of high-speed circuits that for interconnection require matched transmission lines and specific terminations. b) Purpose This method gives values of delay and transition times for inverting and non-inverting circuits when their inputs and outputs are connected to specified networks. c) Circuit description and requirements The pulse generator, in connection with the input driving network, shall have the capability of delivering an input pulse with specified rise and fall times ( see for example Fig. 16 ). These voltage levels ( as given in Fig. 16 ), shall be set up with the input network driving a dummy load which represents a typical circuit. The measuring jig shall be specified if it has an effect on the result. d) Circuit diagram ( see Fig. 15 ) The input and output capacitances ( C1 and Co ) shall include all parasitic capacitances present in the driving and loading networks and stray capacitances associated with the mounting jig, test fixtures and measuring instruments, but shall exclude the parasitic capacitances of the integrated circuit being measured. C1 and Co may be included in the input driving network and output loading network if appropriate. The input impedance of oscilloscope shall be high compared to the input and output impedances of the integrated circuit being measured, or shall be included in the input driving and output An equivalent time loading networks. measuring instrument may be used in place of the oscilloscope. There shall be no significant differential delay in the oscilloscope. e) iMeasurement procedure
The delay and transition

- Conditions - Capacitances

at other terminals;

and

8.2.2 MOS Circuits (5) ( see Fig. 17 ) The method described in 7.1.2 applies for the measurement of transition times of MOS integrated circuits, with the following amendments.
SpeciJied conditions

The last specified condition: " voltage V," is to be replaced by :output voltages V, and VZ. 8.3 Set-up Time (8) and Hold Time (9) a) Purpose

Value of Values of

To measure the minimum set-up time and minimum hold time of the preparatory input, relative to a trigger input of a sequential circuit, necessary to produce correct switching. sequential circuit will switch into a NOTE -A different output configuration when the appropriate signal applied to the preparatory input(s) coincides with a specified level and/or transition applied to the trigger input. Failure to switch occurs when the duration of coincidence is less than a value which is characteristic for the integrated circuit being measured. b) Circuit Description and Requirements The pulse generator(s) shall provide two output pulses that are synchronized but adjustable in phase relative to each other. For certain classes of sequential circuit ( for example D-type ), the delayed pulse shall have a repetition frequency half that of the reference pulse. This will be specified in the detail specification; otherwise, both pulses must have the same repetition frequency. Driving and loading networks must be connected when and as specified. Unused inputs must be connected as specified.

times are measured from the waveforms displayed on the oscilloscope, as shown for example in Fig. 16.

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3

j

: 1993

POWER

SUPPLY I

INPUT DRIVING NETWORK

-

INTEGRATED CIRCUIT 8ElN.G flEASURE

-

i
I

OUTPUT LOADING NETlolORK

DUAC-TRACE OSCILLOSCOPE

FIG. 15 CIRCUIT FOR MBASURBMENT OF DELAY AND TRANSITIONTIMES c) Circuit Diagram ( see Fig. 18 )

tion of switching, but only in a change phase of the output signal. e) Measurement Procedure

of

The input impedances of the oscilloscope and of the signal detector must be high compared with the impedances at the input and output measuring points. A equivalent time measuring instrument may be used in place of the oscilloscope. The instrument used should not Introduce a significant difference in delays. The signal detector must include either an oscilloscope or other instrument that can indicate whether the measured output of the sequential circuit switches between its two configurations. It must also be able to indicate that the output signal satisfies the limits for VOHB or VoLa between each transition. The oscilloscope and signal detector should be synchronized from one of the input pulses, usually the triggering pulse. dj Precautions to be Observed The use of an input signal having a 50 percent duty cycle should be avoided since, for this condition and for certain classes of sequential circuits, insufficient setup or hold times may not result in a cessa12

The integrated circuit is connected in the measuring circuit and the supply and input voltages are set to the specified values. The temperature is set to the specified value and checked immediately before and after the measurement . The pulse generator output pulses are adjusted to give the specified pulse conditions at the input of the integrated circuit being measured. The time delay, as measured between the specified levels which lie between VMB and VrLA ( for bipolar circuits, the 50 percent level is preferred j on the specified transitions of the preparatory pulses and the trigger pulses, is increased ( or decreased j from zero. The output of the sequential circuit is observed to note when switching occurs; the Ielationship between the input and output frequencies shall be specified. The coresponding delay time is measured. The measurement will give either the minimum set-up or mmlmum hold time according to which pair of appropriate transitions is selected ( see Fig. 19 and 20 ).

IS 12970(Part
//a,.--tl2hhHA +l/OtiB,

3jSec 3 ):1993

VlN

tDLH

tTLH

~(non.fnverting)

vow -

`ILA bLA$

--

-----~--.-

----I
tDHL

ttm _ , !THL
Vour -

4Inverting)

&+-._/I;,v~LA*v*LA
FIG. 16 WAVEFORMS

f) Specijied Conditions Ambient or reference-point ture, - Supply voltage(s), - Input pulse conditions, - amplitude, - width, - rise time, tempera-

-

fall time, repetition frequency, input pulses, when transitions of input delay between appropriate; of

-

Direction signals;

Output loading network(s), for both measured and unmeasured outputs;

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993

FIG. 17

WAVEFORM FOR TRANSITIONTIME OF MOS CIRCUITS

POWER

SUPPLY

1

DRIVING NE Y WORK

LOADING NET WORK

INTEGRATED INPUTS CIRCUIT BEING MEASURED

.
LOADING NET WORK i

i
I I I

REFERENCE

TERMINAL

DUAL-TRACE

OSCILLOSCOPE I
I

I
0
` I I

25

SIGNAL DETECTOR I I

FIG. 18

CIRCUIT FOR THE MBASURBMBNT OF SBT-UP TIME AND HOLD TIME 14

IS 12970 ( Part 3jSec 3 ) : I993

-SPECIFIED TRIGGER

REFERENCE

LEVEL

--/

PULSE

SPECIFIED REFERENCE

LEVEL +t\F'R fiPARATORY PULSE

FIG. 19 SET-UP TIME ( TYPICAL WAVBPORMS )

-

LEVEL

PREPARATORY f'UL SE

/

FIG. 20 HOLD TIME ( TYPICAL WAVEFORMS ) Input driving network(s), if required; - Conditions at other terminals; and and waveforms at other - Sequence input terminals. 3.4 Resolution Time (36) a) Purpose To measure the minimum resolution necessary to produce correct switching. b) Circuit Diagram ( see Fig. 21 ) c) Circuit Description and Requirements The time measurement Instrument shall be suitable for measuring the time interval between two subsequent transitions of the input signal applied to the same input termiThe reference level for this time nal. measurements shall lie between VIHn and V ILA. Furthermore, the voltage measurement instrument shall be capable of measuring the output voltage of the circuit being measured. The pulse generator shall be able to provide pulses having adjustable duty cycles and The measurement adjustable frequency. circuit shall provide the voltages and loads to the other input and output terminals as specified. The measurement system shall be such that the circuit being measured is at the specified temperature. 15 time
-

i,-J-

I

--

k

SPECIFIEOREFERENCE

LEVEL

d) Precautions to be Observed No special precautions are required. e) Measurement Procedure The integrated circuit being measured is connected in the measurement circuit, the supply voltage conditions at other terminals are adjusted to the specified values. The temperature is adjusted to the specified value and checked before and after the measurement. The pulse generator is adjusted to give the specified voltages and the specified rise and fall times at the input of the integrated circuit being measured. NOTE - Normally,
shall be limited the input pulse amplitude to the range VOLA and VOHB.

By further adjustment of the pulse generator and with tWH being kept at a specified fixed duration, the input pulse duration twL is adjusted until the appropriate level of the output signal just reaches VoLA and VoHB, alternatively, with twr, kept at a specified fixed duration, the input pulse duration tWN is adjusted until the appropriate level of the output signal just reaches VoLn or VOHB. The measured input pulse duration tWL ( or twa ) is the minimum resolution time for the specified duratton twII ( or twI, ) ( see Fig. 22 ).

IS 43970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993

DRIVING NET WORK i-

-

-

I
VI
I-

I NT EGRATED CIRCUIT BEING MEASURED

LOADING

NET WORK

, I co

L

TIME MEASUREHEN IE(STRUMENT

OLTAGE MEASUREMENT

I

??dw
FIG.

21

CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENT OF RESOLUTIONTIMB

trcsL = twLI twH SPECIFIED) FIG.

fresH = twH (twL SPECIFIED1

22 RESOLUTIONTIME: ties output rator; impedance of the pulse gene-

f ) SpeeiJied Conditions

-

Ambient or reference-point temperature; Supply voltage(s); Input driving network, if required, or
16

Input pulse conditions: - amplitude, - duration twr, and/or twx,,
t

IS 12970 ( Part 3jSec 3 ) : 1993 - rise time, - fall time; Reference level for tWLand tWH; Output loading network(s); Conditions at other terminals; Ratio of input to output frequencies; Input and output capacitances C1 and Co including stray capacitances associated with the mounting jigs and test fixtures; and Values of vOLh or VORB. Times ( for voltage levels and loads at the terminals and shall keep the circuit measured at the specified temperature. other being

-

-

NOTE - In order to be able to distinguish between the three different states of a three-state output (low, high and high-impedance 1, an output in the high-impedance state has to be pulled to a voltage level opposite to that produced by the output when it is enabled. This voltage level is established by the loading network.

4

Measuremenf

Procedure

-

.8.5 Ostpnt Enable and Disable Three-State Outputs ) (49) Purpose

To measure the output enable and disable times of digital integrated circuits with three-state outputs. Circuit Diagram ( see Fig. 23 ) Circuit Description and Requirements

The measuring equipment shall be capable of generating suitable pulses for the output control input(s) and the remaining inputs, as far as relevant. It shall also be capable of measuring the time relations of the signalsat the specified reference voltage levels. The test circuit shall provide the specified loads for the output(s) being measured. Figure 25 shows a suitable loading network for TTL logic. Furthermore, the equipment shall provide the

The temperature is set to the specified value and checked immediately before and after the measurement. The input and output terminals as well as other terminals are connected according to the specification. The power supplies are connected as specified ( for example, in a specified sequence ). The pulse generating equipment is adjusted to give the specified pulse amplitudes durations and repetition frequencies at the input(s) of the integrated circuit being measured. The output enable time ( see Fig. 24 ) is measured as the time interval between the transition of the output enable signal from inactive to active state and the transition of the output from the high-impedance (2) state to the high-(H) or low-(L) level. The output disable time is measured as the time interval between the transition of the output enable signal from active to inactive state and the transition of the output from the high or low level to the high-impedance state (2). All measurements are made at the specified reference voltage levels.

I

POWER SUPPLIES
I I
!

I'

I
I

I
1

CIRCUIT 6ElHC MEASURED

I I _ I L-----l

OUTPUT NETWORKt

INPUT HEASUREflENT

I

OUT PUT HEASUREHENT

VOLTAGE LEVELSANDllME MEASURING
c

EQUlPflENT

FIG. 23

CIRCUIT FOR MEASURBMBNT OF OUTPUT ENABLEAND DISABLETIMES

17

IS, 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993
OUTPUT ILO% CONTROL VOLTAGE EFERENCE VOLTAGE I/+

LEVEL ENABL\NG)

OUTPUT WAVEFORM
ISEE NOTE)

1

OUTPUT WAVEFORM

3

I SEE NOTE 1 Ien ( ZH 1 or ten ( ZL 1 = output enable time ldla ( HZ ) or ldis ( LZ 1 = output disable time = reference voltage for L to Z ( or H to Z 1 output disable time Vref'clj or Vref (2) = steady-state output voltage, with output going from L-Level to Z-State ( or H-LeveE V + orV_ to Z-State 1. NOTE - Waveform 1 is for an output with internal conditions such that the output is low except when' disabled by the output control. Waveform 2 is for an output with internal conditions such that the output is high except when disabled by the output control. FIG. 24 MBA~UREM~NT OFOUTPUT ENABLE AND DISABLB TIMES

v+FOR
I/-FOR

tent ZL)

- Conditions at other terminals; and
ANUtdir(Lz)

-

kntm)ANCl'tdldHt)

Reference voltage levels for the tiine measurements.

8.6 Specific Times for Memories (50) to (54) General The measuring methods described . used ?!7? for establishing value of the
FIG. 25 EXAMPLE OF OUTPUT LOADING NETWORK FOR TTL OR EQUIVALENT LOOIC NOTE - Since transitions may take different times, it may be necessary to define two enable and two disable times ( for Z to L, Z to Hand L to Z, H to Z 1. e) Spec$ed Conditions - Ambient or reference-point ture ( Tamb or Tref >; - Supply voltage(s);

below may be characteristics to be specified for integrated circuit memories. They may, of course, be adapted for use in ~automatic test procedures. They are also considered to be suitable as reference methods and may be used as required to establish the true value of a particular characteristic. a) Purpose To measure the following dynamic characteristics and timing requirements of a memory cell of an integrated circuit memory: - Address access time; - Chip select access time; - Read access time; - Write recovery time: and - Minimum write pulse duration (width). b) Circuit diagram ( see Fig. 26 ) c) Circuit description and requirements The measuring equipment should be capable of generating suitable signal pulses and pulse patterns for the address, data inputs and for

tempera-

- Input pulse conditions: - rise time t,, - fall time tf, - amplitude, - repetition frequency, - set-up and hold times, where appropriate, - duration; - Input networks; - Output and loading networks, including loading capacity CL ( CL includes stray capacitances ); 18

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993 POWER
I

SUPPLIES

INPUT hrr1 NETWORK 1 SIGNAL PULSE GENERATING

OUTPUT NETWORK 1

csJA:TED R lEING MEASUREI IN;

J

INPUT

I I MEASUREMENT

7
OUTPl
separation network are needed. CIRCUIT

OUTPUT NETWORK n

I
*In the case of common input/output

VOLTAGE AN0 TIME MEASUFdNG EQUIPMENT

terminals,

input/output

FIG. 26 MEASUREMENT any other specified inputs, as far as relevant. The time relations of the signals should be measurable at the specified reference voltages. Furthermore, the equipment must provide the voltages and loads at the other terminals and appropriate separation facilities for circuits having common input/output terminals. d) Measurement procedure The measurement circuit is shown in Fig. 26. The circuit being measured should be set to the specified temperature. The input and output terminals as well as the other terminals are to be connected according to the specification. The power supplies are to be connected as specified ( for example in a specified sequence ). The signal pulse generating equipment is adjusted to give the specified pulse level, duration (width), repetitron frequency, delay and rise and fall times at the input of the circuit being measured. 1) Measurement to address access time (50) With the aid of the slgnal pulse generating equipment, specified data shall be written into the memory cells to be used during the measurement. During the subsequent read operations, it is necessary to change the applied address signal to move from one defined cell location to another, these two locations storAll other input ing complementary data. `signals necessary for the memory to be read should be applied sufficiently early so as not 19

to affect the address access time. The address access time is measured as the time from the change of the address to the occurrence of valid data at the output, the measurement being made at specified reference voltages ( see Fig. 27 ). 2) Measurement of chip select access time (51) With the aid of the signal pulse generating equipment, specified data shall be written into the memory celis to be used during the measurement. All other Input signals necessary for the memory to be read should be applied sufficiently early so as not to affect the enable and.`or select access time. The enable and/or select access time is the time interval between the transition of enable and/ or select from tnactrve to active state and the occurrence of valid data at the output, the measurement being implemented at specified reference voltages ( see Fig. 28 ). 3) Measurement qf read access time (52) With the aid of the signal pulse generating equipment, specified data shall be written into the memory cells to be used during the measurement.
NOTE-This method is only suitable for memories with separate input and output terminals.

The measuring procedure comprises twc steps: i) a bit of data is written into the memory cell, ii) the data bit should be such that it causes a change at the output when read.

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993

DATA-OUT

I

M

#
ta (A) = address access time. FIG. 27 MEASUREMENTOF ADDRESS ACCESSTIMH

E2ABiE

AND/OR

SE'

DATA-OUT

lo (E) and ta (S) = enable and/or select access time. FIG. 28 MEASUREMENT OF ENABLEAND/OR SELECT ACCESSTIME The read access time is measured as the time interval between the transition from a write mode to a read mode and the occurrence of valid data signals at the outputs ( see Fig, 29 ).

Typical waveforms are shown in Fig. 30. 5) Measurement of minimum write pulse duration ( width ) (54) With the aid of the signal pulse equipment, specified data shall into the memory cells to be used measurement, The measurement consists of three steps: generating be written during the procedure cell

4) Measurement of wife recovery time (59) With the aid of the signal pulse generating equipment, specified data shail be written into the memory cells to be used during measurement.
This method is only suitable for memories with separate input and output terminals.
NOTE -

i) Data is written into the memory according to the specifications, il) The cell is overwritten with complementary data, and

write pulse duration ( width j is increased from the mtnimum guaranteed value. The output of the device is observed to notice when the written data makes an error in the next read cycle operation ( that in non-conformity of the output value ). The write recovery time is measured as the time interval between the end of the write pulse and the beginning of the next cycle ( for example a change of address ) at the specified reference level.
signals necessary for the correct operation of the memory in the read mode should oe applied allowing a sufficient margin relative to the specified timing requirements, such that the measured value is not adversely affected.

The

specified with

iii) The data is read out and compared the data wrItten in during step (ii).

NOTE - All other

These three steps are repeatedly performed with continuously decreasing write pulseduration (width) in step (ii) until data coincidence in the comparison is no longer obtained in step (iii). The pulse duration is then increased until coincidence is obtained again. The pulse duration (width) is the "minimum write pulse duration ( width )" ( see Fig. 31 ). All other signals ( for example, chip select in data-in ) necessary for the write operation should be applied so that the write operation is not adversely affected.
20

IS 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3:) : 1993

WRtTEtlV READ(H)

DATA-IN

t8

(R)

=

read access time.

FIG. 29 MBASURBMBNT OFREADACCBSS TIME

DATA-IN

---a

DATA-OUT-.- -

DATA-VP'_ID twr = write recovery time.
FIG. 30 MEASUREMENT FOR WRITE RBCOVBRY TIME WHERE THE &XT. CYCLE IS INITIATED

BY A CHANGBOFADDRESS
c) S'pec$ed condition

Ambient or reference-point temperature ( Tamb or &cl% ); Supply voltage(s); - Input signal pulse patterns and sequences including required timing relationships, for example, cycle, set-up and hold times; - Characteristics of the input signal pulses, including rise time, fall time and amplitude; - Input and output networks ( including stray capacitance ); - Conditions at other terminals;
21

-

Reference voltage(s) for the measurement; - Contents of the defined memory cell(s); - Address of the defined memory cell(s); and - Sequence of the addresses, where appropriate. 9 SWITCHING FREQUENCY OF A SEQUENTIAL CIRCUIT ( 10 ) a) Purpose
To determine whether t?le maxinlum ( minimum ) switching frequency of a sequential circuit lies above ( below j a specified limit.

-

IS

12970( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993

S CHIP SELECTOF NECESSA

W WRITE

D DATA-IN
CW(W) = write pulse duration ( width ) ~su(S) = chip select set-up time before write tsu(DJ = data-in set-up time before write t&S') = chip select hold time after write II~(D) = data-in hold time after write NOTE - The data set-up time, Isu (D), should be referenced to the trailing edge of the write pulse ( as shown in the above figure ) for memories whose storage elements are tiansparent latches. It should be referenced to the leading edge of the write pulse for memories whose storage elements are edge-triggered tatches.
FIG. 31 MEASUREMENT OF MINIMUM WRITE PULSE DURATION ( WIDTH )

bj Circuit

Diagram

See Fig. 21.
c) Circuit Description and Requirements

A sequential circuit, which may be in particular a bistable circuit or a counter or a shift register, will switch into a different output configuration, when: i) the appropriate triggering pulse(s) has ( have ) been absent for a given time, and then, ii) the appropriate triggering pulse(s) is ( are ) applied for a given time. These two periods of time need not be equal. Failure to switch at maximum frequency will occur when the sum of these two times in any single cycle falls below the value that determines this characteristic at the maximum frequency for the integrated circuit. Similarly, failure to switch will occur when one of these times exceeds the value that determines this characteristic at minimum frequency for the integrated circuit. For certain cl:~sscs of sequential circuits, addiThese may be required. tional signals additional signals must be synchronized, but adjustable in time delay relative to the first, and must have a frequency which is an of the first. Loading integral division networks for both measured and unmeasured outputs, and driving networks will be connected when and as specified. Unused input shall be connected as specified. The signal detector must include either as oscilloscope or other instrument that can indicate whether the measured output of the 22

sequential circuit switches between its output configurations at a specified frequency related to that of the triggerirg pulses. It must also be able to indicate that the output signal satisfies the limits for VOR$or Vcr,& between each transltion. d) Precautions to be Oherved No special precautions are required.

e) Measurement procedure The integrated circuit is connected into the measuring circuit, the suppIy and input voltages are set to the specified values. The temperature is set to the specified value and checked immediately before and after the measurement. The pulse generator output pulses are adjusted to give the specified pulse amplitudes, durations and repetition frequency(ies) at the input of the integrated circuit under measurement. Any other required pulse generator is similarly.gdjusted and its delay(s) set to the specified value. The output of the integrated circuit must be observed via the signal detector, for correct switching at the specified output frequency.
f ) Specijied Conditions

ambient or reference-point ture; - Supply voltage(s); - Input pulse conditions: - amplitude, - width, - rise time.

-

tempera-

1s 12970 ( Part 3/Set 3 ) : 1993 fall time, repetition frequency, input pulses, of when input Output loading network(s) for both measured and unmeasured outputs, - Input driving network(s), if required, - Repetition frequency of output signal, - Conditions at other terminals, and - Sequences and waveforms at other input terminals.
-

delay between appropriate; of

- Direction signals;

transitions

23

-___.__

____

._

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau q Zndian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard `conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer, Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. `)

Bareau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau 01 Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission iti writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are any reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. LTD 010 ( 1227 )
Amendments

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036
600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 I 37 84 99, 1 37 86 26, 53 38 43, I 53 23 84
235 02 16, I 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40
235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

Andheri ( East )

Branches : AHMADABAD.

BHOPAL. BANGALORE. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATT. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. JAIPUR.
l'rlnted at New Indls

Println#Prels.
9

KhurJs.

Indle

