IS 15903 : 2010

Hkkjrh; ekud

esVjfuVh ufl�x gkse gsrq fn'kkfunsZ'k
Indian Standard GUIDELINES FOR MATERNITY NURSING HOME

ICS 91.040.10

� BIS 2010

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

May 2011

Price Group 9

Hospital Planning Sectional Committee, MHD 14

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hospital Planning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. This is the formal recognition by the community of the social structure of a country and its responsibility for providing the means for keeping them well or restoring lost health. The maternity nursing home has been defined as an integral part of a social and medical organization, the function of which is to provide medical care to female population especially to mother and newly borne child and whose services reach out to the family in its home environment. In the recent past there has been a mushrooming growth of substandard maternity nursing homes in India which necessitated the need of review of position in this regard and put forward suggestions for improving the quality of these nursing homes through standardization and setting up of minimum norms for extending medical care to common consumer. While formulating this standard, assistance has been derived from the following: Guide to Staffing Pattern for Hospitals, issued by the National Institute of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India Delhi Nursing Home Registration Act, 1953 and Amendment to Rules (1965), issued by Delhi Administration This standard covers functional requirements, space requirement, manpower requirement, instruments and equipments requirements, patient access, assessment and continuity of care management, patient rights and education, care of patient, management of medication, infection control, continues quality improvement, responsibility of management, facility management and safety, human resource management, information management system etc. The guidelines for nursing home covered in a separate Indian Standard. The other standards published on the subject, which could also be relevant, are given in Annex A. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B.

IS 15903 : 2010

Indian Standard GUIDELINES FOR MATERNITY NURSING HOME
1 SCOPE This standard covers basic requirements for planning a maternity nursing home in respect of functional, space, man-power, instruments and equipment, and management requirements. Certain essential requirements for building, services and environment have also been included. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions which through references in this text constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreement based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 1742 : 1983 Title Code of practice for building drainage (second revision) 1860 : 1980 Code of practice for installation, operation and maintenance of electrical passenger and goods lifts (first revision) 2064 : 1993 Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of sanitary appliances (second revision) 2065 : 1983 Code of practice for water supply in buildings 2190 : 1979 Selection, installation and maintenance of first-aid fire extinguisher -- Code of practice 3362 : 1977 Code of practice for natural ventilation of residential buildings 4347 : 1967 Code of practice for hospital lighting 5329 : 1983 Code of practice for sanitary pipe work above ground for buildings IS/ISO 14001 : Environmental management systems 2004 -- Requirements with guidance for use 14665 (Part 1) : Electric traction lifts: Part 1 2000 Guidelines for outline dimensions of passengers, goods, and service and hospital lifts IS/ISO 15189 : Medical laboratory -- Particular 2003 requirements for quality and competence 1 IS No. 15195 : 2000 Title Performance guidelines for quality assurance in hospital services up to 30 bedded hospitals Performance guidelines for quality assurance in hospital services up to 100 bedded hospitals Occupational health and safety management systems requirements

15461 : 2004

18001 : 2007

3 MATERNITY NURSING HOME 3.1 Functionally the maternity nursing home shall have four distinct sections: a) b) c) d) Out-patient and emergency services, Diagnostic and therapeutic services, In-patient nursing units (wards), and Administrative, non-clinical and engineering support services.

3.2 Maternity service includes antenatal care, delivery and post-natal care, before and after child birth, the patient should be attended to in the out-patient clinic and during labour the patient is confined to bed in the nursing unit. The out-patient clinic should also provide diagnostic facilities for gynaecological patients. Since these services are cyclic, it is recommended to place the in-patient unit close to the out-patient clinic making it easily accessible to the child bearing women. . 3.3 Entrance Lobby-cum-Reception and Admissions It should also serve as waiting area for the patients before getting registered. 4 FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 4.1 Out Patient and Emergency Services These are needed to perform following chief functions, namely: To diagnose and treat patients at an early stage, b) To follow up treatment after discharge from the maternity nursing home, and c) To institute health education programme to educate the public in environmental hygiene. These shall comprise of obstetric and gynaecological, family welfare, paediatric and general purpose clinics. a)

IS 15903 : 2010 4.1.1 Obstetric and Gynaecological Clinic The clinic should include consulting-cum-examination room(s), treatment, and supported with clinical laboratory. Facilities should be available for antenatal patients to undergo certain formalities prior to examination such as a toilet and change. 4.1.2 Family Welfare Clinic The clinic should provide educative, preventive, diagnostic and curative facilities for obstetric and gynaecology treatment, paediatric and health education. Treatment room in this clinic should act as operating room for IUCD insertion and investigation etc. 4.1.3 Paediatric Clinic The clinic should provide medical care for infants (including new born) and children up to the age of 12 years. Owing to risk of infection, it is essential to isolate the clinic from other clinics. The clinic shall be provided with a separate dressing, treatment and immunization room. 4.1.4 General Purpose Clinic (Optional) The clinic may cater consultation in the field of general medicine, general surgery, eye and ENT. The consulting room of the clinic may be shared by the consultants by fixing specific hours of specialty consultation. 4.1.5 Emergency Unit The unit comprising examination cubicle, treatment and an observation room may be scheduled to function outside out-patient clinics hours. The unit close to entrance lobby should be provided for emergent cases so that a very minimum time is lost in giving immediate treatment. 4.1.6 Supporting Facilities Supporting facilities in common, namely, waiting spaces, clinical laboratory and injection room should be provided. 4.1.6.1 Waiting spaces General waiting per clinic and subsidiary waiting spaces are required adjacent to each consultation and treatment room. 4.1.6.2 Clinical laboratory A small clinical laboratory for quick investigations and sample collection facilities should be provided close to injection room with all essential requirements. 4.1.6.3 Injection room For administering injection to patients a central 2 injection room should be provided in conjunction with clinical laboratory. 4.1.7 Pharmacy (Dispensary) The pharmacy should be located in an area conveniently accessible from several clinics and shall be with regards to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules in respect of space, storage facilities and shall be in accordance to the provisions of Section 42 of the Pharmacy Act in respect of dispensing of drugs. 4.2 Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services Pathology and radio-diagnosis are the diagnostic function whereas surgical-cum-obstetric suite unit is the therapeutic service which should be provided for a maternity nursing home. 4.2.1 Pathology Pathology is concerned with the analysis of diseased tissue or fluid and other elements in the body. It may comprise activities like biochemistry, microbiology, clinical pathology and haematology. 4.2.1.1 Biochemistry laboratory Biochemistry laboratory is concerned with chemical analysis of body tissue and fluids. 4.2.1.2 Microbiology laboratory Microbiology laboratory is concerned with the bacteria or pathogen found in the body or the environment. 4.2.1.3 Clinical pathology and haematology laboratory Clinical pathology and haematology laboratory is concerned with the study of urine, stool and blood specimens. 4.2.1.4 Each laboratory should be provided with 600 mm wide and 800 mm high bench of length about 1.6 m per technician. Each laboratory bench shall have laboratory sink with swan neck fittings, reagent shelving, gas and power point and under counter cabinet. Top of the laboratory bench shall be of acid and alkali-proof material. 4.2.1.5 Blood transfusion States/Union territories shall enact rules for registration of maternity nursing homes wherein provision for affiliation with a licensed blood bank for procurement of blood for their patients shall be incorporated. 4.2.2 Radio-diagnosis The diagnostic unit of the maternity nursing home generally deals with radiography and ultrasound to cover its basic need. Beside X-ray and ultrasound rooms, a film developing-cum-processing room, and

IS 15903 : 2010 a room for the radiologist/technician should be provided for the unit. 4.2.2.1 Radiography room The room should have a sub waiting area with a toilet and a change room facility. The radiography unit should be operated from a separate control cabin or behind a lead mobile protection screen of 1.5 mm lead equivalent. From radiation protection and safety point of view, normal one brick wall thickness is adequate. 4.2.2.2 Ultrasound For ultrasound room, a patient toilet either accessible from the procedure room or from the corridor, shall be provided. 4.2.2.3 Film developing and processing room A dark room shall be provided for processing film unless the processing equipment normally used does not require a dark room for loading and transfer. Film processing shall be located convenient to the procedure room. 4.2.2.4 Consultation area An appropriate area for individual consultation with referring clinicians and for quality control that is for viewing film shall be provided. 4.2.3 Obstetrical-cum-Surgical Suite A high degree of asepsis should be ensured to provide environment for staff and patients. Zoning shall be done to keep the suite free from micro organisms. There shall be four well defined zones of varying degree of cleanliness. These are protective, clean, sterile, and disposal zones. The suite should comprise of obstetrical (delivery suite unit), operation theatre unit for conducting gynaecological and general surgical operations. The suite should include facilities described here after. Since delivery and operating rooms are in the same suite, access and service arrangements shall be such that neither staff nor patients need to travel through one area to reach the other. 4.2.3.1 Zoning traffic flow It should be ensured that flow of traffic from one zone to another is arranged through proper barrier nursing. All soiled material both disposable and non-disposable should move without crossing the sterile and clean zone. Non-disposable material like instruments, etc, should be cleaned in dirty wash and they shall be returned for sterilization. All communication between the operation theatres, dirty utility, and instrument layup shall be carried out through well designed hatches or a door through which the material is passed. 3 4.2.3.2 Circulation Normally there are three types of traffic flow, namely (a) patients, (b) staff, and (c) supplies. All these should properly channelized. Patients are brought from ward and should not cross the transfer area in their ward clothing which is great source of infection. Changeover of trolleys should be done at a place which will link up both pre-operative and post-operative rooms. Staff should enter from a separate route and through a set of change rooms. All sterile goods should have a separate entry point reaching the clean corridor independently. 4.2.3.3 Comfort condition An optimum comfort level in the operation theatre/ delivery room is of vital importance. Temperature between 16 to 21�C and with 50 percent humidity shall be maintained through air-conditioning. Ventilation should be of 15 to 20 air changes per hour. 4.2.3.4 Reception bay and relative waiting Reception bay with a relative waiting shall be provided close to the suite. Many a time, patient may arrive in a state of imminent delivery, who can be received at the reception bay. Waiting room with toilet facility for the relatives attending the patients to wait and meet them after operation/delivery should be provided. 4.2.3.5 Change rooms Separate change rooms for doctors, nurses and technicians should be provided, with arrangement for lockers and toilet facility. 4.2.3.6 Storage Store room should be provided for storing theatre supplies like stretcher, trolley, sterile material, medical gas cylinders, instruments and linen. 4.2.3.7 Theatre pack preparation room It should be a work room for arranging of sutures, dressings and all other surgical items. 4.2.3.8 Pre-operative room Patients are transferred from ward to this room for premedication before surgery/delivery. The room should have toilet facility. 4.2.3.9 Examination and preparation room for delivery suite unit The room should accommodate one or two beds and provide space for the doctor with the work table, etc. A change room with attached toilet facilities shall be provided with the examination cubicles. The provision of lockers for keeping the personal clothes and articles may also be kept in view.

IS 15903 : 2010 4.2.3.10 Recovery room Immediately after the operation, the patients are kept in this room until such time they are found fit to be taken back to their parent ward/room. 4.2.3.11 Labour room(s)/labour delivery recovery room (LDR) A minimum of two labour beds shall be provided for each caesarean/delivery room. Each room shall be designed for either one or two beds. Each labour room should contain hand washing fixture and to have access to toilet which may serve 2 labour rooms. LabourDelivery- Recovery room to accommodate the birthing process from labour through delivery and recovery of mother and baby may be provided if so desired. 4.2.3.12 Delivery rooms Delivery rooms shall be of the following types: a) Clean delivery room for normal deliveries, b) Operation theatre for caesarean, and c) Septic delivery room. Delivery rooms shall preferably be provided at the rate of one for every 20 maternity beds. The operating theatre size for caesarean shall be the same as that of the operating theatres. Sterility and other requirements shall be maintained like operation theatres department. In the smaller size of maternity nursing home, the operating theatre for surgical and caesarean cases shall be restricted to one. 4.2.3.13 Operation theatre/delivery room Operating room/delivery room should be made dustproof, moisture proof, corners and junctions of walls, floor and ceiling coved to prevent accumulation of dust and to facilitate cleaning. Its door should be two leaf type with a minimum 1.5 m width and shall have self closing devices. Natural lighting and general illumination should be provided. The operating room/ delivery room should be normally arranged in pairs so as to have scrub-up and instrument sub-sterilizing/layup room facility in common. 4.2.3.14 Scrub-up In this space the operating team washes and scrub-up their hands and arms, put on their sterile gown, gloves and other covers before entering the operation theatre/ delivery room. It may have a single leaf door with self closing device. A pair of elbow or knee operated taps for a suitably designed scrub-up unit should be provided. 4.2.3.15 Instrument sterilization It is a sub-sterilizating unit attached to the operation theatre/delivery room limiting its role to sterile 4 operating instruments on an emergency basis only, and lay-up instrument trolley. This room should be equipped with high pressure, quick sterilization apparatus, and work top with sink and storage cabinets. 4.2.3.16 Dirty utility Operation theatre/delivery refuse such as dirty linen, used instruments and other disposable/non-disposal stuff is removed to this room after each procedure. Nondisposable instruments after initial wash is given back to instrument sterilization and rest of the disposable items are disposed and destroyed. Dirty linen is sent to laundry through a separate exit. The room should be provided with a sink, drain board, bed pan sink, and work top. 4.3 In-patient Nursing Units (Wards) In-patient services shall comprise of a) b) c) d) e) Maternity ward, Paediatric ward, Neo-natal care unit, Private ward, and Intensive care unit.

4.3.1 Ward Ancillaries Each of the nursing unit or ward should have a set of ward ancillaries. 4.3.1.1 Nursing station It should be positioned in such a way that the nurse can keep a continuous watch over the patients. The station shall contain a drug cupboard, call system points, records space and cabinets to hold materials which might otherwise be placed in clean utility room. A dirty utility room for soiled holding should also be placed. Separate toilet facilities for nurses shall be provided. 4.3.1.2 Treatment room For carrying out major dressing and complicated treatments to avoid the risk of cross infection. 4.3.1.3 Ward pantry For collection and distribution of meals and preparation of beverages, a ward pantry should be provided. It should be fitted with a geyser for hot-water supply, refrigerator, a hot case and the facilities for storing cutlery, etc. 4.3.1.4 Ward store A store for storing the weekly requirements of clothes, bed sheets, and other ward equipments shall be provided. 4.3.1.5 Sluice room A room shall be provided for emptying and cleaning bed pans, urine bottles, and sputum mugs, disposing

IS 15903 : 2010 of used dressing and similar material, stool and urine specimen, etc. 4.3.1.6 Day space For those patients who are allowed to sit and relax, a space shall be provided. It should afford an easy access to patients and supervision by nursing staff and should be provided with easy chairs, book shelves. It may serve as dining space. 4.3.1.7 Sanitary Toilet for an individual room (single or two bedded) in ward unit shall be of 3.5 m2 toilet common to serve two such rooms shall be 5.25 m2 comprising a bath, a wash basin and a WC. For multiple beds of a ward unit, a lavatory block comprising of WC cubicle at 1 for every 6 beds or part thereof, wash basin and shower bath cubicle at 1 each for every 12 beds or part thereof shall be provided. One bed pan sink and cleaner's sink for washing mackintosh shall also be provided. 4.3.2 Maternity Nursing Unit (Ward) Nursing unit shall include ante-natal, post-natal, eclampsia, post-operative and gyanecological beds. 4.3.2.1 Ante-natal beds The female patients admitted for treatment during the period of their pregnancy should be in these beds separate from those who have undergone the labour. 4.3.2.2 Post-natal or Lying-in beds Patients who have had normal deliveries and do not suffer any complication, calling for medical care are forming these beds. The size of the bed space depends upon whether the babies are kept with the mothers or all babies are kept in the central nursery. It is recommended that in case of normal deliveries, the healthy babies may be kept with the mothers in the baby cradle attached to the bed/placed by the side of the patients. 4.3.2.3 Eclampsia bed The patient fall under ante-natal category. The bed one per 20 ante-natal beds should either form part of antenatal beds unit or placed close to delivery suite unit. 4.3.2.4 Post-operative beds The post-operative beds for the patients who have undergone operation shall be able to accommodate two beds per operating delivery room including operation theatre. Area per bed may be 8.75 m. 4.3.2.5 Gynecological beds The proportion of gynecological beds should be 40 percent of the maternity beds. 5 4.3.3 Paediatric Ward A separate ward unit shall be provided. The ward unit shall have at least 25 percents of patients in isolated cubicles in single and two bedded rooms. These cubicles should be separated through glazed partition for better supervision. Each pair of cubicles may be provided with a common toilet of 5.25 m2 having WC, bath and wash basin. 4.3.4 Neo-natal Care Unit Well being of the new born becomes the responsibility of the paediatrician. A separate neo-natal unit to include high dependency and low dependency should be established as independent sub-units. Facilities like nurseries, nurses' station, formula-cum-breast feeding room, store, photo therapy and sluice room should be provided. 4.3.4.1 High dependency unit Low birth weight and premature babies in individual heated bassinets or incubators with temperature and humidity control should be accommodated and oxygen outlet installed. They should also have electronic monitoring facilities. 4.3.4.2 Low dependency unit Babies with problems that need short-term observation or treatment are kept in this unit. 4.3.4.3 Nurses station It should be so placed so as to ensure continuous observation over the nurseries and to render efficient treatment to infants. 4.3.4.4 Formula-cum-breast feeding room A formula-cum-breast feeding room shall be provided close to the nurses station for the preparation of food for the infants who are not fully breastfed. There shall washing and sterilizing of feeding bottles facility in the room. 4.3.5 Intensive Care Unit In this unit, critically ill patients requiring highly skilled life saving medical aid and nursing care are concentrated. These should include major surgical and medical cases. It should be the ultimate medicare the maternity nursing home can provide with highly specialized staff and equipment. The number of patients requiring intensive care may be 2 percent of the total bed strength, however the unit shall have minimum of 4 beds. 4.3.5.1 This unit should be located close to obstetrical-cum-surgical suite so that the staff and ancillaries could be shared. This unit will also need all

IS 15903 : 2010 the specialized services such as suction and medical gases, continuous electric supply, heating, ventilation, air-conditioning and efficient lift services. A good natural light and pleasant environment should also be of great help to the patients and staff as well. 4.3.5.2 Floor space All beds in this unit are to be arranged in glazed cubicles with centrally located nurse's station. The area per bed in this unit preferably should be 10.5 m2 to cater for free movement, check against infection and at time utilization of specialized bulky equipments. 4.3.5.3 Planning of ICU The basic consideration in planning of ICU should be to have, a fully visible patients area with adequate space all round for positioning of specialized equipment; b) a central nurses station with minimum possible walking distance; c) an adequate stock of medicines; and d) distinct clean and dirty utility area where movement of staff and supplies could be minimized. 4.3.5.4 Nurses station This should be planned as an open area with adequate counter space for writing, telephones, patients monitoring equipments, X-ray viewing boxes, etc. Open planning should be adopted for visibility as well as audibility of entire patients' area. A small pantry space along with the nurses' station may be helpful. 4.3.5.5 Clean utility This should contain all the essential supplies, linen, medicines, lotions, syringes, trolleys, various mobile equipments etc. 4.3.5.6 Equipment-cum-intensive care laboratory This should provide for immediate clinical tests and investigations. All essential testing equipments should be housed in it. 4.4 Administrative Unit, Non-clinical and Engineering Services 4.4.1 Administrative Unit The administrative unit of any maternity nursing home shall essentially look after an organized group of people, patients and resources in order to accomplish the task of providing best patient care. It shall deal with all matters relating to overall upkeep of the maternity nursing home as well as welfare of its staff and patients. 6 a) 4.4.2 Non-clinical Services Non-clinical services shall include sterilization, dietary, laundry and stores. 4.4.2.1 Sterilization Sterilization, being one of the most essential services, requires the utmost consideration in planning. Centralization increase efficiency results in economy in the use of equipment and ensures better supervision and control. The materials and equipments dealt in for those related to surgical cum obstetric suite, in-patient nursing units and out patient clinics. 4.4.2.2 Dietary service Dietary service is an important therapeutic tool. Properly rendered, it should be a clinical and administrative means of stimulating rapid recovery of patients thereby shortening patients stay in the maternity nursing home. 4.4.2.3 Laundry service Laundering of maternity nursing home linen should satisfy two basic considerations, namely, cleanliness and disinfection. Maternity nursing home be provided with facilities for washing, extraction, drying, pressing, and storage of soiled and cleaned linen. 4.4.2.4 Stores Maternity nursing home's store comprises of stores needed for medical and non-medical purposes. The space for each type of stores should be utilized to the optimum by providing storage racks. Adequate ventilation and security arrangement shall be provided. 4.4.3 Engineering Services These should mainly comprise of civil, electrical, mechanical, water supply, drainage and sanitation, communication, gas supply, and waste disposal. 4.4.3.1 Civil engineering An office-cum-store should be provided to handle day to day maintenance works of the building. 4.4.3.2 Electrical Electrical installation to meet the electrical requirement of a maternity nursing home shall be provided. Standby generator should be provided to generate power requirement for essential and critical areas of the nursing home. 4.4.3.3 Illumination The level of illumination for various visual tasks shall be provided in accordance with IS 4347. General lighting of all maternity nursing home's areas shall be fluorescent/CFL.

IS 15903 : 2010 4.4.3.4 Ventilation Ventilation may be achieved by either natural supply and natural exhaust of air, or natural supply and mechanical exhaust of air. The general principles of natural ventilation shall be in accordance with IS 3362. 4.4.3.5 Mechanical Air-conditioning and environmental control is essential to ensure the comfort of patients, sterile and comfortable conditions in operation theatre and delivery suite, maintenance of essential sophisticated equipments and to help in speedy ill patients recovery. 4.4.3.6 Water supply Arrangement shall be made to supply 350 litre of potable water per bed per day to meet the requirements. Storage capacity for 2 days requirements should be on the basis of above consumption. The laying and distribution of the water supply system shall be according to the provisions of IS 2065. Cold and hot water supply piping should run in concealed form embedded into wall with full precautions to avoid any seepage. 4.4.3.7 Drainage and sanitation The design, construction and maintenance of drains for waste water, surface water, sub-soil water and sewerage shall be in accordance with IS 1742. The selection, installation and maintenances of sanitary appliances shall be in accordance with IS 2064. The design and installation of soil waste and ventilating pipes shall be as given in IS 5329. 4.4.3.8 Traction: Besides stairways, electrically operated automatic control lift(s) shall be provided if the building is more than one storey. The installation, operation and maintenance of lifts shall be as given in IS 1860. The outline dimensions of machine room, pit depth and total headroom, shall be in accordance with IS 14665 (Part 1). The recommended car speed for hospital bed lifts shall be 0.25 m/s. 4.4.3.9 Gas supply Medical gases, comprise mainly of oxygen and nitrous oxide. The cylinder supply should be made available. b) LPG (Liquefied petroleum gas), for better hygienic conditions use of LPG (liquefied petroleum gas) cooking gas cylinders are recommended. LPG cylinders/piped supply may also be made available for laboratory. 4.4.3.10 Fire protection Adequate first-aid, fire fighting equipment shall be provided and installed in accordance with IS 2190. 7 a) Manually operated fire alarm shall be provided which sound an audible alarm in fire office/round the clock work room where gongs, sirens, whistles or bells do not disturb the patients. Distinctive visual or audible alarm shall be installed at each nurse station and used for fire alarm purposes only. 4.4.3.11 Waste disposal system Maternity nursing home may be provided with a suitable waste disposal system as per prevailing practices and Bio-Medical Wastes (Management and Handling) (Amended) Rules, 2000. 4.4.4 Building Requirements Building requirements shall suitably be considered. 4.4.4.1 Circulation Circulation areas, such as corridors, entrance lobby, and stairways in the maternity nursing home shall not be less than 30 percent of the total floor area of the building. 4.4.4.2 Floor height The floor height of the rooms in the Maternity Nursing Home should not be less than 3.00 m and not more than 3.65 m, measured at any point from the floor to soffit of roof/floor slab. The minimum head room, such as under the bottom of beams, fans and lights shall be 2.5 m measured vertically under them. 4.4.4.3 Apertures for light and air Room shall have, for admission of light and air, one or more apertures, such as windows and fan lights, opening directly to the external air or into an open space/verandah. The minimum aggregate areas ( the openable area only) of such opening, excluding doors inclusive of frames, shall not be less than 20 percent of the floor area in case such apertures are located in one wall and not less than 15 percent of the floor area in case such apertures are located in two opposite walls at the same sill level. 4.4.4.4 Architectural finishes These shall be of high quality in view of maintenance, better hygienic conditions particularly in toilets and lavatory blocks. Flooring in such situations should preferably be done with marble or non-skid ceramic tiles and dado of glazed/polished ceramic tiles finish. 4.4.4.5 Building design The design shall ensure control of noise due to walking, movement of trolleys, etc. Expansion joints should have a non-metallic material finish. The doors should be openable on both sides in operation theatre, while inwardly at other places and out-wardly for patient's room toilet.

IS 15903 : 2010 5 SPACE REQUIREMENT 5.1 Space planning Module To facilitate planning and framing of the structural grid, a usable and workable space planning module of 14 m based on basic space unit of 3.5 m2 has been stipulated in order to rationalize the requirements for various facilities in the maternity nursing home. 5.2 The recommended space requirement for various functions (see 4.1 to 4.3) is given at Table 1. 6 MANPOWER REQUIREMENT 6.1 For a viable size of maternity nursing home, in the beginning when it starts working, it is recommended that the total strength should be based on two persons per bed but should get increased to three persons per bed when the maternity nursing home is working to its full load capacity. 6.2 The recommended manpower requirement for the maternity nursing home is given at Table 2.

Table 1 Space Requirement -- Maternity Nursing Home (Clause 5.2)
Sl No. (1) Facility Per Number if Room/Space More than One (3) (4) space gents ladies space cubicle room room room room room room room room room room room room room room room lobby room room room gents ladies room cubicle room room lobby room cabin laboratory toilet room room room 2 2 Minimum Area m2 (5) 35.00 8.75 12.25 10.50 3.50 17.50 14.00 10.50 5.25 21.00 17.50 10.50 10.50 17.50 14.00 10.50 14.00 14.00 17.50 10.50 10.50 7.00 7.00 7.00 8.75 12.25 10.50 10.50 17.50 14.00 3.50 10.50 10.50 14.00 7.00 3.50 28.00 10.50 10.50 To be shared in common by patients, visitors and staff Remarks

(2) i) Entrance Lobby-cum-Reception and Admission ii) Out-patient and Emergency Services iii) General: a) Lavatories -- separately for gents and ladies b) Canteen c) Janitor closet Obstetric and Gynaecology Clinic: a) Consultation and examination b) Treatment c) Clinical laboratory d) Toilet-cum-change e) Waiting Family Welfare Clinic: a) Consultation and examination b) Treatment c) Waiting Paediatric Clinic: a) Consultation and examination b) Minor surgery-cum-dressing c) Immunization d) Waiting e) Recreation and play General Purpose Clinic: a) Consultation and examination b) Treatment c) Waiting Supporting Facilities: a) Central injection b) Clinical laboratory c) Social worker d) Lavatories -- separately for gents and ladies

(6)

iv)

With toilet common to both Attached to treatment Inclusive of attached toilet

v)

vi)

Inclusive of attached toilet

vii)

Inclusive of attached toilet

viii)

To be shared in common by patients, visitors and staff.

ix) Pharmacy: x) Emergency Service Unit: a) Examination b) Treatment c) Observation d) Toilet e) Waiting xi) Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services: xii) Pathology: a) Specimen collection b) Pathologist c) Laboratories d) Toilet xiii) Radio-diagnosis: a) Radiography b) Ultrasound c) Film developing and processing

4 2

May be arranged in one room for patient and staff

8

IS 15903 : 2010 Table 1 (Continued)
Sl No. (1) Facility Per Number if Room/Space More than One (3) (4) area lobby toilet space room room room room room room room room room room space room room room space room room room room space room room room bed bed bed bed room Minimum Area m2 (5) 14.00 10.50 3.50 14.00 14.00 3.50 5.25 10.50 21.00 24.50 24.50 17.50 28.00 35.00 7.00 7.00 5.25 10.50 14.00 10.50 7.00 7.00 7.00 10.50 17.50 3.50 14.00 21.00 7.00 10.50 8.75 7.00 7.00 10.50 3.50 14.00 21.00 10.50 7.00 10.50 10.50 10.50 3.50 5.25 3.50 14.00 10.50 7.00 7.00 7.00 14.00 21.00 5.25 10.50 17.50 10.50 Remarks

(2) d) Consultation e) Waiting f) Toilet Surgical-cum-Obstetric Suite: a) Reception bay and relative waiting b) Examination and preparation c) Change d) Store e) Theatre pack preparation f) Pre-operative g) Recovery h) Labour (LDR) j) Eclampsia bed with toilet k) Delivery m) Operation theatre n) Scrub-up p) Instrument sterilization q) Dirty utility r) Doctor's work In-patient Nursing Units (Wards) Ward Ancillaries: a) Nursing station with CU & DU b) Treatment c) Ward pantry d) Ward store e) Sluice f) Day space g) Patient's relatives waiting h) Nurses' toilet Maternity Ward: a) Isolation bed with toilet b) Progressive beds (two) c) Ante-natal beds d) Post-natal beds e) Post-operative f) General beds -- multiple g) Formula and breast feeding h) Sanitary block j) Janitor closet Paediatric Ward: a) Isolation bed with toilet b) Progressive beds (two) c) General beds -- with mother's bed d) General beds -- multiple e) Formula and breast feeding f) Play g) Sanitary block h) Janitor closet Neo-natal Intensive Care Unit: a) High dependency unit

(6)

2

For patient and staff

xiv)

3

To accommodate 2 beds 2 bedded with attached toilet 2 bedded with attached toilet be placed close to delivery Common for OT & delivery Common for OT & delivery Common for OT & delivery

xv) xvi)

Inclusive of toilet of 3.5 sq.m With ward ancillaries With toilet

xvii)

minimum 4 minimum 4 as required

xviii)

With ward ancillaries room room bed bed room room 25% of beds 25% of beds 50% of beds With toilet

xix)

bassinet bassinet room room room room room room room cubicle console room

minimum 2 minimum 2

b) Low dependency unit c) Nursing station with CU & DU d) Formula and breast feeding e) Store f) Phototherapy g) Sluice xx) Private Ward: a) Single bedded b) Two bedded c) Toilet for each xxi) Intensive Care Unit: a) Intensive care bed b) Nursing station with CU & DU c) Equipment-cum-Laboratory

Temperature and humidity control Isolated with cubicles with toilet facility

Ward ancillaries be shared with General Ward minimum 2 minimum 2 minimum 4

9

IS 15903 : 2010 Table 1 (Concluded)
Sl No. (1) Facility Per Number if Room/Space More than One (3) (4) room room Minimum Area m2 (5) 7.00 7.00 10.50 3.50 17.50 21.00 10.50 5.25 5.25 7.00 10.50 14.00 7.00 7.00 10.50 14.00 7.00 5.25 7.00 7.00 7.00 5.25 7.00 5.25 5.25 14.00 5.25 10.50 10.50 7.00 10.50 10.50 3.50 7.00 3.50 7.00 5.25 To be shared by all staff Inclusive attached toilet Including account and purchase Remarks

(2) d) Pantry e) Store f) Sanitary block g) Janitor closet Administrative: a) Medical director b) General administration c) Nursing home information d) Staff and visitor's toilet e) Medical record Non-clinical Services: Sterilization: a) Dirty receipt b) Washing/disinfection and assembly c) Sterilization d) Sterile store and distribution Dietary: a) Stores -- dry and day b) Preparation c) Cooking d) Wash -- pot and utensils Laundry: a) Receipt and sorting b) Sluice and washing c) Hydro extraction d) Drying e) Press f) Clean storage and issue Stores: a) Medical store b) Non-medical store Engineering Services: Civil Engineering a) Building maintenance office b) Maintenance store Electrical Engineering a) Transformer and panel b) Generator silence type c) Office and store d) Mechanical engineering store e) Air-conditioner and cooler store f) Water supply, drainage and sanitation g) Store h) Gas supply j) Store k) Fire protection m) Store -- spares and appliances n) Control room p) Public utility

(6)

xxii)

room room room toilet room area area room room room area area space bay area area area bay room room room room room room room room room room room room room toilet

xxiii) xxiv)

xxv)

xxvi)

xxvii) xxviii)

7 INSTRUMENTS REQUIREMENT

AND

EQUIPMENTS

7.1 The instruments and equipment required by various services section/units of a maternity nursing home shall be as given in Table 3. The instruments and equipments may conform to the relevant Indian Standards. 8 MANAGEMENT PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS 8.1 Access, Assessment and Continuity of Care 8.1.1 Patients shall be well informed of the services 10

that the maternity nursing home can and cannot provide. This will facilitate in appropriately matching patients with the healthcare facility's resources. The maternity nursing home should clearly define and prominently display the services that it can provide and the staff oriented to these services. 8.1.2 The maternity nursing home facilities shall have a well-defined registration and admission process with standardized policies and procedures for out-patients, in-patients and emergency patients. Emergency patients shall receive life-stabilizing treatment and be then

IS 15903 : 2010 Table 2 Manpower Requirement -- Maternity Nursing Home (Clause 6.2)
Sl No. (1) Staff (2) Sl No. (1) Staff (2)

i) Medical Staff: 1) General medicine (Physician) 2) General surgery (Surgeon) 3) Obstetrics and gynaecologist 4) Paediatrician 5) Anaesthetist 6) Pathologist 7) Radiologist 8) General duty officers 9) Community medicine ii) Health Staff: 1) Female health assistant 2) Extension educator 3) Nutritionist 4) Public health nurse iii) Nursing Staff: 1) Matron 2) Operating theatre nurse 3) Labour room nurse 4) General nurses 5) Nursing aids 6) Receptionist iv) Para Medical Staff: 1) Assistant pharmacist (Registered)

2) Assistant dietician 3) Technician ECG 4) Technical aids 5) Technologist imaging 6) Technologist pathology 7) Technologist sterilization 8) Technologist medical record 9) Technologist laundry 10) Cook v) Engineering Staff: 1) Junior engineer 2) Technician 3) Electrician 4) Plumber 5) Engineering aids vi) Administrative and Ancillary Staff: 1) Medical director 2) Assistant administrator 3) Clerical staff 4) General attendants 5) Security attendants 6) Sanitary attendants 7) Store keeper

Table 3 Instruments and Equipments -- Maternity Nursing Home (Clause 7.1)
Sl No. (1) Instruments and Equipments (2) Sl No. (1) Instruments and Equipments (2)

i) Entrance Lobby-cum-Reception and Admissions: 1) Chairs, metal office type 2) Chairs, plastic moulded 3) Tables, metal, office 4) Reception, registration desk/counter 5) Trollies, patient 6) Wheel chairs 7) Janitor's equipments ii) Out-patient and Emergency Services: 1) Doctor tables 2) Doctor chairs 3) Attendant chair 4) Patient examination couches 5) Patient examination stools 6) Doctor cabinets 7) Double foot steps 8) Instrument trollies 9) X-ray view boxes 10) Ultrasound examination table 11) Examination lights 12) BP apparatus and stethoscopes 13) Height scale adult and paediatric 14) Weighing machines adult and Paediadric 15) General examination kits 16) Gynaecological examination couch 17) Vaginoscope 18) ECG machine 19) Patient transport wheel chairs 20) Patient transport trollies 21) Portable patient monitor 22) Benches 3 seater 23) Spirometry 24) Neublizer 25) Hydraulic patient ER trolley 26) Bedside locker

27) Kick bucket stainless steel mobile 28) Dressing trolley stainless steel mobile 29) Emergency cart with defibrillator 30) Medication cart 31) Dressing instrument set 32) Portable sterilizer 33) Dressing drums 34) Instrument Trays stainless steel 35) Soiled linen cart stainless steel 36) Dirty disposal bins (set of 3) 37) Female urinal stainless steel 38) Pick station double model 39) Needle/syringe destroyer 40) Screen stand iii) Diagnostic and Therapeutic Department: Pathology: 1) Microscope 2) Refrectometer 3) Hot air oven 4) Hot plate 5) Magnetic stirrer 6) Centrifuge 7) BOD incubator 8) Autoclave 9) Incubator 10) pH meter 11) Glass ware 12) Balance laboratory 13) Regent bottles assorted 14) Test tubes assorted 15) Cabinet for slides 16) Deep freezer -20 degree 17) Haemoglobinometer 18) Laboratory benches 19) Working tables

11

IS 15903 : 2010 Table 3 (Continued)
Sl No. (1) Instruments and Equipments (2) Sl No. (1) Instruments and Equipments (2)

20) Pneumatic chairs 21) Instrument tray for grossing 22) Syringe needle destroyer 23) Dressing trolley 24) Laboratory sinks iv) Radiology: 1) Automatic film processor 2) Dark room equipment 3) Mobile X-ray 60 mA 4) Static X-ray 300 mA 5) Ultrasound machine with colour doppler 6) X-ray View box (4 films) 7) X-ray protectionscreen 8) Patient trolley 9) Step stool 10) Stool revolving 11) Film clips 12) Film hanger and wall bracket v) Surgical-cum-obstetrical Suite: 1) EHOR table 2) Hydraulic OR table 3) Ceiling light twin dome 4) Anaesthesia work station 5) Aneasthesia machine with monitor 6) Emergency cart with defibrillator 7) Medication cart 8) Resuscitation kit 9) Scrub station double bay 10) IV stand 11) Infusion pump 12) Bowl stand 13) Electrosurgical unit 14) Surgeon hydraulic stool 15) Orthopaedic instrument set 16) Plate and screw set 17) Minor surgery set 18) General surgery instrument set 19) Cathterisation set 20) LP tray spinal 21) Suturing set 22) Suture removal set 23) Appendicectomy set 24) Vagotomy set 25) Vaginal hysterectomy set 26) Hernia instrument set 27) Caesarian instrument set 28) D& C set 29) Laprotomy instrument set 30) Speculum set sims + cusco 31) Hysterectomy instrument set 32) Fetal doppler 33) Medical/sterile storage unit 34) Retractors assorted 35) Needle holder set 36) Hydraulic mayo trolley 37) Saddle trolley 38) Pick station double module 39) Instrument trolley 40) Dressing trolley stainless steel mobile 41) Kick bucket stainless steel mobile 42) X-ray view boxes 43) Instrument sterilization box with filters 44) Wide body foot step 45) Soiled linen cart stainless steel 46) Disposal bins (set of 3) 47) Vacuum extractor with Sialastic cups 48) Delivery instrument set and forceps 49) Delivery table

vi) Inpatient Nursing (Ward): 1) Patient care beds FF/SF 2) Bed side lockers 3) Over bed food trollies 4) Male/female urinals 5) Ceiling isolation cubicle systems 6) Pick station single module 7) Medication carts 8) Medical storage cupboard 9) BP and stethoscope 10) Nebuliser 11) Instrument trolley 12) Dressing drums 13) ECG machine 14) Soiled linen cart stainless steel 15) Patient record holder 16) Dirty disposal bins (set of 3) 17) Fresh linen cart 18) Syringe/needle destroyer 19) X-ray view box vii) Nursery: 1) Baby cradle 2) Instrument trolley 3) Medical/sterile storage unit 4) Soiled linen cart stainless steel 5) Dirty disposal bins (set of 3) viii) Intensive Care Unit: 1) Intensive care beds 2) Bed side lockers 3) Over bed food trollies 4) Ceiling curtain cubicle system 5) Kick bucket stainless steel mobile 6) Multi parameter patient monitor 7) Dressing trolley stainless steel mobile 8) Emergency cart with defibrillator 9) Medication cart 10) Ceiling infusion system with pump 11) ECG machine 12) Procedure/halogen light 13) Resuscitation kit 14) Dressing drums 15) Instrument tray stainless steel 16) Adult ventilator 17) Needle/syringe destroyer 18) Male/female urinal stainless steel 19) Nebuliser ix) NICU: 1) Micro processor control baby incubator 2) Comprehensive infant care unit 3) Neo-natal radiant warmer 4) Neo-natal phototherapy unit 5) Neo-natal ventilator 6) Apnea monitor 7) Pulse oximeter 8) Multi parameter monitor 9) Infusion syringe pump 10) Weighing machine paediatric 11) Resuscitation kit 12) Soiled linen kit 13) Dirty disposal bins (set of 3) 14) Instrument trolley xi) Administrative Unit, Non-clinical and Engineering Services xii) Administrative Unit: 1) Executive office tables 2) Executive office chairs 3) Office tables 4) Office chairs

12

IS 15903 : 2010 Table 3 (Concluded)
Sl No. (1) Instruments and Equipments (2) Sl No. (1) Instruments and Equipments (2)

5) Visitor chairs 6) Storage almirahs 7) Filing cabinets 8) Computers 9) Waste receptacles xiii) Non-clinical Services: xiv) Sterilization: 1) Sluicing table 2) Sterile packing table 3) Autoclave instruments/sundries 4) Sterile storage mesh units 5) Sterilising drums stainless steel big 6) Sterilising drums stainless steel medium 7) Sterilising drums stainless steel small xv) Dietary: 1) Refrigerator 2) Deep freezer 3) Kitchen burners 4) Double side working table 5) Food table 6) storage cabinets 7) Utility rack 8) Storage rack 9) Modular trolley 10) Working table with basin 11) Patato peeler 12) Utensils

13) Food tray 14) Food trolley electric 15) Tea snack service trolley 16) Oven twin chamber 17) Bulk boiler 18) Deep fryer 19) Mixer/Juicer 20) Microwave oven xvi) Laundry: 1) Sluicing machine 2) Washing machine 3) Hydro extractor 4) Drying tumbler 5) Pressing table with iron xvii) Stores: 1) Storage cabinets 2) Storage racks stainless steel 3) Storage rack steel 4) Mesh mobile 5) Closed transport cart 6) Instruments cabinets 7) Waste receptacle 8) Weighing scale xviii) Engineering Services: 1) Office tables 2) Office chairs 3) Storage racks

either admitted (if resources are available) or transferred appropriately to another healthcare facility that has the resources to take care of such patients. 8.1.3 The maternity nursing home shall have an appropriate mechanism for transfer or referral of those patients who can not be treated there. The maternity nursing home shall give a summary of patient's condition, investigation reports and the treatment given at the time of transfer/referral to other healthcare facilities. 8.1.4 During admission it shall be ensured that the patients and/or family members are explained about the proposed care, expected results, possible complications and expected costs in a language that can be understood by them. 8.1.5 The initial assessment for in-patients shall be documented within 24 h or earlier as per the patient's condition. The initial assessment shall result in a documented plan of care, which includes preventive aspects of the care. 8.1.6 All patients cared for by the maternity nursing home shall undergo regular reassessment. All patients shall be reassessed at appropriate intervals as per the need to determine their response to treatment and to plan further treatment or discharge. 8.1.7 Laboratory services shall be provided as per the

requirements of the patients. Scope of the laboratory services shall commensurate with the services provided by the maternity nursing home and adequately qualified and trained personnel perform and/or supervize the investigations. The facility for those tests which are not available in the maternity nursing home shall be outsourced to outside agency depending upon their quality assurance system and facility available. 8.1.8 There shall be a documented established laboratory quality assurance programme (see IS/ISO 15189). This programme shall address verification and validation of test methods, surveillance of test results, periodic calibration and maintenance of all equipments with documentation of corrective and preventive actions. 8.1.9 There shall be a documented established laboratory safety programme. Written policies and procedures shall guide the handling and disposal of infectious and hazardous materials. Further the laboratory personnel shall be appropriately trained in safe practices and shall be provided with appropriate safety equipment/devices. 8.1.10 Imaging services shall be provided as per the requirements of the patients and shall comply with legal and other requirements. The scope of the imaging services shall commensurate with the services provided by the maternity nursing home. Adequately qualified 13

IS 15903 : 2010 and trained personnel shall perform and/or supervise and interpret the investigations. Those imaging tests, which are not available in the maternity nursing home, shall be outsourced to other agency based on their quality assurance system. 8.1.11 Written policies and procedures shall guide the handling and disposal of hazardous materials. Imaging personnel shall be provided with appropriate radiation safety devices, which shall be periodically tested and documented. Personnel shall be trained in radiation safety measures. The imaging signage shall be prominently displayed in all appropriate locations. 8.1.12 During all phases of care, there shall be an identified qualified person responsible for the patient. Care of patient shall be coordinated in all care settings within the maternity nursing home. Information about the patient's care and response to treatment shall be shared among medical, nursing and other care providers. The information shall be exchanged and documented during each staffing shift, between shifts and during transfers between units/departments. Patient's record(s) shall be available to the authorized care providers to facilitate the exchange of information. 8.1.13 Policies and procedures shall exist for coordination of various departments and agencies involved in the discharge process (including medicolegal cases). Policies shall be in place for patients leaving against medical advice. A discharge summary shall be given to all the patients leaving the maternity nursing home (including patients leaving against medical advice). 8.1.14 Maternity nursing home shall define the content of the discharge summary, which shall be provided to the patients at the time of discharge. Discharge summary shall contain follow-up advice, medication and other instructions in an understandable manner and incorporate instructions about when and how to obtain urgent care. 8.1.15 In case of death, the summary of the case shall also include the cause of death and may be given to the next of kin on demand. 8.1.16 The patient records shall contain a copy of the discharge/case summary. 8.2 Patient's Rights and Education 8.2.1 The maternity nursing home facilities shall protect patient's and family's rights during care. There shall be a documented process for obtaining patient and/or family's consent for informed decision-making, about their care. This shall also include general consent at the time of patient's admission. 8.2.2 Patients and families shall have a right to information and education about their healthcare needs in a language and manner that is understood by them. They have a right to information on expected costs. 8.3 Care of Patients 8.3.1 The care of patients shall be uniform in different treatment settings and shall be guided by the applicable laws, rules and regulations. The care and treatment orders shall be signed, named, timed and dated by the concerned doctor and shall be countersigned by the clinical in-charge of the patient within 24 h. Evidence based medicine and clinical practice guidelines shall be adopted for patient care wherever available. 8.3.2 Emergency services shall be guided and documented by policies, procedures and applicable laws and regulations. These shall also address handling of medico-legal cases and the patients shall receive care in consonance with the policies. 8.3.3 The ambulance services, if available shall commensurate with the scope of the services provided by the maternity nursing home. There shall be adequate access and space for the ambulance. These shall be appropriately equipped, manned by the trained personnel and shall have proper communication system. 8.3.4 There shall be a checklist of all the equipments and emergency medications. Equipments shall be checked on a daily basis. Emergency medications shall be checked daily and prior to dispatch. 8.3.5 If the cardiac facility available in the maternity nursing home, then all the staff providing patient care shall be trained and periodically updated in cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The events during a cardiopulmonary resuscitation shall be recorded. 8.3.6 A post-event analysis of all cardiac arrests shall be done by a multidisciplinary committee. Corrective and preventive measures shall be taken based on the post-event analysis. 8.3.7 There shall be documented policies and procedures to define rational use of blood and blood products. The applicable laws and regulations shall govern the transfusion services. The consent shall be obtained for donation and transfusion of blood and blood products. The staff shall be trained to implement the policies and procedures. Transfusion reactions shall be analyzed for preventive and corrective actions. 8.3.8 There shall be documented policies and procedures to guide the care of patients in the intensive care and high dependency units. The maternity nursing home facilities shall have documented admission and

14

IS 15903 : 2010 discharge criteria for these units. The staff shall be trained to apply these criteria. 8.3.9 Adequate staff and equipment shall be available in intensive care and high dependency units. A quality assurance programme and infection control practices shall be implemented. The policies shall have defined procedures to handle situation of bed shortage in these units. 8.3.10 There shall be documented policies and procedures for the care of vulnerable patients (elderly, physically and/or mentally challenged and children). These shall be in accordance with the prevailing laws and the national and international guidelines. Staff shall be trained to care for this vulnerable group. A documented procedure shall exist for obtaining informed consent from the appropriate legal representative. 8.3.11 There shall be documented policies and procedures for the care of paediatric patients. The maternity nursing home shall define and display the scope of its paediatric services. 8.3.12 The policy for care of neo-natal patients shall be in consonance with the national/international guidelines and those who care for children shall have age specific competency. There shall be provisions for special care of children including facility for breast feeding. 8.3.13 There shall be policies and procedures to prevent child/neonate abduction and abuse. The children's family members shall be educated about nutrition; immunization and safe parenting and this shall be documented in the medical record. 8.3.14 There shall be policies and procedures to guide the care of patients undergoing moderate sedation. Competent and trained persons shall perform sedation. The person administering and monitoring sedation shall be different from the person performing the procedure/surgery. 8.3.15 Intra-procedure monitoring shall include at least the heart rate; cardiac rhythm, respiratory rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and level of sedation. Patients shall be monitored after sedation. Criteria shall be specified and used before transferring out the patient from the recovery area. 8.3.16 Equipment and manpower shall be available to rescue patients from a deeper level of sedation than that intended. All patients for anaesthesia shall have a pre-anaesthesia assessment by a qualified individual, which shall result in formulation of documented anaesthesia plan. 8.3.17 The anaesthesiologist shall obtain informed 15 consent for administration of anaesthesia. During anaesthesia, monitoring includes regular and periodic recording of heart rate, cardiac rhythm, respiratory rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, airway security and potency and level of anaesthesia. 8.3.18 The surgical patients shall have a pre-operative assessment and a provisional diagnosis documented prior to surgery. The treating surgeon shall obtain informed consent prior to the procedure. Persons qualified by law shall be permitted to perform the surgical procedures. The operating surgeon shall also document the post-operative plan of care. There shall be a quality assurance programme followed for the surgical services, which includes surveillance of the operation theatre environment and monitoring of surgical site infection rates. The staff shall receive training and periodic updating in control and restraint techniques. 8.3.19 For maternity nursing home conducting research, patient's informed consent shall be obtained before entering them in research protocols. They shall be informed of their right to withdraw from the research at any stage and also of the consequences (if any) of such withdrawal. 8.3.20 Patients shall receive food according to their clinical needs and shall have a written order for the diet, if dietary services are available in the maternity nursing home. When families provide food, they shall be educated about the patient's diet limitations. Food shall be prepared, handled, stored and distributed in a safe manner. 8.4 Management of Medication 8.4.1 There shall be documented policies and procedures to guide the maternity nursing home of pharmacy services, storage and usage of medication. There shall be a defined process for acquisition of these medications and a process to obtain medications not listed in the formulary. Medications shall be stored in a clean, well-lit and ventilated environment. Sound inventory control practices shall guide storage of the medications and shall be protected from loss or theft. Emergency medications shall be available all the time and replenished in a timely manner when used. 8.4.2 There shall be documented policies and procedures for prescription of medications. The maternity nursing home shall define a list of high-risk medication, which shall be verified prior to dispensing. 8.4.3 There shall be defined and documented procedures for medication administration and must be administered by those who are permitted by law to do so. There shall be documented policies and procedures to govern patient's self-administration of medications

IS 15903 : 2010 and also patient's medications brought from outside the maternity nursing home. 8.4.4 There shall be documented policies and procedures to govern/guide procurement, handling, storage, distribution, usage and replenishment of medical gases. These shall address the safety issues at all levels and appropriate records shall be maintained in accordance with the policies, procedures and legal requirements. 8.5 Infection Control 8.5.1 The maternity nursing home shall have a welldesigned, comprehensive, coordinated and an effective documented infection control programme, aimed at reducing/eliminating risks to patients, visitors and providers of care. It shall have a multi-disciplinary infection control committee, an infection control team shall have designated and qualified infection control nurse(s) for this activity. The infection control programme shall be documented. It shall include equipment cleaning and sterilization practices. There shall be an appropriate antibiotic policy, which shall be established and implemented. It shall also include laundry and linen management processes, kitchen sanitation and food handling issues. 8.5.2 Appropriate feedback regarding maternity nursing home's associated infection rates shall be provided on regular basis to medical and nursing staff. 8.5.3 Proper facilities and adequate resources shall be provided to support the infection control programme. Facilities like hand washing shall be accessible to healthcare providers in all patient care areas, and compliance with proper hand washing shall be monitored regularly. Isolation/barrier nursing facilities shall be available, adequate gloves, masks, soaps, disinfectants etc shall be available and used correctly. 8.5.4 There shall be documented procedures for sterilization activities in the maternity nursing home and there shall be adequate space available for sterilization activities. Regular validation tests for sterilization shall be carried out and documented. 8.5.5 The infection control programme shall be supported by the maternity nursing home's management and includes training of staff and employee's maternity nursing home's management shall make available resources required for the infection control programme. The maternity nursing home facility shall regularly earmark adequate funds from its annual budget in this regard. 8.5.6 The maternity nursing home shall conduct regular pre-induction training for appropriate categories of staff before joining concerned department(s). It shall 16 also conduct regular `in-service' training sessions for all concerned categories of staff at least once in a year. Appropriate pre and post-exposure prophylaxis shall be provided to all concerned staff members. 8.6 Continuous Quality Improvement 8.6.1 There shall be a documented structured quality assurance and continuous improvement programme developed, implemented and maintained by a multidisciplinary committee within the maternity nursing home (see IS 15195 and IS 15461). 8.6.2 The maternity nursing home shall identify key indicators to monitor the managerial structures, processes and outcomes which shall include procurement of medication essential to meet patient needs, reporting of activities as required by laws and regulations, risk management and utilization of facilities. Further monitoring shall include patient satisfaction, employee satisfaction, adverse events, data collection to support further study for improvements and data collection to support evaluation of the improvements and its evaluation. 8.7 Responsibilities of Management 8.7.1 The maternity nursing home shall comply with the applicable legislations and regulations. Those responsible for governance shall address the maternity nursing home's social responsibility. 8.7.2 The maternity nursing home shall be managed by the leaders in an ethical manner. The leaders shall make public the mission and shall establish its ethical management. It shall honestly portray the services, which it can and cannot provide. The maternity nursing home shall accurately bill for its services based on a standard billing tariff. A suitably qualified and experienced individual shall head the maternity nursing home. The designated individual shall have requisite and appropriate administrative qualifications and experience. 8.7.3 Management shall ensure implementation of systems for internal and external reporting of system and process failures and shall provide resources for proactive risk assessment and risk reduction activities. 8.8 Facility Management and Safety 8.8.1 The maternity nursing home's environment and facilities shall operate to ensure safety of patients, their families, staff and visitors (see IS/ISO 14001). The maternity nursing home shall be aware of and shall comply with the relevant rules and regulations, laws, bye-laws and requisite facility inspection requirements. 8.8.2 Up-to-date drawings shall be maintained which detail the site layout, floor plans and fire escape routes.

IS 15903 : 2010 The provision of space shall be in accordance with the available literature on good practices, Indian Standards or International Standards, enacted legislation (wherever applicable) and directives from government agencies. There shall be a documented operational and maintenance (preventive and breakdown) plan. 8.8.3 There shall be designated individuals responsible for the maintenance of all the facilities and maintenance staff shall be contactable round the clock for emergency repairs. Response times shall be monitored from reporting to inspection and implementation of corrective actions. 8.8.4 The maternity nursing home shall have a programme for clinical and support service equipment management in accordance with its services and strategic plan. A collaborative process shall select equipment and all equipment shall be inventoried and proper logs are maintained as required. 8.8.5 Qualified and trained personnel shall operate and maintain the clinical and support service equipments. These equipments shall be periodically inspected and calibrated for their proper functioning. 8.8.6 The maternity nursing homes shall have provisions for safe water, electricity, medical gases and vacuum systems. Potable water and electricity shall be available round the clock with alternate sources, which shall be tested on regular basis. 8.8.7 The maternity nursing home shall plan for handling community emergencies, epidemics and other disaster and shall identify potential emergencies. The nursing home facilities shall have a documented disaster management system. 8.8.8 Provision shall be made for availability of medical supplies, equipment and materials during such emergencies and maternity nursing home staff shall be trained in the maternity nursing home's disaster management plan. This plan shall be tested at least once in a year. 8.8.9 The maternity nursing home may have documented plans for fire and non-fire emergencies with plans for early detection, abatement and containment of the same. 8.8.10 The maternity nursing home facilities may have a documented safe exit plan in case of fire and nonfire emergencies and staff shall be trained for their role in case of such emergencies. Mock drills shall be held at least once in a year. 8.8.11 The maternity nursing home shall have a defined policy on smoking as per the Government regulation/ guidelines. 17 8.8.12 The maternity nursing home shall have a well defined and documented plan for management of hazardous materials and such materials shall be identified within the maternity nursing home. The maternity nursing home shall implement processes for sorting, handling, storage, transporting and disposal of hazardous material. There shall be a plan for managing spills of hazardous materials and staff shall be educated and trained for handling such materials. 8.8.13 Statutory provisions with regard to bio-medical waste management shall be complied with. Biomedical waste treatment facility shall be managed as per statutory provisions (if in-house) or outsourced to authorized contractor(s). Requisite fees, documents and reports shall be submitted to competent authorities on stipulated dates. Appropriate personal protective measures shall be used by all categories of staff handling bio-medical waste. 8.8.14 Facility inspection rounds, to ensure safety, shall be conducted at least twice in a year in patient care areas and at least once in a year in non-patient care areas. Inspection reports shall be documented and corrective and preventive measures shall be undertaken. Further there shall be a safety education programme for all staff. 8.8.15 The maternity nursing home shall have a safety committee to identify the potential safety and security risks. This committee shall coordinate development, implementation, and monitoring of the safety plan and policies (see IS 18001). 8.9 Human Resource Management 8.9.1 The maternity nursing home shall have a documented system of human resource planning. 8.9.2 The maternity nursing home should maintain an adequate number of staff to meet the care, treatment and service needs of the patient as per the norms wherever available. The required job specifications and job description shall be well defined for each category of staff. The maternity nursing home shall verify the antecedents of the potential employee with regards to criminal/negligence background. 8.9.3 All employees shall be educated with regard to patient's rights and responsibilities and shall be oriented to the service standards of the maternity nursing home. 8.9.4 There shall be a documented on-going programme for professional training and development of the staff. Training shall also be given when job responsibilities change/new equipment is introduced. There shall be a feedback mechanism for assessment of training and development programme.

IS 15903 : 2010 8.9.5 Staff members, students and volunteers shall be adequately trained on specific job duties or responsibilities related to safety. All staff shall be trained on the risks within the maternity nursing home environment. 8.9.6 Staff members shall be able to demonstrate and take actions to report, eliminate/minimize risks. Staff members shall be made aware of procedures to follow in the event of an incident. Reporting processes for common problems, failures and user errors shall exist. 8.9.7 There shall be a documented appraisal system for evaluating the performance of an employee as an integral part of the human resource management process. The employees shall be made aware of the system of appraisal at the time of induction. Performance shall be evaluated based on the performance expectations described in job description. The appraisal system shall be used as a tool for further development. Performance appraisal shall be carried out at pre-defined intervals and shall be documented. 8.9.8 The maternity nursing home shall have a welldocumented disciplinary procedure and shall have a written statement of the policy in place. The disciplinary policy and procedure shall be based on the principles of natural justice. 8.9.9 The policy and procedure shall be known to all categories of employees of the maternity nursing home and the disciplinary procedure shall be in consonance with the prevailing laws. There shall be a provision for appeals in all disciplinary cases. 8.9.10 There shall be a grievance handling mechanism in the maternity nursing home. The employees shall be aware of the procedure to be followed in case they feel aggrieved. The redress procedure shall address the grievance. Actions shall be taken to redress the grievance. 8.9.11 The maternity nursing home shall address the health needs of the employees. A pre-employment medical examination shall be conducted on all the employees. Health problems of the employees shall be taken care of in accordance with the maternity nursing home's policy. Regular health checks of staff dealing with direct patient care shall be done at least once in a year and the findings/results shall be documented. Occupational health hazards shall be adequately addressed. 8.9.12 There shall be a documented personal record for each staff member. Personal files shall be maintained in respect of all employees. The personal files shall contain personal information regarding the employee's qualification, disciplinary background and health status. All records of in-service training and 18 education shall be contained in the personal files. Personal files shall contain results of all evaluations. 8.9.13 There shall be a process for collecting, verifying and evaluating the credentials (education, registration, training and experience) of medical professionals permitted to provide patient care without supervision. 8.9.14 Medical professionals permitted by law, regulation and the maternity nursing home to provide patient care without supervision shall be identified. The education, registration, training and experience of the identified medical professionals shall be documented and updated periodically. All such information pertaining to the medical professionals shall be appropriately verified whenever possible and necessary. 8.9.15 There shall be a process for authorizing all medical professionals to admit and treat patients and provide other clinical services commensurate with their qualifications, training, registration and as per the laid down policies and authorization procedures of the maternity nursing home. The requisite services to be provided by the medical professionals shall be known to them as well as the various departments/units of the maternity nursing home. 8.9.16 There shall be documented process for collecting, verifying and evaluating the credential (education, registration, training and experience) of nursing staff. It shall be updated periodically. All such information pertaining to the nursing staff shall be appropriately verified wherever possible and necessary. 8.9.17 There shall be a process to identify job responsibilities and make clinical work assignments to all nursing staff members to commensurate with the qualifications, training and registration and any other regulatory requirements. The services provided by nursing staff shall be in accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations. The requisite services to be provided by the nursing staff shall be known to them as well the various departments/units of the maternity nursing home. 8.10 Information Management System 8.10.1 There shall be documented policies and procedures to meet the information needs. These shall be in compliance with the prevailing laws and regulations. 8.10.2 All information management and technology acquisitions shall be in accordance with the policies and procedures. The maternity nursing home shall contribute to external databases in accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations. 8.10.3 The maternity nursing home shall have

IS 15903 : 2010 processes in place for effective management of data. Formats for data collection shall be standardized. Necessary resources shall be available for analyzing data. Documented procedures shall exist for storing, retrieving and timely and accurate dissemination of data. These shall also cover selection of appropriate clinical and managerial staff in selecting, integrating and using data. 8.10.4 The maternity nursing home shall have a complete and accurate medical record for every patient. Every medical record shall have a unique identifier. 8.10.5 The maternity nursing home policy shall identify those authorized to make entries in medical record and every medical record entry shall be dated and timed. The recorder of the entry can be identified and contents of medical record shall be identifiable and documented. These records shall help in providing an up-to-date and chronological account of patient care. 8.10.6 The medical record shall reflect continuity of care and shall contain information regarding reasons for admission, diagnosis and plan of care. Operative and other procedures performed shall be incorporated in the medical record. 8.10.7 When patient is transferred to another healthcare facility, the medical record shall contain the date of transfer, the reason for the transfer, the name of receiving healthcare facility and a copy of the discharge note duly signed by appropriate and qualified personnel. 8.10.8 In case of death, the medical record shall contain a copy of the death certificate indicating the cause, date and the time of death. Whenever a clinical autopsy is carried out, the medical record shall contain a copy of the report of the same. Care provider shall have access to current and past medical record. 8.10.9 There shall be documented policies and procedures in place for maintaining confidentiality, integrity and security of information. These shall be in consonance with the applicable laws and shall incorporate safeguarding of data/record against loss, destruction and tampering. 8.10.10 The maternity nursing home shall have an effective process of monitoring compliance of the laid down policy. The maternity nursing home shall use developments in appropriate technology for improving confidentiality, integrity and security. 8.10.11 There shall be documented policies and procedures for retention time of patient's clinical records, data and information. These policies and procedures shall be in consonance with the local and national laws and regulations. The retention process shall provide expected confidentiality and security. The destruction of medical records, data and information shall be in accordance with the laid down policy. 8.10.12 The maternity nursing home shall regularly carry out medical audits. Medical records shall be reviewed periodically. Reviewing shall use a representative sample based on statistical principles. The review shall be conducted by identified care providers and shall focus on the timeliness, legibility and completeness of the medical records. The review process shall include records of both active and discharged patients and shall mention any deficiencies in records. Appropriate corrective and preventive measures undertaken shall be documented.

ANNEX A (Foreword)
LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS RELATED TO HOSPITALS IS No. 10905 Title Recommendations for basic requirements of general hospital buildings: (Part 1) : 1984 Administrative and hospital services department buildings (Part 2) : 1984 Medical services department buildings (Part 3) : 1984 Engineering services department buildings 19 IS No. 12377 : 1988 Title Classification and matrix for various categories of hospitals 13808 Quality management for hospital services (up to 30-bedded hospitals) -- Guidelines: (Part 1) : 1993 Out-patient department (OPD) and emergency services

IS 15903 : 2010 IS No. Title (Part 2) : 1993 Diagnostic and blood transfusion services (Part 3) : 1995 Wards, nursing services and operation theatre (Part 4) : 1996 Hospital support services (Part 5) : 1996 Hospital equipment management IS No. 15551 : 2003 Title Quality management systems -- Guidelines for process improvements in health service organization Medical devices -- Quality management systems -- Requirements for regulatory purposes

15579 : 2005/ ISO 13485 : 2003

ANNEX B (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Hospital Planning Sectional Committee, MHD 14
Organization Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi Artificial Limbs Manufacturer Corporation of India, Kanpur Batra Hospital & Medical Research Centre, New Delhi Christian Medical College & Hospital, Vellore Defence Research and Development Organization, New Delhi Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services, New Delhi Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi Directorate General of Quality Assurance, New Delhi Directorate of Architecture, New Delhi Directorate of Health Services, Delhi Employees State Insurance Corporation, New Delhi Health & Family Welfare Division, Planning Commission, New Delhi Health Care Human Services and Family Welfare Department, Gangtok Holy Family Hospital, New Delhi Hospital Management Planning Consultants, New Delhi Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (India) Ltd, Noida Indian Hospital Association, New Delhi Representative(s) DR N. K. CHATURVEDI ( Chairman) DR A. K. SINGHAL (Alternate ) DR P. C. CHAUBEY DR D. K.SHARMA (Alternate) DR H. N. S HARMA SHRI B. L. WADHWANI (Alternate) DR (SHRIMATI) M. SHARMA ADDITIONAL MEDICAL S UPERINTENDENT (Alternate) DR SELVAKUMAR DR R. P. TRIPATHI. DR M. C. GUPTA (Alternate) DR (COL) PAWAN KAPOOR LT COL U. S. SEN (Alternate) DR R. N. S ALHAN DR A. N.SINHA (Alternate) SHRI RAJESH SRIVASTAVA SHRI DHIRENDRA SHUKLA (Alternate) SHRI N. B. S HELAR DR (S MT) UPINDER KAUR (Alternate ) DR ANIL M EHRA DR S. MIGLANI (Alternate) DR S. K. JAIN SHRI ANIL AGGARWAL (Alternate) DR SHRIMATI AMBUJAM NAIR KAPOOR DR (K UMAR) BHANDARI DR R. L. SHARMA (Alternate) DR E DWARD DAVID SHRI L EKH RAJ LALLA SHRI SANJIV SOOD SHRI R. K. KHAITAN (Alternate) DR (SHRIMATI) PRAMILA G HEI. SHRI I. B. SINGH (Alternate)

20

IS 15903 : 2010
Organization Indian Institute of Health Management & Research, Jaipur Indian Medical Association, New Delhi Indian Society of Health Administrators, Bangalore Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi Jawahar Lal Nehru University, New Delhi Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi Medical Council of India, New Delhi Ministry of Consumer Affairs Food & Public Distribution, New Delhi Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), Kolkata National Academy of Medical Sciences (India), New Delhi National Accreditation Board for Hospital, New Delhi National Institute of Health & Family Welfare, New Delhi Office of the WHO Representative to India, New Delhi School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi Socio Educational Health & Allied Team (SEHAT), New Delhi BIS Directorate General Representative(s) DR S. D. GUPTA DR SANTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) DR ASHOK ADHAO DR DHARAM PRAKASH (Alternate) DR ASHOK S AHNI DR A. K. AGARWAL PROF S. B. ARORA (Alternate) DR RAMA V. BARU DR S. RAMJI DR (SHRIMATI) K AMLESH KOHLI SHRI G. P. PILLAI SHRI KISHAN PAL (Alternate) DR KALYAN GHOSH DR P. K. DAVE DR (S HRIMATI) GEETA S UBBA RAO (Alternate) DR (COL) PAWAN KAPOOR DR B. K. R ANA (Alternate ) DR J. K. DAS SHRI SUNIL N ANDRAJ SHRI ANIL DEWAN JANAB MOHAMMAD R IYAZUDDIN JANAB JAVED ASHAN QUADRI (Alternate) SHRI RAHUL KUMAR, Head (MHD) [Representing Director General (Ex-officio )] Member Secretary SHRI P REM KUMAR Scientist E (MHD), BIS

Panel for Formulation of Guidelines on Nursing Home, MHD 14/P1
Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi. Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi Hospital Management Planning Consultants, New Delhi Indian Medical Association, New Delhi School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi DR S. RAMJI (Convener) DR S. SAXENA SHRI L EKH RAJ LALLA DR AJAY GAMBHIR SHRI ANIL DEWAN

21

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MHD 14 (0132).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in Regional Offices: Central Eastern : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Telephones

{ { {

{

2323 7617 2323 3841

2337 8499, 2337 8561 2337 8626, 2337 9120

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western Branches: : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

{

60 3843 60 9285

2254 1216, 2254 1442 2254 2519, 2254 2315

2832 9295, 2832 7858 2832 7891, 2832 7892

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Laser Typeset by Sunshine Graphics

