IS : 1944 ( Part Vf ) - 1981

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LIGHTING OF PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES
PART VI LIGHTING FOR TOWN E) 199.5 ) AND CITY CENTRES AND AREAS OF CIVIC IMPORTANCE (GROUP

( Second Reprint AUGUST

UDC

628.971.6/7:006:76

BUREAU

OF

INDI'AN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Gr3

Jdy

1982

IS : 1944( Part VI ) - 1981

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LIGHTING OF PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES
PART VI LIGHTING FOR TOWN E) ETDC 45 AND CITY CENTRES AND AREAS OF CIVIC IMPORTANCE (GROUP

Illuminating Engineering Sectional Committee,
Chairman
SHRI B. H. MHATRE Representing

The Bombay Electric Supply & Transport taking, Bombay

Under-

Members
SHRI A. A. SEQIJEIRA( Al&mate to Shri B. H. Mhatre ) Baiai Electricals Ltd. Bombay SHRI G. K. AITHAL SHRI JAGDISH SHARAN ( Alternate ) " SHRI P. K. BANDYOPADHYAY Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. ROY CHQUDHARY( Afkrnate ) Indian Engineering Association, Calcutta SHRI G. S. CHANDRASEKHER SHRI N.. S. CHARI Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. DAS GUPTA ( Alkrnatc ) CHIEF ENGINEER ( ELECTRICAL )-II Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SURVEYOROR WORKS ( ELECT)-III ( Al&rnate ) SHRI H. N. GUPTA Directorate General Factory Advice Services & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ) , Bombay SHRI G. VAIDYANATHAN ( Alternate) SHRI T. S. KUMAR Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad SHRI U. S. NIGAM ( Alkrnute ) SHRI B. MUKHOPADHYA National Test House, Calcutta SHRI G. BHAT~ACHARYA ( Alternate) SHRI R. V. NARAYANAN Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi SHRI ANIL GUPTA ( Alfernak ) SHRI H. C. PANDEY Directorate of Technical Development and Proce;ty ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New SHRIJ. M. REWAL~~WAR( Al&mate )

( Gntind 0
BUREAU This publication reproduction is protected OF

on flag8 2 )

CobTight 1982
INDIAN STANDARDS C@yri& Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and under the said Act.

under the I&m

in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the of copyright

publisher shall be deemed to be an infriement

IS : 1944 ( Part VI ) - 1981
(Continued from page 1 ) Members LT-COL B. B. RAJPAL Re,bre.wntiq Engineer-in-Chief's New L`:lhi Branch, Army Hradquartcrs.

SHRI R. S. KANWAR ( Alternate) SHRI K. S. SARMA National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi National Industrial Dcvclopmcnt Corporation Lrd, &RI K. P. SIIAND~OCUE New Delhi SHRI P. S. SHARMA Metallurgical Engineers & Consultants, Ranchi SHRI G. S. SRIVA~TAVA ( -Jlternafe) SXRI H. SINHA Illuminating Engineering Society of India, Calcutta SHRI H. K. ROHATGI ( Alternnfe ) SHRI R. P. SRIVASTAVA, RDSO Railway Board, Ministry of Railways SHRI V. K. DATTA ( Alternafe) PNS Lighting Design Consultnncy, Bangalore SHRI P. N. SRINIVASAN SHRI G. N. THADANI Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi &RI S. KASTURI RANGAN( A(temate ) SHR: S. P. SACHADEVA, Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member) Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary SHRI SUKH BIR SINGH :Lsistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

Panel for Code of Practice c onuener
SHRI B. H. MHATRE Members DR ARUN KUMAR SI:RI T. BOSE

for Outdoor

Lighting,

ETDC

45/P9
Under-

The Bombay Electric Supply taking, Bombay

& Transport

Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi Calcutta lMetropolitan Development Authority, Calcutta Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay SHXI N. S. CHARI Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHZEFENGINEER ( ELECTRICAL )-II SURVBYOROR WORKS(ELECT)-III (&tern&) New Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi SHP~ S. S. GOEL SHRI R. N. MATHUR ( dl&rnate ) The Bengal Electric Lamp Works Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. P. GUPTA National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI K. S. SARMA Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI P. K. SAXENA SHRI G. L. DUA ( Alternate ) Railway Board, Ministry of Railways SHRI R. P. SRIVASTAVA, RDSO SHRI G. S. BHATIA ( Alternate ) Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. T. VALIA SHRI P. K. BANDHOPADKYAY ( Alternate ) International Airport Authority of India, New Delhi MAJ V. C. VERMA SHRI T. M. C. SRINNA~AN ( Alternati)

IS : 1944( Part VI ) - 1981

hzdian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LIGHTING OF PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES
PART VI LIGHTING FOR TOWN E) AND CITY CENTRES AND AREAS OF CIVIC IMPORTANCE (GROUP

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part VI ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Illuminating Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This part ( Part VI ) of the code is brought out so as to provide guidelines to the Public Lighting Authorities for preparation of lighting installation designs for Group `E' roads. 0.3 This standard ( Part VI ) has been prepared in pursuance of 0.4 of IS : 1944 ( Parts I and II ) - 1970*. Revision ofIS : 1944 ( Parts I and II ) 1970* is also under consideration of the Committee and it is intended that Part I of the revised IS : 1944 should cover general principles and subsequent parts should deal with the requirements for various groups of roads as per the standard classification. This standard, therefore, when the revision of IS : 1944 ( Parts I and II )-1970* is completed, will have the following parts : Part I General principles Part II Lighting for main roads ( Group A ) Part III Lighting for secondary roads which do not require lighting up to Group A standard ( Group B ) Part IV Lighting for residential and unclassified roads ( Group C ) Part V Lighting for grade separated junctions, bridges and elevated roads ( Group D ) Part VI Lighting for town and city centres and. areas of civic importance ( Group E ) Part VII Lighting for roads with special requirements ( Group F ) Part VIII Lighting in tunnels ( Group G ).
*Code of practice for lighting of public thoroughfares (J% revisim ) .

3

IS:1944(PartvI)-`1981 0.4 In the preparation of this standard derived from the following: i) ii) ( Part VI ), assistance has been

CIE 32 ( TC 4.6 ) 1976 - `Lighting in situations requiring special treatment'. International Commission on Illumination. BS 5489 ( Part 9 ) - 1969 - `Road lighting: ( Part 9 ) --Lighting for town and city centers and areas of civic importance'. British Standards Institution.

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of the standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This part of the code deals with functions, appearance and design requirements of lighting for towns and city centres and areas of civic importance ( Group E ). 1.2 It includes lighting for those areas within towns and cities which have an importance for civic or other reasons, and for which a standard of lighting is different from and higher than that described in other parts. Such areas include not only civic centres, but also important shopping streets, boulevards, promenades and other places which are focus of social activities after dark. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this code, definitions given in IS : 1944 ( Parts I and II )-1970t and those provided in IS : 1885 ( Part XVI/Set 2 )-1968: shall apply. 3. GENERAL 3.1 Requirements 3.1.1 When designing the lighting for town and city centres, and areas of civic importance, the aim should be to provide installations which are outstanding as compared to those on the approach-roads, and suited to the environment.
*Rules for roundingoff numerical values ( revtied ) . tCode of practice for lighting of public thoroughfares (Jirsf revision). ~Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part XVI Lighting, Section 2 General lighting fittings and lighting for traffic and signal@.

illumination

4

IS:1944(PartvI)-1981 3.1.2 The question of aesthetic appearance, both by day and night, should be taken into account in addition to the standard and quality of the lighting, and no account should be taken of extraneous contributions made by shop window, facia signs, etc. 3.1.3 The iighting has often to cater for large concentrations of pedestrians, as well as vehicular traffic, and the type of lighting may with advantage be selected so as to encourage social and business activities and make the locality attractive after dark. 3.1.4 In view of the high standards of lighting desirable, and the requirement for general lighting of the whole visual scene, direct or area lighting is more appropriate than the technique normally adopted for the lighting for traffic routes. The standard of lighting, however, should be compatible with the requirements of IS : 1944 ( Parts I and II )-1970* and there should be proper integration with the lighting of all approach roads. 3.1.5 Since local conditions recommendations are intended lations should be designed as requirements bearing in mind and requirements vary considerably, these to provide only guiding principles. Instalpart of 1he total environment to suit local possible future developments.

3.2 Design and Choice of Equipment 3.2.1 Columns, luminaires and brackets, should be of good integrated design and should be compatible with their surroundings. 3.2.2 When selecting columns, consideration should also be given to their structural stability and to their suitability for carrying supplementary seasonal decorative lighting which may be required on festive occasims. 3.2.3 To create a pleasant and attractive atmosphere, the type of light source chosen is of importance. As objects will be seen mainly by direct vision rather than by silhouette, colour distortion should be avoided. Therefore, lamps with good colour rendering quality are desirable. 3.3 Siting and Appearance

3.3.1 The siting of all lighting equipment should be carefully undertaken so as neither to detract from the genera1 or particular views of interest such as buildings, trees and gardens, nor be confusing or incompatible with the visual scene. The position of luminaires, besides being functional, should by day and night provide a pleasing layout. The principles for the daytime appearance of lighting installations laid down in IS : 1944 ( Parts I and II )-1970*, apply to all roads. Important civic areas such as, shopping streets, promenades would need special treatment.
*Code of practice for lighting of public thoroughfares 5 (jrst revision ).

IS:1944(PartVI)-1981 4. LIGHTING FOR AREAS CARRYING VEHICULAR TRAFFIC 4.1 Main Squares 4.1.1 Lighting Criteria - The layout and character of main squares vary enormously; each poses a special lighting problem. However, the most essential point is that the lighting of the square should be considered as a whole and the different types and standards of lighting that may bq required to enhance the night time appearance should be carefully co-ordinated. Special considerations may have to be given where open markets, railway or bus terminal are incorporated in, or adjoin, the main square.
There are generally three lighting areas to be considered: a) The carriageways where road safety must be the first consideration; character should b) The peripheral buildings where the architectural be given prime consideration; and

c) The central part of the square where the lighting should enhance the amenity of the area. It is recommended that average level of illumination should be 20 lux. The following are appropriate methods by which lighting of the required standard may be produced: a) By luminaires of special characteristics selected to suit the locality; at an intermediate height,

b) By luminaires of an appropriate type on high masts or on convenient buildings; c) By extending the Group A-2 lighting approach road installation, either by spacing the luminaires at closer intervals, or by using light sources of higher wattage in comparison with that of the approach-roads. d) By Group A-2 lighting similar to that on the major road, supplemented by additional street lighting, or by flood-lighting luminaires as required. 4.1.2 Types of Installation - The choice of the type of installation will be dictated by local circumstances, due consideration being given to the particular characteristics of the surrounding features. It may be desirable to provide an adequate spread of light to illuminate building facades, or, on the other hand, it may be preferable to concentrate the major light output from the luminaires in more downward directions. In deciding upon the mounting height, consideration should be given to the total extent of the area and the spacing to height ratio necessary so as to give adequate coverage and to avoid undesirable diversity of brightness. 6

IS : 1944 ( Part VI ) - 1981 It is particularly important to avoid an excessive number of luminaires as these may give rise to confusion and glare. The standard of lighting required can frequently be more effectively provided by a lesser number of high lumen power pack luminaires of special optical characteristics at greater mounting height. For practical purposes any of the following heights can be selected: a) Intermediate height of 10 to 15 m with larger dimension luminaires with low surface brightness for visual comfort, b) High mast of 15 m and above with appropriate suitable light distribution avoiding glare, and luminaires of

c) Mounting floodlight luminaires with adequate control on glare, on nearby buildings taking the advantage of higher height. 4.2 Important Shopping Streets-In important shopping streets the standard of lighting should be high and should be based on direct vision. This will generally involve mounting luminaires sufficiently high to allow appreciable variations in siting and spacing. The possibility of mounting lighting units on the facades of buildings should not be overlooked provided that they can be designed so as to harmonize with the surroundings and be located without detriment to the efficiency and appearance of the installation. 4.3 Promenades - Promenades can be divided into two categories as follows: a) Seaside promenades, which have the sea on one side and building on the other.

b)

Boulevards, tree-lined streets or inland promenades, which are usually symmetrical with trees on each side backed by buildings or lawns.

As promenades are usually places of popular resort, a high standard of lighting is desirable. In both kinds of promenade the design and siting of lighting columns can make a positive formal contribution to the scene. In the case of seaside promenades, care should be exercised so as not to detract from the view out to sea. 5. LIGHTING FOR OTHER TREATMENT AREAS REQUIRING PARTICULAR

5.1 Pedestrian Precincts - In the lighting for pedestrian precincts, traffic-free shopping centres and related open spaces, other problems arise due to the absence of vehicles, the irregular movement of pedestrian traffic, and the presence of street furniture or decorative features. These factors, and other purely local considerations, need to be taken into account and it is necessary that all such lighting schemes are individually designed.

IS : 1944 ( Part VI ) - 1981 5.1.1 Lighting Criteria - Average horizontal illuminance at footway level, should not be less than 20 lux and the luminaires should be sited in such a way so as to give adequate lighting in all parts. Where floodlighting techniques are employed, maintenance problems will mainly determine the siting of units and in all cases illumination values should be calculated by the point method, considering parameters like mounting height, beam characteristics of luminaires, etc. Imaginative use has to be made of light sources, luminaires and equipment to give the area a bright and cheerful appearance. Some variation in the standards of lighting is desirable to highlight particular features. Higher standards of lighting are required under canopies and normal interior lighting design methods should be used to calculate average horizontal illuminance, which should not be less than 50 lux. Here, the luminaire position, however, shall be determined by the symmetrical appearance of the installation in relation to the module of the shop units, or structural columns. The lighting installation should be planned as part of the total environment and early consultation is desirable so that luminaires, cables, conduits, etc can be incorporated into the final scheme. 5.1.2 Design of Equipment - Luminaires and columns, or wall brackets where appropriate, should be carefully selected so as to harmonise with their surroundings. Great care needs to be exercised in the selection of type of luminaires and conventional street lighting luminaires will seldom be satisfactory. Where columns are employed, mounting heights will usually be 5-6 m for aesthetic reasons and because maintenance difficulties would arise with greater heights. A symmetrical light distribution will generally provide the most satisfactory solution. In cases where such areas can be floodlighted with luminaires mounted on buildings or masts, suitable screening devices to avoid glare should be used that will avoid glare when viewed from normal angles. Where luminaires are incorporated in the soffits of canopies and arcades, low brightness diffusers are essential; and in these situations, tubular fluorescent lamps will generally be found to be most satisfactory. 5.2 Public Car Parks - In designing the lighting installation for car parks particular attention should be paid to the layout and orientation of the luminaires in order to draw attention to the traffic paths and provide. warnings of changes of direction. It is also desirable to light traffic circulation aisels and a road length of 200 m on either side to permit drivers to change from diffuse to concentrated attention.

IS : 1944 ( Part VI ) - 1981 5.2.1 Recommendation - Outdoor car parks will.usually require a reasonable standard of general lightin g and an average horizontal illuminance of 10 lux is recommended, but at control points, additional local lighting may be required. General lighting of this nature can be provided more readily from floodlight luminaires mounted on high mast spaced at appropriate spacing. The height of the mast will be governed by local considerations and parameters like area to be covered. 5.2.2 De@ Sufplements - The choice of light source for car park illumination will generally be dictated by economics, aesthetic and the desired photometric requirements. If the car park area is located near important city squares, then aesthetic consideration should also be given to the structural aspect of the mast. 5.3 Pedestrian Stairways/Footbridges

5.3.1 Whatever the location and surroundings in which a footbridge is located, the lighting installation should be blended harmoniously into the whole scene. Precautions should be taken against theft and vandalism. The lighting on the surface of the footbridge stairways should not bc less than 6 lux and the stairs should be lit in such a way as to reduce as much as possible risks of error or accidents. When the cross is over an unlit road, its lighting should not be disturbing to the users of that road. Wheri the crossin? is over railway tracks, its lighting may take into consideration the special requirements mentioned in IS : 1944 ( Part V )1981 *. 5.3.2 Pedestrian Subways - The lighting on the surface of the pedestrian subways should not bc less than 10 lux for the reason of security at night and to complement the daylight during day-time. Special attention should be given to entrances/exists of pedestrian subways for providing adequate lighting to complement daylight during daytime and same should be provided with switching flexibility to rcducc lighting level to be in line with outside road lighting on which pedestrian subway exists. This is to avoid error and accidents on footways.

*Code ol` practice for lighting of public thoroughfares: Part V Lighting separated ,junctions. bridges and elevated road ( Group D ).

for grade

9

BUREAU
Headquerters:

OF

INDIAN

STAMDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Co,mmon to all Offices ) Regional Offices: Iefephor7e Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : 1 /14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 331 01 31 331 13 75 I 36 24 99

21843 I 3 1641 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 25 19 I 41 2916 tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093

Branch Offices: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 2 63 49 I SPeenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 I 38 49 56 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, ' 6 67 16 BHOPAL 462003 5 36 27 PlotNo. 82783. Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 3 31 77 531'5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 23 1083 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 500001 63471 R14 Yudhister Marg. C ScQeme. JAIPUR 302005 ( 6 98 32 1!7/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam {S 21 04 16 21 17 TRIVANDRUM 695035 /nspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 25171 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35 PUNE 411005 `
*Sales Office700072 in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Street. Calcutta tSales Office in Bombay 8ombay 400007 ISales Office in Bangalore Bangalore 560002 is at Approach, P. 0. Princep 27 88 00 Grant Road, 88 66 28

1;: ES 795

Novelty Chambers,

is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja

Square, 22 36 71

Reprography

Unit,

BE,

New

Delhi,

India

