**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8493 (1977) : Analogue dc voltage signals for industrial 
process measurements and control systems [ETD 18: 
Industrial Process Measurement and Control] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



JS:B«3-I?77 

Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2005) 

ANALOGUE DC VOLTAGE SIGNALS 

FOR rNDUSTRIAL PROCESS MEASUREMENT 

AND CONTROL SYSTEMS 



UDC 0213-501 




© Copj/rigM IS 77 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BUAVAN. 9 ISAIIADl'H ISlFAii ^A^AR MARC 

NEW DELHI \mU2 

^^ OctohUT 1077 




IS : 8493 - 1977 

Indian Standard 

ANALOGUE DC VOLTAGE SIGNALS 

FOR INDUSTRIAL PROCESS MEASUREMENT 

AND CONTROL SYSTEMS 



Electrical Instruments for Industrial Processes Sectional 
Committee, ETDG 53 

Chairman 
Proe ( Db ) J, K. Ghouphuby 
Jadavpur University, Calcutta 

Members Representing 

Shri J. S. AHiiUWALiA Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Db Y. L. Arora Century Rayon, Bombay 

Shri G. B. Pandit ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Banerjee Instrumentation Ltd, Kota 

Shri C. S. Dang ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. R- Bhatia Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 

Shri J. S. Passi ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Bhatia Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Dr N. Satyanarayana ( Alternate ) 
Dr H. Bhaumik Institute of Paper Technology, Saharanpur 

Shri V. K. Bukshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Chakravorty Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri H. P. Dey Mahindra &; Mahindra Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S, Biswas ( Alternate ) 
GoL R. C. Dhingra Controllerate of Inspection ( Electronics ) ( Ministry 

of Defence ), Bangalore 

Shri H. K. Ramamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. N. Gandhi Institute for the Design of Electrical Measuring 

Instruments, Bombay 

Shri N. Vanvari ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Ghosh Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi 

Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. N. Upadhya ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Gopai-akrishnan Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Verma ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed co be an infringement of copyright under the said Act 



18:8493-1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri B. p. Mital Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( GSIR ) , 

Chandigarh 
Shbi K. G. Parikh Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shbi B, S. Pk-abhakab Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay 

Shbi S. Ramakbishnak ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. V. S. Raju Elico Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shbi S. A. H. Khan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. N. RamaSwamy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shri R. Soundhirabajak ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. N. Sabkab M. N. Dastur & Co ( Pvt ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi N, G. Ghattopadhyay (Alternate ) 
Shbi P. S. Shabma Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants 

(MECON),Ranchi 

Shri B. C. Naib ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. P. Subi National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Dr T. K. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Db G. R. Toshniwal Toshniwal Industries Pvt Ltd, Ajmer 

Shri S. C. Maheshwari ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. P. Sachdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretarjf 

Shbi Habchaban Singh 
Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



18:8493-1977 

Indian Standard 

ANALOGUE DC VOLTAGE SIGNALS 

FOR INDUSTRIAL PROCESS MEASUREMENT 

AND CONTROL SYSTEMS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 27 June 1977, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Instruments 
for Industrial Processes Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0-2 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from Doc: 65 A ( Central Office ) 5 'Draft — Analogue direct voltage 
signals for industrial processes measurement and control systems' issued by 
the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0-3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the fmal value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies analogue do voltage signals used in industrial 
process measurement and control systems to transmit information between 
the elements of systems. 

Note — Contrary to the analogue dc current signals specified in IS : 7728-1 975t, 
the analogue dc voltage signals are not intended for transmission over long distances, 

1.2 This standard does not apply to analogue dc voltage signals used 
entirely within an element. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 

apply. ^ 

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
fAnaiogue dc current signals for process control systems. 



IS J 8493 -1977 

2.1 Elements of Industrial Process Measurement and Control 
Systems — Functional units, or integrated combinations thereof, which 
ensure the transducing, transmitting or processing of measured values, 
control quantities, control variables and reference variables. 

2.2 Analogue dc Voltage Signal — A dc voltage signal used for 
transmission or processing which varies in a continuous manner according 
to one or several physical quantities. 

2.3 Measured Value of an Analogue dc Voltage Signal — The 

mean value during a stated duration. 

2.4 Range of an Analogue dc Voltage Signal — The range determi- 
ned by the lower limit and the upper limit of the signal voltage. 

2.5 Lower Limit — The signal voltage corresponding to the minimum 
value of the dc voltage signal. 

2.6 Upper Limit — The signal voltage corresponding to the maximum 
value of the dc voltage signal. 

2.7 Load Impedance — The resultant of the impedances of all connec- 
ted receivers and connection lines. 

2.8 Ripple Content — The ratio between the peak-to-peak value of the 
alternating component and the upper limit of the voltage signal. 

2.9 Signal Connections and Signal Common — Signal circuits may 
have common electrical connections. One of these, which may or may 
not be connected to earth, may be defined as the signal common. 

2.10 Signal Isolation — The absence of an electrical connection between 
the signal loop and all other circuits and earth. 

3. SPECIFIED VALUES 

3.1 Ranges of Analogue dc Voltage Signals — The ranges of analogue 
dc voltage signals shall be as given in Table 1 . 

3.2 Ripple Content — The following values, applicable when using the 
ripple free dc power supply, should be specified: 

a) The ripple content within a system element and its frequencies, 
and 

b) The noise generated internally within a system element and its 
frequencies. 

3.3 Signal Common — For unipolar signals, signal negative should be 
signal common. If the signal common is connected to a dc powder supply, 
it should be connected to the power supply negative. 







IS : 8493 - 1977 


TABLE 1 RANGES OF ANALOGUE dc VOLTAGE SIGNALS 




{Clause 3 A ) 




LowEB Limit 




Upper Limit 


V 




V 


+ 1 




+ 5* 







+ 4* 







+ 5* 







+ 10* 


-10 




+ iOt 



♦Voltage signals which can be derived from the dc current signals specified in 
IS : 7728-1975 Analogue dc current signals for process control systems. 

fVoltage signal which can represent physical quantities with inherent bipolar 



3.3.1 For bipolar signals, the signal neutral should be the signal 
common. If the signal common is connected to a dc power supply, 
it should be connected to the power supply neutral. 

3.4 Earthing — For unipolar signals, if the element is to be earthed, the 
signal negative and/or the dc power supply negative, should be specified. 

3.4.1 For bipolar signals, if the element is to be earthed, the signal 
neutral and/or the dc power supply neutral should be earthed. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

ELECTRICAL INSTRUMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES 

IS: 

2053-1974 Thermocouple pyrometers ( first revision ) 

2054-1962 Reference tables for nickel /chromium-nickel /aluminium tkerm.ocouples 

2055-1962 Reference tables for platinum/rhodium-platinum thermocouples 

2056-1962 R_eferencc tables for copper-constantan thermocouples 

2057-1962 Reference tables for iron-constantan thermocouples 

2711-1966 Direct reading />H meters ( revised ) 

2806-1964 Methods of temperature measurement by electrical resistance thermometer 

2848-1965 Platinum resistance thermometer elements 

4309-1967 Methods of measurement on direct reading j&H meters 

5883-1970 Nickel resistance thermometer elements 

6720-1972 Reference tables for platinum/30 percent rhodium-platinum/6 percent 
rhodium thermocouples 

6804-1972 Glass electrodes for direct reading /»H meters 

7358-1974 Thermocouples 

7722-1975 Analogue pneumatic signals for process control systems 

7728-1975 Analogue dc current signals for process control systems 

7988-1976 Reference tables for chromel-kopel thermocouples 

8018-1976 Platinum and platinum alloy wires for thermocouple elements 

8493-1977 Analogue dc voltage signals for industrial process measurement and control 
system.s 

8495 ( Part I )-1977 Ceramic components for thermocouples and resistance thermo- 
meters: Part I Terminal blocks 



