RAT Alte IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Saad Tate Ne Torre — farts 
ATT 1 Ot I HT HAT 
( RA GARETT ) 


Personal Fall Arrest 
Systems — Specification 


Part 1 Full Body Harness 
( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 13.340.99 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2021 Price Group 9 


Occupational Safety and Health Sectional Committee, CHD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Fourth Revision) is adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft 
finalized by the Occupational Safety and Health Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division 
Council. 


Full body harnesses are required to protect persons from injury by arresting the fall in the event of the user losing 
his/her balance or support and falling from the place of working either at an elevation or in closed locations or 
containers. Some examples of work where a danger of fall exists are given below: 


a) Industrial duty in plant and maintenance work while working at higher elevations; 

b) Construction, erection, installation and such other jobs; 

c) Working of electrical servicemen and linemen on general duty or high tension installation poles; 
installation and overhead maintenance and also for service to outdoor transformers and other similar 
jobs; 

d) Workers working inside ship holds, tankers, silos, chimneys, manholes, sewers or similar other 
enclosed spaces; 

e) Maintenance of buildings, structures or similar jobs, such as paintings, window cleaning, chimney 
cleaning, etc.; and 

f) Working in potentially explosive environment. 


This standard covers full body harnesses for use in safety installations. It does not cover anchorages, which are 
covered in IS 3521 (Part 7)/ISO 14567. It is emphasized that secured anchorage point should be located before 
using any type of full body harness. 


In selecting suitable harness for a particular duty, care should be taken to ensure that such equipment gives the 
wearer protection, as far as possible, and also ensures safety, maximum degree of comfort, freedom of movement 
and in the event of falling, the greatest possible security against injury either from the impact from ground or from 
surrounding structures. 


Such full body harnesses complying with this standard should satisfy ergonomic requirements and should only 
be used if the work allows means of anchorage and can be carried out safely. Personnel should be trained and 
instructed in the safe use of the equipment and be observant of such training and instruction. 


IS 3521 was first published in 1965. The first, second and third revision were carried out in 1983, 1989 and 1999, 
respectively, in order to keep the standard up to date based on knowledge and practice at that time concerning the 
use of systems that incorporate a harness to restrain the body. In the third revision, the harness was classified on the 
basis of various positions of work; minimum width and thickness of the webbing for waist straps were specified 
and static and dynamic strength of the harness were also specified, for which test methods were also prescribed. 


Fourth revision of the standard has been undertaken to harmonize the standard with the latest ISO standard, 
ISO 10333-1. The Committee decided not to adopt the ISO standard identically because there is additional content 
in the Indian Standard, hence this revision can be considered a technically modified adoption of ISO 10333-1. 
The major changes in this revision are: 


a) IS 3521 split into several parts; this part deals with FBH; 

b) Title harmonized with the title of ISO standard; 

c) Terminology has been revised to include terms related to personal fall arrest system (PFAS); 
d) Positioning of fall arrest attachment modified for Class A; 

e) Positioning of work positioning attachment modified for Class P; 

f) Concept of primary strap and secondary strap introduced, their width defined; 


g) New test methods included: Buckle shake test, corrosion test, static suspension test and static 
suspension angle test; and 


h) For performance test of harnesses, IS 3521 (Part 6)/ISO10333-6 has been referred. 


(Continued to third cover) 


Indian Standard 


PERSONAL FALL ARREST 
SYSTEMS — SPECIFICATION 


PART 1 FULL BODY HARNESS 
( Fourth Revision ) 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) specifies the requirements, 
methods of sampling, test methods, instructions for 
general use, marking, packaging and maintenance for 
full-body harnesses (FBH). 


The main purpose of a FBH is to allow the user to 
connect into a personal fall-arrest system (PFAS), 
which has been specified in IS 3521 (Part 6)/ISO 
10333-6, such that if an arrest takes place, the arresting 
force will not exceed 6 KN. 


1.2 For the purposes of this standard, FBH may have 
attachment elements that allow the user to connect into 
other types of safety or access system, for example a 
work-positioning system, a controlled descent/ascent 
system or a confined-space access system. This part 
of IS 3521 includes requirements for such attachment 
elements. 


This part of IS 3521 is applicable only to FBH limited 
to single-person use of a total mass not exceeding 
100 kg. 
NOTE — Users of fall-protection equipment whose total mass 
(including tools and equipment) exceeds 100 kg are advised 
to seek advice from the equipment manufacturer regarding 
the suitability of the equipment, which may need additional 
testing. 


1.3 The scope of this part does not extend to: 


a) Waist belts or chest harnesses: such equipment is 
not considered as safe to use in personal fall-arrest 
systems (PFAS); 


b) All other types of harnesses that are not designed 
primarily for use in PFAS; 


c) Other special requirements for FBH, peculiar to 
use in a controlled descent/ascent system or a 
confined-space access system; and 

d) Any assessment of compatibility or suitability in 
respect of the performance of FBH in a controlled 
descent/ascent system or a confined-space access 
system. 


1.4 This part does not specify those additional 
requirements that would apply when harnesses are 
subjected to special conditions of use (where, for 


example, there exist unusual limitations concerning 
access to the place of work and/or particular 
environmental factors). Thus, treatments to ensure the 
durability of the materials of construction (such as heat 
treatment, anti-corrosion treatment, protection against 
physical and chemical hazards) are not specified in this 
part of IS 3521, but should comply with appropriate 
national standards and other specifications dealing 
with relevant physical characteristics and/or the safety 
of users. In particular, when it is considered necessary 
to test the corrosion resistance of metallic parts of the 
equipment, reference should be made to ISO 9227. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreement based on this Indian 
Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the Indian 
Standards indicated below: 


IS No./ISO No. Title 


3521(Part 5) : 2021/ 
ISO 10333-5 : 2001 


Personal fall-arrest systems: 
Part 5 Connectors 


3521 (Part 6) : 2021/ Personal fall arrest 
ISO 10333-6 : 2004 systems — Specification: 
Part 6 System performance 

tests 


101 (Part 3/Sec 2) : 
1989 


Methods of sampling and 
test for paints, varnishes 
and related products: Part 3 
tests on paint film formation, 
Section 2 Film thickness 
(third revision) 


3203 : 1982 Methods of testing local 
thickness of electroplated 


coatings (first revision) 


ISO 9227 : 1990 Corrosion tests in artificial 
atmospheres — Salt spray 


tests 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


World Medical Association Recommendations Guiding 
Physicians in Biomedical Research Involving Human 
Subjects (Helsinki Declaration), adopted by the 18" 
World Medical Assembly, Helsinki, Finland, June 1964 
and amended by the 29" World Medical Assembly, 
Tokyo, Japan, October 1975, 35% World Medical 
Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983, 41% World 
Medical Assembly, Hong Kong, September 1989 and 
the 48" General Assembly, Somerset West, Republic of 
South Africa, October 1996. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Full-body Harnesses 


3.1.1 Full-body Harness (FBH) — Component of the 
body-holding device which connects a person into a 
personal fall-arrest system (see Fig. 1). 

NOTES 


1 The FBH may comprise straps, fittings, buckles or other 
elements suitably arranged and assembled to support the body 


of a person and to restrain the wearer during a fall and after the 
arrest of a fall. 


2 The FBH may incorporate other fittings which permit its 
connection into other types of safety systems such as a work- 
positioning system. 


3.1.2 Primary Strap — Strap of a full-body harness that 
is intended by the manufacturer to transmit load, and 
support the body or exert pressure on the body during a 
fall of the person and after the arrest of a fall. 


3.1.3 Secondary Strap — Strap from which the FBH is 
constructed, other than primary straps. 


3.1.4 Fastening Buckle — Two-part fitting designed to 
facilitate the donning and doffing of a FBH. 
NOTES 


1 The two parts can be coupled and uncoupled; each part is 
incorporated into mating straps, and when coupled together 
forms a joint between the mating straps. 


2 A fastening buckle can be an adjusting buckle. 


Key 
1 ‘Back 5 Shoulder straps 5 Shoulder straps 
2 Front 6 Shoulder strap restrainer 6 Shoulder strap restrainer 
3. Sub-pelvic strap 7 Buckles 7 Buckles 
4  Fall-arrest attachment 8 Thigh straps 


Fic. 1 EXAMPLE OF A FBH 


3.1.5 Adjusting Buckle — Fitting designed to facilitate 
the lengthening or shortening of FBH straps, to provide 
adjustment for different body sizes and shapes. 


NOTE — An adjusting buckle can be a fastening buckle. 


3.1.6 Fall-arrest Attachment Element — Mandatory 
fitting designated as the point of attachment for the 
connection into a fall-arrest system. 


3.1.7 Work-positioning Attachment Element — Optional 
fitting exclusively designated as the point of attachment 
for the connection into a work-positioning system. 


3.1.8 Controlled Descent/Ascent Attachment 
Element — Optional fitting exclusively designated 
as the point of attachment for the connection into a 
controlled descent/ascent system. 


3.1.9 Confined-space Access Attachment Element — 
Optional fitting exclusively designated as the point of 
attachment for the connection into a confined-space 
access system. 


3.1.10 Collector Plate — Slotted plate which allows 
individual straps to intersect one another, and to be held 
in this position without being joined. 


NOTE — This also allows independent adjustment, i.e. one 
strap can be adjusted without affecting the other. 


3.1.11 Cleat — Retainer which when fitted to straps is 
designed to gather excess strap length after the process 
of adjustment has taken place. 


NOTE — This prevents the nuisance and danger of flapping 
straps interfering with the worker’s task. 


3.1.12 Comfort Pad — Extra support fitted to any of 
the primary straps, which in effect locally increases the 
strap’s width and thickness. 


NOTE — This reduces the pressure exerted on the body by the 
FBH when in normal or emergency use. 


3.1.13 Work-positioning Back Support — Rigid or 
semi-rigid back support which can be incorporated into 
a FBH. 


3.1.14 Tool Loop — Accessory, usually fitted integrally 
to the waist strap of a FBH used to attach tools 
temporarily to the harness while a person is working. 


3.1.15 Total Mass — Sum of the user’s mass plus 
all attached clothing and equipment (other personal 
protective equipment, work related tools etc.). 


3.1.16 Waist Belt — Part of FBH which is fastened 
round the waist. 


3.1.17 Lanyard — Finished length of flexible material, 
which in conjunction with an energy absorber is used as 
a connecting subsystem in PFAS. 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


3.2 Systems 


3.2.1 Personal Fall-arrest System (PFAS) — System 
designed to arrest a fall from a height, to minimize the 
fall-arrest forces, to control the total fall distance in order 
to prevent collision with the ground or other obstacle, 
and to maintain the fallen person in a suitable post-fall 
attitude. 


3.2.2 Work-positioning System — System that enables 
a person to work supported by personal protective 
equipment in tension in such a way that a fall is prevented. 


3.2.3 Controlled Descent System — System whereby 
a worker can descend from one level to another, by 
rappelling (abseiling) or other method, whilst suspended 
in an appropriate harness. 


3.2.4 Confined-space Access System — System used in a 
work situation where the worker has to enter into a narrow 
or confined space using a ladder or by being suspended 
in a harness, and where emergency evacuation can only 
be carried out with the worker in a near upright position. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 General 


To ensure that components assembled into a personal 
fall-arrest system perform correctly, it is recommended 
that they be tested in accordance with IS 3521 
(Part 6)/ISO 10333-6. 


FBH may have attachment elements that allow the user 
to connect into other types of safety or access system, for 
example a work-positioning system, a controlled descent/ 
ascent system or a confined-space access system. 


4.2 Classification 


4.2.1 Class Identification 


This part of IS 3521 establishes a classification system 
that specifies that the fall-arrest function be mandatory 
and other functions be optional as follows: 
a) All FBH shall be at least Class A for fall-arrest 
purposes (see Fig. 2); 
b) Where FBH have optional attachment elements they 
are classified as follows: 
1) Class D for controlled descent/ascent purposes 
(see Fig. 2); 
2) Class E for confined-space access purposes 
(see Fig. 2); 
3) Class L for fall-arrest purposes whilst ladder 
climbing (see Fig. 2); and 
4) Class P for 
(see Fig. 2). 
NOTE — A FBH may be in more than one class. 


work-positioning purposes 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Evacuation 
(Class E) 


Ladder 
(Class L) 


Fall Arrest 
Descent (Class A) 
(Class D) 
Positioning, 
(Class P) 
FRONT BACK 
FALL PROTECTION CLASSES 


Fic. 2 FALL PROTECTION CLASSES 


4.2.2 Class A— Fall Arrest 


Class A FBH are designed to support the body during 
and after the arrest of a fall. They shall have at least one 
fall arrest attachment element, incorporated as to lie at 
the back of the wearer and centrally between the upper 
shoulder blades. The attachment element shall be easily 
reachable to user’s hands. 


4.2.3 Class D — Controlled Descent/Ascent 


Class D FBH are those which meet the requirements 
for Class A FBH and which have additional attachment 
elements that allow the user to connect into a controlled 
descent system. Class D FBH shall have the controlled 
descent/ascent attachment elements incorporated 
in such locations as to enable the user to adopt an 
approximate seated position whilst in suspension. 
Controlled descent/ascent attachment elements are not 
acceptable for connecting into a PFAS. 


4.2.4 Class E — Confined-space Access 


Class E FBH are those which meet the requirements 
for Class A FBH and which have additional attachment 
elements that allow the user to connect into a 
confined-space access system. Class E FBH shall have 
a sliding attachment element on each shoulder strap, 
to be used as a pair, that is, not separately, so as to 
enable the user to adopt a near upright position whilst 
in suspension. Confined-space access attachment 
elements are not acceptable for connecting into a PFAS. 


4.2.5 Class L — Fall Arrest (Ladder Climbing) 


Class L FBH are those which meet the requirements for 
Class A FBH, and which has an additional fall-arrest 
attachment element that allows the user to connect into a 
fall-arrest system necessary for use when climbing. They 
shall have at least one fall-arrest attachment element, 
incorporated as to lie at the front of the wearer and 
centrally between the rib cages. 


4.2.6 Class P — Work Positioning 


Class P FBH are those which meet the requirements for 
class A FBH and which have an additional attachment 
element or elements that allow the user to connect into a 
work-positioning system. Class P FBH shall have at least 
one work-positioning attachment element incorporated 
so as to lie at approximately waist level. If only one work 
positioning attachment element is provided, it shall lie 
centrally to the front. If work-positioning attachment 
elements are provided other than centrally at the front, 
they shall be placed symmetrically in pairs and shall only 
be used as a pair, i.e. not separately. Work-positioning 
attachment elements are not acceptable for connecting 
into a PFAS. 


4.3 Design and Construction 
4.3.1 General Requirements 


4.3.1.1 The purpose of the FBH is to contain the body and 
to suitably distribute the dynamic fall-arrest forces and 
post fall-arrest suspension forces over the body. The FBH 
shall not create any supplementary risk and shall offer an 
acceptable degree of comfort. 


4.3.1.2 A FBH shall comprise an assembly of joined 
straps, disposed around the pelvic area, legs and 
shoulders as shown in Fig. 1. In addition a waist belt 
strap and/or a chest strap may be incorporated. A means 
of adjustment shall be provided to enable the FBH to 
fit the wearer in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


4.3.1.3 The FBH shall be so designed so that when 
worn, the FBH straps shall be incapable of inadvertently 
migrating or loosening from their original position or 
setting. 


4.3.1.4 A FBH may be incorporated within a garment. 


4.3.1.5 It shall be possible to carry out a visual 
inspection of the whole FBH, even if incorporated 
within a garment. 


4.3.1.6 A fall indicator identification shall be provided 
in the FBH. 


4.3.2 Textile Requirements 


4.3.2.1 Webbing and yarns shall be made from virgin 
filament, or from multi-filament synthetic fibres suitable 
for the use intended. The breaking strength of the 
synthetic fibre shall be at least 0.6N/tex?. The Webbing 
Width will be 40 mm (min) and shall not break under a 
minimum tensile load of 19.6 KN (2 000 kg). 


4.3.2.2 Primary straps shall have a width of at least 
40 mm and secondary straps shall have a width of at 
least 20 mm. It shall be visually confirmed during the 
static suspension tests specified in 5.8 which of the 
straps that support the person are primary and which 
are secondary. 


4.3.2.3 Sewing threads shall be physically compatible 
with and of a comparable quality to that of the 
webbing, but shall be of a different colour from that 
of the webbing in order to facilitate visual inspection. 
Number of stitches shall be not less than 3 per cm. 


4.3.2.4 Webbing and rope shall pass the flammability 
tests as given in 5.10. 


4.3.3 Requirements for Fittings 


4.3.3.1 All buckles, attachment elements, collector 
plates, cleats, comfort pads, back support pads and tool 
loops shall be smoothly finished and free from defects 
due to faulty material and manufacture; they shall not 
have sharp or rough edges that may cut, abrade or 
otherwise damage webbing or cause injury to the user. 


4.3.3.2 All adjustment buckles shall self-lock securely 
onto the FBH webbing material but shall not present 
roughened surfaces or sharp edges that may abrade or 
otherwise damage the webbing material. Knurled bars 
are permitted. 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


4.3.3.3 Fastening buckles shall not be capable of 
inadvertent uncoupling. 


4.3.4 Additional Requirements for Attachment Elements 


4.3.4.1 All attachment elements made from loops of 
textile material shall be adequately protected against 
abrasion, both inside and outside of the loop. 


4.3.4.2 Depending upon FBH classification, attachment 
elements shall be incorporated into the FBH so as to 
lie in the positions required in 4.2. Under this part of 
IS 3521, front and side attachment elements for 
connecting into work positioning systems are not 
accepted for fall-arrest use. 


4.3.4.3 The fall-arrest attachment element of a Class A 
FBH, incorporated as to lie at the back of the wearer 
and centrally between the upper shoulder blades, shall 
be so designed as to not slide down the back of the torso 
test mass during the inverted dynamic test described in 
5.7.2. 


4.4 Corrosion Resistance 

In order to protect all metal fittings against corrosion 
and/or other chemical reaction, it is necessary that all 
the fittings shall be coated by chromium plating or 
powder coating. The minimum thickness of chromium 
plating shall be 8 microns when measured in accordance 
with the method prescribed in IS 3203 whereas for 
powder coating the thickness shall be minimum 
45 microns when measured in accordance with the 
method prescribed in IS 101 (Part 3/Set 2). 

When tested in accordance with 5.2, all metallic fittings 
shall be free of red rust, as visible to the unaided eye, or 
other evidence of corrosion of the base metal. Post-test 
presence of white scale is acceptable. 


4.5 Buckle Uncoupling and Slippage 


When tested in accordance with 5.3, fastening buckles 
shall not uncouple, and adjustment buckles shall not 
allow a strap slippage of more than 25 mm. 


4.6 Static Strength 


4.6.1 The FBH shall withstand a force of 15 kN when 
tested: 


a) At each fall-arrest attachment element as specified 
in 5.4; 
b) And where incorporated: 


1) At each controlled descent/ascent attachment 
element as specified in 5.5; 


2) At each confined-space access attachment 
element as specified in 5.6; 


c) And shall show no: 
1) Tearing of webbing material; 
2) Complete separation of any sewn joint; 
3) Partial or complete fracture of any buckle; and 
4) Inadvertent opening of any fastening buckle. 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


4.6.2 Straps and attachment elements shall not 
asymmetrically migrate from position. Straps are 
allowed to slip through adjustment buckles, but not by 
more than 25 mm. 


4.7 Dynamic Performance 


4.7.1 The FBH shall retain the torso test mass clear of 
the ground and in an upright position when tested at 
each fall-arrest attachment element in accordance with 
5.7. In addition, there shall be: 


a) No tearing of webbing material; 

b) No tearing of any primary strap sewn joint; 

c) No partial or complete fracture of any buckle; and 
d) No inadvertent opening of any fastening buckle. 


4.7.2 At the conclusion of the test the angle formed 
between the back of the torso test mass and the test 
lanyard shall not exceed 45°. 


4.7.3 The FBH shall be capable of retaining the torso 
test mass in post-dynamic test suspension for a period 
of at least 10 min. 


4.8 Static Suspension Test 


The FBH shall retain the subject in a position with the 
head upright when tested at each fall-arrest attachment 
element in accordance with 5.8. In addition, there 
shall be: 


a) No metal fittings in contact with the groin, the 
inside of the thighs or the armpits; 


b) No part of the FBH exerting direct pressure on the 
genitals, head or neck; 


c) No intense pain felt; and 
d) No restriction to normal breathing. 


4.9 Static Suspension Angle Test for Class AE FBH 


Class AE FBH shall retain the torso test mass in an 
upright position when tested at each confined-space 
access attachment element in accordance with 5.9. The 
angle formed between the back of the torso test mass 
and the test lanyard shall not exceed 10°. 


5 TEST METHODS 


5.1 Apparatus 


5.1.1 Torso Test Mass for the Static Test (see Fig. 3) — 
In accordance with the dimensions and requirements 
specified in Fig. 3. The suspension eyebolts should 
have an inside diameter of 40 mm and maximum 
cross-section diameter of 16 mm. The surface should 
be smooth and, if of timber construction, should be 
shellacked or varnished. 


5.1.2 Torso Test Mass for Dynamic Test (see Fig. 4) — 
Constructed of rigid material with hard wood surfaces 


in contact with the FBH webbing straps as in Fig . 4a) 
and 4b) and shall have a mass of (100 + 1) kg. The 
included angle between section line A in Fig. 4a) and 
the shoulder line shall be (22.5 + 5)°. 


5.1.3 Test Lanyard — Of wire rope terminated with 
snap hooks such that the combined length of wire and 
hooks is (2400 + 25) mm, measured from snap hook to 
snap hook bearing points under a tension of 44 N. The 
lanyard shall be fabricated from type 302 stainless steel 
ina 9.5 mm diameter, 7 x 19 aircraft cable construction. 
The lanyard terminations shall be formed by a method 
which prevents cable slippage. 


5.1.4 Test structure, consisting of the following: 


a) The rigid anchorage structure shall be so 
constructed that its natural frequency of vibration 
in the vertical axis at the anchorage point is not 
less than 100 Hz and so that the application of a 
force of 20 KN on the anchorage point does not 
cause a deflection greater than 1 mm; 


b 


wm 


The rigid anchorage point should be a ring of 
(20 + 1) mm bore and (15 + 1) mm diameter 
cross-section, or a rod of the same diameter 
cross-section; 


c 


wa 


The rigid anchorage point shall be at such a height 
to prevent the torso test mass from striking the 
floor during dynamic testing. 


5.1.5 Static Strength Test Apparatus — Consisting of a 
test frame, winch or hydraulic puller and indicator, with 
sufficient traverse to load the torso test mass. 


5.1.6 Quick-release Device — Compatible with the 
eyebolt of the torso test mass or connectors which 
ensures the release of the test mass without initial 
velocity. 


5.1.7 Test Yoke — Consisting of a bar 200 mm long 
with two connected ropes equal in length and at least 
300 mm, constructed as shown in Figure 5. Each rope 
shall be terminated with a connector. An attachment 
point for test purposes shall be provided at the centre 
of the bar. 


5.1.8 Force-measuring Instrumentation — Capable 
of measuring forces from 1.2 kN to 20 kN with an 
accuracy of +2 percent and withstanding a force of 
50 kN without damage, and arranged so that 
measurements are carried out with a continuously 
active band up to 100 Hz but with a minimum sampling 
rate of 1000 Hz. 


5.2 Corrosion Test 


The metallic fittings shall be salt spray tested in 
accordance with ISO 9227, with an initial exposure of 
24 h, followed by 1 h of drying, followed by a second 
exposure of 24 h. 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Minimum radius of curvature: R 50 

Mass: 100 kg 

Material: hardwood or plastics (Shore hardness > 90) 
aCentre of gravity 


Fic. 3 Torso TEST MASS FOR STATIC TESTING 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Materials: 
Sections 1, 2 and 3: hard wood 
Sections 4, 5 and 6: lead 
Sections 7 and 8: steel 
NOTE Shapes are approximate. 
a Centre of gravity 
a) HORIZONTAL HALF-SECTIONS OF ToRSO TEST Mass 


Datum Back 
Level 0° 15° 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Front 
180° 


b) POLAR COORDINATES OF HORIZONTAL HALF-SECTIONS OF TORSO 


Fic. 4 Torso Test Mass For DYNAMIC TESTING 


5.3 Buckle Shake Test 


5.3.1 General 


Apply this test to each adjustment buckle and each 
fastening buckle. 


5.3.2 Adjustment Buckles 


5.3.2.1 Move the webbing through the buckle so that 
an unset portion of webbing can be tested. Thread the 
webbing through the buckle in the manner intended by 
the manufacturer. Mark the webbing in the buckle and 
the buckle frame so that the marks align. 


5.3.2.2 Grasp the webbing on either side of the buckle 
and shake it quickly by alternatively moving the 
webbing towards the buckle then away from it for a 
total of 25 cycles. 


5.3.2.3 Observe the alignment marks. Misalignment 
of the marks indicates webbing slippage. Measure and 
record any slippage. 


5.3.3 Fastening buckles 


5.3.3.1 Couple the parts of the buckle together in the 
manner intended by the manufacturer. 


5.3.3.2 Grasp the webbing either side of the buckle and 
shake it quickly by alternatively moving the webbing 
towards the buckle and away for a total of 25 cycles. 


5.3.3.3 Observe and record whether or not the buckle 
inadvertently uncouples. 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 5 TEST YOKE 


5.4 Static Strength Test for Fall-arrest Attachment 
Elements 


5.4.1 Fit the FBH to the torso test mass (5.1.1) in 
a similar manner to that when fitting to a person, in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Make 
all adjustments to ensure a snug fit of the FBH to the 
torso test mass. 


5.4.2 Mark the webbing in each adjustment buckle and 
buckle frame so that the marks align. 


5.4.3 Apply a tensile force of 15 kN between the 
fall-arrest attachment element and the lower eyebolt of 
the torso dummy, ensuring that the time to reach this 
force is (4 + 1) min. Maintain this force for a period 
of 3 min. 


5.4.4 Observe and record whether there is: 
a) Any tearing of webbing material; 
b) Any partial or complete separation of any sewn 
joint; 
c) Any partial or complete fracture of any fastening 
or adjusting buckle; 


10 


d) Any inadvertent opening of any fastening buckle; 
e) Any asymmetric migration of straps and 

attachment elements from original position; and 
f) Any misalignment of buckle marks. 


5.4.5 Repeat the test for all fall-arrest attachment 
elements. A new harness may be used in each case. 


5.4.6 Repeat the procedures of 5.4.1 to 5.4.5 but 
by applying the test force between the fall-arrest 
attachment element and the upper eyebolt of the torso 
test mass. 


5.5 Static Strength Test for Controlled-descent 
Attachment Elements 


5.5.1 Fit the FBH to the torso test mass (5.1.1) in 
a similar manner to that when fitting to a person, in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Make 
all adjustments to ensure a snug fit of the FBH to the 
torso test mass. 


5.5.2 Mark the webbing in each adjustment buckle and 
buckle frame so that the marks align. 


5.5.3 Apply a tensile force of 15 kN between the 
controlled-descent attachment element and the lower 
eyebolt of the torso dummy, ensuring that the time to 
reach this force is (4 + 1) min. Maintain this force for 
a period of 3 min. Measure and record in accordance 
with 5.4.4. 


5.6 Static Strength Test for Confined-space Access 
Attachment Elements 


5.6.1 Fit the FBH to the torso test mass (5.1.1) in 
a similar manner to that when fitting to a person, in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Make 
all adjustments to ensure a snug fit of the FBH to the 
torso test mass. 


5.6.2 Mark the webbing in each adjustment buckle and 
buckle frame so that the marks align. 


5.6.3 Where necessary, attach the connectors of the test 
yoke ropes to the confined-space access attachment 
elements. Apply a tensile force of 15 kN between the 
test yoke and the lower eyebolt of the torso dummy, 
ensuring that the time to reach this force is (4 + 1) min. 
Maintain this force for a period of 3 min. Measure and 
record in accordance with 5.4.4. 


5.7 Dynamic Performance Tests 
5.7.1 Feet First Test 


5.7.1.1 Fit the FBH to the torso test mass (5.1.2) in 
a similar manner to that when fitting to a person, in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Make 
all adjustments to ensure a snug fit of the FBH to the 
torso test mass. In addition, position the uppermost 
inner surface of the dorsal fall-arrest attachment 
element to lie (200 + 20) mm below the flat end of the 
neck of the torso test mass. 


5.7.1.2 Raise the torso test mass in an upright posture, 
and hold it in position by the quick-release device. 
Attach one end of the test lanyard to the fall-arrest 
attachment element under test using a connector 
complying with IS 3521(Part 5)/ISO 10333-5, and 
similarly the other end to the test-rig anchorage. 


5.7.1.3 Raise the torso test mass so that: 


a) The lifting eyebolt is at a maximum horizontal 
distance of 300 mm from the vertical axis of the 
test-rig anchorage before release; and 

b) When the quick-release device is operated the 
torso test mass is allowed to fall freely over a 
distance of 1.0 m. 


5.7.1.4 Release the torso test mass. Observe and record 
whether there is: 

a) Any tearing of webbing material; 

b) Any tearing of any primary strap sewn joint; 


c) Any partial or complete fracture of any fastening 
or adjusting buckle; and 


11 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


d) Any inadvertent opening of any fastening buckle. 


5.7.1.5 Measure and record the angle formed between 
the back of the dummy and the test lanyard. 


5.7.1.6 Leave the torso test mass in post-drop test 
suspension for a period of at least 10 min and observe 
that the torso test mass is retained. 


5.7.1.7 Repeat the procedures 5.7.1.1 to 5.7.1.6 for 
each fall-arrest attachment element, using a new 
FBH and test lanyard in each case. 


5.7.2 “Head first test” 


5.7.2.1 Repeat the procedure in 5.7.1.1 using a new 
FBH. 


5.7.2.2 Raise the torso test mass (5.1.2) in an inverted 
posture, and hold it in position by the quick-release 
device. Attach one end of a new test lanyard to the 
fall-arrest attachment point under test using a connector 
complying with IS 3521(Part 5)/ISO 10333-5, and 
similarly the other end to the test-rig anchorage. 


5.7.2.3 Lower the torso test mass until the test lanyard 
is straight, without loading the FBH. Ensure that the 
attachment element under test is pointing upwards. 


5.7.2.4 Raise the torso test mass so that: 


a) The lifting eyebolt is at a maximum horizontal 
distance of 300 mm from the vertical axis of the 
test-rig anchorage before release; 


b) When the quick-release device is operated the 
torso test mass is allowed to fall freely over a 
distance of 1.0 m. 


At the end of the free fall the torso test mass will pivot 
about the fall-arrest attachment element. Therefore, a 
greater clearance will be required than that in the “feet 
first test”. 


5.7.2.5 Release the torso test mass. Observe and record 
in accordance with the procedures given in 5.7.1.4 to 
5.7.1.6. 


5.7.2.6 Repeat the procedures 5.7.2.1 to 5.7.2.5 for 
each fall-arrest attachment point, using a new FBH and 
test lanyard in each case. 


5.8 Static Suspension Test for Fall-arrest Attachment 
Elements 


5.8.1 The test is to be carried out with a minimum of 
three people who are within the stature height range 
of 1.6 m to 1.9 m. Medical supervision shall be made 
available as a safety precaution during the tests in 
accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. If any person 
reports extreme pain during testing, the tests shall be 
stopped immediately. 

NOTE — There is no set duration for each test since the 

purpose of the test is to detect obvious design defects only. 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


5.8.2 Attach the FBH to the first test participant in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Make 
all adjustments to ensure a snug fit. 


5.8.3 Attach one end of the test lanyard to the fall-arrest 
attachment point using a connector complying with 
IS 3521(Part 5)/ISO 10333-5, and similarly the other 
end to an anchorage which is capable of supporting 
the test participant’s mass with a safety factor of at 
least 10. This anchorage should be at a position so that 
the test participant can be freely suspended with the 
feet just clear of the test-rig floor. This can be achieved 
by raising the test participant with a winch. The 
clearance between the feet and floor shall not exceed 
100 mm. 


5.8.4 With the test participant clear of the test floor, 
observe and record whether there is: 


a) Any metal fittings in contact with the groin, the 
inside of the thighs or the armpits; 


b) Any part of the FBH exerting direct pressure on 
the genitals, head or neck; 


c) Any intense pain felt; and 
d) Any restriction to normal breathing. 


5.8.5 Repeat the procedures described in 5.8.2 to 5.8.4 
for each fall-arrest attachment point. 


5.8.6 Repeat the procedures described in 5.8.2 to 5.8.5 
for the remaining test participants. 


5.9 Static suspension Angle Test for Class AE FBH 


5.9.1 Fit the FBH to the torso test mass (5.1.2) in a 
similar manner to that when fitting to a person, in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Make 
all adjustments to ensure a snug fit of the FBH to the 
torso test mass. 


5.9.2 Where necessary, attach the connectors of the test 
yoke ropes to the confined-space access attachment 
elements. 


5.9.3 Raise the torso test mass so that it is just clear of the 
floor. Allow the torso test mass to remain suspended for 
3 min, and then measure and record the angle between 
the back of the torso test mass and the test yoke ropes. 


5.10 Flammability Resistance Test 
5.10.1 General 


5.10.1.1 This is a small-scale laboratory screening 
procedure for comparing the relative burning behaviour 
of vertically oriented plastic specimens exposed to a 
low energy level, ignition. 


5.10.1.2 This method of test determines the after 
flame/afterglow times and damaged length of specimens. 
It is applicable to solid and cellular materials having 
an apparent density of not less than 250 kg/m*. This 
method is not applicable for materials that spring away 
from the applied flame without igniting. 


12 


5.10.1.3 The classification system described is intended 
for quality assurance and the preselection of component 
materials for products. This system is not intended 
to assess the fire behaviour of building materials, 
furnishings, complete items of equipment or finished 
parts. 


5.10.2 Outline of the Method 


A test specimen bar is supported vertically by one end 
and the free end is exposed to a specified gas flame. The 
burning behaviour of the bar is assessed by measuring 
the after flame/ afterglow times. 


5.10.3 Significance of the Test 


5.10.3.1 Test made on a material under the conditions 
specified may be of considerable value in comparing 
the relative burning behaviour of different materials, 
in controlling manufacturing processes or in assessing 
any change in burning characteristics prior to, or 
during use. The results obtained from this method are 
dependent upon the shape, orientation and environment 
surrounding the specimen and the conditions of 
ignition. Correlation with performance under actual 
service condition is not implied. 


5.10.3.2 Results obtained in accordance with this 
method shall not be used to describe or appraise the 
fire hazard presented by a particular material or shape 
under actual fire conditions, unless used as one element 
of a fire risk assessment that takes into account all of 
the factors that are pertinent to the assessment of the 
fire hazard in a particular end use for the material. 
Assessment for fire hazard requires consideration 
of such factors as fuel contribution, intensity of 
burning (rate of heat release) products of combustion 
and environmental factors, such as the intensity of 
source, orientation of exposed material and ventilation 
conditions. 


5.10.3.3 Burning behaviour as measured by this test 
method, is affected by such factors as density, any 
anisotropy of the material and the thickness of the 
specimen. 


5.10.3.4 Certain materials may shrink from the applied 
flame without igniting. In this event test results are 
not valid and additional test specimens are required to 
obtain ten valid tests. If the test specimens continue to 
shrink from the applied flame without igniting, these 
materials are not suitable for evaluation by this method 
of test. 


5.10.3.5 The burning behaviour of some plastic 
materials may change with time. It is accordingly 
advisable to make tests before and after ageing by an 
appropriate procedure. The preferred ageing conditions 
shall be 7 days at 70 °C. However, other ageing times 
and temperatures may be used by agreement between 
the purchaser and the supplier and shall be noted in the 
test report. 


5.10.4 Apparatus 


5.10.4.1 Laboratory fume hood (cupboard) — Having 
an inside volume of at least 0.5 m° shall be used 
when testing the specimen. The chamber shall permit 
observation and shall be draught-free while permitting 
normal thermal circulation of air past the specimen 
during burning. For safety and convenience, it is 
desirable that this enclosure (which may be completely 
closed) be fitted with an evacuation device, such as an 
exhaust fan to remove products of combustion which 
may be toxic. However, it is important to note that the 
device shall be turned off during the actual test and 
started again immediately after the test to remove the 
products of combustion. 


NOTE — The amount of oxygen available in support 
combustion is naturally important for the conduct of these 
flame tests. For tests conducted by this method when burning 
times are protracted chamber sizes less than 1 m3 may not 
provide accurate results. 


5.10.4.2 Laboratory burner — A Bunsen burner 
having a tube length of 80 to 100 mm and an inside 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


diameter of mm. The tube shall not be equipped with an 
end-attachment, such as a stabilizer. 


5.10.4.3 Ring stand with clamps or the equivalent — 
Adjustable for positioning of the specimen. 


5.10.4.4 Timing device — Accurate to 1 s. 

5.10.4.5 Measuring scale — Graduated, in mm. 
5.10.4.6 Supply of technical grade methane gas — 
With regulator and meter for uniform gas flow. Other 


gas mixtures having a heat content of approximately 
37 MJ/m3 have been found to provide similar results. 


5.10.4.7 Desiccator — Containing anhydrous calcium 
chloride or other drying agent. 


5.10.4.8 Conditioning Room or Chamber — Capable of 
being maintained at 27 + 2 °C and a relative humidity 
of 65 + 5 percent. 


5.10.4.9 Complementary apparatus (see Fig. 6). 
5.10.4.10 Dry absorbent surgical cotton 


FIG. 6 VERTICAL BURNING BEHAVIOUR TEST APPARATUS 


13 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


5.10.4.11 Full-draught  air-circulating oven 
Minimum of 25 air changes/hour, capable of being 
maintained at 70 + 1 °C or other agreed temperature. 


5.10.5 Specimens 


5.10.5.1 All specimens shall be cut from a representative 
sample of the material (sheets or from end products), 
or shall be cast or injection, compression or transfer 
moulded to the necessary form. After any cutting 
operation, care shall be taken to remove all dust and 
any particles from the surface, cut edges shall have a 
smooth finish. 


5.10.5.2 Standard bar specimen shall be 125 + 5 mm 
long, 13.0 + 0.3 mm wide and 3.0 + 0.2 mm thick. 
Other thickness may be used by agreement between the 
purchaser and the supplier and, if so shall be noted in 
the test report. 


NOTE — Tests made on specimens of different thicknesses 
or density are not comparable and tests made in different 
directions of anisotropy may also not be comparable. 


5.10.5.3 A minimum of 26 bar specimens shall be 
prepared. It is advisable to prepare additional specimens 
in the event that the situation described in 5.10.3.4 is 
encountered. 


5.10.6 Conditioning 


5.10.6.1 Unless otherwise required by the material 
specification, the following shall apply. 


5.10.6.1.1 Two sets of 5 bar specimens shall be 
preconditioned for at least 48 h at 27 + 2 °C and 65+ 5 
percent relative humidity. 


5.10.6.1.2 Two sets of 5 bar specimens shall be 
preconditioned for 168 h at 70 + 1 °C and then cooled 
in a desiccator (5.10.4.7) for at least 4 h at ambient 
temperature. 


5.10.6.1.3 All specimens shall be tested in a standard 
laboratory atmosphere of 27 + 2 °C and 65 + 5 percent 
relative humidity. 


5.10.7 Procedure 


5.10.7.1 Clamp the specimen from the upper 6 mm 
of its length with the longitudinal axis vertical so 
that the lower end of the specimen is 300 mm above 
a horizontal layer of dry absorbent surgical cotton 
(50 mm x 50 mm) thinned to a maximum uncompressed 
thickness of 6 mm (see Fig. 6). 


5.10.7.2 Adjust the burner to produce a blue flame 
20 + 1 mm high. The flame shall be obtained by 
adjusting the supplying and air ports of the burner until 
an approximate 20 mm yellow-tipped blue flame is 
produced. Increase the air supply until the yellow tip 
disappears. Measure the height of the flame again and 
adjust it if necessary. 


14 


5.10.7.3 Place the flame of the burner centrally under 
the specimen, so that the top of the burner is 10 mm 
below the lower end of the specimen, and allow it to 
remain there for 10 s. Withdraw the burner to a distance 
at least 150 mm away and simultaneously start the 
timing device. Note the after flame time t, in seconds. 
If the specimen drips molten or flaming material 
during flame application, the burner may be tilted to 
an angle of 45° to avoid material dripping into the tube 
of the burner. However, the 10 mm distance shall be 
maintained between the major portion of the specimen 
and the tilted burner. 


5.10.7.4 When after flaming of the specimen ceases, 
immediately place the flame of burner again under the 
specimen. After 10 s turn off the burner and note the 
after flame 1, and afterglow ¢,, times of the specimen. 


5.10.7.4 The test procedure shall be conducted on at 
least five specimens. 


5.10.8 Expression of Results 


5.10.8.1 Calculate the total after flame time tfi, in 
seconds, for an individual specimen, using the formula: 


t,=t +t, 
where 

t, = first afterflame time, in seconds; 

t, = second afterflame time, in seconds; and 


2 
i= 


specimen number. 


5.10.8.2 For each set of five specimens from a given 
preconditioning treatment, calculate the total set 
afterflame time tfs, in seconds, using the formula: 


where i and ti are as defined in 5.10.8.1. 
5.10.8.3 Calculate the combustion time tci in seconds, 
for an individual specimen, using the formula: 


i, =t, +t, 


where 


i and t, are as defined in 5.10.8.1; and b= after glow 
time, in seconds. 


5.10.9 Categories of Burning Behaviour 


The behaviour of the specimens shall be classified in 
one of the categories given in Table | (FV = Flaming 
vertical specimen) determined by selecting the 
appropriate column, using test results to answer the 
conditional questions posed. 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 1 Categories of Burning Behaviour 
( Clause 5.10.9 ) 


SINo. Conditions Category 
(see Note 1) 

(1) (2) © @ 6 ©) 

i) If: Any individual specimen total after flame ¢,, <10s <30s <30s >30s 

li) And: Total set after flame time t, <50s <250s <250s >250s 

iii) And: Any individual specimen combustion time after the second flame applications, <30s <60s <60s >60s 

iv) And: After flame or after glowing up to the specimen holding clamp No No No Yes 

v) And: Cotton indicator ignited by flaming particles or drop No No Yes Yes or No 

vi) Then: The category is FV-0 — FV-1 FV-2 (see Note 2) 
NOTES 


1 If only one specimen from a set of five specimens for a given preconditioning treatment does not comply with the requirements for a category, 
another set of five specimens subjected to the same preconditioning shall be tested. All specimens from the second set shall comply with the 


appropriate requirements for the category. 


2 The material may not be categorized by this method. 


5.10.10 Test Report 
The test report shall include the following particulars: 


a) 


Complete identification of the product tested, 
including the manufacturer’s name, number or 


code; 
b) The thickness to the nearest mm, of the test 
specimen; 
c) The direction of any anisotropy relative to the test 
specimen dimensions; 
d) Conditioning treatment; 
e) Any prior treatment before testing, other than 
cutting, trimming and conditioning; and 
f) Classification according to the category code 
designation specified in 5.10.9. 
6 INSTRUCTIONS FOR GENERAL 
USE, MARKING, PACKAGING AND 
MAINTENANCE 


6.1 Instructions for General Use and Maintenance 


Clear instructions in English and Hindi, for fitting, 
adjustment and use shall be supplied with each FBH. 
Such instructions shall also include the following 
information: 


a) The name of the manufacturer; 


b) Where appropriate, the name and address of the 
supplier or such other information as enables the 
supplier to be traced; 


c) Astatement of the purposes and limitations of the 
FBH. Also that it should only be issued for use, 
when it is known that it will be part of a PFAS 
which will ensure that should an arrest take place, 
the arrest force will not exceed 6 kN and the arrest 
distance will be controlled; 


15 


d) A warning against making any alterations or 
additions to the product; 

e) In cases where securing buckles (i.e. buckles 
other than those used primarily for adjustment of 
fit) are capable of assembly in more than one way, 
instructions of the method of assembly by which 
the harness complies with this part of IS 3521 and 
a warning against the use of any other methods of 
assembly; 


A warning against the danger that may arise by 
the use of combinations of components and/or 
sub-system in which the safe function of any one 
component and/or sub-system is affected by, or 
interferes with, the safe function of another; 


An instruction to make a visual inspection of the 
equipment immediately before use and to ensure 
that the equipment is in a serviceable condition 
and operates correctly; 


g) 


h) Advice or limitations of the materials in the product 
which may affect its performance, for example 
temperature, the effect of sharp edges, chemical 
reagents, cutting, abrasion, UV degradation and 
that the user should consult the manufacturer in 


case of doubt; 

Storage instructions; 

Instructions for cleaning and/or washing; 
Instructions for maintenance; 


Advice that the equipment is to be inspected 
periodically, taking account of the conditions of 
use, and at least once a year, by a competent person 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions; 


A warning that repairs to the equipment be 
carried out only by the manufacturer or by a 
competent person appropriately authorized by the 
manufacturer; 


p) 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


q) Guidance concerning the inspection of the 
equipment and those factors (for example, 
fall indicator indication) that should cause the 
equipment to be discarded; 


r) An instruction that any equipment that has been 
used to arrest a fall be removed from service; 


s) An instruction that any  work-positioning 
attachment elements mounted at the side waist 
positions shall not be used for connecting into a 
PFAS; and 


t) Advice that before and during use, consideration 
should be given as to how any rescue of a user 
in post fall-arrest suspension can be safely and 
efficiently carried out. 


6.2 Marking 


FBH shall be clearly and indelibly marked or 
permanently labelled by any suitable method not 
having a harmful effect on materials with the following 
information: 


a) The number of this part of IS 3521 [that is, 
IS 3521 (Part 1)], its type, and its class 
(for example, A, AD, ADP, ALP, etc.); 

b) The name, trade mark or other means of 
identification of the manufacturer or the supplier 
who is responsible for acting on behalf of 
the manufacturer of the product for claiming 
compliance with this part of IS 3521 [that is, 
IS 3521 (Part 1)]; 


The manufacturer’s product identification 
information that shall include the manufacturer’s 
batch or serial number that enables the origin of 
the item to be traced; 


c) 


d) The year of manufacture of the product; 


e) The identity of the fibre used as the material of 
construction; 


f) A fall indicator identification; 


g) All information stating by appropriate means the 
intended purpose of each attachment element and 
specifically identifying those attachment elements 
that are designed to be used as part of a complete 
fall-arrest system (see 4.2); 


h 


wm 


A warning to read the manufacturer’s instructions; 
and 


wa 


A special marking indicating the attachment 
point for a fall-arresting application. The letter 
“A”, at least 3 cm in length and width and the 
width of each character stroke at least 0.5 cm, 
shall be marked on each shoulder strap below the 
back-mounted attachment element above the waist 
(Fig. 7). An arrow “ft” at least 5 cm in length and 
3 cm in width and at least a 1 cm wide character 


j 


16 


stroke shall be marked on each shoulder strap 
immediately above or adjacent to the letter “A”, 
pointing in the direction of the attachment element 
(see Fig. 6). All lettering shall be in a prominent 
contrasting colour. 


6.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


6.4 Packaging 


Each harness shall be supplied wrapped but not 
necessarily sealed in moisture-proof material. 


7 SAMPLING 


7.1 Lot 


All the units of product, from those submitted for 
inspection at one time, produced under reasonably 
similar conditions of manufacture including time 
material and process shall be grouped together to 
constitute a lot. 


Samples shall be selected at random from each lot 
separately and tested in order to ascertain conformity 
to the requirements of this specification. 


In order to ensure randomness of selection, use shall be 
made of random number tables. In case such a table is 
not available, the following procedure shall be adopted: 


Starting from any unit, count them in one order as 
1, 2, 3...,etc. up to r and so on, where r is the integral 
part of N/n (N being the total number in the lot and 
n being the number selected for the test). Every r" 
unit thus counted shall be withdrawn to constitute the 
sample (see IS 4905). 


7.2 Sampling of Raw Materials and Components 


7.2.1 To build reliable performance into the final 
assemblies of safety belt and straps, reliability of the 
component parts shall be ensured during production by 
reducing the quality fluctuations to the minimum through 
applications of statistical quality control methods 
[see IS 397 (Part 1)]. When adequate production control 
is maintained by the manufacturer, the past record of 
test results on components will be readily available to 
the purchaser for scrutiny and for the purpose of final 
inspection only small samples need be tested by him. 
Therefore, it is recommended that the manufacturer 
may carry out tests and maintain records of test results 
on the raw materials and components parts according 
to the procedures given in 7.2.2 and 7.2.3 respectively. 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Dimensions in millimetres 


a) Lettering 


Key 


1 Fall-arrest attachment D-ring 


b) Location 


Fic. 7 SPECIAL MARKING FOR THE FALL-ARREST ATTACHMENT ELEMENT 


7.2.2 Whenever the Indian Standard specification 
exists for raw materials used in the manufacture may 
either obtain certificates from the supplier certifying 
conformance of the raw materials to the relevant 
specifications or he may test for conformance the raw 
materials according to test procedure specified in those 
Indian Standard specifications and maintain records of 
tests. 


7.2.3 In conformance of the components, as given in this 
specification the manufacturer may conduct tests for 
ascertaining conformance to the specified requirements 
according to Table 2 if the tests are not destructive 
and according to Table 3 if the tests are destructive. 
The samples for test shall be selected at random. The 
lot shall be considered satisfactory if all the samples 
satisfy the requirements of this specification. 


17 


Table 2 Sample Size of Component Parts for 
Destructive Tests 


( Clause 7.2.3 ) 


No. of Units in the Lot 
() (2) 


No. of Units in the Sample 


Upto 25 5 

26 to 150 8 
151 to 1000 13 
1001 and above 20 


Table 3 Sample Size of Component Parts for 
Non-destructive Tests 


( Clause 7.2.3 ) 


No. of Units in the Lot 
(1) (2) 


No. of Units in the Sample 


Upto 25 1 
26 to 100 2 
101 to 500 3 

501 and above 5 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


7.3 Scale of Sampling of Assembled FBH 


7.3.1 For the purpose of performance test the assembled 
safety belts and straps shall be selected at random and 
shall be in accordance with col 2 of Table 4. 

All the assemblies selected in 7.3.1 shall be subjected 
to performance test. 


Table 4 Sample Size of Assembled FBH for 
Performance Test 


( Clause 7.3.1 ) 


18 


No. of Units in the Lot No. of Units in the Sample 
(1) (2) 
Upto 25 1 
26 to 100 2 
101 to 500 4 
5 


501 and above 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[1] IS 4905, Random sampling and randomization procedures (First Revision) 


[2] IS 397 (Part 1), Method for statistical quality control during production: Part 1 Control charts for variables 
(Second Revision) 


19 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Occupational Safety and Health, CHD 08 


Organization 


Director General, National Safety Council 
3 M India Ltd, Bangalore 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Builders Association of India, Mumbai 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research 
(CIMFR), Dhanbad 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives & Environment Safety, 
Min of Def, New Delhi 


Coal India Limited, Kolkata 


Confederation of Indian Industries, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Development Organization, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Deptt of Industrial Policy and Promotion, New Delhi 


Department of Space (ISRO), Bangalore 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), 
New Delhi 


Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), 
Dhanbad 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service & Labour 


Institute, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS), 
New Delhi 


Directorate of Industrial Safety and Health (DISH), 
Gujrat 


Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, 


New Delhi 


Directorate of Industrial Safety and Health, 
Maharashtra 


Directorate of Industrial Safety and Health, 
Tamil Nadu 


Representative(s) 


Dr LALIT GABHANE (Chairman) 


SHRI VINAY PATHAK 
SHRI RIsHI Ray ARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI LAKSHMI NYAYA VALIVETI 
SHRI DIPTENDU Das (Alternate) 


SHRI S. D. BHARAMBE 
SHRI G. NAGARAJU (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI SANJAY JAIN 
SHRI NAVEEN K SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr J. K. PANDEY 


DR. M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


DR (Mrs) ARTI BHATT 
DR S. Mary CELIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR BHARALI 
SHRI VINAY SEHGAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIKHAR JAIN 
SHRI RAKESH TRIPATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI NANDULA SURYANARAYANAN 
SHRI K. G. KAPOOR (Alternate) 


Suri T. S. G. NARAYANNEN 
SHRI NAND LAL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. SUBBANATHAN 
SHRI R. MANo; (Alternate) 


Dr R. K. UPADHYAY 
DR A. Yapav (Alternate) 


SHRI PRABHAT KUMAR 
SHRI K. GYANESWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT Roy 
Suri H. M. BHANDARI (Alternate) 


DR A. K. MANDAL 
DR A. N. SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI VILAS SUDHAKAR MORAY 
SHRI A. K. DONGRE (Alternate) 


THE SECRETARY 
THE JOINT DIRECTOR (STANDARDS) (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


20 


Organization 
Drager Safety India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Employee State Insurance Corporation, New Delhi 


Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Ajmer 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indian School of Mines, (ISM), Dhanbad 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR), 
Kalpakkam 


Intech Safety Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 
Joseph Leslie Dynamiks Mfg Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Joseph Leslie and Co LLP, Mumbai 


Karam Industries, Noida 


Larsen & Turbo Ltd, Mumbai 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Gol, New Delhi 


Ministry of Labour, New Delhi 
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Disaster Management, 
New Delhi 


National Disaster Response Force, New Delhi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Northern India Textile Research Association, NITRA, 
Ghaziabad 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD), Min of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Mumbai 


Petroleum & Explosives Safety Organization, Nagpur 
Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


M/s Reflectosafe, Mumbai 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI HIRENDAR CHATERJEE 
Ms JHANKHANA GYANI (Alternate) 


Dr DEEPAK KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr RAVINDRA Pawar (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIKET SINGH 


DR N. J. SINGH 
SHRI A. A. PANJWANI (Alternate) 


Dr D. K. PATEL 
Dr SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


ProF D. C. PANIGRAHI 


DR K. SATPATHY 


SHRI SUBRATA MUKHERJEE 
SHRI GOUTAM BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI CYRIL PEREIRA 
SHRI DEAN LESLIE Roy (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI RAJESH NIGAM 
SHRI MOHAMMAD (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


Suet D. K. SHAMI 
DY FIRE ADVISOR (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI VIJAY SINGH NEMIWAL 
SHRI KUNAL SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr B. RAVICHANDRAN 
DR A. K. MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


DEPUTY DIRECTOR GENERAL 
SHRI A Y SUNDKAR (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI ALOK VARSHNEY 
Suri M. U. Vincy (Alternate) 


SHRI SHASHI VARDHAN 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE, (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. BAHL 
SHRI ABHAY PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI LALIT B. AGGARWAL 
SHRI BALRAM CHADHA (Alternate) 


21 


IS 3521 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization 
Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Research, Design and Standard Organization, 
New Delhi 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


The Singareni Colleries Company Limited, 
Kothagudem 


Unicare Emergency Equipment Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Venus Safety and Health Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR PRASAD TIPNIS 
SHRI NEERAJ SHARMA (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


Suri M. KANT 
SHRI KRIT Maru (Alternate) 


SHRI KALIDAS SEN GUPTA 
SHRI SHASHI VASISTHA (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI MAHESH KUDAV 
SHRI RAvI SHINDE (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. LAL, ScreNTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms. PREETI PRABHA 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (CHD), BIS 


22 


(Continued from second cover) 


The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex-A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).’ The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 08 (15082). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


