IS 13877:1993

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

Indian Standard

PLANNING AND DESIGN OF FISH PASSGUIDELINES

UDC

627'882 ( 026 )

0

RIS

1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAK MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

1993

Price Group 3

Barrages

and Weirs Sectional

Committee,

RVD 20

FOREWORD This Tndian Standard was adopted by the Bureau the Barrages and Weirs Sectional Committee Council. A fish pass is a device provided in barrages, rapids the movement of fish from upstream to downstream of Indian Standards, had been approved after the draft finalized by by the River- Valley Division

or similar type of obstacles and vice-versa.

in rivers to facilitate

When a diversion structure is constructed across the river, the passage of the fish is obstructed. Hence for the protection of fish, especially of migratory types, it would be necessary to construct suitable fish pass as a component of the diversion structure. Aspects relating to their locatlon, investigation and data to be collected, type of fish passes, design requirements, etc, are included in this standard.

IS 13877 : 1993

Indian Standard

PLANNING
1 SCOPE

AND DESIGN OF FISH PASS GUIDELINES
3.1.11 The stimuli of fish, whether by large volume of water or greater it is attracted velocity. 3.1.12 The normal time that fish takes from downstream to spawning grounds and the delay which it is capable of withstanding without any detrimental effect on its hiolngical functions. 3.1.13 The size of downstream migrants.

This standard covers guidelines for location, investigation, type and design of fish pass. 2 LOCATION 2.1 The fish pass should be provided near the deep channel through which they always move about. Its location should be readily f,)und by the migrating fish as otherwise the fish may never enter the fishway. 2.2 The entrance and exit of the fish pass should be away from the range of heavy overfull of water from the diversion structure. The fish pass is usually located near the divide wall of the structure between the sluice bays and spillway bays, since water would always be available near the divide wall. 3 INVESTIGA'T10NS AND DATA REQUIRED

3.1.14 The nature of spawning ground and the river conditions at the time of spawning, namely, turbidity and temperature of velocity, depth, water. 3.2 Hydraulics 3.2.1 River velocity and river discharge are two most important hydraulic data which are to be known correctly. Other hydraulic data such as location of points of turbulence, upwelling and intensity of surge are to be correcitly recorded. These data can then be related to biological observations of the behaviour of fish in the marginal areas in order to ensure that the fishway is located in the best location. 3.2.2 By plotting the hydrograph of river discharge and fish migration period, it is possible to determine the range of discharge likely to be available dul-ing the period of migration and the water surfrice profiles for each river bank correspocdicg to this range may be used in the design of the fish pass. 4 TYPES OF FISH PASS

3.1 For planning and designing pass, certain data should be thorough investigations and the Some important investigations are to 3.2.2. 3.1.1 Type of fish, their instincts and environmental 3.1.2 Place of spawning, spots or anywhere.

an effective fish after collecled data analyzed. given in 3.1.1 habits,

characteristics, behaviour. whether at

particular map of route

3.1.3 If anadromous in nature, location the river/streams showing the migratory and spawning grounds. 3.1.4 Timing of upstream migration, nature of river temperature of water during

and downstream JIows, turbidity and these periods. per hour when or

3.1.5 Maximum number of fish passing during peak migration period.

The fish pass can be of two types, namely, fish locks and fish ladders. The fish ladders can be further subdivided into five types as (i) inclined chute type, (ii) pool and weir type, (iii) pool and orifice type, (iv) pool and iet type, and (v) Denil type. 4.1 Fish Lock The operation of fish lock ( see Fig. 1 ) is sitnilar to that of navigation lock. A group of fish is admitted into the lock at a tirnc and transferred either to upstream or downstream as the case may be. The lock is generally located next to the divide wall.

3.1.6 Requirement of w;iter per fish confined to keep it in normai condilicln. 3.1.7 Nature in line. of migration, whether

in gt-"ups

3.1.8 The number of fish passing upstrc~~m of the proposed structrlre fol the previolls periods s;ty I'or a period trf .W years. 3.1.9 Commercial value of the fisheries they contribute in order to work out eco,nomics of having a fish pass o,- not 3.1.10 The normal darting speed and jumping. swimming preference speed of fish, its for swimming or

is

13877 : 1993

4.2 Fish Ladder 4.2.1
Inclined Chute Type

The inclined chute which are so arranged takes a zig-zag course, side. These are of obstacle and alternate 4.2.1.1

types have checks or baffles that the dischar~ging water being driven from side LO two types namely, palled obstacle hsh pass.

4.2.3

Pool and OriJicc

Type

Paired obstacle.7 fish pass

The paired obstacles fish pass ( see Fig. 2 ) consists of a sloping pairs of obstacles spaced along the channel at intervals equal to about the width of the channel and a straight free passage between them. The free passage is considerably restricted and one-half to five-eighths of the channel width being taken up by the obstacles. The floor in the free passage is usually flat, although small bottom obstacles may be used. The wide spacing of the pair of obstacles along the channel gives the fish pass the hydraulic function of a pool and jet type fish pass, but since the pools are divided by the central flow, they do not afford much of a resting place except to the smaller fish. When the Denil type is compared with the paired obstacles fish pass, the ratio of preference is 5 : I in favour of Denil type. Cat-fish does not prefer the paired obstacles fish pass.

Sometimes the entire flow between the pools is passed through a submerged orifce, and the lish ascend from pool to pool through the orifices. These are of two types: (a) Coil type, and (b) Submerged orifice type ( see Pig. 5 and 6).

Fro.

5

Corr> TYPE FISH PASS

When the obstacle5 have submerged orifices, the fish generally prefer to USC them. thus avoiding exposure. 4.2.4 FIG. 2
4.2.1.2 PAIRED OIISTACLR TYPE FISII PASS pass Pool and Jet Type

Alternrrte obstcrclejsh

Alternate obstacle fish pass ( see Fig. 3 ) consists in general of a straight rectangular channel with obstacles or baffles placed alternatively along the sides producing a jet dellection in the horizontal plane. The flow is confined to zig-zag path which is much longer than the fish pass. This type of fish pass is not quite satisfactory. A type of this fish pass with a reasonable slope of say 1 in 4 is shown in Fig. 3.

This is similar to thr: pool and orifice tvpe except that the orifice extends over the fnll hc!g!!t of the balllc in the form of a vertical slot r:rrhcr !linn a submerged orifice.
111 negotiating an up the falling jet.

ov<rI'all

the fish usually

swim

4.2.5

Uvrril Fish POSS

FIG. 3
4.2.2
consists

ALTERNATE OHSTACU TYPE FISH PASS

Pool and Weir Type
or a serrcs

of this type ( See Fig. 4 ) usually of' pools with s~nall clt-aps in water surface at the cross walls. Drops in water surface are generally about 0 3 metre, but COLIIC~ be as great as 0'6 rn at short ladders where only a few .jurnps arc necessary. Long ladders are often provided with intermediate rest pools. The migratory lish jump from one step to the other. The fish ladder

type of fish pass consists of' a straight clrauncl w1t11 closely spaced bathes set at an angle with the axis of the channel. The energy of the water flowing down the steep tlumz is dissipated by the closely spaced baflles on the sides and bottom, thereby or vanes causing part of tile flow to turn hack on itself. The velocity of the water turned by the vanes meets the velocity of the main flow in the central part of the fish pass, which results in rcduct~on in velocity. It is cqlinllv effective as alternutt~ obstacle fizh pass ( .s<`c4.2.1.2 ), 4.2.5.1
SilllplC

-Tile Drrlil or channel

The Denii

fi?ll i::!ss sho\\n

rn F:i;! 7 IS ::
lI;lvlll~ h~llciw!

it ;s 21 cll~rntlel ilI't';lllgClllCTlli.

and !_wpcrlclicLll;ir 1'1~rnied t'rburn ohirqlie `l`lie cv~rrni has proved quite ellicicrit parts. The velocitrcs in the channel are extremely moderate. This simple svmmetrical fish pass can bo used for shallow depths.

h,lflles

IS 13877 : 1993
4.2.5.2 Modification

of the Denil fis!l pass having parallel bailles at the sides, placed at an angle with the side walls and the bottom shown in Fig. 8 has proved to be very efficient.

5.6 Typical [`lg. IU. 6 DESIGN

details

of fish pass

are

shown

in

REQUIREMENTS

4.2.5.3 Another modified Denil fish pass, shonn in Fig. 9 has been cvolvcd out from a series of laboratory experiments. It has been seen that this fish pass is not ali`ected by head and tall watel conditions as long as the fish can enter the fish pass and sllticietlt water is flowing. Strong overtopping does llot reduce its effectiveness.

6.1 The dimension of the fish pass, supply of water and grade would have to be suitably adjusted to reduce the turbulence in the compartments to the point wl[ere the fish variety would not become fatigued. I he following points may serve as guidelines in a satisfactory design of a fish pass. 6.1.1 The entrance should be well submerged at all stages of water when the fish are seeking ascent through it.

~`IG. 7

DEhII, TYPR ( %lAI.I, ) FISH PASS
( ALTERNATIVE-~ )

6.1.2 If the Row from a fish pass is small compared to llow in the river, an auxiliary water supply may be required to increaac the velocity of' flow out of the fish entrance for the pllrpose of attracting the fish more readily.
6.1.3 Vertical Slot Bqflie Type

Frci. 8

DENIL TYPE ( SMALL ) Frarr PASS ( ALTERNATIVE-II )

FIG.

9

DI.NIL nPE ( SMALL ) ( i\LTH<NATlVE-111 )

FISH

I'ASS

Ascent by fish is possible at any depth of the fish pass. Depending on rate of migration, the pool capacity should be adequately provided to reduce fish stress. Approximately 0'1 13 nl" of space is required for fish movement of major carp of 150 mm length. The slot width should be adjusted in relation to the sizes of fish. A mrnimum 300 mm slot width is regarded as sullicient for free entry of big fish. The larger the slot width, the larger the pool sire necessary to cushion and dissipate the energy of the increased rate or flow passing through the slot. 6.1.4
Pool Cnpacity

5 SEI.EC!TION

OF TYPE:

5.1 The selection of the type of fish pass, either a fish lock or fish ladder ( any sub type ) depends on many considerations including economy, but the plime consideration is (he suitability or attraction to tf~e migratory fish. The fisheries department has to he invariably consulted before the structure is selected and planned. 5.2 Hydraulic model studies may be got conductcd for selection of the appropriate type of fish pass and to formulate itq design. 5.3 The Den11 type of fish pass which incorporate the ideas of erlergy dissipation is generally ndaptably to any particular srt of local conditions and rcqulremcilts. Alternative types also should be considered and compared for economy and attractioil to fish.

The pool capacity may the following expression: v _~ Cl) 6U r whcrc V = pool c:lpaci:y
V y volrlfiie recluiled

be determined

by using

in m", per fish in m3, in nlimbers of

C = fish pass capacity fi\h per hour, and
r --= rate

of ascent per minute.

in number

of pools

The siLe of fish pass depends on tilt: available voI:ilne of \c,!ter, the nun~hci- 01` fish expeclet! to use tile f1s11pass, G/r, spee(! an(1 kind of spccics wllich will list' the fi\!c p:+ss.

5.5 Wlwc the InajoxitY ot' fish is of tlje cat-fish variety, Dcnil type nr;~y be Rdv;inla~e~LIs. An alter-native obslaclc lypc ni:~y bc prelc-nhle for quill black fish variety. 3

IS 13877:1993

FIG. IO

TYPICAL SKTtWAI,

ELEVATION Or: A FISH PASS IN A BARRAGE

SECTION

1
FIG. 1OA

_.--_____A
PLAN

DETAIL OF `A' 6.1.7 Fish Pass Gradient The fishypass gradient

should preferably be I : lcll so as to ensure a flow velocity not exceeding I 800 mm per set in any portion of fish pass. velocity of

General practice is to provide average 400 to 900 mmlsec in each pool.

FIG. 11
6.1.6 Herd

TYPICAL STAGE D[fferalcr

DISCH~WE

CURVE

between

Pool

To check the number of baffles required, it is desirable to draw correctly a set of headwarer and tailwater CIIWCS (.scc Fig. I I ). To do this, the elevations of the water su~farr at the upstream end of the fish pass and the downstream end are determined from the water surface profiles at various rates of discharge ( we Fig. I2 ). The maximum distance hCtween these iW0 curves Wilt guide in deciding the n~~nthc~- of b:~illec; requil-cd io bc placccl in the wish p:~sc to overcome this he,-\J.

The head loss per pool may be varied

to decrease Row and check turbulence. Fur sm:iller pools ( 1 800 mm x 2 400 mm or so ) the head per baffle should he 200 cm, while for larger pools ( 3 000 mm x 3 600 mm ) elevation difrerence between pools may be kept 300 mm. 4

IS 13877: 1993

J__.0
30

SO

.

SO DISTANCC

.
,"I

.

-..._L

~._

I50

___c

FIG. 12 6.1.11 Length

TYPICAL WATER SURFACE PROIILE the' quantity of fish admitted can be controHed. Otherwise, the compartments would be unduly flooded;during high water periods and insufficient supplies during low water periods. 7.2 Automatic regulation may be provided where the Variation of water level is not too gt-eat, by the provision of a series of compartments wirh apertures through the bottom of the dividing partitions, the dimensions of the apertures being reduced in each successive partitiou commencing at t!le inlet.

ofFish Yoss in Barrages

The length of the fish pass should be considered from the point of entrance downstream to a place above the barrage where relatively calm water with low velocity is available, which will not sweep away the fish passing through the fish pass, 7 REGULATION 7.1 The provided upper with end of the fish pass regulating arrangements should be so that

I

-

I

I

Standard The

Mark I use

of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the RWPUII n/~Indi;rn Stmdurds ACT. 1986 and the Rules an:i Regulations made thereunder. The Standard hiark on products covered by an Indl::rl Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirelnents of that standard under a well defined system 01' insp~cr~::n, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by B1S and opelalec! by (Ire producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by HIS f-or conf`orn~~tr, to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which rl 1rccnc.t I'OI the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manul'acrurers or produce:s IIIR~ !W c~bl:~t,leti from the Bureau of Indian Standards. -----.-I

Bureau of Indian Standards is a statutory institution established under the BUWUU of Indiun Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. BIS Copyright

NO part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. the free use, in the any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does nor preclude such as symbols and sizes, type or grade details, course of implementing the standard, of necessary designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arlses on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Jndian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. _ Amend No. RVD 20 ( 101 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Date of Issue

Text Affcctcd

RTJREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 I3 75

OF INDJAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Mannksansrha ( Commou to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

OfXccs: : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

( 331 01 31 331 I3 75 Maniktola 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43. 53 23 84 235 02 16, 1 235 15 19. 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Eastern

: l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VI1 M. V. I. P. Road. CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. I. T. Campus, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri

Northern Southern Western

160036 600113

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. PARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERAHAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE. JAIPUR. KANPUR.

Printed

at Printrade,

New

Delhi,

India

