**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2216 (1985): Tennis Balls [PCD 22: Sports Goods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 685-634*22 



IS: 2216 »1985 




Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
TENNIS BALLS 

(First Revision) 



( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



1. Scope — Covers requirements for tennis balls. 
£ 2. Dimensions — The balls shall be of diameter 63'5 to 66'7 mm and mass 567 to 58'5 g. 

3. Requirements — The balls shall have a uniform outer surface and shall be white or yellow in 
colour. If there are any seams, they shall be stitchless. 

3.1 Bounce — The ball shall have a bounce of not less than 135 cm and not more than 147 cm when 
dropped from a height of 254 cm upon a 1 : 3 : 6 concrete base of 76 mm thickness. 

Note — The measurements shall be taken from the concrete base to the bottom of the ball. 

3.2 Deformation — The ball shall have a forward deformation of more than 5'6 mm and less than 74 
mm and a return deformation of more than 8'9 mm and less than 10'8 mm at 8*165 kg load. The 
two deformation figures shall be the averages of three individual readings along three axes of the ball 
and no two individual readings shall differ by more than 0*8 mm in each cases. 

4. Tests 

4.1 Atmospheric Conditions for Testing — Unless otherwise specified, ail tests shall be carried out at 
a temperature of 27 ± 2°C and relative humidity of 65 ± 5 percent. All balls shall be removed from 
their container and kept at the said temperature and humidity for 24 hours prior to testing and shall be 
at that temperature and humidity when the test is commenced. 

4.2 P re-compression Test ~ Before any ball is tested, it shall be steadily compressed by approximately 
25'4 mm on each of three diameters at right angles to one another in succession. This process shall 
be carried out three times ( nine compressions in all ). All tests shall be completed within two hours 
of pre-compression. 

4.3 Wear Resistance — The balls shall be tumbled in a large drum, the inside of which is covered 
with coarse abrasive paper ( Grit 50, silicon carbide ) to about two-fifths of the interior surface. The 
tumbling shall be done at about 24 revolutions per minute for six hours. The weight of ball as also 
the bounce before and after tumbling shall be measured. The loss in mass as a result of the wear 
shall not exceed half percent of the original mass of the ball. The increase in bounce shall not exceed 
more than half the permissible variation for the ball before test. 

4.4 Testing Diameter — The ring gauge used (see Fig. 1) shall consist of a metal plate preferably 
non corrosive, of a uniform thickness of 3 2 mm in which there are two circular openings 65*4 and 
68*6 mm in diameter respectively. The inner surfaces of the gauge shall have a convex profile with 
a radius of 1 '6 mm. The ball shall not drop through the smaller opening (not go gauge) by its own 
weight and shall drop through the larger opening ( go gauge ) by its own weight. 




NOT GO GAUGE 



GO GAUGE 



FIG 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
1 GAUGE FOR TESTING DIAMETER 



Adopted 13 March 1985 



© September 1985, ISI 



Gr2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110008 



18:2216-1985 

4.5 Deformation — The balls when tested for deformation in accordance with the procedure given in 
Appendix A shall satisfy the requirements given in 3.2. 

5. Marking — The balls shall be marked with the manufacturer's name or his registered trade-mark 
and, on their inner side, they shall be marked with the manufacturer's code mark indicating the date 
of manufacture. The containers shall also be marked with the quarter and year of manufacture of 
the balls. 

5.1 ISI Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

6. Sampling — Suitable number of samples, subject to agreement between the purchaser and the 
supplier, shall be selected for carrying out the tests. 

7. Packing — The balls shall be packed in a weather-proof manner, such as in sealed polyethylene bags 
or air-tight tin containers. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 4.5 ) 
DEFORMATION TEST 

A-1. Description of the Machine 

A-1.1 The testing unit ( see Fig. 2) consists of two resting platens, upper and lower, in between 
which the ball is kept for testing. There is a beam which carries the counter weight, sliding weight and 
the upper platen. There are a number of slits on the beam for keeping the test weight. Lower platen 
may be raised or lowered by rotating the hand wheel placed on the right hand bottom of the machine. 
The hand wheel is connected to the lower platen through worm and worm wheel, and bevel gears. 
There are two scales on the machine, one on the front face and the second, a vernier, on the hand 
wheel. The front scale is capable of reading up to a millimetre and the vernier scale is capable of 
reading up to 0*1 or 001 millimetre. 

A-2. Procedure — The ball is placed in position so that the platen of the testing machine does not 
come in contact with the cover seam. The contact weight is applied, the pointer and the mark brought 
in level and the dial set to zero. The test weight equivalent to 8*165 kg is placed on the beam and 
pressure applied by turning the wheel at a uniform speed so that five seconds elapse from the instant 
the beam leaves its seat until the pointer is brought in level with the mark. When turning ceases the 
leading is recorded (forward deformation ). The wheel is turned again until it reaches 10 on the scale 
( 25*4 mm deformation ). The wheel is then rotated in the opposite direction at a uniform speed 
(thus releasing pressure ) until a beam pointer again coincides with the mark. After waiting ten 
seconds the pointer is adjusted to the mark, if necessary. The reading is then recorded (return 
deformation ). This procedure is repeated on each ball across the two diameters at right angles to the 
initial position and to each other. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

On the suggestion of Consultative Committee of Parliament for Department of Sports, the con- 
cerned expert Panel of Sports Goods Sectional Committee has modified this standard and brought in 
line with the requirements covered in respective hand-book of Tennis Ball's Federation. 



IS :2216 -1985 



-COUNTER WEIGHT 



SLIDING WEIGHT- 




COINCIDING 
MARK 



VERNIER 
SCALE 



HAND 
WHEEL 



POINTER 



-LEVEL ADJUSTING 
SCREW 



FRONT ViEW 



rUPPER PLATEN V BEAM WITH SLITS ^PRESSURE WEIGHT 

_^_ \ / < 2k 9> 




3&j ^ 



FRONT VIEW WITH COVER PLATE 
REMOVED 



FIG. 2 TENNIS BALL TESTING MACHINE 



