( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) -`19?I
(Supe+sedingIS:610-1955mdIS:611-1955)

Indian Standard
STORAGE MANAGEMENT
PART II

CODE
OF

GENERAL CARE IN -HANDLING AND STORAGE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE AND INPUTS
and

Storage

Marketing Structures for Agricultural Sectional Committee, AFDC 28
Reprsrcnting

Commodities

Chairman SHRI SHRI KRISHNA Members SHRI V. S. AGGARWAL SHRI G. V. SWAIKA ( Alternate ) E NG I N E E R AGRICULTURAL ( IMPLEMENTS ) SHRI B. V. ANTE SHRI K. K. MADHOK ( Alternate SHRI S. K. BEDEKER

Central Public Works Department Indian Produce Association, Calcutta

Directorate of Agriculture, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh The Builders' Association of India, Bombay ) Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ), Faridabad SHRI R.N. CHATURVEDI ( Alternate ) Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters COL BHARAT SINGH COL R. R. RAO ( Alfernafe ) AND Directorate of Storage & Inspection ( Ministry of DIRECTOR (STORAGE Food, Agriculture, Community Development & INSPECTION ) Co-operation ) Farmaids Corporation, New Delhi SHRI V. K. GUPTA Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and DR D. S. KATHURXA Storage ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ), Faridabad National Co-operative Development Corporation, SHRI S. T. KHUSHALANI New Delhi SHRI J, P. MITAL ( Alternate ) Grain Storage Research & Training Centre, Hapur DR K. KRISHNAMURTHY Agriculture Department, Government of West SKRI J. N. MAHALANOBIS Bengal, Calcutta SHRI T. K. MAZUMDER ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute sHRIs.K.&fAJUMDER ( CSIR ), Mysore Planning Commission SHRI K. V. NATARAJAN Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR), DR S. PRADHAN New Delhi DR RATTAN LAL ( Alternate ) ( Continued on pug8 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW -DELHI 1

IS : 6151. ( Part II ) - 1971
( Confinuedfronzpage 1 ) Members
SHRI I. C. PURI

Representin Food Corporation of India,New Corporation, Delhi New Delhi

SHRX O.N. BAJPAI (Alternate ) SHRI P: RAMDAS

Chamber of Commerce, Hapur SHRI RA~~ESHWAR DAYAL SHRI BHAGWATI PRASAD JAIN ( Alternate ) Howe (India ) Private Limited, New Delhi F&RI S. K. RCESSLER SHRI H. p ANDI ( Alternate ) Millers' Association, Andhra Pradesh Rice &ZI ADUSUMILLISUBB.~ RAO
&SRI

Central Warehousing

SHUMSHER SINGH

Vijayawada Defence Institute of Stores, Preservation Packaging ( Ministry of Defence )

and

DR H. G. KHAISA ( Alternate ) SHW N. S. SOZUN SHRI L. H. PATIL ( Alternate ) STATE MARKETING O~xWxn

Agriculture & Co-operation Department, ment of Maharashtra, Bombay Agriculture Department, Nadu, Madras Government of

GovernTamil

AssIsTANT MARKETING OFFICER ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( ELECTRICAL) ( FOOD STORAGE ELECTRICAL CIRCLE )
SUPERINTENXNG

SURVEYOR

OF

Central Public Works Department

WORKS ( FOOD ) SHRI M. L. ?`ANJ+%

RIinistry of Food, Agriculture, ment & Co-operation Agriculture)

Community Develop(Department of

SHRI s. P. VIRMANI

Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, Delhi SHRI S. M. MAZUMDAR ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o@cio Me:nber ) DR HARS BXAGWAN, Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary SHRIMANOKAR
Assistant Director

SHRI S. S. VIRDI SHRI S. L. RAINA ( Alternate )

National

Seeds Corporation

Limited,

New Delhi New

T. SANTWANI
( Agri & Food ), ISI

Storage Management
Convener
SHRI

Subcommittee,

AFDC 28 : 9
New Delhi Calcutta

M.R.SIKKA

Food Corporation Indian

of India,

Members SHRI V. S. AGGARWAL DR N. S, AGRAWAL
SHRI S. N. BANERJE"

Produce Association,

Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation, New Delhi Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Corn-munity Development & Co-operation ), New Delhi

DR D. S. KATWJRIA ( Alternate )

2

IS I 6151 ( Part II j - 19-71 CONTENTS .

0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.

FOREWORD . . . SCOPE ...

... ... ...

... . .. ... ... .. . . .. ... . .. .. . . .. ... ...

...

.. . ...

4 6 6 7 14 15 15 20 22 22 23 24

TERMINOLOGY

... . .. . .. . .. .. . ... . .. ...

... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. . .. .

HANDLING OF AGPI IN TRANSIT METHOD OF STORAGE ...

RECEIPTOF AGPI FOR STORAGE CARE PRIOR TO BAG STORAGE CARE DURING BAG STORAGE CARE PRIOR TO BULK STORAGE CARE DURING BULK STORAGE ISSUEOF AGPI SAFETY PRECAUTIONS

...
...

...

.. .

APPENDIX A APPENDIX B APPENDIX C APPENDIXD APPENDIX E

INSECTPESTSOF STOREDAGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES 24 METHOD FOR TREATMENTOF GUNNY BAGS.XNDSTACKS METHOD FOR SPRAYINGVEHICLES, BOATS, WALLS, ETC METHOD FOR POISON BAITINGOF RATS.. . ...

35 3% 39 43

AGPI STORAGEWAREHOUSESANITATION CHECK LIST

IS : 6151( Part II ) - 1971

Indian Standard
STORAGE MANAGEMENT
PART II

CODE
OF

GENERAL CARE IN HANDLING AND STORAGE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE AND INPUTS

0.
0.1 This Indian Standard

FOREWORmD

( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 November 1971, after the draft finalized by the Storage and Marketing Structures for Agricultural Commodities Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Scientific storage of agricultural produce and inputs demands proper care of different commodities, construction of appropriate type of storage structures suitable for different commodities; hygienic transport, receipt, distribution and delivery of these commodities; maintenance of warehouse inspection records; etc. The standardized norms of storage management would help in overcoming problems of recurring nature like general and specific care of agricultural commodities, calculation of storage space for various commodities, occupancy of storage structures, and calculation of cost of storage and construction. Such a code would, therefore, lead to overall improvement in storage at farmers', trade and government level and ultimately to overall economy in the storage of various agricultural commodities. 0.3 In India, there is a huge avoidable loss of agricultural produce and inputs during handling and storage. The loss may be due to faulty handling or storage in structures not equipped with provisions for minimizing the risk of infestation by insects, micro-organisms or rodents; seepage of ground and rain-water; and development of temperature gradient. 0.3.1 In addition to the insect pests given in Appendix A, mites, psocids, ants and termites, etc, also become a nuisance at times in stored food grain. The presence of mites and psocids in large numbers gives the food grain a musty odour and due to their droppings, cast skins, etc, the food grain product becomes rancid and unwholesome. Ants do not infest the food grain but remove it to their nests built in the neighbourhood of storage structures. 0.3.2 As regards dampness or moisture, it affects stored food grain in Due to the absorption of excess moisture by food grain, its many ways. rate of respiration increases which produces more heat and the food grain may start ' heating `. Even if the quantity of moist or damp food grain within a food grain mass be small, it may act as a centre for spreading ` heating `. 4

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) - 1971 The process
of such spreading of ` heating ' takes place in the following manner: The heated air from the radiating point travels to cooler parts in the food grain mass, carrying along with it a higher percentage of moisture. The moisture brought by the heated air is condensed in the cooler parts resulting in the increase of the moisture content of the food grain With the increase of the moisture content in the food grain in there. cooler parts, the rate of respiration is accelerated and the original cooler parts start ' heating `. This phenomenon of transmission of moisture from one part to the other and subsequently, ` heating ' continues in a cycle till arrested. Excessive ` heating ' may result in cake formation. Micro-organisms also readily attack moist food grain. Increased moisture content of food grain due to dampness or moisture helps in the acceleration of insect breeding if the food grain is already infested. Sometimes, wet grain may sprout. 0.4 During transport, receipt and issue of agricultural produce and inputs avoidable losses often occur either due to negligence or ignorance on the part of the personnel handling the bags. Such losses may be due to spillage of food grain during loading and unloading, or due to faulty conveyance or vehicle, which may damage the bags, permitting the food grain to spill. The conveyances may be dirty and may contain deleterious contaminations or undesirable refractions which may be picked up by the bags of food grain During rains, while transporting bags of agricultural transported in them. produce and inputs, adequate protection may not be provided, and the food grain may become moist or wet which may subsequently result in its becoming heated, fungus attacked or caky. Though in India, vehicles are not earmarked for the transport of bags of food grain, in port towns and pro_ for a curing or distributing centres, some vehicles are used continuously number of days for transporting bags of grains. In such vehicles at times, bags containing insect infested commodities may be transported but, for want ofdisinfestation measures, insects may remain lurking in them. Such vehicles may thus form a source of insect infestation to the bags containing uninfested food grain. 0.5 The loss may, therefore, be avoided by scientific handling and storage. Besides the general norms of handling and storage of some agricultural pro_ duce and inputs, a number of them demand special care and arrangement. The agricultural produce and inputs which do not require any specific care or arrangement are food grains, oilseeds, sugar, tobacco, spices and implements, while those which require specific arrangement are fertilizers, pesticides, chillies, jaggery, seeds and cotton. 0.6 With a view to providing general information on causes of loss in handling and storage of agricultural produce and guidelines on norms of scientific handling and storage of general and specific agricultural produce and inputs which would lead to better storage awareness and conditions in the country, this Indian Standard has been formulated. 5

1s : 6151( Part II ) - 1971 0.7 This code supersedes
IS : 610-1955" and IS : 61 l-19551_ which dealt with food grains only and needed revision to incorporate the latest storage techniques and fumigation practices. The present code has an enlarged scope and also incorporates the relevant provisions given in the above standards. 0.8 This code is being formulated as follows: Part I Part III Terminology Specific care in handling and inputs and storage of agricultural produce in three parts. Other two parts will be

0.9 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960:. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
transport, require receipt ( Part II ) prescribes and issue; and storage general care of agricultural in handling during produce and inputs. which

1.1.1 This standard
cold storage.

does not deal with care of such commodities

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, of this code shall apply. In addition, used in the standard. 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 the definitions of terms given in Part I the following abbreviations have been

ALP BGSS BKSS -

Aluminium Bag storage

phosphide. structure. structure.

Bulk storage Ethylene

EDB -

dibromide. dichloride and carbon tetrachloride in

2.5 EDCT - A mixture of ethylene the ratio of 3 : 1 ( by volume ) . 2.6 2.7

MBR AGPI -

Methyl

bromide produce and inputs.
during storage.

Agricultural

*Code of practice for storage of food grain and its protection tCode of practice for handling of food.grain in transit. *Rules for rounding off numerical valuer ( revised).

6

IS : 6151 ( Part811 ) - 1971 3. HANDLING OF AGPI IN TRANSIT or Animal Packs

3.1 Head or Shoulder

Loads,

3.1.1 Head or shoulder loads or animal packs of AGPI shall be made up in a suitable sheet or bag of sufficiently large size, so that when the loads or packs are completed, the AGPI does not ooze or spill out of them. 3.1.1.1 Sheet - The sheet of textile fabric used for making loads or packs of AGPI shall be sound, clean and dry. It shall be sufficiently strong so as to sustain the lateral pressure of AGPI packed inside and not tear even in the event of the loads or packs inadvertently falling from a small height. If the same sheet is used over and over again for making loads of packs of AGPI, such a sheet shall be well beaten every time prior to its reuse so that insects adhering to the sheet, if any, are removed. If the sheet contains plenty of insects, it shall be dipped in a suitable insecticidal preparation or fumigated as given in Appendix B. 3.1.1.2 Precautions for transjort - The loads or packs of AGPI, either at the loading or unloading point, shall not be kept at a dirty or damp place or a place considered otherwise deleterious for keeping AGPI. During their transport, they shall bc held secure so that they do not drop or otherwise get damaged, and shall always be well protected from rain. 3.2 Bags

3.2.1 Empty GZUU~Bags for Filling of AGPIAGPI meant for transport shall be filled in sound, clean, insect-free and dry empty gunny bags. Empty gunny bags -c\-hich arc damaged due to moisture, or fungus, or are contaminated with deleterious substances, or those which have patches or cut portions exceeding 50 mm, shall not be used for transport of AGPI. Such of the empty gunny bags which have cut or torn portions not exceeding 50 mm, shall be so rcpaned that AGPI does not leak through them. 3.2.1.1 or transport preparation before filling Empty gunny bags which have been used previously for storage of AGPI shall be disinfested by dipping in a suitable insecticidal or by fumigation by the method prescribed in Appendix B them lvith AGPI.

3.2.2 lJnz3rmity of Bags-The bags of single consignment shall be of uniform size and lveight, and shall contain the same type of AGPI. If the bags are slack, they shall be made up to the standard weight of the bags of the consignment prior to loading in conveyance. 3.2.3 Stitching of the iIIo&h of a Bag - The mouth of each bag meant for transport shall be stitched with machine or manually in which case the mouth shall be rolled over and given 14 stitches in each row. In case of machine stitching 3-ply thread stitching with 18 twist giving about 5 stitches in 2.5 cm shall be used. 7

IS : 6151 ( Part II) - 1971
otherwise

3.2.4 Protection A,gainst Rain -Bags
handled

shall not be loaded in the open if it is raining.

or unloaded

or

3.2.5 Loss in Weight of Bags During Transport - During transport of a consignment of bags either in a vehicle, wagon or a boat, or in any other conveyance, no tolerance for loss in weight of total bags shall be allowed except in case of a cargo of a boat having been jettisoned during voyage. For determining loss in weight of bags during transport, as far as possible, 100 percent bags of a consignment meant for transport shall be weighed prior to loading in either a vehicle, wagon or a boat, or in any other conveyance, at the loading point, and then again re-weighed at the unloading point. 3.2i5.1 Failing 100 percent weighment of bags and in the absence of an agreement between the consigner, the transporting organization and the consignee, regarding the percentage of the bags to be weighed, the scale given in Table 1 is suggested as a guide for determining the total weight of the consignment.

TABLE

1

SUGGESTED

SCALE FOR WEIGHING A CONSIGNMENT NO.OPBAGSTO BE WEIGHED. PICKED AT ' RANDOM (3)

OF BAGS

OF

SL No.

SIZE OFTHE CONSIGNMENT INNUMBEROF BAGS

PERMISSIBLEDIFFERENCE INAVERAGE WEIGHT PERBAGAT DIFFERENT WEIGHING POINTS IN g (4) 300 240 200 175 150 125 100

(1) 9
ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii)

(2)
Under 50 to 100 ,) 200 )) 300 ,) 500 ,, 50 99 199 299 499 999

10 15 20 25 30 50 100

1 000 ), 5 000

NOTE - This table assumes normal variation of 450 g in the weight of individual bags and guarantees against loss in weight in 95 percent of cases.

3.2.52 If the total weight of a consignment is found to vary at any one weighing point from that at any other weighing point by more than the permissible difference specified in co1 4 of Table 1, the consignment shall be considered to have undergone loss in weight during transit. 3.3 Transport of Bags by Animal Driven or Motor Vehicle or containing of bags.

3.3.1 Vehicle-A vehicle which is either damp, dirty deleterious contamination shall not be used for the transport 8

IS : 6151( Part II) - 1971 3.3.1.1 The vehicle shall have a sound floor so that even if the bags burst or otherwise get damaged during transport, the AGPI does not spill out of the vehicle. The floor of the vehicle shall be scrubbed clean and dry.
3.3.1.2 In case of bulk transport of AGPI, a sound, clean and dry sheet of a suitable size shall be spread in the vehicle so as to cover the entire~flaor space of the vehicle, where necessary, to avoid leakage; 3i3.1.3 If the same vehicle is used continuously for transporting bags, the floor and sides of the vehicle shall be sprayed with 0.5 percent malathion emulsion by the method prescribed in Appendix C, on every seventh day of the continuous use of the vehicle. 3.3.2 Loading of the Bags in the Vehicle more than its certified capacity. A vehicle shall not Abe loaded to

3.3.2.1 Prior to the commencement of loading of bags in the vehicle, sound, clean and dry sheets of suitable size shall be spread on the ground all along the passage from the loading point to the vehicle and also round about the vehicle so that all spillages of food grain during loading of the bags fall on the sheet and not on the ground. If the spillages are perfectly clean, they shall be bagged and put in the same consignment; if the spillages got dirty, they shall be treated as sweepings in the manner given under 3.3.2.2. 3.3.2.2 Sweepings - Sweepings shall be sieved, winnowed and cleaned, and the sound food grain recovered. The recovered sound food grain shall be blended with rest of the grain and bagged. The remnants of the sweepings, after the recovery of the sound food grain, shall be disposed of by burning, dumping or for industrial or manurial use. 3.3.2.3 Stacking of bags in the vehicle - The bags shall be stacked in the vehicle according to a stack plan avoiding bays and lop-sided heaping and also ensuring compact and balanced stacking so as to make the bags least susceptible to movements and jerks due to the movement of the vehicle. 3.3.3 Securing of Bags on the Vehicle -The stack in the vehicle shall be tied securely so that when the vehicle is in motion, the bags do not get dislodged or drop out. 3.3.3.1 During rainy weather, the stack in the vehicle shall be covered with sound, clean and dry waterproof tarpaulins in such a manner that when it rains, the water does not reach the bags. The loose edges of the tarpaulins covering the sides of the stack shall be well spread over so as to hang free over the sides of the vehicle and not tucked under the stack. 3.3.4 Despatch Order - The supervisor of the vehicle, before the vehicle leaves the despatching point, shall be handed over a despatch order bearing the following information: a) Date b) Kind of despatch; of vehicle; 9

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) - 1971 c> d) e> f> g) h) 2 k) m) n)
Vehicle Name Kind Total No.; of driver; of AGPI; number weight of bags; of a bag; ); of the vehicle; of the bags ( if available point; point; mileage between the despatching point and receiving

Average

Gross weight Gross weight Despatching Receiving Approximate point;

time required for the vehicle to cover the distance; P) Approximate Signature of despatching authority, with designation; and q) r) Name and address of consignee. 3.3.5 Checking of Contents of Des-patch Order at the Unloading Point - On . . ^. .._ arrival ot the vehicle at the receiving point, the receiving authority shall check up all the information given in the despatch order ( see 3.3.4 ). 3.3.6 Unloading of Bags from the Vehicle - Prior to the commencement of unloading of the vehicle, sound, clean and dry sheets of suitable size shall be spread on the floor all along the passage from the vehicle to the unloading point and also round about the vehicle SO that all spillages of food grain during unloading of the bags fall on the sheet and not on the ground. If the spillages are perfectly clean, they shall be bagged and put in the same consignment; if the spillages get dirty, they shall be treated as sweepings and shall be dealt with in the manner given under 3.3.2.2. 3.4

Transport

of Bags by Railway

Wagon

3.4.1 Storage of Bags at Despatching Station -The floor, on which stacks are ~built, shall be dry and clean. As far as possible, care shall be taken to provide a place having a leak-proof roof and sound solidly built floor for the storage of bags. If the floor is not solidly built, or is otherwise unsuitable for the storage of food grain, dunnage of either old discarded rails or timber pallets or 10 x 10 cm timber squares shall be laid on the floor before the bags are stacked. The pallets or squares shall be made preferably of hard and well-seasoned timber, and shall not have such cracks in which insects may hide. The rails or the pallets or the squares shall be laid parallel to one another, and shall not be more than 15 cm apart. Before laying the dunnage, it shall be brushed clean.
~?TE - Pallets shall consist of rectangular platforms ( like duckboards ) made by nallmg narrow timber battens on the upper edge of, and at right angles to, wider They shall be of suitable size so as to enable easy handling. battens, ( A size of the order of 2.5 m long and 1.5 m broad, with 3 cm space in between transverse battens, is often considered convenient.)

10

IS : 6151~(Part II) - 1971 3.4.1.1 The stack shall be stable. space all round the stack. Deleterious the vicinity of the stack.
There shall be at least 75 cm clear substances shall not be placed in

3.4.1.2 If leak-proof roofed place for storage is not available, the stacks shall be covered with sound, clean and dry waterproof tarpaulins of suitable The loose size in such a manner that no part of the stack is exposed to rain. edges of the tarpaulins covering the sides of the stack shall be well spread out In the on the ground abutting the stack and not tucked under the stack. event of rain, it shall be ascertained that no water reaches the bags. 3.4.2 Wagon-Wagon shall be of the closed type and shall be sound, A wagon falling in any one leak-proof and without any structural defect. of the following categories shall not be used for transport of bags: Wagon having a> defective; damaged floor, sides or roof, or otherwise structurally

b)

Wagon having close properly,

defective doors, or having such doors which do not or which are not close fitting; and of deleterious contaminations, oils, chemicals, bone meal, or commodity. such as coal, or some other

Wagon having traces c> sand, cement, mineral deleterious 3.4.2.l and ceiling O-5 percent material

The floor, inner sides including the inside surface of the doors of the wagon, shall be scrubbed clean and then sprayed with malathion emulsion in the manner prescribed in Appendix C.

3.4.3 Loading ofBags in the Wagon - Prior to the commencement of loadcleaned. If the ing of bags in a wagon, its interior shall be thoroughly spillages are perfectly &an, they shall be bagged and put in the same consignment; if the spillages get dirty, they shall be treated as sweepings and dealt with in the manner given under 3.3.2.2. 3.4.3.1 Stacking of bags in the wagon-The bags shall be stacked in the wagon according to a stack plan avoiding bays and lop-sided heaping and also ensuring compact and balanced stacking SO as to make the bags least susceptible to movements and jerks due to either movement or shunting of the wagon. Care shall also be taken that at least 30 cm clear space is left between the doors and the stack. Some buffer in the form of dummy bags filled with hay, husk or BHOOSA, shall also be provided at the door. As far as possible, no other commodity shall be placed in the wagon containIf, however, plenty of room is available in the wagon ing bags of AGPI. and some other commodities are to be placed, these commodities shall be only those which are not likely to have any deleterious effect on the AGPI. 3.4.3.2 Immediately after loading shall be closed and sealed. of the wagon is completed, the wagon

IS : 6151 (Part II ) - 1971
following

3.4.4 Label for the Wagon information

After sealing the wagon shall be fixed to the wagon:

a label bearing

the

a) Wagon number, Da& of despatch, cl Kind of AGPI, 4 Number of bags, e) Average weight of a bag, f ) Total weight of the bags, d Despatching station, h) Receiving station, 3 Address of the consigner, k) Address of the consignee.

bj

and

Midze'ay of Bags - In_ the event of midway trans-ship3.4.5 _ ^ Tram-s!@ment _ __ _ . . _ ment ofbags from the orlgmal wagon, necessitated by damage to the orlgmal wagon, change of railway gauge, or any other reason, the bags of the original wagon, as far as possible, shall be loaded straightaway. If trans-shipment of the bags from the original wagon to the transferee wagon is not possible and the bags have to be unavoidably unloaded from the original wagon, the unloading of the bags shall be done in the manner given under 3.4.5.1. 3.4.5.1 Unloading of the bags - Before the commencement of unloading of bags from the wagon, sound, clean and dry sheets of suitable size shall be spread on the floor all along the passage from the wagon to the unloading point and also just below the door of the wagon so that all spillages of food grain while unloading the bags fall on the sheets and not on the ground. If the spillages are perfectly clean, they shall be bagged and put in the same consignment; if the spillages get dirty, they shall be treated as sweepings and dealt with in the manner given under 3.3.2.2. 3.4.5.2 Storage of bags at tram-shipment station the trans-shipment station shall be stored according cribed under 3.4.1, 3.4.1.1 and 3.4.1.2. The unloaded bags at to the conditions pres-

3.4.5.3 Loading of bags in the transferee wagon - At the time of reloading the bags into the transferee wagon, the provisions given under 3.4.3, 3.4.3.1 and 3.4.3.2 shall be observed. 3.4.6 Care During Movement of Wagon - At all intermediate stations en route, the railway authorities shall provide adequate watch and ward arrangements for the safety of the wagon so that no tampering of the wagon or its seal, or pilferage of AGPI takes place. 3.4.7 lnsfiection of Seal of the Wagon at the Receiving Station - On arrival of the wagon at the destination, the seal of the wagon shall be examined and, if broken, necessary record shall be maintained by the railway authorities. 3.4.8 Checking of Contents of the Label 12 of the Wagon -The contents of the

IS : 6151 ( Part II)label of the wagon ( see 3.4.4 ) shall be checked by the railway at the destination and necessary record maintained by them.

1971

authorities

3.4.9 Unloading of Bags at the Receiving Station - At the time of unloading the bags from the wagon, the provisions given under 3.4.5.1 shall be observed. 3.4.1-O Storage of Bags at the Receiving Station the receiving station according to the conditions and 3.4.1.2. 3.5 Transport of Bags by Country or Steam The bags shall be stored at given under 3.4.1, 3.4.1.1 Boat

Jet9-

Acceptance of Bags for Tansfiort by Boat Authorities at Despatching The boat service authorities at the despatching jetty shall give priority to the work of despatching of bags. Jetty Bags at Despatching and 3.4.1.2 shall be observed. The provisions given

3.5.1

3.5.2 Storage of under 3.4.1, 3.4.1.1

3.5.3 Place in the Boat for Stack&g of Bags - If the boat has got a hold, it shall be ascertained that the hold is leak-proof and dry and also that it does not contain any traces of deleterious contamination. The floor .and sides of the hold, and also the planks used for covering the hold, shall be scrubbed clean and sprayed with 0.5 percent malathion emulsion in the manner prescribed in Appendix C, every time a fresh cargo of bags is loaded in the hold. 3.5.3.1 If there is no hold in the boat and the bags have to be stacked on deck, the deck space to be used for stacking shall be well inside the boat away from the edge of the boat so that in ordinary weather splash of water does not reach the bags. The deck shall have a sound, dry, leak-proof and smooth floor and shall not contain any traces of deleterious contamination. It shall be scrubbed clean and treated with a suitable pesticide in the manner prescribed in Appendix C, every time a fresh cargo of bags is placed on it. 3.5.4 Loading of Bags i?z the Boat than its certified capacity. The boat shall not carry more cargo

3.5.4.1 Prior to the commencement of loading of bags in a boat, sound, clean and dry waterproof sheets of suitable size shall be spread on the jetty all along the passage from the loading point to the jetty and all along the passage from the boat and touching the jetty to the place for stacking of bags, ~0 that all spillages of food grain during loading of bags fall on the sheets If the spillages are clean, they shall be and not on the jetty or in the boat. bagged and put in the same cargo; if the spillages get dirty they shall be treated as sweepings and dealt with in the manner given under 3.3.2.2. 3.5.4.2 Stacking of bags in the boat - The bags shall be stacked in the hold or on the deck according to a stack plan, avoiding bays and lop-sided heaping and also ensuring compact and balanced stacking so as to make the -bags least susceptible to movements of the boat. 13

IS : 6151 ( Part II

- 1971

3.5.4.3 If the bags are stacked on the deck, sound, clean and dry waterproof tarpaulins of suitable sizes shall be spread over the stack in such a manner that no part of the stack is exposed to rain or splashes of water. The loose edges of the tarpaulins covering the sides of the stack shall be well spread out on the floor abutting the stack and not tucked under the stack. A 75-cm clear space shall be left all round the stack. Deleterious substances shall not be placed in the vicinity of the stack.
3.5.5 Label for Each Cargo cargo of bags shall have a label bearing the following 3.5.5.1 information:

4 Name of the boat, b) Date of despatch, C>Kind of AGPI, 4 Total number of bags, e) Average weight of a bag, f > Total weight of the bags, 9) Despatching jetty, h) Address of the consigner,

and

3

Address

of the consignee.

3.5.6 Care During Voyage of the Boat - Proper care shall be taken by the crew of the boat during the voyage of the boat so that the bags are not damaged en route, particularly by water. 3.5.7 Checking of Contents of the Label for the Cargo of Bags at the Receiving Jetty - The contents of the label for the cargo of the boat ( see 3.5.5 ) shall be checked by the boat service authorities at the receiving jetty and necessary record maintained by them. 3.5Z Unloading of Bags at the Receiving Jetty-Prior to the commencement of unloading of the bags at the receiving jetty, sound, clean and dry waterproof sheets of suitable size shall be spread on the boat all along the passage from the unloading point to the boat end touching the jetty and also from the jetty to the unloading point so that all spillages of AGPI during unloading of the bags fall on the sheets and not on the boat or the jetty. If the spillages are perfectly clean, they shall be bagged and put in the same * if the spillages get dirty, they shall be treated as sweepings, and gi??&ith in the manner given under 3.4.5.2. 3.5.9 Storage of Bags at the Receitiing Jetty - The bags shall be stored at the receiving jetty in the manner given under 3.4.1, 3.4.1.1 and 3.4.1.2. 4. METHOD

OF STORAGE

4.1 AGPI shall be stored either in bags or in bulk. While the modern bag storage facilities may protect commodities from rodents and dampness, they
14

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) - 1971
are not bird- and insect-proof. Moreover, in these efficient fumigation may not It is, therefore, recommended that, wherebe possible without special care. ver possible, AGPI may be stored in bulk, which is economical in space and storage may be possible for periods from 5 to 10 years with ease of fumigation and mechanization of handling operations. However, certain AGPI like rice, sugar, certain oilseeds, pesticides and fertilizers are not recommended for bulk storage, since they suffer loss in quality. 4.2 Bag storage structures like those recommended in IS : 607-1971* and bulk storage structures like steel or aluminium bins ( see IS : 631-I 96lt ) for farmers' storage and hexagonal concrete-cum-masonry bins ( see IS : 345'31966x) silos (see IS : 5503-1969s) and flat storage structures (see IS : 5826197011 andIS : 6201-19717 ) for trade and government purposes are suitable for scientific storage. 5. RECEIPT carefully

OF AGPI FOR STORAGE
for damp carriers like trucks, wagons or carts shall be and infested AGPI. should be provided

5.1 At the time of receipt, AGPI
inspected

5.2 Wagon or truck dumps receiving grain for storage with suitable sieves to separate hay, stones, etc. 5.3 Temporary sheds and weighing scales receiving storage should be cleaned prior to receipt of AGPI. 5.4 Wagon or truck dumps, temporary provided protection against rain.

bags or loose grain for scale should be

sheds and weighing

5.5 Pesticides and fertilizers should not be transported serious risk tural produce and inputs, since rt ' mvolves ' The conveyances used for transportation of pesticides not be used for transportation of agricultural produce consumption. 6. CARE-PRIOR

along with agriculof contamination. or fertilizers shall meant for human

TO BAG STORAGE

6.1 Bag

Storage
Bags used for storage shall be either new or sound second

6.1.1 Bags -

*Code of practice for construction of bagged food grain storage structures (second revision ). tSpecification for aluminium food grain storage bins. fCode of practice for construction of hexagonal type concrete-cum-masonry bins for bulk storage of food grains. iGenera requirements for silos for grain storage. onstructional requirements for flat storage structures for grains ( capacity above 2OOYonnes). IConstructional requirements for flat storage structures for grains ( 100-200 tonne capacity ).

15

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) 4 1971 hand bags. As far as possible, B-twill bags shall be employed for food grains. The However, A-twill bags ( see IS : 1943-1964* ) shall be used for sugar. bags used for pesticides shall be lined with suitable material to make them leak and moistureproof. The bags used for fertilizers shall be as recommended in IS : 5985-1971t. 6.1.1.1 After filling the bags, the mouth of each bag shall stitched or machine stitched with at least 14 stitches in each line. be hand by

6.1.1.2 If sound second-hand bags are used, they shall be treated the method prescribed in Apprendix B, before filling them with AGPI.

6.2 Examination and Segregation of Damaged Bags or Bags Containing Damaged AGPI - All bags, prior to storage, shall be examined, and such of the damaged bags or those containing damaged AGPI as given below, shall be segregated: a) Bags which are cut, torn, slack or have deleterious and b) Bags which contain AGPI either damaged moisture, dampness or having deleterious nation. 6.3 Damaged in the manner contaminations;

due to insect infestation, refractions or contami-

Bags - The damaged bags [see 6.2 (a) ] shall be dealt with given under 6.3.1 and 6.3.2.

6.3.1 Bags damaged due to moisture, fungus or deleterious contaminations, or those unduly damaged or cut shall be discarded and replaced. 6.3.2 lot. Slack bags shall be made up to the average weight of bags of the

6.4 Damaged AGPI - Bags containing damaged AGPI be dealt with in the manner given under 6.4.1 to 6.4.5. 6.4.1 Insect-Infested AGF'lBags containing insect be fumigated by the method prescribed in AppendixB. 6.4.2 Moist Table 2, AGPI 6.4.2.1 mechanical

[ see 6.2 (b) ] shall AGPI shall in

infested

AGPI-

If the moisture content exceeds shall be treated to safe moisture level.

the level given

Drying driers.

of AGPI may be done either in the sun or by means of However, rice shall not be dried in the sun.

6.4.3 Heated AGPIIf the AGPI feels hot on the palm of hand, but no cake formation has set in, it shall be aerated by spreading in layers not exceeding 2.5 cm in thickness on a smooth plastered, dry and clean floor In no case shall heated AGPI be exposed to the sun. inside the BGSS. 6.4.4

Fungus-Attacked,
of for animal

Caky or S&outing
feed or industrial

&posed

AGPISuch AGPI use, as the case may be.

shall

be

*Specification for A-twill jute bags ( reuiscd). tCode of practice for handling and storage of bagged fertilizers.

16

I6 : 6151( Part II) - 1971
TABLE 2 SAFE LIMITS OF MOISTURE OF AGRICULTURAL CONTENT PRODUCE FOR STORAGE

( Clauses 6.4.2 asd 8.1.2 )
SL

No. (1)

COMMODITY (2) Cereals and Mill&

MOISTURE, PERCENT (3)

1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9)

Paddy Raw rice Boiled rice Wheat JOWAR Maize Barley RAGZ BAJRA Pulses

14 14 14 12 12 12 12 12 12

10) 11) 12) 13)

Pulses ( whole) Pulses ( broken ) Gram KABUL1 Gram DESI Milled Products and Bran

12 12 12 12

14) 15) 16) l-7) 18) 19)

Wheat ATTA MAIDA BESAM RA VA or S Rice bran Maize bran Slices and
Nawotics

12'5 12'5 12.5

U3I

13.5 10-o 10'0

20)

Turmeric Coriander Black pepper Chillies Cumin seed Fenugreek ( whole ) Fennel seed

12.0 10-O 10'0 10.0 10'0 10'0 11-o ( Conrinucd)

2 1) ~22) 2 3) 24) 25) 26)

17

%

: 6151 ( Part II) - 1971
TABLE 2 SAFE LIMITS OF MOISTURE CONTENT FOR AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE - Contd COMMODITY STORAGE PERCENT OF

SL No.

MOISWRE, (3) 9.0 10 12.0

(1) 27) Coffee 28) Tobacco
29) Cloves

(2)

Oil See& and Cakes 30) 31) 32) 33) 34) 35) 36) 37) 38) 39) 40) -41) 42) 43) Groundnut Mustard Milling copra groundnut oilcake oilcake oilcake Decarticated Groundnut Mustard Cottonseed pods 6-7 7 5-8 8-10 10 10 10 10 10 10 8

oilcake

Cocontit oilcake Sesamum oilcake Linseed oilcake Castor-seed Arrowroot Edible tapioca Sago (SABOODANA) oilcake

Root Crops and Starch

AGPI purpose ( conversion to inedible products ) or dumped in manure pits. Contaminants like fertilizers and coal shall be suitably removed before AGPI is used for human or animal consumption.
contaminated with pesticide shall bc either disposed of for industrial

6.4.5

AGPl

Containing

Deleterious

Refractions

or

Cofztaminants -

6.5 Preparation of BGSS - Before storage of AGPI, disinfestation vacant BGSS as suggested in 13 of IS : 609-1955" shall be done. 6.6 Capacity of BGSS - In order to avoid overloading the capacity of a BGSS shall be approximately estimated 6.6.1 .l and 6.6.1.2.

of

of storage space, as given in 6.6.1,

6.6.1 The capacity of the BGSS shall be roughly estimated at the rate of 10 bags ( rbch bag weighing approximately 93.2 to 102.6 kg ) per 0.6 m2 if stacked 15 bags high, 10 bags per 0.65 m2 if stacked 12 bags high, and 10 bags for 0.7 ma if stacked 10 bags high.
*Code of practice for improvement for food grain storage. of existing structures used or intended to be used

18

IS : 6151( Part II ) -`1971 6.6.1.1While estimating the height of the stacks, care shall be taken to see that a minimum of 2 m clear space is left between the top surface of the stack and the inside surface of the roof ( or ceiling ).
6.6.1.2 The maximum height to which the bags ofAGPI may be placed in a stack depends upon the load bearing capacity of floor, nature of commodity, strength of container, etc. However, for practical purpose, the maximum general height of stacks for different AGPI shall not exceed the limits given below: AGPI Maximum General Stack Height bags ) ( Bags 1 24 18 16 Approximate Height in Metres 6 4.5 4

Sugar

( packed

in A-twill

Turmeric Wheat, maize, barley, paddy, oats, grain and other unmilled whole pulses, sorghum, other millets, oilseeds, oilcakes, and coffee seeds Spices, cotton bales, groundnut, bran, and milled pulses and rice, rice

14 12

3.5 3

Wheat flour, gram flour, semolina, broken pulses, other milled products, cashew nut kernels, fertilizers, and pesticides Tamarind Jaggery and jaggery lumps chips in bags

6 -

1.5

1 to l-5

6.6.1.3 Stack space - Depending upon the capacity of the BGSS, and size of fumigation cover available, the floor area shall be marked into a Care shall be taken to leave number of rectangular or square stack spaces. alleyways of 75 cm minimum width between the stacks and walls and also in between thestacks. The width of the alleyways in front of door opening should be 150 cm. The length and breadth of a stack shall be not more than 9 m and 6 m respectively.
6.7 Dunnage - Dunnage comprising either timber pallets, timber squares, mattings or a layer of polythene sheet sandwitched between 2 layers of mattings shall be laid on each stack space. The pallets or squares shall be made preferably of hard and well-seasoned timber and shall be free from any cracks which may harbour insects. They shall be laid parallel to each other and shall be not more than 15 cm apart. Before laying the dunnagc it shall be brushed clean. 6.7.1 Squares shall be exactly of the stack space. equal to either the length or the breadth

6.7.2 In absence of timber pallets or square, 2 to 3 layers of mattings or a layer of polythene sheet sandwitched between two layers of bamboo matting shall be used. 19

IS : 6151 ( Part

II ) - 1971

6.7.3 After laying the-dunnage, the floor space between them as well as the dunnage itself shall be sprayed with 0.5 percent malathion emulsion by the method prescribed in Appendix B.
6.8

Stacking 6.84
Bags -

of Bags
All bags in a given stack shall be of uniform stack shall be built over size and weight. the dunnage as

6.8.2 Building of Stack-The laid on the stack spaces.

6.8.2.1 The stack shall be so built that when completed, it is stable and perfectly cuboid in shape and also that all peripheral bags on the faces of the stack are in one plane without any face of the stack bulging outward or inward at any point. 6.8.2.2 Care shall be taken to see that the stitched shall not face the peripheral side of the stack. 6.8.2.3 After percent malathion mouth of the bags

the completion of a stack, it shall be sprayed with O-5 emulsion by the method prescribed in Appendix B.

6.8.3 All spillages during building of a stack shall be collected and separately dealt with as sweepings in the manner given under 6.8.3.1 and not thrown over or placed in the stack. 6.8.3.1 Sweepings Sweepings shall be dealt with as given in 3.3.2.2.

7. CARE DURING 7.1 Cleanliness

BAG STORAGE BGSS The inside of the BGSS shall be kept collected from time to time shall be dealt

Inside

thoroughly clean, and sweepings with as given under 6.8.3.1.

7.1.1 Accessories for Storage - Empty bags, tarpaulins, dunnage and such other accessories, not in use shall also be treated for disinfestation purposes, where there is little likelihood of their becoming infested. They shall be treated by the method prescribed in Appendix B. 7.1.1.1 Empty second-hand gunny bags shall be made up in rolls of 20 bags each and stored at one place. As and when necessity arises, empty second-hand gunny bags shall be treated by the method prescribed in Appendix B. 7.2 Fertilizers produce. 7.2.1 Each or pesticides shall not be produce stored along with agricultural

stack shall contain

of one type onIy.

7..3 Periodical Inspection and Treatment of Stacks - Each stack shall be inspected at least once in two weeks to check the condition of AGEI. Agricultural produce may be inspected for any increase in moisture content 20

IS : 6151 (Part
and temperature, and damage by inspected for ingress of moisture principal major and minor insects scientific and common names and of damage caused by them is given

II ) - 1971

Pesticides and fertilizers may be pests. and increase in temperature. A list of of stored agricultural produce with their distinguishing characteristics and nature in Appendix A.

7.3.1 Draw a sample of 500 g ( 250 g from top and 250 g from four sides ) from 40 to 50 bags taken at random from each stack of 1 000 bags. In this composite sample look for insect infestation of major and minor insect pests and excess moisture. 7.3.1.1 Classajication of infestation - The insect infestation shall be classified as negligible, moderate or heavy depending upon number of major and minor pests found in the sample of 500 g. The stack having moderate infestation shall be fumigated by the method prescribed in Appendix B. 7.3.1.2 If rats are BGSS shall be checked given in IS : 609-1955*, prescribed in Appendix the BGSS. observed doing damage, their points of entry in the up and necessary measures to protect their ingress as In addition, poison baiting by the method adopted. D of this standard shall be taken recourse to inside

7.3.1.3 If it is observed that damage is being caused by dampness due either to seepage of water from the floor or from the walls of the BGSS or due to leakage of rain-water, the source of dampness or rain shall be removed by adopting necessary measures for protection against ingress of dampness or Also the stack shall be broken and the rain as given in IS: 609-1955". damaged AGPI segregated and undamaged AGPI salvaged. 7.3.2 Each stack shall be periodically in Appendix B. 7.3.3 All cut bags in the replaced. stacks shall treated be by the method suitably prescribed repaired or

either

7.3.4 Each stack shall bear a tally card giving details of date of receipt; number of bags and average weight of each bag; origin; kind of AGPI; nature of dunnage provided; date of despatch; date of inspection; condition of grain and nature of infestation; category of infestation; treatment, if any; and signature and remarks of the inspector. 7.3.5 It is recommerded that.an AGPI storage. warehouse sanitation check list as prescribed m Appendix E shall be mamtamed at all warehouses. This shall assist inspectors in maintaining cleanliness in warehouses and carrying out timely Dperations. 7.3.6 Special care involved in storage down in Part III of this standard. *Code of practice for improvement for food grain storage. of various AGPI shall be as laid

of existing structures

used or intended to be used

21

IS : 6151 ( Part II) - 1971 8. CARE PRI-OR TO BULK STORAGE

8.1 Examination and Segregation of -Damaged AGPI - AGPI prior to storage shall be examined for damage due to moisture, insect pests, etc, or deleterious refractions and contamination, and shall be segregated. 8.1.1 AGPI damaged with insect pests, rodents, moisture, etc, shall be dealt with in the manner given in 6.4.1 and 6.4.2. AGPI containing deleterious refractions or contaminants shall be dealt with in the manner prescribed under 6.4.5. 8.1.2 content 8.2 It shall be ascertained before filling in AGPI that does not cxcced the moisture levels given in Table 2. of BKSS cleaned the moisture

Preparation

8.2.1 Before and disinfested

filling in the AGPI, the BKSS shall be thoroughly as given in 13 of IS : 609-1955".

8.2.2 Prior to filling in AGPI, the temperature sensory devices, fumigation system, air controlling accessories and other openings, if provided inside a BKSS, shall be thoroughly checked and repaired, if necessary. 8.3 Filling of AGPI in BKSS

8.3.1 AGPI shall be filled in a BKSS taking care to leave about 30 cm from the ceiling, irrespective of the type of structure. While loading AGPI, some of the covers on opening of the roof should be removed as an escape for trapped air. 8.3.2 All spillages during the filling of the food grain in the BKSS shall be collected and separately dealt with as sweepings in the manner given under 6.8.3.1 and never allowed to be mixed up with the bulk of food grain.

g. CARE

DURING

BULK

STORAGE AGPI in BKSS shall be regularly

9.1 Inspection and Treatment inspected at monthly intervals.

9.1 .l Opening of BKSS - In case the AGPI is previously treated, all the openings of the BKSS above the level of the AGPI mass stored inside shall be thrown open. These openings shall be kept open for a period of-about 12 hours, during which period, nobody shall be allowed to approach them, unless wearing a mask. 9.1.2 After the openings have samples of the stored AGPI shall the grain mass as far removed _*Code of practice for improvement for food grain storage. thus been kept open for about 12 hours, be drawn from 10 different points within from one another as practicable. These of existing structures used or intended to be used

a2

IS : 6151( Part II ) - 1971 The samplsamples shall be drawn with the help of a bulk sampling tube. ing tube shall be of sufficient length so as to be able to reach the bottom of the stored AGPI mass. Each sample shall be examined separately for: a) moisture b) ` heating d) insect content, `, and cake formation, and

c) fungus attack

infestation.

9.2 Classification of Infestation - Classification of AGPI for insect infestation &all be done as given in 6.4.1 [see IS : 6151 ( Part I )-1971* 1. In case of infestation demands treatment the structure shall be closed and the AGPI shall be fumigated as given in 9.3. 9.3 Fumigation - Requisite quantity of EDCT at the rate of 35 kg per 100 cubic metres of space for 5 days depending upon the degree of infestation may be used. However, EDCT is not recommended for fumigation of -milled products, oilseeds and spices. 9.3.1 Methyl bromide at the or aluminium phosphide in the each ) per tonne of commodities EDCT. Thcsc fumigants may godown fumigation, the dosage 9.3.2 Care shall be taken rate of 1.5 to 2.5 kg per 100 ma for 24 hours form of tablets at the rate of 2 tablets ( 3 g -for one week may also be used in place of be applied to any commodity. In case of shall be .one tablet per 15 ms. the BKSS as airtight as possible. the ' following

to make

9.3.3 A placard of suitable size depicting prominently minimum cautionary notice shall be fixed to the BKSS:

` DANGER

-

UNDER

FUMIGATION

9.3.4 After the above period of exposure for about 12 hours and nobody shall structure ( see 9.1 .l ) .

the commodity shall be degassed be allowed to approach the

9.4 Aeration - If the commodity shotis signs of heating, it shall be dealt with in the manner specified in 6.4.3 or by the aeration arrangement provided in the BKSS. 9.5 In case the commodity `manner specified in 6.4.2. has become moist, it shall be dealt with in the caky

9.6 In case the commodity has been attacked by fungus or becomes it shall be dealt with in the mannergiven under 6.4.4. 10. ISSUE OF AGPI

10.1 At the time of issue of bags, the most important criterion in determinof the fact whether AGPI was received ing priority of issue, irrespective *storage management code: Part I Terminology.

IS : 6151 (,Part II ) - 1971
earlier or later, shall be the extent of damage to the AGPI. To illustrate: AGPI which is most damaged shall be issued first while the least damaged or sound AGPI issued last. Also small lots of AGPI left over from larger lots after earlier issues shall be given priority in issue.

-10.1.1 The stack shall be so broken as to cause least disturbance After taking out the bags to be delivered the stack shall be properly

to bags. rebuilt.

10.2 Since, at times, damage to AGPI due to dampness placed in the interior of the stack is not readily discerned during storage. The damaged AGPI shall be dealt with as given under 6.4.2, 6.4.3 and 6.4.4 as the case may demand, shall be observed at the time of issue also.
IO.3 After issue of food grain, the BGSS and BKSS shall cleaned and disinfested, as given under 13 of IS : 609-1955'*. be thoroughly

11. SAFETY

PRECAUTIONS
supplies and equipment exposure to pesticides. shall be made

11.1 Suitable provisions of first-aid to safeguard against any accidental

APPENDIX

A

( Clauses 0.3.1and 7.3 )
IN!3lZCT PESTS A-O. GENERAL
A-O.1 Amongst the insect pests of stored agricultural commodities, there These are SitojMus or~za L. are 12 species which are of importance. ( the borer beetle ), Trogoderma ( the rice weevil ), Xh&o@rtha dominica F. granaria E. ( the khapra beetle ), Sitotroga cerealella Oliv. ( the grain ( the rice moth ), Plodz'a spp. ( the moth ), Corcyra cephalonica Staint. meal moths ), Cadra cautella ( the diamond moth ), Bruchus spp. ( the pulse beetles ), Tribolium castaneum Herbst. ( the red rust flour beetle ), Laetheticus ovzae JVaterhouse ( the long headed flour beetle ), Ory<aephilus surinamensis Linn. ( the saw toothed grain beetle ), and Laemophloeus minutus Oliv. ( the Aat grain beetle ). Out of these twelve species of insects, the first eight are called primary pests, because they are capable of damaging all kinds of stored food grain, while the last four are *Code of practice for improvement of existing structures used or intended to be used for food grain storage. 24

OF STORED

AGRICULTURAL

COMMODITIES

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) - 1971
incapable of damaging whole sound grain, and they either follow the attack of primary pests or infest already broken or milled food grain. These latter A brief description of the habits four are, therefore, called secondary pests. and life history of these insects is given in the following clauses.

A-l. A-l.1

SITOPHZLUS ORYZA L. CURCULIONIDAE. )

( ORDER

COLEOPTERA,

FAMILY

This pest ( see Fig. 1) is popularly known as the rice weevil. It is a small chocolate-coloured or dark brown beetle about 3.5 mm long with its head prolonged into a long cylindrical snout or proboscis. The dorsal surface of the weevil is characterized by being marked with.four light reddish or yellowish Both the adults and the larvae spots. The weevil attacks all kinds ofcereals. are voracious feeders. The female weevil bores small cavities on the surface of the food grain and lays the eggs~in these cavities. Only one egg is laid in each cavity. A single female is capable of laying about 300 to 400 eggs. The tiny larva, after The incubation period for eggs is about 3 to 6 days. emergence from the egg, directly bores its way into the food grain and makes a cavity inside the kernel in which it passes the rest of its life. As the The larval larva feeds on the kernel within the cavity, the cavity enlarges. stage lasts for about 20 to 30 days, after which the larva pupates inside the The adult weevils cavity itself. The pupal period lasts from 3 to 6 days. live up to 6 months and cause damage by feeding on grains. A-2.

RHIZOPERTHA
FAMILY

BOSTRYCHIDAE.

DOMINICA

)

F.

( ORDER

COLEOPTERA,

AG2.1 This~pest

(see Fig. 2) is known in India as the borer beetle. In some of the overseas countries, it is, erroneously, also called as the lesser grain borer, It is a major though it causes very serious destruction of stored food grain. pest of all cereals, but at times becomes also a serious pest in milled food grain products, such as flour, ATTA and semolina. It is cylindrical in form and comparatively smaller than Sitoflhilu~ orysa L. ( see A-l ). It is dark brown in colour with a punctated dorsal surface. It is characterized by its head Both the adults and the larvae are capable deflexed down under the thorax. of causing enormous destruction, reducing the food grain at times to mere shells, or converting milled food grain products into tangled mass of excreta. The eggs are laid loose in the food grain. A single female is capable of hying &out 300 to 500 eggs. The Incubation period for eggs is about 6 to 9 days. Immediately after hatching, the tiny larva starts moving about actively eating broken parts of food grain. After a few days, the larva bores its way inside a grain generally through a point at which the grain has already been Having once gone inside the food grain the larva damaged by the adults. As it feeds on the kernel within the cavity, the does not come out again. cavity enlarges. The larval period lasts from 4 to 8 weeks, and the pupal from 7 to 8 days. The adults hve up to 6 months and cause damage. 25

IS: 6151 ( Part II ) - 11971

FIG. 1 siT.oPI-IILD;i O&?`&d L, ( Approximate Magnification - 23 Times

)

A-3.

TROGODERMA
FAMILY

GRANARIA
)

DERMESTIDAE.

E.

( ORDER

COLEOPTERA,

A-3.1 This pest (see Fig. 3) is commonly known as the ` khapra `. This too~is a serious pest of all ccrcals and some times also of pulses. Wheat, however, is its principal food. Unlike Sitophilus oryza L. ( see A-l ) and Rhicopertha dominica ( see A-2 ) the adult is incapable of causing any damage. It is the larva The larva is, in fact, so destructive that it alone which attacks food grain. almost compensates for the lack of damaging capability of the adult. The adult is about 2.54 mm long and has a characteristic oval shape. The colour of the adult is light chocolate with a glabrous dorsal surface. The female lays its eggs loose, generally in batches of 4 to 6. A single female lays about 80 to 150 eggs. 7 hc incubation period for eggs is about 4 to 7 days. The larva is brownish in colour, with characteristic reddish brown tufts of hair on each of its segments. On the posterior-most segment, the tufts of hair are in the form of a tail. The larva has the habit of attacking a large number of food grains instead of restricting its damage to one food grain. It starts 26

IS:6151(PartX)-l!D71

FIG. 2

RHIXOPERTHA
Magnification

DOMINICA
-

( Approximate

F. 26 Times )

eating from the embryo region. In case of heavy infestation, the food grain is completely hollowed out leaving only the shell. The larval period lasts The larva is a very tenacious creature and has been from 3 to 8 weeks. known to live without food for a number of years. The larva pupates outside the food grain and the pupa lies loose in grain mass. The pupal period lasts from 4 to 6 days. The adults live for a week and do not cause damage.

A-4. SITOTROGA CEREALELLA OLIV. FAMILY GELECHIIDAE. ) A-4.1 This pest ( see Fig. 4) is commonly

( ORDER

LEPIDOPTERA,

known as the grain moth or the AnIt is chiefly a pest of paddy and maize, but may attack goumois grain moth. other food grain as well. It is a small hay-coloured moth with a wing spread of 12.7 to 16.9 mm. The margin of fore-wings is fringed with characteristic small hair and these hair are longer than the width of wing membranes. The wing membranes are prolonged at the apical angle like a finger. When the 27

IS : 6151( Pat

II ) - 1971

Fm 3 TROGODERMA GRAJVARIA E. ( Approximate Magnification - 29 Times )
moth is at rest, the wings are folded in a sloping manner ( not flat ) over the abdomen; the antennae point backwards and are slightly raised above the wings; and the palpi are raised upwards like two horns. A female is capable of laymg about 120 to 400 eggs. The eggs are deposited singly or in clusters in depressions or damaged parts of the food grain, or are laid loose in the grain mass. The incubation period for the eggs is about one week. The tiny larva, immediately after emergence, bores into the kernel of the food grain, and forms a cavity there. As it feeds, the cavity inside the food grain enlarges, Before pupating, the larva bores a circular where the larva finally pupates. hole in the food grain leading from the cavity to the outside for the emergence of the adult. The larval period lasts from 2 to 3 weeks, and the pupal period from 5 to 6 days. A-5. LEPIDOPTERA, FAMILY PYRALIDAE. ) A-5.1 This pest ( see Fig. 5 ) is commonly known as the rice moth. It is a pest of all cereals, particularly rice, and also at times of pulses, It is a pale 28

CORCYRA

CEPHALONICA

STAINT.

( ORDER

IS : 6151 ( Part II) - 1971

FIG. 4 SITOTROGA CEREALELLA OLW. ( Approximate Magnification - 5 Times )
greyish-brown moth. It is comparatively bigger in size than Sitotroga cerealella Oliv. ( seeA-4 ). When the mothis at rest, the wings are folded in a sloping manner over the abdomen like Sitotroga cerealellaOh., but the antennae lie straight ( not crossed ) on the wings; and the palpi lie close to each other pointing forwards giving the appearance of a closed beak. A singIe female The eggs are laid indiscriminately and loose in lays about 90 to 200 eggs. period for eggs is about 4 to 5 days. The the grain mass. Tl x incubation tiny larva starts its activity soon after its emergence and.moves about actively When fully fed, the larva spms a silken cocoon in feeding on food grains. which it pupates. In the process of spinning the cocoon, the larva also webs along with small pieces of broken food grain with the result that the whole cocoon appears like a webbed mass of food grain. The larval period lasts from 3 to 4 weeks, and the pupal period about 10 days.

FIG. 5
A-6.

CORCYRA

CEPHALONICA
-

( Approximate

Magnification

STAINT. 3 Times )

PLODIA SPP. ( ORDER PYRAL%DAE. )
of species belonging

LEPIDDPTERA,

FAMILY

A-6.1 These insects (see Fig. 6) are generally
a number 29

called the meal moths. There are to this genus, but it is still unknown as to which

If3: 6151 ( lbrt

f! ) - 1941

of them are more common in this country. They attack all kinds of food The moths have a wing spread of 12.7 to 19.05 mm. When the grains. moths are at rest, the wings are folded touching each other closely along their posterior margin and lie flat on the abdomen; the antennae lie crossed over the wings; and the palpi lie slightly apart from each other pointing forwards giving the appearance of an open beak. The base of the fore-wings is greyish-white in colour and the top half or two-thirds of the fore-wings as well as the head and the thorax are a contrasting brown. A female lays between 40 to 350 eggs. The eggs are laid loose in the grain mass either singly or in clusters. The incubation period for eggs is generally about 2 weeks. When fully fed, the larva webs a silken cocoon in which it pupates. In case of heavy infestation, webbed sheets are formed by the larvae over the bags and in the grain mass. The larval period is generally about three weeks, but it is known to live under adverse conditions up to two years. The pupal period lasts for about 2 weeks.

FIG. 6 PLODIA SPP. ( Approximate Magnification - 12 Times ) 30

I$: 6151 ( Part 11) - 19?i A-7. CADRA CAUTELLA WALKER FAMILY PYRALIDAE. ) ( ORDER LEPIDOPTERA,

A-7.1 They are generally called almond moths ( see Fig. 7 ) . They attack all kinds of food grain, particularly wheat. The adult moths have a win,g spread of about 11 mm. The colour of the moth is pale-grey with the fore-wings marked When the moth is at rest, the with dark bands at their anterior margins. wings lie closely like the Plodia spp. ( see A-6 ) . A female generally lays about 200 eggs. The eggs may be laid loose or in the cracks in the storage structure and dunnage. The incubation period for eggs is about 3~to 5 days. The larva after feeding for a few days spins a cocoon, which is in the form of a little tube. It is in this tube that the larva lives and then finally pupates inside the cocoon. The larval period is about 4 to 6 weeks while the pupal period about 1 to 2 weeks.

FIG. 7
(

CADRA CAVTELLA
Magnification -

WALKER

Approximate

8 Times

)

A-8.

TRIBOLIUM
FAMILY

TENEBRIONIDAE.

CASTANEUM

HERBST. )

( ORDER

COLEOPTERA,

A-8.1 This pest ( see Fig, 8 ) is popularly termed as red rust flour beetle or red grain beetle. It is essentially a pest of milled products, such as flour and semolina, but may also be found in food grain which is already infested with~primary pests. It is a small reddish-brown flattened beetle, about 3.17 mm in length. The dorsal surface of the beetle has characteristic parallel lines of slightly darker colour. A female is capable of laying 400 to 500 eggs. The eggs are laid loose in the grain mass. The incubation period is about 5 to 12 days. The larval period lasts about 4 weeks, and the pupal period from 6 to 9 days. The adult beetles may live as long as one year.
31

IS : 6151-( Part II) - 1971

FIG. 8 TRIBOLIUM CASTAJVEUM HERBST. ( Approximate Magnification - 20 Times ) A-9. LAETHETICUS ORYZAE

COLEOPTERA,

FAMILY

WATERHOUSE

TENEBRIONIDAE.

-( ORDER
)

lighter in colour and the dorsal surface is glabrous. It is also comparatively slightly less flattened than Tribolium castancum Herbst. The life history and habits of this beetle ase similar to those of Tribolium castaneum Herbst.

A-9.1 This pest ( see Fig. 9 ) is popularly known as the long-headed flour beetle and is very similar to `Tribolium castaneum Herbst. ( see A-8.1 ), except that it is

A-10.

COLEOPTERA,

ORYZAEPHIL~US

FAMILY

SURINAMENSIS

CUCUJIDAE.

LINN.

)

( ORDER

A-10.1 This is popularly known as the saw-toothed grain beetle ( see Fig. 10 >. It is much smaller in size than Tribolium castanwm Herbst, or Laetheticus oryZae Waterhouse ( see A-8.1 and A-9.1 ). The thorax is characterized by ser_ rations on its dorsal surface, due to which the beetle has acquired its popular name. Its life history and habits are similar to those of Tribolium castaneum
Herbst. 32

IS : 6151 (Part II) - 1971

FIG. 9
(

LAETHETICUS

ORT<AE
-

WATERHOUSE.

Approximate

Magnification

23 Times

)

A-11. LAEMOPHLOEUS
COLEOPTERA,

FAMILY

MINUTUS

OLIV. CUCUJIDAE.

( ORDER )

A-11.1 This is popularly known as the flat grain beetle ( see Fig. 11 ). It is a minute flattened oblong reddish-brown beetle about I.54 mm long. The antennae are characteristically elongated, about two-thirds of the body, and are very vibratile. This beetle is the smallest amongst almost all the The life history and habits are similar to insect pests of stored food grain. those of Tribosee hum castaneum Herbst. ( see NJ.1 ). A-12. BURCHUS SP. (ORDER BRUCHIDAE . ) A-12.1 COLEOPTERA, FAMILY

They are popularly called as pulse beetles ( see Fig. 12 ). There are a number of species of this genus which are common in India. These are essentially pests of stored pulses. They are the biggest in size amongst the group of 33

IS : 6151( Part II ) - 1971

FIG. 10

0 R TZAEPHIL US SURI.NAME.NSIS LINN. -

FIG. 11 LAEMOPHLOEUS MINUTUS OLIV. ( Approximate
Magnification 36 Times ) -

( Approximate Magnification 30 Times )

all stored food~grain pests, with a characteristic globular body. They are about 5.08 mm long and 2.54 mm in diameter. The females glue their eggs to the outside of the pulse grains. About 1 to 12 or even more eggs may be glued on the same grain. The incubation period for the eggs is about a week. The larva on emergence bores directly inside the grain and makes a cavity in the kernel. As the larva feeds in the kernel, the cavity enlarges. Before pupation, the larva cuts a circular hole in the grain leading from the cavity to the outside for the adult to emerge. The larval period lasts from 3 to 5 weeks, and the pupal period from 3 to 6 days. 34

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) - 1971

FIG. 12 BRUCHUS ( Approximate Magnification

-

SW. 16 Times )

APPENDIX

B

(Clauses 3.1.1.1, 3.2.1.1, 6.1.1.2, 6.4.1, 6.7.3, 6.8.2.3, 7.1.1, 7.1.1.1, 7.3.1.1 and 7.3.2)
METHOD B-l. FOR TREATMENT OF GUNNY BAGS AND STACKS

FUMIGATION

B-l.1 Fumigant-The fumigant shall be EDCT or methyl bromide, or For spot fumigation or small scale storage, ethylene aluminium phosphide. dibromide may be used. B-l .2 Equipment El .2.1 Gas Mask ( Canister Respirator ) -Each 35 operator shall be provdied

IS : 6l!il( Fart II ) - I971
with a suitable gas mask. considered suitable: A gas mask of the type described below is

A face-piece covering the eyes, nose and mouth, connected to a canister containing absorbent material for the vapours of fumigant, by means of a flexible non-kinking breathing-tube and arranged with valves so that all air inhaled by the wearer passes through the canister and the exhausted air passes direct to the surrounding atmosphere through a non-return valve. The canister containing the absorbent material should have a warning indicating the number of hours for which it could be used effectively in an atmosphere charged with the vapours of the fumigant used. B-1.2.2 Cans - Adequate number jerry cans for keeping the measured of empty 9-litre petrol quantities of fumigant cans or 18-litre ready.

B-1.2.3 Loose-Fitted Cubical Gas-Proof Covca - A gas-proof cover of suitable dimensions according to the stack size may be stitched out of 3-ply rubberized cloth or any other suitable gas-proof fabric which is sufficiently strong to withstand rough handling in use. In case of a stitched cover, the seams should be painted with some suitable rubber or plastic solution so as On the to prevent leakage of vapours of the fumigant through the seams. top face of the gas-proof cover, there should be a few openings, each 15 cm The joints in diameter, and provided with a leather sleeve 22 cm in length. between the sleeves and the cover should be so made as to prevent any leakage of the vapours of EDCT through them. B-1.2.4 Mud Plaster - Mud plaster shall not contain devoid of lumps, dry earth, stones, etc. B-1.2.5 B-1.2.6 diameter, veniently B-1.2.7 Ladder of adequaie length so as to reach sand and shall be

the top of the stack, 20 cm in may con-

Galvanized Iron Drum - about 35 cm in height and ( Such a drum with airtight seams and airtight lid. hold two rolls of gunnies, each roll having 20 bags. ) Halide Leak Detector

B-l .3 Precautions B-1.3.1 Fumigation shall be carried out under the supervision of an experienced and responsible person, with the assistance of well-trained operators. B-1.3.2 Inhalation of any fumigant or exposure wearing gas mask shall be completely avoided. to its vapours without

out in cans or in gas-proof

B-1.3.3

Care

shall be taken not to spill any fumigant covers. 36

while pouring

it

IS t 6151( Part II ) - 1971 B-l .4 Procedure B-1.4.1 Fumigation of Emp& Gunny Bags - Make rolls of empty gunny Place these rolls in the drum (see bags, each roll containing 20 bags. B-1.2.6 ). The quantity of different fumigants required shall be as follows:
EDCT MBR EDB ALP 0.3 kg/m3 0.02 kg/m3 0.02 kg/m3

One

tablet

( 3 g ) per

15 m3.

Take out the required quantity of the fumigant, except MBR, in a clean dry glass bottle. Quickly pour this quantity in the drum containing the rolls of gunnies. Cover with the lid and seal it. The sealing of the lid may be done The required dose of by either mud plaster or preferably with plasticine. MBR should be introduced from the cylinder directly through a rubber or plastic tube. Keep the drum closed for about 48 hours except in case of aluminium phosphide, keep it closed for 5 days, after which remove the The rolls may then be taken lid and keep the drum open for about 6 hours. out. If the number of rolls is sufficiently large and fumigation in drums is found to be tedious, all the rolls may be made into a stack and fumigation carried out under gas-proof covers in the manner given under B-l .4.2. B-1.4.2 Fumigation af Stack - Cover the stack with the gas-proof cover Fold the lower edges of the cover inwards ( see B-1.2.3 ) of a suitable size. and spread the folded edges of the floor to the extent of not less than 15 cm. Plaster the folded edges on to the floor with mud so as to prevent the vapours Take out the required quantity of fumigant from escaping out from edges. Carry the of different fumigants ( B-1.4.1 ) in petrol cans or jerry cans. required number of these cans to the top of the stack and pour the fumigant Tie the in the cover through the sleeves provided in the top face of cover. Keep the cover closed leather sleeves as in the case of a football bladder. over the stack for a period of 24 to 48 hours for methyl bromide and 5 days for EDCT, and one week for ALP, after which lift the edges of the cover. During this period nobody should Leave the BGSS open for about 6 hours. be allowed to either enter or remain inside the BGSS. After this period of 6 hours, remove the entire cover from the stack. B-2. B-2.1 S,PRAYING Material

B-2.1 .l B-2.2

Malathion

Emulsjfiable

Concentrate -

50 percent.

Equipmqt Sprayer Sprayer. A suitable hand compression sprayer, rocker sprayer

B-2.2.1 or power

IS : 61X( B-2.2.2
B-2.2.3

Part II ) - 11971
Buckets Reqhator, Mask and Overalls --Each

with a suitable respirator, overalls.

operator shall be provided a mask to protect his eyes from the spray, and

B-2:3 Procedure - Take 10 ml of malathion emulsifiable concentrate ( 50 percent ) for one litre of water to obtain 0.5 percent concentration of the emulsion. Fill the emulsion in the sprayer. Spray the empty bags or stacks with the emulsion. B-2.4 Precaution -The operators should wash their hands, neck and other parts of the body likely to be exposed after wearing the overalls and the mask prior to spraying as well as after finishing the operation. B-3. DIPPING OF USED GUNNY BAGS

B-3.1 Used gunny bags shall be disinfested by dipping for 10 minutes in 0.5 percent malathion emulsion prepared by the method given in B-2.3. B-3.1.1 Care shall be taken to dry the bags in the shade.

APPENDIX
METHOD C-l. FOR SPRAYING VEHICLES,

C
BOATS, WALLS, ETC

( Clauses 3.3.1.3, 3.4.2.1, 3.5.3 and 3.5.3.1 )

MAT.ERIAL material used for spraying ( 50 percent ). shall be malathion emulsifiable

C-l.1 The concentrate C-2. C-2.1

EQUIPMENT Sprayer A suitable sprayer.

C-2.2 Respirator, Mask and Overalls -Each operator shall be provided with a suitable respirator, a mask to protect his eyes, and overalls. C-3. PROCEDURE

C-3.1 For spraying, select such a time when the weather is calm. For spraying the floor and the sides of the vehicle, park the vehicle in a garage. If a garage is not available, park the vehicle on the leeward side of a high 38

I!J:615l(PartII)-1971 building so that the spray is not blown away by the wind during the operation In case of a wagon, keep its door closed during the operation of spraying. of spraying. Take 10 ml of C-3.2 Gweep clean the surface which has to be sprayed. malathron emulsifiable concentrate ( 50 percent) for one litre of water to obtain O-5 percent emulsion, and work the sprayer in such a manner that its nozzle is at a reasonable distance from the surface to be sprayed, and also that the deposit of the material on the surface is uniform. C-4. PRECAUTION

C-4.1 The operators should wash their hands, neck and other parts of the body likely to be exposed after wearing the overalls and the mask, prior to spraying as well as after finishing the operation.

APPENDIX ( Clause 7.3.1.2 )
METHOD D-l. GENERAL FOR POISON

D
BAITING OF RATS

D-l.1 Out,, of the group of rats, which generally attack stored AGPI, following SIX species are common in India: a) Rattus rattus ( the black rat ), b) c) d) e) f)
Rattus norvegicus ( the brown rat ), Mus muscuh ( the house mouse ), ( the common Bandicota bandicota Bandicota bengalensis

the

bandicoots ), and

Gerbillus spp. ( the common field rat ).

D-1 .I.1 These species of rats can be distinguished by their various characteristics, but from the point of view of damage to stored AGPI the distinction between the species is immaterial. Rats are very fast breeders. A single female can produce five litters in a year, each litter containing 9 young ones, It is which begin to breed within a period of two months from their birth. estimated that one pair of rats can produce ?S many as 800 offsprings during the course of one year. Rats not only deprive us of our AGPI by consuming it but also by spoiling the AGPI by nibbling it into brokens, and by conIn bag storage godowns particularly, taminating it with their droppings. they are additionally harmful because they cut the bags, with the result that 39

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) - 1971 when bags are moved from one place to another or trans-shipped, considerable quantities of AGPI are lost through bleeding of the damaged bags. D-l.2 Poison baiting is carried out by the use of a bait base and a poison.

D-1.2.1 Bait Base-The bait base may comprise the same AGPI as stored in the BGSS, or other foodstuff, such as flour, ATTA, gram flour, freshly boiled rice or biscuit meal. There is no universally acceptable bait for all rodents. Proper selection of bait is very essential for good results, which depends upon the season, species to be controlled, other food material available in the place of control and when the control work is undertaken. The bait base, to bc used either for preparing poison bait ( see D-4 ) or for pre-baiting ( see D-5.1.1 ), shall be freshly moistened and given a touch of raw coconut oil. If unmilled food grain is to be used as bait base, the food grain shall be soaked in water for a few hours till it becomes soft, and then spread out on a piece of gunny in order to remove the free droplets of water. D-1.2.2 Poison - Various poisonous substances are available which may broadly be classified as single dose ( acute ) or multiple dose ( chronic ) poisons. A number of poisons fall under these groups but comparatively a few of them are widely used for rodent control work. Following poisons may be used for protection of AGPI from rats. D-l .2.2.1 Single-dose poisons - Zinc phosphide, percent by weight to the bait base. D-l .2.2.2 Multiple-dose namely, warfarin, fumarin, in the proportion Hydroxy of 2.5

fioisons ( anticoagulants ) etc.

coumarins,

Anticoagulant poisons cause internal and external haemorrhage when consumed for several days. As the symptoms of poisoning appear only gradually, rats do not feel bait shyness. No pre-baiting is necessary when anticoagulants are used. Commercially, anticoagulants are available in three forms, namely, concentrate; water-soluble compound; and readymixed bait. For preparation of baits, one part of0.5 percent concentrate or O-5 percent water soluble compounds is to be mixed with 19 parts of bait base or water. Simultaneous use of both dry and liquid baits is more effective when density of rat population is very high. The poison baits containing poison other than zinc phosphide shall be suitably coloured with a warning colour. ED-2. EQUIPMENT D-2.1 Buckets or Galvanized Iron Drums to quantity of the poison bait to be prepared. -of suitable size, according

D-2.2 Ladles-for taking out the poison bait from the buckets or galvanized iron drums and placing the poison bait (see D-4 ) in containers for poison bait ( see D-2.3 ). 40

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) - 1971 D-2.3
made bait trays Containers for Poison Bait -Ready are also available commercially and may be used. Alternatively, rejected cans or pipes may be used. and cups pieces of

D-2.4 D-3.

Rubber

Gloves -

a pair for each operator.

PRECAUTIONS

D-3.1 The poison ( see D-1.2.2 ) and the poison bait ( see D-4 ) shall not be The operators shall wash their hands thoroughly touched with bare hands. with soap and water after handling the poison or poison bait. The poison when not in use shall be kept under lock and key under the supervision of The unused poison bait left over in the evenings or a responsible person. that collected in the mornings from BGSS, shall be buried under the supervision of a responsible person. D-3.2 Care shall be taken that the poison or poison bait does not contaminate the AGPI. If the AGPI gets contaminated, it shall be destroyed or buried under the supervision of a responsible person. D-4. PROCEDURE FOR PREPARING BAIT

D-4.1 Weigh out the required quantity of the moistened bait base ( see B-l .2.1 ) and place it in a bucket or galvanized iron drum ( see D-2.1 ) of a suitable size so that the bait base does not occupy more than half the capacity of the bucket or drum. Next, weigh out the required quantity of the poison to be used according to the proportion given against each poison under D-l i2.2. Sprinkle this quantity of the poison over the moistened bait base kept in the bucket or drum. Thoroughly mix the poison and the bait base. D-5. D-5.1 PROCEDURE Single-Dose FOR Poison BAITING

D-5.1.1 Pre-baiting - Place, at dusk, about 50 g of bait base ( without the poison ), in containers ( see D-2.3 ) in the BGSS at different points near the suspected rat runs. Close and lock the BGSS. Watch the following morning whether the bait base has been eaten during the night by the rats. Remove the containers in the morning and throw away the bait base left in the containers. Repeat this process by placing fresh quantities of the same type of bait base ( without the poison ) at the same points in the BGSS as on the previous day, for a few successive days till it becomes certain that the rats have started eating the unpoisoned bait base. 41

IS : 6151 ( Part II ) - 1971 D-5.1.2 Poison Baiting - When during the process of pre-baiting ( see D-5.1.1 ), it has been ascertained that rats have started eating the unpoisoned
bait and and days base, replace the bait base with freshly prepared poison bait ( see D-4 ), continue with the procedure of~placing the poison bait in the evenings removing it the next morning, as given under D-5.1.1, for another few till it is observed that rats no longer eat the poison bait.

D-5.1.3 Followu;b Treatment - Follow up the treatment of pre-baiting and baiting cycle in succession ( see D-5.1.1 and D-5.1.2 ) after a period of about a week or ten days horn the last date of poison baiting, till it is observed that The follow-up treatment the rat menace in the BGSS has been eradicated. shall be done at least twice after the first pre-baiting and baiting cycle given under D-5.1.1 and D-5.1.2. D-5.2 Multiple-Dose Poisons of sugar may also be added to the bait to make

D-5.2.1 Small cluantity it more palatable.

D-5.2.2 In case of dry baits, place the prepared bait or ready-to-use bait in bait cups at \;arious points along the rat runs, at the rate of 200 g per spot. In a small house, one or two placements may be sufficient, whereas in warehouses and industrial establishments, the number of placements depends upon the size of the establishment and severity of rodent damage. D-5.2.3 Liquid baits should be placed in shallow containers at the rate of Place the containers along rat runs. 0.25 litre per container. Replenish the baits as and D-5.2.4 Leave the baits as long as possible. when necessary. L)ue to slow action of anticoagulants, the kill may be obtained only after 8 to 10 days of continuous feeding. Mice may take even 20 days. D-5.2.5 In order to ensure maximum intake of baits by rats and to safeguard against any hazards, it is recommended that permanent bait stations, A simple bait in which the bait trays/cups are to be kept, may be fixed. station may be used. Poison bait containers may be placed in these stations. The poison bait may also be placed directly in the bait stations made of Necessary arrangements may be made empty powder cans or earthen pots. to firmly fix them. D-5.3 In the follow-up treatment, it is advantageous to use another and another poison than what has been used previously. bait base

42

IS : 6151 ( Part

II ) - 1971

APPENDIX ( Clause 7.3.5 )
AGPI E-l. STORAGE WAREHOUSE CONSTRUCTION

E
SAN'ITATION AND
tonnes----_____-_------___-----; Bagged_-_--_-_-

CHECK

LIST

WAREHOUSE

UTILIZATION
.m2_____

E-l .l Storage E-1.2 AGPI in E-l.3
Bag E-2. E-2.1 Type Bulk

capacity-----Storage-----Bulk ( flat )----

______--_________--__ of Storage: head-------OF tracks: present accumulations docks: present accumulations WAREHOUSE PERIMETER

CONDITION Railroad (a) Debris (b) Grain

Yes /No" Yes/No* Yes/No* Yes /No* Yes/No* Yes/No* Yes /No * EXTERIORS Yes/No* Yes /No* Yes/No* Yes/No"

E-2.2

Truck (b)

loading

(a) Debris Grain E-2.3 E-2.4 E-2.5 E-3. E-3.1 E-3.2 enter Trash Rodent

piles on grounds or near warehouse signs on warehouse grounds

Birds nesting, MAINTENANCE Canopies

or roosting under canopies OF WAREHOUSE

in need of repair which birds can

Holes in walls through

E-3.3 Holes in walls at floor level giving access to rodents E-3.4 Doors rodents E-3.5 E-3.6 E-3.7 Broken Windows are not tight windows fitting to exclude

or sky lights

Yes/No* Yes/No* Yes/No*

or doors in need of screens

Roof or walls leak when it rains
is not applicable

*Strike out whichever

IS : 6151 ( Part

II ) - 1971 -OF WAREHOUSE
cleaning

E-4. MAINTENANCE

INTERIORS
Yes/No* Yes/No*

E-4.1 Do floor areas require
E-4.2 E-4.3 Do walls require Do overhead

cleaning cleaning

areas require

Yes/No*

E-4.4 Are there cracks in floors or walls which accumulate grain E-5. AGPI INSPECTION PROCEDUR,ES before

Yes/No*

E&l

Is AGPI sampled and inspected receiving it in the warehouse: a) Moisture b) AGPI c) AGPI is determined for insects for is graded checked

Yes/No* Yes/No*

Yes/No*
evidence ) inspected: ) ) ) Yes/No * of Yes/No* Yes/No*

d) AGPI is checked rodents ( pellets---e) AGPI E-5.2 Is AGPI is checked

for off-odors

in storage routinely ( frequency-----

a) For moisture c) For insects

b) For temperature

( frequency--for maximum

Yes /No*
Yes/No* Yes/No*

( frequency----

E-5.3 Standards are established insect ~and/or rodent evidence E-5.4 E&. E-6.1 Grain AGPI is fumigated STORAGE AGPI AGPI

if insects PRACTICES

noted

Yes/No*

Bagged

is stored on pallets is stored in orderly

Yes/No*
Yes/No*

E-8.2 Bagged fashion

E-6.3 Stacks of bagged AGPI ed for different AGPI E-6.4 Stacks of bagged 1 metre below overhead

as recommendYes/No* at least Yes/No*

AC-PI are structures

E-8.5 Stacks of bagged AGPI are stored at least 75 cm from all walls and at least 75 cm between stacks
*Strike out whichever is not applicable.

Yes/No*

44

IS : 6151( E-6.6 E-6.7 Broken bags oEAGPI in stacks not noted Is AGPI cleaned when received CONDITIONS

Part

II ) - 1971

Yes/No* Yes/No*

E-7. INSECT E-7.1 E-7.2

Moths noted flying in warehouse Adult insects or larvae noted: a) On floors or walls b) On outsides of bags of AGPI c) In accumulations of spilled AGPI d) In samples taken from stacks ofAGP1 ( on separate sheet list lots of AGPI sampled andinsects present, if any )

Yes /No* Yes/No* Yes/No* Yes/No*

Yes/No* Yes/No* CONDITIONS Yes /No* Yes/No* Yes/No* Yes /No* Yes/No* Yes/No* Yes /No * Yes/No*

E-7.3 Insect tracks in dust on walls, floors and overhead areas E-8. E-8.1 RODENT, BIRD AND/OR MICROBIAL

Live or dead rodents noted in warehouse

E-8.2 Rodent pellets noted in warehouse or on bags of AGPI E-8.3 E-8.4 E-8.5 E-8.6 E-8.7 E-8.8 E-9. E-9.1 Rodent urine stains on bags Rodent chewed bags Rodent tracks noted in dust Birds noted in warehouse Bird droppings on bags, floors and overhead areas Moulded or sprouted AGPI noted PEST Insect CONTROL

E-9.1.1 Regularly scheduled residual spraying of warehouse practised: ----_ a) Frequency----b) Insecticide used-*Strike out whicheveris not applicable,

Yes/No* Yes/No*

IS : 6151 ( Part

II) - 1971
being treated with Yes/No* Yes/No*

E-9.1.2 Is warehouse smokes or fogs:
a) Frequency---------b) Insecticide

used---------

E-9.1.3 Grain E-9.1.4
received :
a)

fumigated when received: Fumigant used--------Protective treatment applied when

Yes/No*

Applied

to bags--------to grain---------

Yes/No* Yes/No* Yes/No* Yes/No*

b) Applied c) Material

applied--------fumigated as required

E-9.1.5

AGPI

E-9.2 Rodent E-9.2.1
warehouse E-9.2.2 warehouse Rodent bait stations maintained exterior Rodent bait stations maintained interior traps maintained on Yes/No* on

Yes/No*
Yes/No*

E-9.2.3 Rodent house interior E-9.2.4 regularly:
a)

on ware-

Bait stations serviced with fresh bait Type of bait used----Yes/No* Yes/No*

b) Frequency

of service------

E-9.3

Birds
Baits in use ( Type----Traps in use ) Yes/No*

E-9.3.1
E-9.3.2 E-19.

Yes/No*

RECOMMENDATIONS/REMARKS
out whichever is not applicable.

*Strike

46

IS : 6151( Part II ) - 1971
( Continuedfrom pa,ge 2 ) Representing Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Food & Supplies Department, Government Punjab, Chandigarh of

Mem bcrs DR 0. S. BINDRA DIRECTOR
SHRI S. S. BEDI ( Alternate ) SHRI GURBACHAN.SINGH

The Punjab State Co-operative Supply & Marketing Federation Limited, Chandigarh ) The

Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, New Delhi SHRI RAGHUNANDAN BHATIA ( Alternate ) National Co-operative Development Corporation, &RI S. T. KHUSHALANI New Delhi SHRI J. P. MITAL ( Alternate ) Grain Storage Research and Training Centre, Hapur DR K. KRISHNAMURTHY Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI S. K. MAJUMDER ( CSIR J, Mysore The Grain, Rice and Oilseeds Merchants' AssociaSHRI MANGALDASNATHUBHAI tion, Bombay Indian Agricultural Research 3nstitute ( ICAR ), DR S. PRADHAN New Delhi Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. RAMDAS Millers' Rice Association, Andhra Pradesh Sam ADUSUMILLI SUBBARAO Vijayawada National Seeds Corporation Limited, New Delhi SHRI S. S. VIRDI &RI R. KURMANAIKULU ( Allernate )

CIVIL ENGINEER( A/tern& SHRI R. P. JAIN

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

STORAGE AND COMMODITIES IS: 600-1955 601-1955 602-1955 603-1960 607-1965 609-1955 610-1955 611-1955 631-1961 1497-1959 1787-1961 1788-1961 2059-1962 2821-1964 3453-1966

MARKETING

STRUCTURES

FOR

AGRICULTURAL

Code ofpracticefor structure Code of practice structure Code of practice structure

construction

of BUKHARZ of XOTHAR of MORAZ

type rural food grain storage type food grain storage structure type rural rural food grain food grain storage storage

Code of practice for construction for construction for construction

of underground

Code of practice for construction of bagged food grain storage structures suitable for trade and government purposes ( revised) Code of practice for improvement used for food grain storage Code of practice Code of practice Specification for handling of existing structures used or intended to be

for storage of food grain and its protection of food grain in transit food grain storage bins

during storage

for aluminium

Layout for regulated Layout for regulated Layout for regulated Layout for regulated Thermo-sampler

market yards for agricultural market yards for cattle market yards for tobacco

commodities

market yards for fruits and vegetables

Code of practice for construction of hexagonal bins for bulk storage of food grains

type

concrete-cum-masonry Part I Constructional Part II Grain

General requirements 5503 ( Part I )-1969 requirements 5503 (Part 5606-1970 5826-1970 II)-1969 handling

for silos for grain storage:

General requirements for silos for grain equipment and accessories for steel bins for grain storage for flat storage

storage:

Specification

Constructional requirements above 200 tonnes )

structures

for grains

( capacity

