INRI AAF IS 12619 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Ha SENT — WMA HaT 


( Teel JAGET ) 


Printing Industry — Safety Code 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.110; 37.100.10 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2022 Price Group 4 


Printing Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 25 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Printing Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in October 1989. Experience gained in implementation of this Standard 
necessitates this revision and certain changes that are necessary have been incorporated. 


Following important changes have been incorporated in this revision: 

a) Applicable safety requirements for pre-press/post-press activities; 

b) Different types of mechanical safety guards for offset printing machines; 

c) Prestart warning devices and safety signals; 

d) Special requirements for safeguarding danger zones; and 

e) Guidelines for electrical safety devices. 
The fact that a factory, including the printing processes, needs safety measures does not call for any emphasis nor 
elaboration. The Factories Act, 1948 lays down certain norms regarding safety measures for the employees in a 
factory in general. 
In this standard only the safety requirements relevant to specific plant and machinery involved in printing industry, 
such as foundry, photolitho, printing machines, cutting and binding machines have been enumerated. Other general 
safety requirements for building, electricity, fire-fighting arrangements, effluents and environment control, etc, as 
applicable to any other industry shall have to be in compliance with Factory Regulation Act, 1948, prevailing in 
respective states where they are located. 
This standard has been prepared keeping the provision of the Act in view so that this does not contravene the Act. 
Attempt has also been made to avoid repetition of the Act in this code. 
Wherever the word ‘Act’ appears in this standard, it refers to Factories Act, 1948; whenever the word “Rule” 
appears in this standard, it refers to Delhi State Factory Rules. 
Under the Factories Act, Factory Rules are framed by the different State Governments for their respective States. 
For obvious reasons, rules of all the states could not be quoted. Rules might vary from state to state but the basic 
approach of the rules of the different states are the same. In this Indian Standard, Rules of Delhi State have been 
quoted for illustration purposes and also as a guide for furtherance of the safety measures. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of the standard is given in Annex B. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12619 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
PRINTING INDUSTRY — SAFETY CODE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the safety requirements 
applicable to all types and sizes of printing industry 
ranging from small scale to large scale industries 
engaged in either the total process of paper printing or 
part thereof. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions which through reference in this text 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 APPLICABLE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Area-wise safety requirements shall be as follows. 


3.2 Type Foundry 


a) Automatic temperature regulation by thermostat 
control shall be provided with the electric furnaces; 


WEB SPEED, m/s 


2 4 


b) Guards shall be provided around all continuous 
moving parts such as pulleys; 


c) There shall be proper provision of ventilation and 
flow of free air to drive the fumes coming out of 
the crucible; 


d) Adequate room height and space for proper 
ventilation shall be maintained; 


e) Dress collection shall be done in closed containers 
and kept at a minimum distance of 3 m from the 
casting machine to prevent lead poisoning; 


f) Near the working area, proper exhaust shall be 
provided to avoid fumes; and 


g) Fire hazard shall be reduced as far as possible. 
Suitable fire extinguishers as per local area 
regulations guaranteed to function effectively 
shall be kept ready in case of need and installed in 
places which are readily accessible. 


3.3 Letter Press 


a) Electrical interlocks shall be provided for guards 
required to be opened during operation; and 


b) In multi-unit machines stop, inch, run and 
emergency stop shall be provided within easy 
reach of the operator or a starting alarm shall be 
provided. 


6 8 10 12 


MAXIMUM BRAKING TIME,(SECOND) 


Fic. 1 BREAKING TIME GRAPH FOR WEB OFFSET MACHINE 


1 


IS 12619 : 2022 


3.4 Offset Printing Machines 


3.4.1 General Safety Requirements for Offset Printing 
Machines 


Printing machines must be provided with safety devices 
to protect the operator against mechanical and electrical 
hazards during the operation and maintenance of the 
press line. Movement of machine parts, electric energy, 
sharp edges, heat, noise, chemicals, etc, may create 
these hazards. 


All these hazards cannot be avoided by design 
measures because of the functional requirement of the 
machine/mechanism and hence safety measures are 
required to protect the operator from these hazards. 


Safety measures/devices are broadly classified in three 
categories. 


3.4.1.1 Mechanical safety guards 
There are three types of safety guards. 


3.4.1.1.1 Interlocking guards with guard locking act as 
follows: 


a) The hazardous movements safeguarded by the 
device cannot be carried out unless the guard is 
closed, interlocked and locked; and 


b) The guard remains closed, interlocked and locked 
until the hazardous movement is stopped. 


3.4.1.1.2 Interlocking guards without guard locking act 
as follows: 


a) The hazardous movements covered by the guard 
cannot operate unless the guard is closed; 


b) If the guard is opened during a hazardous 
movement, a stop instruction is given; and 


c) When the guard is closed, the hazardous 
movements covered by the guard can be started, 
but the closure of the guard does not by itself 
initiate the hazardous movement. 


3.4.1.1.3 Mechanical safety guards (without interlocks) 
should be positioned in such a way that no part of the 
human body gets dragged into the rotating nip of the 
printing machine. 


3.4.1.2 Hold-to-run control devices 


Control devices, which initiate and maintain the 
operation of parts of the machine as long as the manual 
control is actuated. The actuator returns automatically 
to the stop position when released. The operation is 
stopped immediately. 


Hold-to-run control devices allow operation with 
a maximum an operating speed of 1 m/min or with 
a displacement limited to 25 mm. It can be deviated 
up to operating speed of 5m/min or displacement of 
75mm where there is no drastic increase in the hazard 
is expected. 


3.4.1.3 Emergency stop devices 


Machines must be fitted with an emergency stop device 
at appropriate and approachable locations to enable the 
operator to stop the machine instantly in case of the 
hazardous conditions. 


Emergency stop devices must satisfy the following 
requirements: 


a) The emergency stop actuator must remain 
engaged; 

b) Disengaging the actuator must not result in the 
machine to restart, but shall only permit restarting; 


c) The emergency stop signal must override all other 
commands; 


d) The emergency stop function must not impair the 
capability of any safety device or facility with 
safety-related functions; 


e) The emergency stop function must not impair any 
facilities designed to release trapped persons; and 


f) Emergency stop actuators must be designed for 
easy actuation. 


3.4.2 In addition to the above three safety measures, 
the following provisions are necessary on the machine. 


3.4.2.1 Provisions for manual rotation of printing 
machine aggregates with electrical interlocks 


Provision should be there to rotate the press line or 
its aggregates manually by inserting the hand wheel 
(crank) connected with an interlocking device, so that 
in case of normal run, the hand wheel should not get 
inserted. 


3.4.2.2 Pre-start warning devices 


Audible pre-start warning devices must be provided on 
the machine to indicate start-up of the machine. This 
device must produce sufficient sound for at least 3s to 
alert the persons near machine and machine must not 
take other commands till 3s after sound stops. 


If machine is stopped for more than 12s an emergency 
stop is actuated during machine run, audible device 
must operate before machine re-start. 

3.4.2.3 Warning safety signals 


Despite providing all safety devices on the machine, 
few danger points may remain in the machine because 
of design constraint or product profile. In such cases the 
warning of risks must be displayed on the machine by 
using symbol plates and same is to be mentioned in the 
operating manual. 

3.4.3 Design Guidelines for Safety Guards 


Guards must fulfil the following requirements. 


3.4.3.1 General requirements 
a) Guards must be strong enough and reliable; 
b) Guards must not generate new danger points; 


c) They must not be easily defeated or made 
ineffective; 


d) When openings are provided, they must be at 
sufficient distance from hazardous zone. Operator 
should be able to observe the process wherever 
required without disturbance of the guards; 


e) They must be firmly clamped in their position; 


f) They must either be fastened in such a way that 
they can only be opened by the use of the proper 
tool or they must be interlocked with the hazardous 
movement; and 


g) After removing clamping/fasteners they must not 
retain their guarding position as far as possible. 


3.4.3.2 Fixed and interlocking guards 


Guards which are removed or opened less frequently or 
for maintenance purposes only must always be fastened 
to the machine frame in such a way that release is only 
possible using a proper tool. 


Guards which are opened frequently or for setting-up 
must be interlocked with the hazardous movement in 
such a way that hazardous movements are promptly 
stopped after the guard has been opened or removed. 


3.4.3.3 Special requirements for safeguarding danger 
zones 


a) Danger zones must be safeguarded by fence-type 
enclosures or photo-electric devices provided at a 
height of 400 and 900 mm; and 


b) Danger points can also be safeguarded by 
photo-electric beams or other kinds of 
electro-sensitive protective devices. However, it 
is important to note that adequate safety distances 
must be maintained. 


3.4.3.4 Access to the danger zone must be safeguarded, 
for example by: 


a) Access gates which are interlocked with the 
hazardous movement; 


b) Electro-sensitive protective devices (for example 
photo-electric devices); and 


c) No enabling device in the Danger zone area, to 
avoid press operation from the Danger zone area. 


3.4.3.5 Guidelines for electrical safety devices 


3.4.3.5.1 Devices for switching, control and signalling 


Control devices are used to start and stop machines. 
Such devices must meet certain requirements in order 
to avoid persons being exposed to risks from hazardous 
movements. 


Control devices can be electrical push buttons, 
self-sustaining or not self-sustaining etc. They must 
be designed and located as to be within easy and 
safe reach of the operator. Start buttons initiating 
hazardous movements, for example, machine start 


IS 12619 : 2022 


or hold-to-run operation, must be protected against 
inadvertent actuation. 


3.4.3.5.2 Supply disconnecting devices 


Separate supply disconnecting devices must be provided 
for each source of supply used in order to ensure that 
work that needs to be done on the machine (maintenance 
and repair work on mechanical components, electrical 
equipment, hydraulic or pneumatic equipment, 
cleaning, etc.) can be carried out safely. 


Supply disconnecting devices are allowed to have only 
one ON and one OFF position which determines either 
the beginning of the power supply or the isolation from 
the source. 


Where two or more disconnecting devices are provided, 
protective interlocks are required to prevent hazardous 
situations or damage to the machine or the product. 


Supply disconnecting devices, which are used as 
emergency stop devices must have at least the required 
power breaking capacity. Dis-connectors must be 
identified by a red switching element on a yellow 
background. 


3.4.3.5.3 Requirements for emergency stop devices: 
a) Hazardous movements are interrupted; 


b) Controls remain in the OFF position after actuation 
(control system remains in OFF Mode); 


c) No restart of the machine is possible until 
disengaged; 
d) Disengaging does not allow machine start; 


e) Striking marking colours (red actuator on yellow 
background); and 


f) Actuation of the emergency stop device must not 
initiate hazardous movements. 


3.5 Paper Cutting/Guillotine Machine and Three 
Knife Trimmer 


a) Operating switch shall be in series connection 
with photocells so that machine shall not start in 
case operator’s hand is near the shear blades; 


b) Cut ends or fluffs shall not be accumulated on the 
passage causing obstruction to easy movements of 
other material. It shall be collected in a bin at a 
safe place; 


c) The knife shall be properly guarded in its raised 
position; 

d) Hydraulic system shall be in conformity with 
relevant safety regulation; and 


e) Two-push-button system shall be provided in 
machines for the safety of the operator. This shall 
be applicable for cutting and guillotine machines 
and shall not be applicable for three-knife 
trimmer. Wherever possible, limit switches may 
be provided. 


IS 12619 : 2022 


3.6 Folding, Binding, Stitching, Perforating and 
Punching Machines 


a) Suitable guards shall be provided for all moving 
parts; 

b) Control switch shall be within the reach of the 
operator; 

c) Machine shall have emergency stop switches; and 

d) Rejected wire, strings, paper slags shall be 
collected in a place away from the operating area. 

3.7 Plate Making Machines 


Exhaust for fumes and suitable effluent control for the 
chemicals handled shall be provided. 


3.8 Block Making Machine 
Mechanical guard shall be provided. 


3.9 Photographic Studio 

a) Camera — Suitable firefighting equipment shall 
be provided. 

b) Developer 
1) Good fume exhaust arrangement shall be 

provided; and 
2) Chemicals shall be disposed of as per effluent 
regulation. 

c) Step and Repeat Machine — Proper ventilation 
shall be provided. Where arc lamp is used instead 
of halogen lamp, proper protection against flash 
for the eyes shall be provided. 


d) Artist Table Retouching Table and Drawing Table 
1) Suitable firefighting equipment shall be 
provided. 
2) All electrical equipment shall be properly 
earthed. 
e) Film 


1) Separate storage space shall be provided for 
films in a place away from the process area as 
a precaution against fire hazards. 

2) Proper fume exhausting arrangements shall be 
provided. 

3) Suitable 
provided. 


firefighting equipment shall be 


3.10 Storage of oil, Greases and flammable inks and 
thinners — Suitable safe storage facilities shall be 
provided for oils, grease, flammable inks and thinners 
in compliance with safety regulations under the Act. 
Adequate precautions shall be taken with regard to 
‘NO SMOKING’ instructions and provisions for 
suitable fire fighting equipment. 


3.11 Generator 


Industries having their own generating set for captive 
power shall take adequate precautions in regard to its 
location, maintenance, storing of fuels, etc. 


3.12 General Stores (Paper) 


a) Store and passage ways shall be kept clear and in 
good condition; 


b) Materials stored in tiers shall be stacked, blocked, 
interlocked and limited in height so that they are 
stable and secured; 


c) Storage areas shall be kept free from possible 
hazards from tripping. Adequate clearance shall 
be provided with sprinkler heads or suitable 
firefighting equipment; and 

d) In indoor/internal storage areas, smoking shall be 
strictly prohibited. 


3.13 Gas Dryer/IR Dryer/UV Curing Unit on 
Printing Machines 


a) Exhaust ducting as per recommendation from 
equipment manufacturer should be provided to 
remove harmful exhaust gases; 

b) Operator safety instruments recommended by 
equipment manufacturer should be provided; 

c) Safety instructions provided by equipment 
manufacturer should be followed; 

d) Separate storage space shall be provided for 
consumables used in these equipment in a place 
away from the process area as a precaution 
against fire hazards; and 


e 


== 


Fire hazard shall be reduced as far as possible. 
Suitable fire extinguishers as per local area 
regulations guaranteed to function effectively 
shall be kept ready in case of need and installed 
in places which are readily accessible. 


3.14 Other Safety Procedures to be Followed for 
All the Above Machines 


3.14.1 Following Lock Out Tag Out Procedure (LOTO) 
During Maintenance Work (Refer IS 5216 (Part 1) 


It requires that, “The employer shall establish a(n) 
(energy control) program consisting of energy 
control procedures, employee training and periodic 
inspections to ensure that before any employee 
performs any servicing or maintenance on a machine 
or equipment where the unexpected energizing, 
start-up or release of stored energy could occur 
and cause injury, the machine or equipment shall 
be isolated from the energy source and rendered 
inoperative.” 


Key elements to a successful lockout tag out program: 
a) Develop and document a lockout tag out program 
or policy; 
b) Write machine/task specific lockout tag out 
procedures; 
c) Identify and mark energy isolation points; 


d) Lockout tag 
inspection/audits; 


out training and periodic 


e) Provide proper lockout tag out devices; and 

f) Sustainability. 
3.14.2 Installation of Earth Leakage Circuit Breaker 
(ELCB) Protection (Refer IEC TS 60079-32-1) 
Key elements to a successful static electricity program: 


a) General precautions: 
periodical inspection; 


environment, work, 


b) Measures against static electricity during work; 
c) Measures against static electricity after mounting; 
d) Human body protection; and 


e) Electrostatic breakdown model of semiconductor 
device. 


IS 12619 : 2022 


3.14.3 Protection Against Static Electricity Hazard 
(Refer IS 12640 (Part 1)) 


Residual current operated circuit breakers for 
household and similar uses, circuit breaker is used for 
the protection against electrical leakage in the circuit of 
50Hz/60Hz, rated voltage single-phase 240V, 3-phase 
415V, rated current up to 60A. When somebody gets 
an electric shock or the residual current of the circuit 
exceeds the fixed value, the ELCB can cut off the 
supply within the specified limit. 


Advantages of earth leakage circuit breaker: 
a) It is inexpensive as well as efficient; 


b) It guards humans and animals against electrical 
shock; and 


c) ELCB can sense the coil by sufficient voltage to 
cause it to safety trip. 


IS 12619 : 2022 


IS No./Other 
Publication 


5216 (Part 1): 
1982 


12640 (Part 1): 
2016 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Recommendations on safety 
procedures and practices in 
electrical work: Part 1 general 
(first revision) 


Residual current operated 
circuit breakers without 
integral overcurrent protection 
for household and similar uses 
(RCCBs): Part 1 General rules 
(second revision) 


Title 


IEC TS 60079-32-1 Explosive atmospheres — 


Part 32-1: Electrostatic 
hazards, guidance 


IS 12619 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Printing Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 25 


Organization 


Former Director, Directorate of Printing, New Delhi 
All India Federation of Master Printers, New Delhi 


Autoprint Machinery Manufacturers Private Limited, 


Coimbatore 


Department of Printing Technology, Haryana 


Government of Karnataka Department of Printing 
Stationery and Publication, Bengaluru 


Indian Printing Packaging and Allied Machinery 
Manufacturers Association, Noida 


Karnataka State Printer Association, Bengaluru 


Manugraph India Limited, Kolhapur 


Office of Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Savitribai Phule University, Ganeshkhind, Pune 


TechNova Imaging Systems India Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


The Printers House Private Limited, Ballabhgarh 


In Personal Capacity (A-302, Srabasti Cooperative 
Housing Society Limited, B-13 Sammilani Park, 
Kolkata 700 075) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri A. K. BANSAL (Chairman) 


SHRI HARJINDER SINGH 
PRESIDENT AIFMP (Alternate) 


SHRI K. G. SURESH 
SHRI P. S. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


PROF ANJAN KUMAR 
SHRI ANKIT BOORA (Alternate) 
SHRI BIJENDER (Young Professional) 


SHRI RAVISHANKAR 


SHRI S. DAYAKAR REDDY 
SHRI PRASHANT VATS (Alternate) 


Suet T. V. MUKUND 
SHRI B. L. SRINIVASA (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH MADHUKAR 


SHRI UMESH SHUKLA 
SHRI K. SINGH SoDHI (Alternate) 


Dr DATTATRAYA KUTE 


SHRI [YER MURALI KRISHNAN 
SHRI SHIVA SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. DIXIT 
Suri D. P. DaBas (Alternate) 


SHRI DIPTENDU CHOWDHURY 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 25 (12914). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


