IS.: 9456 - 1980 (Reaffirmed 1993') ( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian hndard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONICAL AND HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOIDAL TYPES OF SHELL FOUNDATI-ONS
( Second Reprint JULY 1997 )

UDC

624.15.023.62

: 624.04 : 006.76

0 Copyright 1980

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADIIR

STAND,lRDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARC,

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI

Gr 7

lMuy 1980

IS : 9456 - 1980
( Reaffirmed 1993')

Indian Stanzhrd
CODE OF PRACrICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONICAL AND HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOIDAL TYPES OF SHELL FOUNDATIONS
Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, BDC 43
G5arrman PBOF DINESE MOE AN Representing Central Building Roorkee Research lnstitute ( CSIR ),

Members Ds R. K. BEANDARI CEIE~ ENQINIZIR SHRI S. GUHA ( Altcrmlc) SIXRI K. N. DADIXA Central Building- Research Institute Roorkee Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta penonal capacity (P-820, Block Aliprc, Calcutta ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay In ( GSIR ),

P.

NCW

SEBI M. G. DANDAVATE SHRI N. C. Dnooa~ ( Afternate) Simplex Concrete Piles ( I ) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SH~I R. K. Das GUPTA SHRI H. GUHA BISWAS ( Affnmate ) ( 5, Hungrrfbr~ CoW, In personal capacity SHRI A. G. DA~TI~AR I.21 Hungerford Street, Calcutta ) Pressure Piling Co ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHBI V. C. DESEIPANDE Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( CSMRS ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( CSMRS ) ( Afternatc ) Asia Foundation and Construction Pvt Ltd, ~HRI A. H. DIVANJI Bombay SHRI A. N. JANQLE ( Altcrnafr ) Brai~~~;;aBurn & Jessop Construction Go Ltd, SERI A. Gomia~
C

S,HBI N. E. A. RA~RVAN ( Altcrnah ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR SEASHI K. GULRATI DR A. VARADARJAN (-Altanutr ) Engineerr India Limited, New Delhi SHRI hf. IYXNQAR DR R. K. M. BH~NDARI ( Alter&c ) G. S. Jain & Associates, Roorkee S-1 G. S. JAIXU SSIBI ASHOX KUMAB JOIN I Ahmuta )

Q Copy+: BUREAU This publication
reproduction

1980 STANDARDS

OF

INDIAN

$ublirher

ia protected under the Zndion Cofiri&; Acf (XIV of 1957 ) and in whole or in part by any means escept with written permirrion of the shall be deemed to be v i&ngement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9456 ( Continuedfrom

1980
page 1 ) Representing

Members

JOINT DIRECTOR RXSEARCH ( SM ) Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ) JOINT DIRECTOR RESEARCH ( 13 & S ) ( RDSO ) ( Alternate) Da R. K. KATTIIndian Institute of Technology, Bombay SHRI K. K. KHANXA National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI SUNIL BERRY ( Alternate ) SHXI S. R. KULKARNI M. N. Dastur and Company Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. ROY (Afternate ) SHRI 0. P. MALHOTRA B & R Branch, Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh SHRI A. P. MATHUR Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi Mchenzies Limited, Bombay SHRI V. B. MA'rIiUR Bokaro Steel Plant ( Steel Authority of India ) SHRI Y. V. NARASIMHA RAO BRIG OMBIR SINGH Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters MAJ H. K. BHUTANI (Alternate) Hindustan Construction Co Limited, Bombay SHRI B. K. PANTHAXY SHRI V. M. MADQE (Alternate) SHRI M. R. PUNJ~ Cemindia Company Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. MUKHERJEE ( Ahrnate ) PRESIDENT Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi SECRETARY ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India, New Delhi SHHI A. A. R~JIJ University of Roorkee, Roorkee DR GOPAL RANJAN Dn V. V. 5. Rao Nagadi Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ARJUN RIJHSINQHANI Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRT 0. S. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) DR A. SARQUNAN College of Engineering, Guincky, Madras SIIRI S. B~OMINATHAN ( Alternate ) Engineering Research Laboratories, Government SRRI K. R. SAXENA of Andhra Pradesh, Ryderabad DR S. PZ~HRIVASTAVA. United Technical Consultants Pvt Ltd. New Delhi DR R. KAPUR ( Alternate ) SHRI N. SIVA~UR% Roads Wing, Ministry of Shipping and Transport SHRI D. V. SIE~A (Alternate) Gammon India Limited, Bombay SERI T. N. SUBBA RAO SHRI S. A. REDDI ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDINQ E N Q I N E E R Central Public Works Department, New Delhi ( DESIGN ) ' EXECUTIVE ENQINEER ( DESIGN V ) ( Alternate) SRRI M. D. TAMBEKAR Bombay Port Trust, Bombay Director General, IS1 (E*-ofiicio Member) SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary K. M. Maraud Deputy Director (Civ Engg),
SHRI

IS1 ( Continued on page 29 )

2

IS:9456

-

1980

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONICAL AND HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOIDA& TYPES OF SHELL FOUNDATIONS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 March 1980,b after the draft finalized by the Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Shells are structures which derive their strength from ' form ' rather its use in than ` mass `. The basic attribute of the shell which recommends roofs is economy under conditions of large spans, apart from aesthetics, which, of course, is of no concern in the case of a buried structure like the foundation. It has been found in respect of foundations that in situations involving heavy column loads to be transmitted to weaker soils, adoption of shells can lead to substantial saving in concrete and steel. 0.2.i Analysis has indicated that the economy with shell foundations normally increases with increase in column load and decreases in allowable bearing pressure of the soil, with greater sensitivity to the latter. 0.2.2 Attendent on the saving in valuable materials of constructions, is the fact that in all cases shell footings are substantially lighter than their plain counterparts. The attribute of lightness and the consequent ease for transportation indicate high scope for precasting these shell footings. 0.2.3 Since foundation shells bear directly on. soil at their bottom and carry backfill on top, besides being deep and thick, the problem of elastic stability ( buckling ) is of lesser concern in foundation shells when compared to roof shells. However, cracking of concrete is a subject of greater concern, as with all foundations, particularly under deleterious ground environments, for fear of corrosion of the reinforcing steel. Hence sufficient cover requirements and other preventive measures are indicated. It may be noted here that design based on membrane theory usually results in nearly untracked sections at working loads. 3

IS : 9456 - 1980
0.3 Even though a variety of shells such as cylinder, cone hyperbolic paraboloid, elliptic paraboloid and inverted dome, and also funicular shells, can be judiciously adapted in various foundation situations, this standard covers only conical and hyperbolic paraboloidal shells; these being of more frequent use in foundations. 0.3.~ Between cone and ` hypar ' ( common abbreviation for hyperbolic paraboloid ),-however, while the use of the former is limited to individual footings on account of its circular plan, the latter can be adopted for individual footings ( square or rectangular ), combined footings as well as for rafts. 0.4 The depth, thickness and boundary, as well as loading conditions of foundation shells are such that rigorous analyses involving them are The state of necessarily much more complex than those of roof shells. stress in foundationshells can be predicted to any reasonably high degree of accuracy only by a rigorous ` bending analysis ' involving the above factors. Such an analysis being not easily amenable to practical use, the design of foundation shells is usually made on the basis of the much of simpler. ` membrane analysis `, which is based on a large number radically simplifying assumptions with regard to the factors mentioned above. The membrane analysis is invariably a conservative design aid, modifications in and the approach to design based on it, with necessary the matter of detailing which will ensure the high ultimate strength ( load carrying capacity ) of these foundations, has been found to be sufficient for Hence the same is recommended in this code. all practical purposes. &5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded offin accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the design and construction aspects pertaining to conical and hyperbolic paraboloidal types of-shell foundations subjected to the action of isolated column loads.
*Ruler for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

4

IS : 9456 - 1980 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of~this standard the definitions given in IS : 1904-]978*, IS : 6403-1971t, IS : 2210-1962$, IS : 2204-19628, and the following shall
apply. 2.1.1 Shell Foundation - Foundations which incorporate structural shell elements in place ui the plain element of ordinary shallow foundations. 3. NECESSARY

INFORMATION

information called as in IS : 1080-196211 and IS : 2950 ( Part I )19731 are required for the purpose of this code. The additional information as indicated in 3.1.1 will also be necessary. of In-situ Soil for Core Preparation (see Fig. 1 to 3 ) If in-situ soil is shrinkable, necessity for bringing non-swelling soil from elsewhere for this purpose is indicated. ( This is necessary to allay the fear of partial loading of the shell brought about by a variable subsidence of the core soil ). 3.1.1 Suitabitity

3.1 The

Under Shell Foundations -

4. PRELIMINARY

DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS M 4.0 The complete design of a shell foundation, consists namely, ` soil design ' and ` structural design `.

of two par,d,

4.1 The aim of soil design is to proportion the foundation ( that is, to determine its plan dimensions ) so that the ` net loading intensity ' (set IS : 6#3-1971t ) under actual field conditions does not exceed the 6 allowable bearing pressure ' ( seeIS : 6403-1971t), which is the lesser of (a) the ` safe net unit bearing capacity `, and_(b) soil pressure for a given It may be noted in this connection that in case of permissible settlement. sand the safe net unit bearing capacity increases and soil pressure for a given settlement decreases with increase in the foundation width, unlike the case of clay where the safe net unit bearinu capacity is independent of the foundation dimensions.
these quantities. *Code
rctiion

NOTE- Width is the smaller of the plan dimensions, which alone infiuences
of prctice for structural safety of buildings

: shallow foundations

( JCCO~~

).

tCode of practice for determination of allowable bearing pressure on shallow foundations. $Criteria for the design of reinforced concrete shell structures and folded plates. iCode of practice for construction of reinforced concrete shell roof. lg&de of practice for design and construction of simple spread foundations. l/Code ~of practice for design and construction of raft foundations: Part 1 Design ( /;rst reriiSiJ?n ).

5

IS:9456

- 1980

BEAM

i_
SECT IONAL ELEVATION REINFORCEMEN:

MERiD!C)NAL REINFORCEMEN

FIG. 1

PLAN SHOWING REINFORCEMENTOF CONICAL Foote

SUBSTRUCTURE

ANNULAR (RING

RAFT I

FOUNOAIION

FIG. 2

CONICAL SUBSTRUCTURE FOR TOWERS

IS : 9456 - 1980

RIINFORCEMENl

HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOtOAL

SHELL SHELL

\ \

RIDGE

BEAM

TRIANGULAR RIB 1. Convex parabola ( tension ) 2. _Concave parabola ( compression ) 3. Straight line generators

FICA 3

HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOIDAL FOOTING

4.2 The net loading intensity and the allowable bearing pressure should be determined according to IS : 6403-1971*. The influence of the position of water-table on these quantities should be carefully ascertained and duly taken into acount. 4.3 If the soil filling the hollow space underneath the shells (core ) ( see Fig. 1 ) is assumed to be incompressible and act integrally with the foundation, the soil response below the shell foundation in terms of both
*Code of practice foundations. for determination of allowable bearing pressure on ~jhallow

7

IS : 9456 - 1980
bearing capacity and settlement will be modified to the extent of the additional friction that will be mobilized at the bottom of the trench between soil and soil, than at the interface between foundation and soil as in the case of plain foundations. However, results of limited number of tests tend to indicate that this variation in soil response is marginal. Hence it is customary to ignore this difference and assume the bearing capacity and settlement under shell and plain foundations to be identical, under identical foundation conditions, for the purpose of soil design. 5. STRUCTURAL

DESIGN

~5.0 The structral
ing the

design of the foundation shoul~d fbllow after proportionfoundations in accordance with the requirements set out in 4.

5.1 The conical footing shown in Fig. 1 is the simplest form in which a she:: is made use of in foundation. The provision of radial afid circumferentii.1 steel is gs simple as for a circular plain raft ( footing ) while the construction is only a little more d&cult.

NATE- While this type of conical foundation is potentially suited for individual columns, chimney stacks and similar tower shaped structures, the majority of instances in which these shells have bran adopted are for tall telecommunication towers ( television, radio, telephone, etc ) in reinforced concrete, where they serve not as regular foundations, but as substructures linking the tower shaft to the annular raft, or ring which is regular foundation bearing on soil ( scc Fig. 2 ). The space within this conical substructure is utilized for services. Very often these cones are stiffened internally, the stiffening taking various forms, to resist moments and shears due to yAnd effects, etc. Prestrtssing is indicated for the hoop reinforcement in the cone as well as the foundation ring, to prevent or limit the width of cracks in concrete. These conical shells being substructures, are beyond the scope of this standard.
5.2 While the cone is a singly curved shell, the hyperbolic paraboloid is a doubly curved anticlastic shell with its surface made up of two sets of parabolae having curvatures in opposite directions. The chief advantage of the hypar, however, is that just as the cone, it is also a ruled surface, (see Appendix A of IS : 2210-l 962* for shell classification ) consisting of two sets of straight line generators inclined at 45" to the parabolae, as shown in Fig. 3. 5.2.1 This straight line property of the cone and hyperbolic paraboloid are effectively exploited in profiling the core soil and the shell, besides preparing the reinforcement grills, and ~formwork for making precast shell footings. 5.2.2 The combination of hypar shell elements ( square or rectangular ) with set of edge and ridge beams shown in Fig. 3, is popularly known as the ` umbrella ' footing, it being the natural offshoot of the well known ( inverted umbrella ' shell used in the construction of roofs.
*Criteria for the design Gf reinforced concrete 8 shell structures and folded plates.

IS : 9456 - 1980 5.3 In the dimensioning of the shell foundations, the ratio of rise to base radius (f/r2 ), in the case of cone ( see Fig. 1 ), and the rise to base ratio of the shell (f/a ) in the case of hyperbolic paraboloid ( see Fig. 3 ), shall vary from 0.5 to 1. From the point of view of ease of construction, valu'es near the lower limit are more suitable. It may, however, be noted that membrane theory will not be adequate for design at very low values of rise.
5.4 The bottom rig beam in the case of con& edge and the ridge beams in the case of hyperbolic paraboloid are to be provided within the shell dimension as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3 respectively, so as to keep the plan dimensions arrived at by soil design intact. 5.4.1 In the case of the cone, the ring beams at the bottom are found to contribute to the stiffness of the footing at lower rises ( f/r2 < 0.5 ), without any marked contribution at higher rises. 5.4.2 In the case of hyperbolic paraboloid, footings have been designed with&t ridge beams but with -thick edge beams, and alternatively, with However, footings with heavy ridge beams but without any edge beams. both edge and ridge beams should be able to adapt themselves better to irregular distribution of soil reaction and accidental eccentricities in load that are bound to occur in practice. As such footings of this kind are to be recommended in normal cases. 5.4.3 As far .as the positioning of the beams is concerned, downstanding beams as shown in Fig. 3 are preferred as they are easier to construct and structurally more efficient from the point of view of possible bending. 5.4.4 When feasible, the width of the ridge beam may be made equal to the width of the column base ( see Fig. 3 ). Where possible, in place of the projecting ridge beams, it may be more expedient, from the point of view of construction both by in-situ and precast methods, and also economy to provide triangular ribs at the ridge, with its rise decreasing from a rriaximum at the column and vanishing at the joint with edge beams. 5.4.5 The ring beam in the case of the cone and edge beams ifi the case of hyperbolic paraboloid, in addition to improving the stiffness, to delay cracking of the shell and also contribute substaxitially to the ultimate load carrying capacity of these foundations by providing substantial reserve of From the point of view strength, leading thereby to higher, load factors. of cracking, strong scope also exists for prestressing these beams. 5.5 Where cover requirements, and shell shall have a minimum thickness this can be reduced to 12 cm. ) not stresses, govern the foundation, of 15 cm. ( In precast construction

IS : 9456 - 1980 5.6 On the basis of the assumption that the weight of the core, mud mat, backfill and the self weight of the shell foundation, are directly transmitted to the soil below in such a manner as will not induce any substantial stresses in the shell foundation, the structural design of the shell foundation may be carried out for the maximum load transmitted at the foot of the column to the foundation, as done in respect of ordinary plain foundations.
5.7 When the above load is divided by the plan area of the foundation ( AP ) which has been already finalized at the end of the ` soil design ' (see 4 ), the average intensity of the soil pressure pV = !AP

for may

the be

structurT1 design of the footing, is obtained. This pressure assumed to be uniform for the purpose of structural design.

5.8 At every point of contact between the shell ( and also beams ) and soil, the soil reaction or ` contact pressure ' can have normal and tangential components. The distribution of the actual resultant contact pressure is highly indeterminate, because of the elastic nature of the soil support, In the case of soft clay where and the complex shell-beam-soil interaction. no tangential frictional contact pressure components can be sustained because. of the negligible wall friction, the resultant soil pressure may However, in the case of sand, since be taken to be normal to the shell. tangential pressures of considerable magnitude can be mobilized due to the availability of higher contact friction, the resultant contact pressure can show a substantial shift from the normal to the vertical. As a general rule, it may be safer to design for the condition giving rise to higher stresses in each case. It may be noted in this connection that the intensity of the normal contact pressure ( when tangential components are absent ) is also obtained as P/Ap if the latter is also assumed to be uniform, which pressure, where A, is the is the same as pV, the intensity of vertical projected area of the foundation in plan ( see also Appendix A ). 5.9 Under a uniform contact pressure, normal or vertical, the conical shell is subjected to hoop tension decreasing upwards from a maximum at the base and a meridional compression decreasing downwards from a maximum at top ( SECAppendix A ). Hoop steel is to be provided to take up the full tension, with preferably varying spacing, to match the variation in hoop tension. The horizontal sections which are in compression may be designed as short columns with steel not exceeding 5 percent. The steel so designed should be placed at the middle plan of the shell. It may further be ensured that sections are provided with minimum nominal steel of 0.5 percent.

5.9.1 The thickness of the cone may be varied from The maximum at the top to a minimum at the bottom.
10

a maximum tensile hoop

IS:9456 stress in the IS : 456-1978* equivalent concrete section may be checked and the thickness finalized (see 5.5).

- 1980 to

according

5.9.2 The ring beam at the bottom of the cone is optional. However, when the frustrating of a cone is used as foundation for a tower shaft, a ring beam at the top is essential to balance the horizontal component of the meridional compression at the top edge of the cone, which produces hoop compression in the latter. 5.9.3 The cracking strength of the above membrane design is normally higher than the load given by the membrane theory. The ultimate strength may be worked out by any suitable theory ( see Appendix A ) and the load factor ascertained. It may be mentioned here that with the onset of peripheral cracking, the soil pressure shows a tendency for shift from edges to the centre, which incidentally helps to increase the ultimate strength. 5.9.4 A cone may also be used in the inverted position as foundation for structures such as guyed masts (see Fig 4). In this case the loading ( soil pressure j on the cone reverses sign subjecting the cone to meridional tension and hoop compression. Use of cone in this manner has the disadvantage of heavy meridional tension, for design, at the bottom sections of the cone.

GUYED

MAST

E

FIG. 4

INVERTED CONE AS FOUNDATION $0~ GUYED MAST

5.10 The hypar footing shown in Fig. 3 is designed on the basis of the membrane theory used in the design of the corresponding inverted umbrella roof. According to this theory, under a uniform vertical soil the shell rnembrane is subjected to a state of pure shear pressure, unaccompanied by normal stresses. This membrane shear, produces tension and compression of equivalent magnitude as the shear along the diagonally orthogonal convex and concave parabolic arches respectively ( see Appendix A ). Since the design of the shell is governed by this tension, *Code of practice for plain and reinforced cwcrete 11
( third r&&m).

IS : 9456 - 1988
the full requirement thereof is to be provided in terms of steel. However to avoid the necessity of bending bars to different parabolic,profiles, it will be more expedient from the point of view of facility of grilwork, to detail the steel in the shell as straight rods along directions parallel to the edges in such a manner that its effective area along the diagonal is sufficient to withstand the full tension. Since this arrangement produces the same effective steel along the directions of the compressive arches also, the presence of concrete makes the compressive arches also stronger than the tensile arches, thereby leading to a slightly unbalanced, but .at the sameIt may be ensured that the steel thus provided does time, safer design. not fall below a value of 0.5 percent. According to the membrane theory, this steel should lie at the middle plane of the shell. In most instances concrete will be needed only as a cover for steel. Checking the tensile stress in the equivalent concrete section in accordance with IS : 456-1978* will usually reveal very low' stresses, thereby ensuring practically untracked sections at working loads. 5.10.1 According to the membrane theory, the edge beams are subjected to uniformly varying tension with zero value at corners and maximum value at the centres of edges ( see Appendix A). Therefore, these central sections may be designed on the same lines as the shell. The section of the edge beam may be determined on the basis of limiting tension according to IS : 456 - 1978* and the edge steel detailed ensuring proper cover requirements. Notwithstanding the reduction in tension, however, the same section is normally provided throughout the edge. As far as the ridge beams are concerned, they are subjected to axial compression with zero value at the base and maximum value at the apex ( see Appendix A ). The section of the ridge beam may be designed as a short, column with steel not exceeding 5 percent and detailed ensuring proper cover requireIrrespective of the variation in compression, the same section may ments. be provided throughout the ridge as done in the case of edge beams. The design is complete with stirrups ( nominal according to membrane theory ) provided both in the ridge and edge beams. 5.10.2 strength Further detailing practices necessary to ensure the full ultimate of the hypar foundation are given in Appendix B.

5.10.3 Footings designed on the above lines crack at loads higher than The full ultimate strength of the those given by the m.embrane theory. ' footing may be determined by a suitable theory (see Appendix A) for ascertaining the load factor. 3.11 Since hyperbolic and 6) are essensially designed on the same paraboloidal combined footings and rafts (Fig. 5 multiple units `of the, individual footing, these are basis, except that valley beams which are edge

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third wision ). 12

IS :9456 - 1980
beams common to two shells on either side, should be designed for the combined tension. Depending upon the area requirement of the foundation (soil design), the spacing of the columns, and the difference in column loads, different sets of square or rectangular shells will result in the design. The same applies to individual rectangular footings (see Fig. 7). However, where the column loads are unequal, it will be profitable to ensure that the resultant column load passes through the centre of gravity of the area of contact between the foundation and the soil in plan, to that the soil pressure on the foundation will be uniform throughout. 5.11.1 Where soil conditions permit (in terms of the requirements on plan area), the inverted hipped hyperbolic paraboloid ( see Fig. 8 ) normally used in roofs, may suggest itself as a possible alternative for use as foundation. While this combination has the structural advantage that notwithstanding the necessity both the sets of beams are in compression, for tie beams between columns, its chief drawback in foundation is the difficulty of providing effective soil support below the triangular edges. Hence this type cannot be recommended for foundations in normal cases.

EDGE

FIG.

5

COMBINED HYPAR FOOTING

VALLEY'

RIDGE'

FIG.

6

HYPAR RAFT 13

IS:9456

- 1980

FIG. 7

RECTANGULAR HYPAR FOOTING

EOGE

BEAM

IINCLINED) VALLEY IHORIZONTAL) BEAM

FIG. 8

INVERTED HIPPED HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOIDAL RAFT

5.12 As with other foundations, shell foundations also may be called upon to resist horizontal loads and moments at the level of its base, as a result of horizontal loads or couples or both transmitted from above or due to eccentricities of column loads. As for horizontal loads, shell foundations have the advantage of higher capacities to the extent of the increased friction ( soil to soil contact ) at the base even though its self-weight may As regards moments, the same be less than that of its plain counterpart. may be treated as in the case of plain foundations, as resulting in a Under such circumstances, the linearly varying soil pressure distribution. individual shell elements may be designed for the maximum soil pressure occurring under it due to the combined effect -of vertical load and moment, to be on the safer side. However, where membrane solutions are available for the asymmetrical soil pressure produced by moment the stress resultants the latter may be superimposed on the stress resultants produced by the symmetrical soil pressure due to the vertical load for the purpose of the designs. 14

IS:9456-1980 6. CONSTRUCTION 6.1 The M20. concrete for shell .foundations shouid be of grade not less than

Even though these 6.2 Shell foundations may be cast in-situ or precast. foundations are generally laid in-situ, the advantages of the shell in terms Because of lightness and transportability is best exploited m precasting. of this basic attribute of lightness, it should be noted that even large-sized footings of this kind are amenable to precasting. To this must be added the possibility of higher strength for the same mix (see 6.1) on account of the better control that can be exercised during prefabrication. 6.3 In the in-situ method of construction, the shell foundation is cast at site on the soil core which has been cut to the correct profile of the shell. The straight line property of the shell enables this profiling to be simply achieved by rotating a template about a central axis in the case of the cone (see Fig. 9), and by moving a straight edge after establishing the ridge and base lines in the case of the hyperbolic paraboloid (see Fig. 10). A thin layer of lean cement mortar (mix not higher than 1 : 3) is then placed over the soil core (see Fig. 11). This is done to facilitate grillwork ( bending and tying of reinforcements ) and subsequent casting. Even when the foundations are moderately steep, formwork is needed only at the edges. 6.3.1 In the case of expansive soils, the core on which the footing is to be laid, should be prepared by cutting a trench to level bottom and filling it with non-swelling, or if possible with stabilized, soil. The soil is This will then compacted and profiled as described in 6.3 (see Fig. 12). prevent the chances of subsidence of the core brought about by a possible At any rate this will give.rise to conditions at the base level shrinkage. of the shell foundation similar-~to those under plain foundation. To this must be added precauti6ns normally taken in respect of plain shallow foundations in shrinkable soils.

Fro. 9

CORE PROFILING FORCONE 15

IS :9456

-1980

\
FIG. 10

STRAIGHT

EDGE

CORE PROFILING FOR HYPAR

HYPAR (ALONG

FOOTING DIAGONAL)

SOIL LMUD MAT

CORE

FIQ. 11

In-situ CONSTRUCTION ( SECTIONALONG DIAGONAL)

HYPAR [ALONG

FOOTING DIAG

SOlL

CORE

Fm.

12

In-situ CONSTRUCTION ON STABILIZED SOIL CORE ( SECTIONALONG DIAGONAL ) 16

IS : 9456 - 1980 6.3.2 In any case, whether the construction is in-situ or precast, it 1s very important to ensure that there iano loss of contact anywhere between the footing and the soil, since partial contact will lead to concentration of loads (soil pressure ) on the shell, which can vitiate the performance of the shell itself, and precipitate premature collapse. 6.4 Precast cone and hypar footings may be cast in inverted wooden mould which helps easier removal of the footing from the rnouid facilita,ted by shrinkage. The moulds may be easriy formed by cutting and nailing plywood strips along the directions of the straight line generators into a frame ( see Fig. 13 ). An alternative technique which may be simpler and certainly more advantageous in terms of the number of units that can be turned out from each mould would be to make a mould in concrete itself (see Fig. 14). Th is can be done by making a box with wooden sides to conform to the edges and filling, the inside with lean concrete, profiling the same by template or straight edge as the case may be and finishing it smooth with cement paste. 6.4.1 In precast construction, however, it will not be expedient to out the soil to the required profile first as done in the case of in-situ construction, and then place the footings on it, since in doing so full contact between the footing and the soil core cannot be ensured under all Instead, it would be more expedient to install the precast circumstances. After centering and levelling the footing m a trench cut to level bottom. footing, dry sand may be poured into the hollow space below the footing The through a hole in the column base provided at the time of casting. sand thus pqured is to be compacted to high and uniform densities. In the case of steep conical footings this space is accessible for compaction by manual tamping through the hole. -However, in the case of shallow

PLY WOOD ST RIPS

LWOODEN FRAME

WORK

FIG 13 MOW-D FOR HYPAR 17

IS : 9456 - 1980
conical footings, and hypar footings whose corners are substantially flat and therefore inaccessible even when the shells are deep, this sand is to be compacted by some remote technique, so as' to form a sound core under the shell to receive the load. Such ~a simple but highly efficient technique of remote compaction is described in Appendix C. For connections with steel columns, bolts may be embedded in the column base at the time of casting which will engage the holes in the base plate of the column I ncorporation (seeFig. 1.5). of a neoprene pad between steel column and base plate will serve as a hinge preventing the transmission of any moment to the footing. Conneetion with concrete columns may be effected through dowels protruding from the column base for continuous casting, or a socket arrangement in the column base into which a precast column is grouted as shown in Fig, 16.
/-CENTRAL LIFTING HOOK-j / FOOTING SIDE PLANK POS?

LEAN

CONCRETE

LBOTTOM
PLANK

FIG.

14

INVERTED CONCRETEMOULD FOR CONE
STEEL COLUMN COLUMN BASE PLATE

COLUMN

BASE

FIG. 15

FIXING OF STEEL COLUMNTO PRECAST HYPAR FOOTINQ !8

IS:9456-1980
PRECAST

RCC

FIN. 16 SOCKETCONNECTION FORR C COLUMN W~H PRECUT HYPAR FOOTING

APPENDIX

A

( Cfuuses 5.8, 5.9, 5.9.3, 5.10, 510.1 and 5.10.3)
FQRMULAE A-l. CONE FOR THE DESIGN OF CONICAL AND Hh'ERROLIC PARABOLOIDAL SHELL FOUNDATIONS

A-l.1 Membrane stress resultants per unit width of the shell due to vertical load and moment, are given below. A-l.l.1 Stress Resultants Under Vertical Soil Pressure (see Fig. 17 )

N ro = 0 where pV is the intensity of vertical soil pressure pV = G, where P = column load, and AP = plan area of the footing ( = x s$ sin" Q for full cone) 19

.`N ONV 7V'W~ON d

3WlSS3Ild

-IVrUXON

CINV -W31L~3L\

83CINCl S.LNV.L-InS3x

SS3XLs

LI

`W

3N03

-I

/

/

/

d

0861- 9SF6 :SI

IS : 9456 - 1980

A-1.1.3 Skess Resultants Under Asymmetrical Soil -Pressure Due io Moirunt Assuming the Soil Pressure to be Nokmal (see Fig. 19 )
Jv',

E

sa sin 2 a

?P'n

[

sz4 - s4 $8 - ss 4s" -* 3 s, c0s2 a

8 1cos

K'e =

$

s tan a cos 0

;\"

NJ -

P'O ( s2*- s4) sin 0 I__ 4 s:! s') cos a
moment producing the

4M in which PI0 = --;_-, where M is the n st3 sm3 a maximum asymmetrical soil pressure pin.

FIG.19 STRESS RESULTANTUNDER ANTI-SYMMETRICAL SOILPRESSURE

IS:9456

- 1980

A-l.2 The ultimate strength (value of soil pressure at which the footing fails structurally) P, for uniform normal soil pressure, under assumptions of fixity at the upper edge, and a lower edge which iseither free or provided with a ring beam, and assuming constant spacing of hoop steel, are given in A-1.2.1 to A-1.2.2 ( see also Fig. 20 ).

FIG. 20
A-1.2.I Edge

ULTIMATE FAILURE OF CONICAL FOOTING

Ultimate Jvormal Soil Pressure for Fixed Upper Edge and Free Lower ?+l-Ro)2+ Pnn = 6 C Ro= M$;ra 3Ro+2 R.

where

1
Jv r2

.N = ultimate capacity of the shell per unit width in direct tension in the hoop direction ( constant ), Ro = ro, where? of the plastic +f= is the radius corresponding hinge, and to the location

moment capacity of the plastic hinge per unit width ( ~0 may be taken rl for all practical purposes ).

A-1.2.2

Ultimate JVormaL Soil Pressure for Lower Edge With Ring Beam .jVcosa(l--0)' 2 r2 ( Ro3 -3Ro+2) ' + M sir-3 a r22 Ro Ro3 - 3Ro + 2 &b cos a sin a ( 1 - RO ) r2 ( Ro3 3 Ro + 2)

Pno = '

where

Nb = ultimate capacity P, = pnu x A, 22

of the ring beam

in direct tension

1

IS : 9456 - 1980 A-2. HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOID

A-2.1 The membrane stress resultants per unit width of the shell against vertical and norinal soil reactions, together with the forces in beams, are given below (see Fig. 21 )
COLUMN `4

CONCAVE

PARABOLA SHELL REINFORCEMENT

BEAM _/

EDGE Fro. 21
STRESSES

A-2.1.1 StressResultants L'nder Vertical Soil Pressure
Jvx = NY = 0

`t' is the ( Nx, NY and Nx, -are the membrane stress resultants. equivalent tension per unit width developing in the convex parabolae ). where, k = f lab in which a and b are the plan dimensions of the rectangular hyperbolic paraboloidal shell quadrant (`k ' is called ` warp ' of the shell). For a square shell (a = b )
k =f/a2

For the square hypar footing, T = t . a where I is the maximum direct tension in the edge beam, at the centre, and C= 2tl/a2 -f" where C is the maximum the apex. direct compression in the ridge beam, at 23

IS :9456 A-2.1.2

- 1980
Stress Resultants Under Normal Soil Pressure

NY = q

x sin h-1 $

( N, and NY are tensile where and u = 41/k" +y2 v = l/l/k2 + x2
.&,=t=$/l+k*~~+k'y' I and C are obtained as before.

A-2.2 Rigorous and simplified expressions for the ultimate strength PU ( column load at failure ) of square hypar footings under vertical soil pressure for both ` ridge ' and ` diagonal ' failuresa re given in A-2.2.1 and A-2.2.2 (see Fig. 22 ).
rRlDGE BEAM

r- r _---I
I

I
I
I

1 I

,
I

1 Lzi
_------

I
I

3

I
I

I '

I
I

L2 --

I

---

-I

1. Principal ridge cracking in shell 2. Yielding section of edge beam 3. Plastic hinge at column face 22A A Ridge Failure

FIG. 22

FAILURE MECHANISMS OF HYPAR FOOTING 24

C&d.

IS:9456-1980
RIDGE BEAM EDGE BEAM

/-

COLUMN

1. Principal diagonal cracking in shell 2. Comer yielding 3. Plastic hinge at column face 228 Diagonal Failure

FIG. 22

FAILURE MECHANISMSOF HYPAR FOOTING

A-2.2.1 Diagonal Failure

where N 5 the ultimate width, ~tensile capacity of the shell section per unit

& = ultimate tensile capacity of the edge beam, and M, = ultimate moment capacity of the ridge section. A simplified form of the above expression which is sufficient for all practical purposes is:

25

IS:9456-1980 A-2.2.2 Ridge Failure - The corresponding ultimate strength by ridge failure is: P, = g&+8& where Mrr is the ultimate section. moment capacity of the failing ridge simplified expression for

APPENDIX ( Clause `5.10.2 )

B

DETAILING OF REINFORCEMENT AT CRITICAL SECTIONS OF THE HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOIDAL FOOTING TO ENSURE ITS FULL ULTIMATE STRENGTH B-l. DETAILING. B-1.0 The critical sections of the hypar footing shown in Fig. `L3 shall be detailed as given in B-l.1 to B-l.3 which will substantially ensure the developmentof its full ultimate strength.

FIG. 23 CRITICAL SECTIONS OF HYPAR FOOTING El.1 Centres of Edge Beams - In the interest of preventing a ridge failure, and ensuring ultimate strength by diagonal failure, the ridge steel may be continued into the edge beams, bending in opposite directions and properly anchored with hooks, as shown in Fig. 24A. The total percentage of steel in the central section.of the edge beam, including such steel, shall not exceed 5 percent. 26

IS :' 9456 - 1980

B-l.2 Corners of Edge Beams -To realise the full reserve strength from the edge beam in diagonal failure, the corners may be strengthened by extra diagonal steel properly anchored into fillets as "shown in Fig. 24B. B-l.3 Column Base-Ridge Joint - Even though the chances of failure of column by punching shear are remote on account of the transmission of `column load to the ridge beams essentially in direct compression, as an extra measure of precaution against column shear, fillets may be provided at the column base-ridge joint, as shown in Fig. 24C, particularly where triangular ribs alone are provided without the projecting ridge beams.
EDGE rRlDGE BEAM BEAM

A

6

c

FIG. 24 EXTRA PROVISIONS AT CRITICAL SECTIONS (ORIGINAL REINFORCEMENT NOT SHOWN)

APPENDIX
(Clause
REMOTE TECHNIQUE SHELL

C 6.4.1 )
PRECAST

FOR INFILLING FOOTINGS

This technique is effected by means of a spindle carrying falling ordinary needle vibrator

called ` Centrifugal Blast Compaction ' and is centrifugal vane rotor, consisting of a rotating blades, designed as a simple attachment to an used for compacting concrete.

In this technique of compaction, after pouring a batch of dry sand the rotor is inserted into the hollow space through the hole in the column 27

IS :9456

-1980

base (see Fig. 25 ). When the motor is, switched on, the vanes open out automatically due to centrifugal action and start rotating at high speeds. This high speed rotation of the vanes creates a heavy blast in the hollow space, under the influence of which, the sand particles become quickly airbone and start moving radially outwards with high velocities. These particles collide against the inner surfaces of the footing, collapse and settle down to positions of maximum density due to the blast. As this process continues, the entire space gets progressively filled up from the periphery inwards. The work can be stopped on reaching the central portion which is directly accessible for manual compaction through the hole. Density indices ( relative density ) of the order of 80 to 90 percent can be obtained by this technique of compaction.

+ANE

Fxo. 25

CORE PREPARATIONBY CENTRIFUGALBLASTCOMPACTION

28

IS:9456 -1980 (Continuedfrom
pngc 2 )

Miscellaneous
Gmener
SHRI

Foundation

Subcommittee,
Repmentinp

BDC

43 : 6

SHIT&LA SHARAX

Public Works Department, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow

Government

of

C:~lnc.rrtc :\ssociation

of India, Bombay and

RXSEARCH! FE-II DEPUTY D~~xc~on. STANDARDS ( B & S ) ( rlltemate ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. K. PA-?~TH~SY Engineering Construction Corporation Limited, Snrtr P. G. RBMAPHISHNAY Madras SHRI G. B. SIP;OII ( Alternate ) Gammon India Limited, Bombay SHR~ S. A. REDDY SHRI G. R. HARIDAS ( Alternate ) Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi SXRI ARJUN RIJHSIXGHANI SHRS 0. S. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) lndian Institute of Technology, Madras DR SANKA-RAN Crntral Building Research Institute ( CbIR) , SHI:I D. S~t.\,l~rz\ Roorker SHlll I\V.\K SINl:H ! .llf.Vll&e `1 PIII I'l!blic \Vorks Department, Government of SI:P6:I<INTl:xI)IXr. L N t. I N JC r\`Pst Bt,ngal, Calcutta ( PIISTIXG CrricLr:~

DIILECTOR DEPUIY DIRXCTOR

Indian Roads Googress, New Delhi ( Ministry of Shipping Roads Wing Transport ), New Delhi Highways Research Laboratory, Madras Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow

Ad hoc Panel fix l'xparati on ol' Code of Practice for Design nntl C'onstruction of' Conical and Hyperbolic Paraboloids1 `l`ypes of` Sl~cll t:o~rndations, BDC 43 : 6 : 2

Irlclian Institute

of Technology,

Madras

29

BUREAU

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 3375,323 9402 Fax: 91 11 3234062, 91 11 3239399, 91 11 3239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Central Laboratory : Telephone Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Regional Central *Eastern Offices: 323 76 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 235 23 15 832 92 95 Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 a-77 00 32

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUlTA
Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 700054

Northern : SC0 335-336, Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113
E9, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),

tWestern : Manakalaya, MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices:: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed

Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD Road,

380001

550 13 48 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 19 96

SPeenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada

Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751001 641037

Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE

Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001

121001

53/5 Ward No.29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI

781003 500001

5411

37

5-8-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001

20 10 83 37 29 25 21 68 76

117/418 B, Sarvodaya

Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road,

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, LUCKNOW 226001 NIT Building, Second

23 89 23 52 51 71 26 23 05 32 36 35 621 17

Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010

Patliputra Industrial

Estate, PATNA 800013 (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 695034

Institution of Engineers

T.C. No. 14/l 421, University P. 0. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM

*Sales OffiCe is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA 700072 tSales

Approach,

P.O. Princep Street, 400007

271085 309 65 28 222 39 71

Office is at Novelty Chambers,

Grant Road, MUMBAI

$Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja BANGALORE 560002

Square,

Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India

AMBNDMENT

NO. 1
TO

MARCH

1982

IS : 9456- 1980 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONICAL AND HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOIDAL TYPES OF SHELL FOUNDATIONS
Alterations ( Page 5, clause 3.1.1, tine 1 ) ` ( see Fig. 1 to 3 ) `.

Substitute the following

` ( see Fig.

1 and

3 ) `for figure:

( Page 7, Fig. 3 ) -

Substitute
/-COLUMN

for the existing

i

HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOIDAL

SHELL SHELL-, SHELL \

EDGE SEAM

RIDGE TRIANGULARRIB

BEAM

I. Convex Parabola (Tension ) 2. Concave Parabola ( Compression 3. Straightline Generators

:

Fra.
Grl

3

HYPERBOLICPARABOLOIDAL

SHELL FOOTING

1

( I'qe 9, clause 5.4, line 1 ) for ` cone edge and the'. before (Page 9, clause 5.4.5, the word ` delay `. clause

Substitute

` cone the

and

the edge

and '

line 2 ) -Delete 5.9.2, line

word

c to ' appearing ` frustrum ' for mag-

( Page 11, ` frustrating `. nitude

2 ) -Substitute Substitute Substitute Substitute

( Page 11, clause 5.10, `for ` shear `.

line 4 ) -

J shear of constant ` SO `for c to `. ` anti-symmetrical Substitute

( Page 13, clause 5.11, line 9 ) ( Page 14, dause 5.12, fine 13 ) ` asymmetrical `. ( Page 19, clause A-1.1.1, or the existing value:

`for

value for ` IV, ' ) -

the following

( Page 20, Fig. 17 ) -

Substitute /`I ' I I

the fo!lowing

for the existing

figure:

P

,'

FIQ. 17

MEMBRANE STRESS RESULTANTS IN CONICAL -FOOTING ualue of ( Nr ' ) Substitute the following

( Page 20, clause A-1.1.2, for the existing value:

( Page 21, clause A-1.13 ): t Anti-symmetrical ' for c Asymmetrical `. a) Line 1 - Substitute the following for the existing value: b) Value of ` No ' - Substitute N, = + P tan a cos 0

2

c) Lnst line ( Pq~21,

Substitute

` anti-symmetrical the f&lowing

' for ` asymmetrical for the existing

`. figure:

Fig. 19 )\--

Substitute

Fro. 19

CONICAL FOOTING UNDER MOMENT

( Page 22, Fig. 20) -

Substitute

the following

for the existing

figure:

LfENsI~E FAILURE

(HOOP1

FIG. .20

ULTIMATE FAILURE OF CONICAL FOOTING

3

( Pagt 22, clause A-i.2.1, uatue of ( ii', ' ) for the existing
<R, = c,

Substitute to the

the

fdlodng
of the

value: corresponding location

where rO is the radius plastic hinge.'

( Page 22, clause A-1.2.2, vahc for the existing value:

of ` P,

' ) -

Substitute

the following

6 Pu = Pn, x A, ' ( Page 23, Fig. 21, caption ) -

Substitute

the following

for the exis-

ting caption: ` FIG. 21 MEMBRANE STRESSES IN HYPAR FOOTING ' Substitute the following

( Page 23, clause A-2.1.1, value of ' C `) for the existing value: `C = 2t */ .a +f"'

( Page 24, clause A-21.2, vahc$ for ` .N, ' and LNY ' J following for the existing values: `NX = 2pnt 1 + k*y 1 + k'x" 1 + k%= 1 + 1;y

Substitute

the

1/

NY = 2 /Q, .z
where 2 = /LX 31, is the co-ordinate [ N, and NY are tensile iv,. = -$* ( 1 + kW + ky

of the point ] )

( see Fig. 21 ).

( Page 25, clause A-2.2.1, for the existing value:

value of ` PU ' ) -

Substitute

the following

( Pafe 26, clause A-2.2.2, for the cxlsting value:

value of ` i'" ' ) -

Substitute the

following

4

( Page

28,

Appendix

C,

line

5 ) -

Substitute

c air-borne

' for

( airbone

`. Addendum

( Page 4, clause 0.4 ) -

Add the following

new note after 0.4:
been to explained Advanced in detail Techni-

provisions given in this standard have `NOTE -The in the book ` Modern FoundationAn Introduction ques: Part I Shell Foundation ' by Dr Nainan P. Kurian.'

(BDC43)

5
Print& at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India

