**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  3025-9  (1984) :  Methods  of  sampling  and  test  (physical 
and  chemical)  for  water  and  wastewater,  Part  9:  Temperature 
[CHD  32:  Environmental  Protection  and  Waste  Management] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


udc  628-1/3: 543-3: 536-5  ( Second  Reprint  JULY  1993)  IS  :  3025  (  Part  9)  -  1984 


Indian  Standard  (  Reaffirmed  2002  ) 

METHODS  OF  SAMPLING  AND  TEST  (PHYSICAL  AND 
CHEMICAL)   FOR  WATER  AND  WASTE  WATER 

PART  9     TEMPERATURE 

(  First  Revision  ) 


.1.  Scope  —  Prescribes  methods  for  the  measurement  of  temperature  of  water  and  waste  water. 

2.  Principle 

2.1  Temperature  measurements  may  be  made  with  any  mercury-in-glass  thermometer,  provided  it  is 
checked  occasionally  against  a  precision  thermometer  certified  by  a  competent  agency. 

2.2  Depth  temperature  may  be  obtained  with  a  protected  reversing  thermometer  or  a  thermistor. 
Measurements  of  temperature  are,  usually,  more  conveniently  done  using  thermistors. 

3.  Procedure 

3.1  Make  measurement  with  the  thermometer  immersed  directly  in  the  water  body,  after  a  period  of 
time  sufficient  to  permit  constant  reading.  If  the  measurement  of  water  temperature  can  not  be  carried 
out  directly,  carry  it  out  in  a  sampling  bottle.  The  bottle  should  have  a  volume  of  at  least  one  litre. 
Adjust  its  temperature,  to  that  of  the  sample  water  before  the  measurement.  Do  not  expose  it  to  heat 
or  direct  solar  radiation.  Measure  temperature  of  tap  water  in  a  bottle  through  the  water  flows  until  a 
constant  reading  is  obtained. 

3.2  Make  measurement  of  the  temperature  of  a  water  body  at  a  particular  depth  with  the  thermometer 
or  thermistor  immersed  directly  in  the  water  body.  After  sufficient  time  has  elapsed  to  allow  the 
thermometer  or  thermistor  to  come  to  the  exact  temperature  of  the  water,  take  a  reading.  In  the  case 
of  the  thermistor  make  a  direct  measurement  of  its  resistance  and  obtain  the  temperature  of  the  water 
body  from  the  calibration  curve  supplied  with  the  thermistor. 

3.3  In  the  case  of  reversing  thermometer,  obtain  the  reading  by  dropping  a  messenger  weight  along 
the  wire  to  which  is  attached  the  reversing  thermometer  in  a  reversing  frame  on  a  water  sampling 
bottle.  This  weight  normally  drops  at  a  speed  of  about  150  metres  per  minute  except  when  the  wire 
is  extremely  inclined  to  the  vertical.  After  sufficient  time  has  passed  for  the  messenger  weight  to  trip 
the  thermometer,  haul  up  the  wire  and  keep  the  water  bottle  with  the  thermometer  carefully  in  a 
vertical  position  away  from  direct  sunlight  in  order  to  prevent  accidental  reversing  before  reading  the 
temperature  to  be  measured.  Allow  about  10  to  15  minutes  for  the  thermometers  to  reach  the  air 
temperature,  after  they  are  brought  up  from  the  water.  At  this  stage  the  auxiliary  thermometer  records 
the  atmdspheric  temperature  and  the  main  thermometer,  the  approximate  temperature  of  the  water 
body. 

4.  Calculations — Calculate  the  exact  temperature  of  the  water  body,  in  the  case  of  the  reversing 
thermometer,  from  the  following  formula: 


and      C   -  /f_10Q 


where 


Tw  —  the  corrected  value,  that  is,  the  true  value  of  the  water  temperature,  °C; 

T  —  the  reading  of  the  main  thermometer,  °C; 

/    =  the  index  correction  given  on  a  calibration  sheet  supplied  with  the  thermometer; 

C    =  correction  for  thermal  expansion; 

VQ  =  volume  of  mercury  below  0°C  mark  given  on  the  calibration  graph; 

K    =  reciprocal  thermal  expansion  coefficient  given  on  the  calibration  graph;  and 

7"i  =  temperature  reading  of  the  auxiliary  thermometer,  °C. 


Adopted  29  February  1984 


July  1985,    BIS 


Gr  1 


BUREAU     OF     INDIAN      STANDARDS 
MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFARMARG 
NEW    DELHI     110002 


IS :  3025  (  Part  9  )  -1984 

4.1  If  an  unprotected  reversing  thermometer  is  used  along  with  the  protected  thermometer  the 
corrected  temperature  Tu  can  be  similarly  obtained.  The  actual  depth  of  reversal  of  the  thermometers 
can  be  obtained  using  the  following  equation: 

j       Ml   —    'W 


Pm-Q 


where 

Z    =  depth  in  metres; 

7\j  =  corrected  reading  of  the  protected  thermometer,  °C; 
Tw  =  corrected  reading  of  the  protected  thermometer,  CC; 
Pm  =  mean  density  of  the  water  column;  and 

Q   ~  pressure  coefficient  of  the  unprotected  thermometer  given  on  the  calibration 
graph. 

5.  Report  —  Report  the  temperature  of  water  to  the  nearest  0*01,  0'1  or  0*5°C,  depending  on  the 
accuracy  required  and  the  thermometer  used. 


EX  PLAN ATOR Y     NOTE 

Measurements  of  temperature  are  required  in  studies  of  self-purification  of  rivers  and  reservoirs 
and  is  one  of  the  parameters  for  suitability  of  an  effluent  waste  discharge  and  for  the  control  of  waste 
treatment  plants.  Temperature  of  water  is  important  in  relation  to  aquatic  biota,  bathing  and  irrigation 
use.  It  also  affects  taste  of  water. 

Accurate  measurements  of  temperature  of  natural  waters  are  essential  for  calculation  of  degrees 
of  saturation  with  respect  to  various  minerals  and  in  study  of  mineral  'equilibria'.  Temperature  readings 
are  used  in  calculation  of  various  forms  of  alkalinity.  In  limnologic  studies,  temperature  readings  at 
different  depths  are  required.  In  industrial  plants,  for  process  use  or  heat  transfer  calculations, 
temperature  values  are  required. 

This  method  supersedes  clause  10  of  IS  :  2488  (Part  0-1966  'Method  of  sampling  and  test  for 
industrial  effluents,  Part  I'. 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


