INATT HTA IS 16676 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


Solventless Liquid Epoxy System 
for Application on Interior and 
Exterior Surfaces of Steel Water 
Pipeline — Specification 


ICS 87.040 


© BIS 2017 


mA AH ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM WH, 9 Fergus BHC AM, Ae feeci#-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 5 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Paints, 
Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


This standard has been developed for the product — Solventless liquid epoxy system for application on interior 
and exterior surfaces of steel water pipeline. This standard provides guidance to the water industry in selecting and 
evaluating liquid epoxy coatings for use in water service and sets optimum requirements for linings and coatings 
used on steel water pipe. Users of this standard are advised to consider additional lining thickness for pipe that 
handles water containing higher than normal levels of particulates or that operates at higher than normal velocities 
and also specify the required finished coating. The specified thickness should not exceed the maximum thickness 
recommended by the coating manufacturer. Consideration should be given to the ability of the coating to resist 
degradation by ultraviolet light and other atmospheric and environmental conditions. It is advisable that the purchaser 
should consult the manufacturer for specific conditions and limitations of this product. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publication: AWWA C210-2007 
‘Liquid Epoxy Coating Systems for the Interior and Exterior of steel water Pipelines’ issued by American Water 
Works Association of America. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16676 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


SOLVENTLESS LIQUID EPOXY SYSTEM FOR 
APPLICATION ON INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR 
SURFACES OF STEEL WATER PIPELINE — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for 
application, method of sampling and test and handling 
of materials of solventless liquid epoxy system for 
application on interior and exterior surfaces of steel 
water pipelines, installed underground or underwater, 
under normal construction conditions, for corrosion 
protection. 


1.2 Itis suitable for application by airless spray or plural 
component system machine. It is not intended for use 
on pipes that will be bent after coating. 


1.3 Solventless system consists of two components; 
epoxy resin and hardener mainly amide/amines. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed hereunder contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


IS No. Title 
101 Methods of sampling and test for 
paints, varnishes and related 
products: 


(Part 1/Sec 1): Test on liquid paints (general and 


1986 physical), Section 1 Sampling 
(Part 3/Sec 2) : Tests on paint film formation, 
1989 Section 2 Film thickness (third 
revision) 
1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water 
1303 : 1983 Glossary of terms relating to paints 
3589 : 2001 Steel pipes for water and sewage 
— Specification (third revision) 
5083 : 1988 Knifing stopper (second revision) 
10163 (Part 1): Recommended methods of tests 
1982 for the determination of dielectric 
properties of insulating materials 
at frequencies above 300 MHz: 
Part 1 General 
10221 : 2008 Coating and wrapping of 


IS No. Title 


underground mild steel pipelines 
— Code of practice (first revision) 
Drinking water — Specification 
(second revision) 

Methods of test for the 
determination of electrical 
resistance and resistivity of 
insulating materials at elevated 
temperatures 

Coal tar based anticorrosion tape 
for protection of underground 
mild steel pipelines — 
Specification 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


10500 : 2012 


11755 : 1986 


15337 : 2003 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions and the definitions given in IS 1303 shall 
apply. 

3.1 Applicator — the organization which undertakes 
the task of coating application in accordance with the 
provisions of this standard. 

3.2 Batch — maximum quantity manufactured from 
the same set of raw materials under the same conditions 
of manufacturing by the same manufacturer. 

3.3 Batch Certificate — certificate of analysis issued 
by the manufacturer. 

3.4 Component — parts of primer and/or finished 
coating when mixed together form epoxy coating. 

3.5 Coating System — mixture of the two components 
in the proportion recommended by the manufacturer. 
3.6 Holiday — coating discontinuity that exhibits 
electrical conductivity when exposed to a specific 
voltage. 

3.7 Manufacturer — organizartion responsible for 
manufacture of coating materials. 


4 TYPES 


4.1 Solventless liquid epoxy coating system is 
categorised into the following two types on the basis 
of nature of the product: 


a) Type I— Polyamide based, and 
b) Type IJ — Amine based. 


IS 16676 : 2017 


4.2 The material used in both, primer and finishing 
coat(s), shall be produced by the same manufacturer. 


4.3 Polyamide based epoxy coating system shall be used 
for internal lining of drinking water pipeline. Drinking 
water shall conform to the requirements specified in 
Table 2 of Annex I when tested in accordance with the 
method of test prescribed therein. 


5 FINISH 


The material may either be in mat finish or glossy 
finish, as agreed between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Condition 


The material shall be free from lumps, skins and shall 
become homogeneous on stirring. The components of 
the epoxy coating system shall be stored in original 
sealed containers under the conditions prescribed by 
the manufacturer. 


6.2 Thinning 


For ease of spray coating application of the product, it 
is recommended that the coating material may be 
thinned by adding thinner, as recommended by the 
manufacturer. 


6.3 Application Properties 


Solventless liquid epoxy coating system shall be suitable 
for application by airless spray machine or plural 
component machine. 


6.4 Recoating Properties 


The solventless liquid epoxy coating system shall be 


applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
recommendations. If more than one coat is applied, the 
second coat shall be applied within the prescribed time 
limits, surface conditions and temperature 
recommended by the manufacturer. After application, 
the coating shall be tested for cure in accordance with 
solvent rub test prescribed in Annex H. The coating 
shall not exhibit colour separation, sagging, pitting, 
flaking or cracking and also confirm to the observations 
of H-4. 


6.5 Consistency 


Insert a clean metal rod or palette knife in the original 
container and examine the nature of settling. The 
material shall not cake hard inside the container and 
shall be in such condition that stirring using 
mechanical device/power stirrer easily produces a 
smooth uniform paint suitable for application by 
appropriate method. 


6.6 Keeping Properties 


The material shall confirm to all the requirements 
specified 6.1 to 6.5 and 6.7, when tested immediate 
after expiry of shelf life period declared by the 
manufacturer. The material shall be stored in original 
sealed container under normal atmospheric conditions. 


6.7 The material shall also comply with the requirement 
given in Table 1. 


7 PACKING AND MARKING 


7.1 Packing 


Unless otherwise specified, the material shall be packed 
in suitable metal container in dual pack (base and 
hardener). 


Table 1 Requirements of Solventless Liquid Epoxy Coating System 
(Clause 6.7) 


Sl Characteristic Requirement Test Method, Ref to 
No. Annex of this 
Standard 
a) 2) G) (4) 
i) Thickness, dry film, Min 400 micron A 
ii) Electrical insulation (holidays) Passes the test B 
iii) Adhesion Test 
a) Tape Test Passes the test C 
b) Pull off Test, Min 5 MPa D 
iv) Immersion and vapour phase, 30 days No blistering, peeling or detaching of coated E 
a) De-ionized water pass film from substrate 
b) Sulphuric acid pass | percent by weight. 
c) Sodium hydroxide pass | percent by weight 
v) Abrasion Resistance, Max 125 mg F 
vi) | Cathodic Disbondment Test, Max 6.0 mm radius G 
vii) Solvent Rub Test, Max Thickness reduction 25 percent H 
viii) Drinking Water Test Passes the tests for requirements prescribed I 


at Table 2 of Annex I 


7.2 Marking 


7.2.1 Each container shall be marked with the 
following: 


a) Name of the material; 

b) Manufacturer name and his recognised trade- 
mark, if any; 

c) Lead content, Max; 

d) Net mass or volume of material; 


e) Batch number or lot number in code or 
otherwise; 


f) Month and year of manufacture; 
g) Shelf life of the material; 
h) A cautionary note as given below: 


1) Keep out of reach of children. 
2) Dried film of this paint may be harmful if 
eaten or chewed. 


3) This product may be harmful if swallowed 
or inhaled. 


j) Additional information—Manufacturer 
should also provide all necessary information, 
instructions and recommended condition for 
coating application of product along with each 
consignment of product for bulk supply or 
individual packaging as applicable. 

7.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 
The product may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 


7.2.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

8 SAMPLING 

Representative samples of the material shall drawn, as 
prescribed in IS 101 (Part 1 / Sec 1). 

9 TESTS 

9.1 Tests shall be conducted according to the methods 
prescribed in Annexure A to I. 

9.2 Quality of Reagents 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled 
water (see IS 1070) shall be used. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemical that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


10 COATING APPLICATION 
10.1 General 


The solventless liquid epoxy coating system shall be 


IS 16676 : 2017 


applied in accordance with manufacturer’s 
recommendations. Application by airless spray or plural 
component machine is recommended. 


10.2 Pipe Preparation 
10.2.1 Initial Preparation 


All dirt, contaminants, defect, irregularities shall be 
removed prior to blasting. 


10.2.2 Blast Cleaning 


Pipe shall be blast cleaned with mineral abrasives, slag 
abrasives, steel shot or steel grit. Minimum Sa 2.5 grade 
of blast to be followed (see IS 9954 and ISO 8501-1). 
The anchor profile depth should not be less than 50 
microns. 


10.2.3 Coating Application 


10.2.3.1 Material preparation shall be in accordance 
with manufacturer’s recommendations. 


10.2.3.2 Holdback for field welds 


When pipe sections are to be joined together by field 
welding, a band, free from lining and coating, shall be 
left on the inside and outside surfaces at the end of 
sections. This band shall be of sufficient width as 
specified by the purchaser to permit making of field 
joints without damage to lining and coating. The 
manufacturer shall be consulted for holdback width. 


10.2.3.3 Application temperature 


Coating shall be applied when the metal temperature is 
more than 3°C above the dew point temperature. The 
temperature of the mixed coating material and the pipe 
at the time of application shall not be lower than 10°C. 
Pre-heating of coating material and use of online heaters 
to heat the coating material may be done on the 
recommendations of the manufacturer. 


10.2.3.4 Application of epoxy coating system 


The solventless liquid epoxy coating system shall be 
applied as per recommendations of the manufacturer. 
If more than one coat is applied, the second coat shall 
be applied within the time limits recommended by the 
manufacturer. If the period between coats is exceeded, 
a repair procedure shall be obtained from the coating 
manufacturer and recommendations followed. 


10.2.3.5 Coating thickness 


Coating thickness shall be in the range of + 20 percent 
as per method of test prescribed in Annex A. 


10.2.3.6 Electrical inspection 


After curing but prior to installation, the coating system 
applied to the pipe shall be tested for holidays as per 
the method prescribed in Annex B. Any holiday, 
indicated by the detector, shall be marked with chalk to 
identify the area to be repaired. The entire area shall be 
subjected to electrical inspection. 


IS 16676 : 2017 


10.2.3.7 Adhesion test 


After electrical inspection (see 10.2.3.6), the coated 
surface is subjected to adhesion (cross-cut) test as 
prescribed in Annex C, followed by adhesion pull-off 
test as prescribed in Annex D. The frequency of test 
shall be one in every ten pipes. 


10.3 Coating Repair 
10.3.1 Defective Coating 


Coating shall be repaired as specified in 10.3.1.1 
to 10.3.1.2. 


10.3.1.1 Surface preparation 


Accessible areas of pipe requiring coating repairs shall 
be cleaned to remove debris and damaged coating using 
surface grinders or other means. The adjacent coating 
shall be feathered by sanding, grinding or other method. 
Accumulated debris shall be removed by blowing with 
contaminant free air or wiping with clean rags. Areas 
not accessible for coating repair, such as interior 
surfaces of small diameter pipe, shall be reprocessed 
and recoated as specified in 10.2.3. 


10.3.1.2 Coating application 


The coating system shall be applied to as specified 
in 10.2.3 on the prepared surface areas. 


10.3.2 Repair Inspection 


Repaired portion shall be electrically inspected using 
a holiday detector as prescribed in Annex B. 


10.4 Welded Field Joints 
10.4.1 Preparation 


Weld joints shall be cleaned so as to be free from mud, 
oil, grease, welding flux, weld spatter and other foreign 
contaminants. Cleaned metal surfaces of weld joints 
shall be blasted or abraded using rotary abrading pads. 
The adjacent coating shall be feathered by abrading the 
coating surface for a distance of 25 mm. 


10.4.2 Electrical Inspection 


After curing, the coating system applied to welding 
joints shall be tested for holiday as prescribed in 
Annex B. Holidays indicated shall be marked to identify 
the area of repair. 


10.5 Bedding and Trench Back-filling 


Back-filling shall be done in a manner that avoids abrasion 
or other damage to both factory and field applied coatings. 
Where the trench traverses rocky ground containing hard 
objects that could penetrate the protective coating, a layer 
of screened earth, sand or rounded river run gravel not 
less than 150 mm thick with a maximum particle size of 
20 mm shall be placed in the bottom of the trench prior to 
installation of the coated pipe. 


ANNEX A 
[Clauses 9.1 and 10.2.3.5 and Table 1, SI No. (i)] 
MEASUREMENT OF DRY FILM THICKNESS 


A-1 GENERAL 


Prescribes method for checking whether thickness of a 
dried film of coating on a test panel lies within the 
specified limits. 


A-2 EQUIPMENT 
Magnetically induced thickness measuring gauge. 
A-3 PROCEDURE 


A-3.1 Number of Measurements 


For 9.29 m? test area, five spots per test area (each 
spot of 3.8 cm) in diameter shall be selected. Three 
gauge readings per spot shall be taken. If the structure 


is less than 27.87 m2, each 9.29 m? should be measured. 
If the structure is between 27.87 and 90.29 m?, three 
9.29 m? test areas shall be selected randomly and 
measured. For structures exceeding 90.29 m?, three 
9.29 m? test areas shall be selected randomly for the 
first 90.29 m? and one test area of 9.29 m7area for each 
additional 90.29 m7area or less. 


A-3.2 Observations 


Individual readings taken to get representative 
measurement shall be unrestricted, but abnormally low 
or high readings shall be discarded. Spot measurements 
(average of three readings) shall be within 80 percent 
of the minimum thickness and 120 percent of the 
maximum thickness. 


IS 16676 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
[Clauses 9.1, 10.2.3.6, 10.3.2 and 10.4.2 and Table 1, SI No. (ii) ] 
ELECTRICAL INSULATION (HOLIDAY) TEST 


B-1 GENERAL 


All the lined/coated pipes shall be tested with an 
approved high voltage holiday detector, preferably 
equipped with an audio visual signalling device, to 
indicate any faults, holes, breaks or conductive particles 
in the protective coating. 


B-2 PROCEDURE 


B-2.1 The applied output voltage of holiday detector 
shall have a spark discharge of thickness equal to at 
least twice the thickness of the coating to assure 
adequate inspection voltage and compensate for any 
variation in coating thickness. The electrode shall be 
passed over the coated surface at approximately half 
the spark discharge distance from the coated surface 
only one time at the rate of approximately 10 to 
20 m/min. The edge effect shall be ignored. Excessive 
voltage shall be avoided as it tends to induce holiday 


in the coated surface, thereby, giving erroneous 
readings. 

B-2.2 While selecting test voltages, consideration 
should be given to the tolerance on coating thickness 
and voltage should be selected on the basis of maximum 
coating thickness likely to be encountered during testing 
of a particular pipe. 


B-3 CALCULATION 


The testing voltage shall be calculated by using 
following formula: 


Testing Voltage V = 7 900 VT+ 10 percent, where T'is 
the average coating thickness in mm. 


B-4 RESULT 


Any audio visual sound or spark indicates pinhole, 
break or presence of conductive particle. 


ANNEX C 
[Clauses 9.1 and 10.2.3.7 and Table 1, SI No. (iii)(a)] 
ADHESION TAPE TEST 


C-1 GENERAL 


This method is used to evaluate adequacy of adhesion 
of coating to a substrate. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Cutting Tool — Sharp razor blade, scalpel, knife 
or other cutting devices. It is of particular importance 
that the cutting edges be in good condition. 


C-2.2 Cutting Guide — Steel or other hard metal 
straightedge to ensure straight cuts. 


C-2.3 Tape — Twenty five mm wide, semi-transparent 
pressure-sensitive tape with an adhesion strength of 44.6 
+ 2.8 g/mm. The backing of the tape may consist of 
fibre-reinforced cellulose acetate, unplasticized poly 
vinyl chloride or polyester film. 


C-2.4 Rubber Eraser — On the end of a pencil. 


C-2.5 Illumination — A light source is helpful in 
determining whether the cuts have been made through 
the film to the substrate. 


C-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


The surface of the substrate shall be cleaned either by 
shot or grit blasting. One coat of epoxy primer (red 
oxide) shall be applied by brush/ airless spray machine 
and allowed to dry for at least 12 h. Solventless epoxy 
coating shall be applied by brush or by airless spray in 
one coat or multiple coats, depending on the thickness 
required. Recoating time shall be min 12 h. 


C-4 PROCEDURE 


Select an area free of blemishes and minor surface 
imperfections. Make two cuts in the film, each about 
40 mm long, that intersect near the middle with an angle 
between 30° and 45°. Inspect the incisions for reflection 
of light from the metal substrate to establish that the 
coating film has been penetrated. Smooth the tape into 
place by finger in the area of the incisions and then rub 
firmly with the eraser on the end of a pencil. 


C-5 OBSERVATION 

The material shall be deemed to have passed the test if 
the coating does not separate from the substrate cleanly 
and the coating remains attached to the substrate. 


IS 16676 : 2017 


ANNEX D 
[Clauses 9.1 and 10.2.3.7 and Table 1 SI No. (iii)(b)] 
ADHESION PULL-OFF TEST 


D-1 PRINCIPLE 


The general pull-off test is performed by securing a 
loading fixture (dolly, stud) normal (perpendicular) to 
the surface of the coating with an adhesive. After the 
adhesive is cured, a testing apparatus is attached to the 
loading fixture and aligned to apply tension normal to 
the test surface. The force applied to the loading fixture 
is then gradually increased and monitored until either a 
plug of material is detached, or a specified value is 
reached. When a plug of material is detached, the 
exposed surface represents the plane of limiting strength 
within the system. The pull-off strength is computed 
based on the maximum indicated load. 


D-2 APPARATUS / INSTRUMENT 


D-2.1 Adhesion Tester 


It consists of three basic components, a hand wheel; a 
black column containing a dragging indicator pin and 
scale in the middle, a base containing three legs and a 
pulling jaw at the bottom; and dollies (test pull studs). 


D-3 PROCEDURE 


D-3.1 Preparation of Test Surface — Once test area 
is selected, it shall be free of grease, oil, dirt and water. 
The area should be flat and large enough to 
accommodate the specified number of replicate tests. 


D-3.2 Prepare of Dolly (Test Pull Stud) — The dolly 
is a round, two sided aluminium fixture. Both sides of 
the dolly look the same. However, one side is sloped 
on top surface while being flat on bottom surface. As 
the surface of the dolly is polished aluminium, roughen 
the same using a coarse sand paper. 


D-3.3 Selection of Adhesive — Use 100 percent solid 
epoxy adhesive. This adhesive requires curing of at least 
24 h at room temperature. 


D-3.4 Attach the dolly to the surface. Using a wooden 
stick, apply an even layer of adhesive to the entire 
contact surface area of the dolly. Carefully remove the 
excessive adhesive by using cotton swab. Allow the 


adhesive to fully cure before performing the adhesion 
test. Attach the dolly to the coated surface and gently 
push downward to displace any excessive adhesive. 
Push the dolly inward against the surface and apply tape 
across the head of the dolly. 


D-3.5 Scoring 


Tape of scoring around the base of dolly prior to testing 
is not recommend. Scoring may produce tiny factures 
in the coating or may generate friction heat, which can 
change the properties of coating and result in lower 
adhesion values. 


D-3.6 Adhesion Test 


Attach the adhesion tester to the dolly by rotating the 
hand wheel counter clockwise to lower the jaw of the 
device. Slide the jaw completely under the head of the 
dolly. Position three legs of the instruments so that they 
are sitting flat on the coated surface. Slide the dragging 
indicator pin on the black column to zero by pushing it 
downward. Firmly hold the base of the instrument in 
one hand and rotate the hand wheel anti-clockwise to 
raise the jaw of the device that is attached to the head 
of the dolly. The dragging indicator pin will move 
upward on the black column as the force is increased 
and will hold the reading. Apply tension at moderate 
speed. Continue to increase tension on the head of the 
dolly until (a) the minimum tension required as per the 
purchase specification is exceeded and the test is 
discontinued; (b) the maximum tension of adhesion 
tester has been achieved and dolly is still attached; and 
(c) the force applied by the adhesion tester causes the 
dolly to dislodge. 


D-4 RESULT 


The black column near the middle of the adhesion tester 
contains two scales and a dragging indicator pin in 
between. The dragging indicator pin will hold the 
reading until pushed back to zero. When the end point 
of the test is achieved, read the scale across the bottom 
of the dragging pin and record the adhesion value. 


IS 16676 : 2017 


ANNEX E 
[Clause 9.1 and Table 1, SI No. (iv)] 
TEST FOR IMMERSION IN VAPOUR PHASE 30 DAYS 


Steel panels of dimensions (50 mm x 150 mm x 
3.2 mm) shall be prepared, coated and cured as 
prescribed in 10.2. The uncoated side and edges shall 
be sealed with hot wax or other resistant material. 
Suitable containers shall be filled to a depth of (100 
mm), one with de-ionized water, one with 1 percent 
(w/v) solution of sulfuric acid and one with | percent 
(w/v) solution of sodium hydroxide. The panels shall 
be placed in the containers to allow exposure to both 


the liquid and vapour phases of the fluids. If multiple 
panels are placed in the same container, a distance of 
at least (25 mm) shall be maintained between panels. 
The containers shall be covered, but not sealed, and 
allowed to stand at 27°C + 2°C for 30 days, 
maintaining liquid levels as required. The panels shall 
be removed, rinsed, and allowed to dry for 24 h. The 
occurrence of any blistering, peeling or disbondment 
shall be considered as failure in the test. 


ANNEX F 
[Clause 9.1 and Table 1, SI No. (v)] 
ABRASION RESISTANCE OF EPOXY COATING BY THE TABER ABRASER 


F-1 APPARATUS 


Wheel number CS—10 or CS—17, as required, shall be 
used. Acceptable hardness for both types of wheel is 
81+5 shore D. A vacuum pick-up assembly, consisting 
of vacuum unit, variable transformer suction regulator, 
nozzle with bracket attachment and connecting hose 
with adaptor, shall be used. 


F-2 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 


Apply uniform coating of material to be tested. Specimens 
shall be a4" x 4" square panel with rounded corner and 
4" (6.3 mm) hole centrally located on each panel. 
Prepare minimum two coated panels of the material. 


F-3 STANDARDIZATION 


Mount the CS wheels on their respective flange holders. 
Adjust load on the wheels to 1 000 g. 


F-4 CONDITIONING 


Condition the coated panels for at least 24 h at 27 + 
2°C and 65 + 5 percent RH. 


F-5 PROCEDURE 


Weigh the test specimen to the nearest 0.1 mg and 
record the weight. Mount the test specimen on the 
turntable. Place the CS wheel on the test film and the 
vacuum pick up nozzle. Set the counter and suction 
regulator. Start the vacuum pick-up and turntable of 
CS wheel. Subject the test specimen to abrasion for 
1 000 cycles. Remove any loose abrasions remaining 
by light brushing. Reweigh the test specimen. Repeat 
the test for additional test specimen. 


F-6 CALCULATION 
Weight loss is calculated by the formula, L = A — B 


where 
A = weight of test specimen before abrasion in 
mg, and 
B = weight of test specimen after abrasion in mg. 


IS 16676 : 2017 


ANNEX G 
[Clause 9.1 and Table 1, SI No. (vi)] 
CATHODIC DISBONDMENT TEST 


G-1 APPARATUS 


G-1.1 Instrument — The instrument shall have stable 
DC power unit, having controlled voltage output 
between 0 and 10 V and a current capacity sufficient to 
supply 20 mA simultaneously to each site in circuit. 
The digital voltmeter shall be capable of reading up to 
third decimal place and the maximum effective input 
current shall not be greater than 11 A. 


G-1.2 Variable resistor shall be of 5 KQ + 10 percent, 
1 W for each test site. 


G-1.3 Flaw detector to detect any flaw like pinholes 
prior to start of the test. 


G-1.4 Reference electrode of saturated calomel type 
having formed plug of diameter less than 10 mm for 
measurement of voltage. 


G-1.5 Platinum wire of diameter 0.8 mm and 75 mm 
of length to act as anode at each site. 


G-1.6 Rigid plastic tube of 50 mm nominal bore and 
60 mm length at each site of coating forming the test 
cell. 


G-1.7 Twist drill for making a 6 mm hole at the middle 
of the test cell. 
G-2 REAGENTS 


G-2.1 Electrolyte — Sodium chloride, 3 percent 
solution (m/v). 


G-2.2 Indicator — Phenolphthalein indicator for 
measurement of extent of corrosion at the end of the 
test. 


G-3 PROCEDURE 


Test samples of solventless liquid epoxy coating systems 
shall be subjected to cathodic disbondment test for 28 days 
at -1.5 V potential and at 30 + 5°C. For cathodic 


disbondment test, two individual cells shall be made having 
electrolyte concentration of sodium chloride solution, 3 
percent. A hole of 6 mm diameter shall be drilled at the 
centre of each cell to remove the coating material upto 
the base metal substrate as a pre-damaged area, which 
acts as a cathode. Platinum electrode shall be used as anode 
and reference calomel electrode shall be immersed in each 
test cell to measure continuous potential for 28 days. 


G-4 ASSESSMENT 


Remove plastics tube from each test site and wipe along 
the surface of the coating using a lint free paper towel 
and cathode area material. Make two parallel incisions 
through the coating, 12.5 mm apart across the panel, 
so as to include the pre-damaged area. The cuts should 
extend 50 mm on each side of the pre-damaged area. 
Using a square ended pellet knife, insert it in the centre 
portion of the pre-damaged area, between the parallel 
cuts, down to the metal. Using a gentle levering action, 
lift the strip of coating, if possible, with a slow peeling 
action and grip the coating between the blade and thumb 
and continue the peeling action until the coating breaks. 
Repeat the peeling test in the opposite direction and 
then repeat the procedure at an angle of 90° to the first 
test. Apply one spot of phenolphthalein indicator to the 
exposed metal surface at the outside edge and allow it 
to flow towards the pre-damaged area. The purple 
boundary indicates the extent of disbonding. 


G-5 REPORTING 


Report the extent of disbonding as the radius in 
millimetres from the edges of the pre-damaged areas. 
Alternatively, if the coating is strongly adhering to the 
steel substrate, take the average distance at which the 
coating breaks as the extent of disbonding. The extent 
of disbonding shall not be more than 6.0 mm radius 
from the edge of the 6 mm holiday. 


IS 16676 : 2017 


ANNEX H 
[Clause 6.4 and Table 1, SI No. (vii)] 
ASSESSING SOLVENT RESISTANCE OF ORGANIC COATING BY SOLVENT RUB 


H-1 SAMPLE PREPARATION 


Take mild steel pipe of 6" dia and 12" length, coat the 
same with solventless liquid epoxy system to minimum 
400 micron. Cure the pipe for minimum 15 days. 


H-2 CHEESE CLOTH 


100 percent cotton mesh, grade 28 x 24 and size 
300 mm x 300 mm and contrasting in colour to the 
coating being evaluated. 


H-3 PROCEDURE 


Select areas on coated surface of at least 150 mm long 
on which to run the test. Clean the surface with tap 
water to remove any loose material and allow to dry. 
Measure dry film thickness of coating in the selected 
area. Mark 150 mm x 25 mm rectangular test area by 
pencil or marker pen. Fold cotton cloth into a pad of 
double thickness and saturate it to dripping wet with 
methyl ethyl ketone. Place properly protected index 


finger in the centre of the pad while holding excess 
cloth with thumb and remaining fingers of the same 
hand. With the index finger at 45° angle to the test 
surface, rub the rectangular test area with moderate 
pressure, first away from operator and then back 
towards operator. One forward and backward motion 
is one double rub and should be completed in 1 s. 
Continue rubbing the test area for 25 double rubs. 
Impact the middle 125 mm of the rubbed area, 
disregarding 12.5 mm at each end with fingernail. 
Check for any visual changes in appearance. 


H-4 OBSERVATIONS 


Compare the rubbed area with an adjacent area which 
is not under test. Measure the film thickness of the 
rubbed area and visually examine the cloth for 
indications of coating removal. The coating thickness 
shall not decrease by more than 25 percent of the 
original film thickness. There shall be no sign of 
blistering or any other visual defect. 


ANNEX I 
[Clauses 4.3 and 9.1 and Table 1, SI No. (viii)] 
REQUIREMENT FOR DRINKING WATER 


I-1 SAMPLE PREPARATION 


Take mild steel pipe of 63 diameter and 123 length 
and coat the same with solventless liquid epoxy system 
to minimum 400 micron. Cure the same for minimum 
15 days. Wash the pipes with drinking water and dry 
the same. 


I-2 PROCEDURE 


Pass drinking water (see IS 10500) through the pipe 
for 30 days continuously or otherwise hold drinking 
water inside the coated pipe for 30 days at ambient 
temperature. After 30 days, collect the water and test 
the same for the requirements prescribed in Table 2 as 
per the method of test prescribed in IS 10500. 


Table 2 Requirement for Drinking water 
[Clause 4.3 Table 1, SI No. (viii)] 


SI Parameter Desirable Permissible 
No. Limit Limit 
qd) (2) (3) (4) 
i) pH 6.5 to 8.5 No Relaxation 
ii) Turbidity (NTU) 1 5 
ili) Total Hardness (as 200 600 
CaCOs), mg/l 
iv) Chloride (C1?) mg/l 250 1 000 
v) Nitrate (as NO3), mg/l 45 100 
vi) Iron (as Fe), mg/l 0.3 1.0 
vii) Arsenic (as As), mg/l 0.05 No Relaxation 
viii) Fluoride (as F), mg/l 1.0 1.50 
ix) Total Coliform Absent Absent 
(CFU/100 ml) 
x) Faecal Streptococci Absent Absent 
CFU/100 ml) 
xi) Odour Agreeable Agreeable 
xii) Taste Agreeable Agreeable 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 20 (11055). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


