Wdta Ah IS 18168 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


zea ASAT HT Hews Theat feast 
ath ranor — tte tifar 


Earthquake Resistant Design and 
Detailing of Steel Buildings — 
Code of Practice 


ICS 91.120.25 


© BIS 2023 


amea Ae aT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 TTL MTE AHL AT, Ag Reet - 110002 
Nee’ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 10 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Earthquake 
Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Many regions of India are prone to strong earthquake shaking, and hence earthquake resistant design of buildings 
and structures is essential. Buildings designed as per this standard are expected to sustain damage during strong 
earthquake ground shaking. The provisions of this standard are intended for earthquake resistant design of only 
normal buildings (without energy dissipation devices or systems in-built). To control loss of life and property, 
base isolation or other advanced techniques may be adopted. A new Indian Standard IS 1893 (Part 6) : 2022 
‘Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures: Part 6 Base isolated buildings’ was published for design of 
such buildings. 


Provisions for ductile design and detailing of steel structures were first published in the country as Section 12 of 
IS 800 : 2007 ‘General construction in steel — Code of practice (third revision)’. But, a need was felt for having 
a separate and detailed standard dealing only with earthquake resistant design requirements of steel buildings in 
line with IS 13920 : 2016 ‘Ductile design and detailing of reinforced concrete structures subjected to seismic 
forces — Code of practice (first revision)’. Towards this cause, the National Disaster Management Authority 
offered financial assistance for research on the subject, which the Committee and BIS acknowledges. 


This standard contains provisions specific to earthquake resistant design of steel buildings using moment or braced 
frames as lateral load resisting systems. In particular, provisions related to mechanical properties of steel and 
welding electrodes, design of beams, columns and joints in special moment resisting frames, and design of 
braces, shear links, and joints in braced frames are covered. Thus, provisions of this standard shall govern when 
in conflict with those in Section 12 of IS 800 : 2007. 


In the development of this standard, effort has been made to coordinate with standards and practices prevailing in 
different countries in addition to relating them to the practices in the field in this country. Assistance has 
particularly been derived from the following publications: 


ANSI/AISC 360-16, ‘Specification for Structural Steel Buildings’, American Institute of Steel Construction, 
Chicago, IL, USA, 2016 


ANSI/AISC 341-16, ‘Seismic Provisions for Structural Steel Buildings’, American Institute of Steel 
Construction, Chicago, IL, USA, 2016 


The compostion of the Committee responsible for the formulation of the standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final, observed 
or calculated value, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN AND DETAILING OF 
STEEL BUILDINGS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the requirements for 
designing and detailing of structural components 
and members of steel buildings designed to resist 
lateral effects of earthquake shaking, so as to 
provide them with adequate stiffness, strength and 
ductility to resist severe earthquake shaking without 
collapse. The general concepts adopted in this 
standard for buildings are applicable also for other 
types of structures; in particular, provisions of this 
standard may be taken as a guide for design of 
components of industrial structures and steel bridges. 


1.2 Provisions of this standard shall be adopted in 
the design of the following types of steel buildings 
located in seismic zones II], IV or V of 
IS 1893 (Part 1): 


a) Residential, educational and institutional 
buildings; 

b) Office and business buildings; and 

c) Community, utility and lifeline buildings 
required for disaster management activities. 


The use of this standard is optional for design of 
steel buildings located in seismic zone II. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard apply for design 
and detailing of steel buildings having the following 
structural systems: 


a) Special moment resisting frame (SMRF); 

b) Special concentrically braced frame 
(SCBF); and 

c) Eccentrically braced frame (EBF). 


In seismic zone V, all steel buildings shall be made 
of EBF systems; SCBFs shall not be used. In 
seismic zones IV and V, SMRFs may be used in 
buildings of height less than 15 m. 


1.4 All steel frames in a building need not be 
designed to resist earthquake induced lateral loads. 
The designer can identify judiciously select frames 
to resist together the vertical loads and at least 
80 percent of the effects of design earthquake lateral 
load and designate them as the lateral load resisting 


system. The other frames shall be designed to resist 
the effects imposed on them due to vertical loads and 
the deformation compatibility induced effects of 
earthquake shaking. Further, moments shall not be 
transferred to the designated lateral load resisting 
systems from frames spanning in perpendicular 
directions. Consequences of failure of structural 
members that are not part of the lateral load resisting 
system shall also be considered in design. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this standard, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms given in 
IS 1893 (Part 1) and the following definitions shall 


apply: 


3.1 Beams — Members (generally horizontal) 
resisting loads through flexural and shearing actions. 


3.2 Braces — Members (generally inclined) 
resisting loads through axial actions. 


3.3 Capacity Design — The design steps (beyond 
those in the basic design of non-yielding structural 
elements, members and connections), which 
consider the effects of inelasticity incurred in 
yielding members resulting in overstrength-based 
demands on the non-yielding structural elements. 


3.4 Capacity Protected Elements — Components 
or members designed to remain elastic using 
capacity design principles when an adjacent 
component or member undergoes inelastic straining 
during design earthquake shaking. 


3.5 Collector — A member that serves to transfer 
loads between diaphragms and the members of the 


IS 18168 : 2023 


vertical force-resisting elements of the lateral load 
resisting system. 


3.6 Columns — Members (generally vertical) 
resisting loads through axial, flexural and shearing 
actions. 


3.7 Column Bases — Assembly of columns, plates, 
connector weld or bolts, and anchor rods at the base 
of columns designed to transmit forces from the 
steel superstructure to reinforced concrete pedestal 
or foundation. 


3.8 Concentrically Braced Frame (CBF) — A 
lateral load resisting system composed of 
interconnected beams and columns with inclined 
members as braces, which function as a complete 
self-contained unit with or without the aid of 
horizontal diaphragms of floor bracing systems, in 
which the system resists gravity and lateral force 
effects primarily by axial actions. 


3.8.1 Special Concentrically Braced Frame (SCBF) 
— A CBF specially designed and detailed to provide 
ductile behaviour as per the requirements specified 
in this standard. 


3.9 Continuity Plate (CP) — A plate provided 
within the flanges of the column at the levels of the 
flanges of the beams framing in the direction of the 
web of the column. 


3.10 Demand Critical Weld — A weld connecting 
two structural components which are part of lateral 
load resisting system and at least one of which is 
expected to undergo inelastic straining following 
yielding. 

3.11 Diaphragm — A horizontal or nearly 
horizontal structural system (for example, 
reinforced concrete floors and horizontal bracing 
systems), which transmits lateral forces to vertical 
elements connected to it. 


3.12 Doubler Plate (DP) — A plate provided 
parallel to the web of the column, and connected 
along its own perimeter to the web of the column 
and at some intermediate locations within itself 
when necessary. 


3.13 Eccentrically Braced Frame (EBF) — A 
lateral load resisting system composed of 
interconnected beams and columns with inclined 
members as braces that has at least one end 
connected to a beam through a link with a defined 
eccentricity from another beam-to-brace connection, 


with or without the aid of horizontal diaphragms of 
floor bracing systems, in which the system resist 
gravity and lateral force effects primarily by axial 
action in the braces, and shearing and flexural 
actions in the links. It is specially designed and 
detailed to provide ductile behaviour as per the 
requirements specified in this standard. 


3.14 Gravity Columns — Columns, which are not 
a part of the lateral load resisting system, and are 
designed to resist (a) gravity loads, and (b) force 
effects due to displacement compatibility induced 
during earthquakes, through axial, flexural and 
shearing actions. 


3.15 Joint Panel Zone (JPZ) — The finite-sized 
area of the column (from top flange level to bottom 
flange level of the deepest beam) at the junction 
where the beams frame into the column. 


3.16 Lateral Load Resisting System — The 
arrangement of structural members which provide 
resistance to the effects induced by earthquakes. 


3.17 Link — The segment of a beam that is located 
between the ends of the connections of two inclined 
braces in EBFs. The length of the link is defined as 
the clear distance between the ends of two diagonal 
braces. 


3.18 Material Strength Uncertainty Factor — 
The ratio of expected stress (yield or ultimate) to the 
characteristic stress (yield or ultimate) of a material, 
greater than unity. 


3.19 Moment Resistant Frame (MRF) — A lateral 
load resisting system composed of interconnected 
beams and columns, without structural walls and 
inclined members as braces, which function as a 
complete self-contained unit with or without the aid 
of horizontal diaphragms of floor bracing systems, 
in which the system resists gravity and lateral force 
effects primarily by axial and flexural actions. 


3.19.1 Special Moment Resisting Frame (SMRF) — 
A MRF specially designed and detailed to provide 
ductile behaviour as per the requirements specified 
in this standard. 


3.20 Protected Zone — Area of a member or 
connection element designed to undergo inelastic 
straining under design earthquake effects, and is 
required to be devoid of additional attachments or 
discontinuities resulting from fabrication and 
erection procedures. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


3.21 Walls — Planar members (generally vertical), 4 SYMBOLS 
generally to be provided to the full height of the For the purpose of this standard, the following letter 
building, resisting loads through axial, flexural and symbols shall have the meaning indicated below 
shearing actions in its own plane. against each of them: 

Ag Area of flange 

Ag Gross cross-sectional area 

Agi Gross cross-sectional area of link 

An Net cross-sectional area 

Ast Area of stiffener 

Awl Area of web of link 

b Width of flange plate 

bor Overall breadth of beam flange 

bet Overall breadth of column flange 

DL Dead load as per IS 875 (Part 1) 

d Depth of section 

dp Overall depth of beam 

de Depth of column 

ds Distance between centroids of flanges of a section under bending 

doz Depth of panel zone 

E Modulus of elasticity of steel = 200 GPa 

EL Earthquake load as per IS 1893 (Part 1) 

ELm Estimated maximum equivalent earthquake load induced in the structure 

e Length of link 

F; Lateral load acting on storey i 

fa Characteristic ultimate tensile stress of structural steel 

fy Characteristic yield tensile stress of structural steel 

fy Characteristic yield tensile stress of structural steel used in beam 

fyc Characteristic yield tensile stress of structural steel used in column 

Hi Height of storey i 

h Inter-storey height 

Ix Second moment of area about major axis of bending 

ly Second moment of area about minor axis of bending 

Kor Required shear stiffness of panel bracing system 

Lor Unbraced length along the centerline of a member 

LL Live load as per IS 875 (Part 2) 

M Bending moment 

Mro Estimated overstrength moment capacity of beam = X1. 1RyZphfyb 

Mpb Plastic moment capacity of beam section 

MpL Plastic bending moment capacity of link 

Mpc Plastic moment capacity of column section 

P Axial load 

p Normalised axial force parameter considering effect of shear force demand (see 11.3) 

Por Required strength of connection of panel bracing system 

Pa Design compressive strength determined using IS 800 

Py Maximum factored axial load demand 

Py Yield axial load capacity 

Ra Ratio of the expected tensile stress to the characteristic tensile stress 

Ry Ratio of the expected yield stress to the characteristic yield stress 

Fy Radius of gyration about the weaker axis of bending 

Sh Factor to account for strain hardening and strain rate in links: 


1.25 for I-shaped links and 1.4 for box shaped links 


IS 18168 : 2023 


t Thickness of component plate 

tof Thickness of beam flange 

tef Thickness of column flange 

tpz Thickness of joint panel zone including the thickness of doubler plates if provided 
Vor Required shear strength of panel bracing system 

VoL Plastic shear capacity of link 

Vpzc Nominal shear force capacity of panel zone 

Vpza Shear force demand on panel zone at the face of the column 

Wi Weight acting on storey i 

Wpz Width of panel zone 

Zp Plastic section modulus 

Zpb Plastic section modulus of beam 

Zpc Plastic section modulus of column 

ZpL Plastic section modulus of link 

di Ratio of the secondary overturning moment to primary overturning moment at storey i 
Ai Lateral displacement of storey i, from linear elastic analysis 

YLL Partial safety factor for live load 

Q Overstrength factor of the building 

E Yield stress ratio = (250/fy)!? 


Unless otherwise specified, all dimensions are in 
millimetre (mm), loads in Newton (N), stresses in 
Mega-Pascal (MPa). 


5 GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS 
5.1 Structural Design 


The design and construction of steel buildings shall 
be governed by provisions of IS 800, except as 
modified by the provisions of this standard for those 
members participating in the lateral load resistance 
under earthquake shaking. 


5.2 Materials 


The provisions of this standard on earthquake 
resistant design of structural steel buildings are 
applicable for the following grades of materials: 


a) structural steel sections and plates of 
grades E250 (BO or C), E275 (BO or C), 
E300 (BO or C) or E350 (BO or C) as per 
IS 2062; 

b) any other equivalent grade of steel 
satisfying the following: 


1) characteristic yield stress fy of 
structural steel sections and plates in 
which inelastic action is expected shall 


not exceed 350 MPa; 


2) Structural steel shall have minimum 
elongation of 22 percent; 


3) Structural steel shall have minimum 
charpy V-notch impact test value of 
27 Jat 0 °C; and 


4) The ratio of the ultimate strength to the 
yield strength shall at least be 1.15. 


For the purpose of this standard, the expected yield 
strength and expected ultimate strength of a member, 
section or connection shall be determined based on 
the expected yield stress and expected tensile stress. 
The expected yield stress and expected tensile stress 
of a grade of steel shall be considered to be equal to 
Ryfy and Ryfu respectively, where Ry is the ratio of the 
expected yield stress to the characteristic yield stress 
fy, and R, the ratio of the expected tensile stress to 
the characteristic tensile stress fa of that material. In 
short, Ry and Ry are referred as material strength 
uncertainty factors; their values for different grades 
of steel are given in Table 1. 


5.2.1 For any other steel satisfying 5.2 (b), values of 
1.4 and 1.2 shall be considered for Ry and Ru 
respectively of such steel. 


Table 1 Material Strength Uncertainty Factors 


Ry and Ru 
(Clause 5.2) 
Sl Grade of Material Strength 
No. Steel Uncertainty Factor 
Ry Ru 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) E250 1.4 1.2 
(BO or C) 
ii) E275 1.4 1.2 
(BO or C) 
iii) E300 1.3 1.1 
(BO or C) 
iv) E350 1.2 1.1 
(BO or C) 


5.2.2 All welds, conforming to relevant Indian 
Standards, shall be made with filler metals 
satisfying minimum elongation of 20 percent, and 
charpy V-notch impact test value of 47 J at 0 °C. 


5.2.3 All demand critical welds shall have charpy 
V-notch impact test value of at least 27 J at - 20 °C. 


5.2.4 Bolts, nuts and washers shall conform to 
relevant Indian Standards, such as IS 1363 (Parts 1, 
2 and 3), IS 1364 (Part 1 to 6), IS 3640, IS 3757, 
IS 4000, IS 5624, IS 6610, IS 6639 and IS 6649. 


5.3 Section Classification 


Structural sections of lateral load resisting system 
shall comply with the  width-to-thickness 
requirements specified in Table 2. 


5.4 Design Requirement 


The general requirements for ductile design and 
detailing of steel buildings shall ensure that required 
capacity is provided to cater to the imposed demand, 
in terms of the following broad aspects: 

a) Stability 

b) Stiffness 

c) Strength 

d) Deformability and ductility 
Here, the words capacity and demand refer to all the 
aspects specified above. Thus, steel buildings 
designed and detailed as per this standard are 
expected to resist design earthquake hazard defined 
in IS 1893 (Part 1) without collapse. 


5.5 Loads and Load Combinations 


Design earthquake loads (EL) shall be estimated and 
combined as per IS 1893 (Part 1), along with those 
in Table 4 of IS 800. In addition, the following load 


IS 18168 : 2023 


combinations shall be considered for design of: (a) 
columns in SMRFs, SCBFs and EBFs, (b) beams in 
SCBFs and EBFs, (c) braces in EBFs, and (d) all 
connections which are part of structural system in 
steel buildings: 


1.2 DL + yuLL t 1.0 ELm enn (1) 
0.9 DL + 1.0 ELm wees (2) 
where 
DL = Dead load as per IS 875 (Part 1); 
YLL = Partial safety factor for live load 
0.25 for live load class less than 
_ | or equal to 3.0 kN/m? 
0.50 for live load class more than 
3.0 kN/m?; 
LL = Imposed load as per IS 875 (Part 2); 
ELy» = Estimated maximum equivalent 
earthquake force induced in the 
structure = Q EL; 
Q = Overstrength factor = 2.5 for 
SCBFs and EBFs = 3.0 for 
SMRFSs; and 
EL = Earthquake load as per 
IS 1893 (Part 1). 
5.6 Analysis 


Structural analysis of buildings, under the action of 
design load combinations, shall be performed as 
outlined in 4.4 of IS 800, unless specifically altered 
for the purpose of complying with the requirements 
of this standard. 


5.7 Stability 


Under the action of the design loads, a building and 
its components shall be stable, and overall force and 
moment equilibrium shall be satisfied. Thus, the 
building shall not slide or overturn under the action 
of the design loads specified in 5.5. 


5.7.1 Stability Bracing Requirement for Members 


When required for structural systems defined in 12, 
stability bracing shall be provided as specified to 
restrain flexural or lateral-torsional buckling of steel 
components or members subject to axial 
compression, bending moment or shear force. The 
strength of bracing connections shall be at least 
1.5 times the corresponding strength of the bracing. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


Table 2 Limiting Width-to-Thickness Ratios for Compression Elements of Earthquake Resistant 
Structures 
(Clauses 5.3, 6.1, 7.1, 10.1, 11.1 and 12.2.4.1) 


Ca = P,/(P;/Ymo) 


SI Component Section Limiting Plate Slenderness 

No. Type Outstanding 

se AaS Web Depth-to-Thickness Ratio 
Ratio 

d) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) | Beam Doubly- 9.0 44.52 
symmetric JRy Ry 
rolled 
I-sections 
Doubly- 
symmetric 
built-up 
I-sections 

ii) | Column Doubly- 9.0€ 72.7€ (i= 1.080,) for 6, < 0.118 
symmetric JEy af Rp 
rolled 
I-sections and 
Doubly- 
symmetric 24.9€ (2.68 —C,) > 44.4 
built-up Re Ge “hy 
I-sections for C, > 0.118 

iii) | Brace Rolled or 11.3¢ 44,4¢ 
built-up JEy al Ry 
I-sections 
Closed box 21.4¢ 21.42€ 
sections af Ry JRy 

(Flange width is 
the flange width 
minus thickness 
of the webs) 

iv) | Links Doubly- 11.32 44.4¢ 
symmetric af Ry al Ry 
rolled or 
built-up 
I-sections 
Closed box 21.42€ 49 Ae 
sections RS JRy 

(Flange width is 
the flange width 
minus thickness 
of the webs) 
where 
c= (250/f) ; and 


5.8 Stiffness 


Buildings shall have adequate lateral stiffness to 
satisfy the drift limit specified in IS 1893 (Part 1), 
and structural members shall satisfy deflection 
limits specified in IS 800, unless specified otherwise 
in this standard. 


5.8.1 Drift 


The storey-drift for SMRFs shall be estimated 
considering the stiffness of the finite sized 
beam-column joints. In the absence of rigorous 
analysis, centreline dimensions of members shall be 
used to estimate storey drift. For braced frames too, 
centreline dimensions of members shall be used. 


5.8.2 P-A Effect 


For moment resisting frames in particular, detailed 
geometric non-linear analysis shall be carried out. 
But, the same may be neglected for any storey i, 
when the ratio a; of the secondary moment to the 
primary moment complies with: 


_ Widi 


< 0.04 
H;F; 


ay 


A value of a; > 0.1 is not permitted. 
5.9 Strength 


Buildings, structural members and components shall 
have adequate strength as required by 
IS 1893 (Part 1), IS 800, and as required by this 
standard. 


5.9.1 Capacity Design 


Capacity design principles shall be adopted in 
design of structural components, members and 
buildings to resist earthquake shaking as specified in 
this standard. 


5.10 Deformability and Ductility 


Buildings shall be considered to satisfy the 
requirements of deformability and ductility by 
conforming to the requirements of this standard. 


6 BEAMS 
6.1 Sections 


Only doubly-symmetric parallel flange standard 
rolled sections (as per IS 808) or built-up sections, 
with flange width to thickness ratio and web depth 
to thickness ratio values less than the limits specified 
in Table 2, shall be used as beams. The flange to web 
weld in built-up beams shall be continuous. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


6.2 Slenderness 


The ratio of the maximum unbraced length of the 
compression flange of a beam Ly, to the radius of 
gyration ry about the weaker axis of the beam 
cross-section shall not exceed 25 for a distance of 
2d» from the end of the beam to column connection. 
Lp, /ty for the remaining portion of the beam shall 


not exceed 0.10E/(Ry fyv)- 
6.3 Bracing 
The stiffness of bracing shall be as given below: 


a) Beams shall be restrained against rotation 
about their longitudinal axis at supports and 
at intermediate locations along the length of 
the beam through the use of internal panel 
bracing without any external rigid support. 


b) The lateral bracing shall be attached at or 
near the compression flange of the beam. 


c) The lateral bracing shall be attached at or 
near both flanges, near the point of 
inflection in beams bending in double 
curvature. 


6.3.1 Stiffness of Bracing 


The stiffness of bracing shall be as given below: 


a) The shear stiffness of the panel bracing 
system closest to the inflection point in a 
beam bending in double curvature shall be: 


_ LOR yMpp 
DEN = beds 


where Ly; is the unbraced length; and dẹ is 
the distance between centroids of the 
flanges of the beam. 


b) The shear stiffness of the panel bracing 
system other than near the inflection point 
in a beam bending in double curvature 
shall be: 


5RyMpp 
we Tordi 


6.3.2 Strength of Bracing 


The shear strength of the panel bracing system shall 
be: 


0.025R, Mo» 
io > T y "Pp 
f 


IS 18168 : 2023 


6.3.3 Special Bracing at Plastic Hinge Locations 


Special bracing shall be located adjacent to the 
expected plastic hinge locations. Both flanges of 
beams shall be laterally braced. The axial strength 
of such lateral bracing shall be: 


0.06R, My, 
br = ds 


and the required bracing stiffness shall be as in 
6.3.1 (b). 


6.4 Strength 


The design strength of beam shall satisfy the load 
combinations in IS 1893 (Part 1), and the 
overstrength load combinations specified in 5.5 in 
SCBFs and EBFs, or when a beam is part of 
diaphragm collector or chord. 


6.4.1 Shear Strength 


The design shear strength of the beam at the location 
of the plastic hinge shall be determined as per IS 800, 
and it shall be at least equal to the shear demand 
specified in 8.4. 


6.5 Splice 


Beam splices shall be located at least 3d, 
awayfrom the face of the column or dp from the line 
of action of any concentrated force acting on the 
beam. The design strength of beam splices shall at 
least be 1.80 times the required strength, except at 
beam-column connections. Further, design strength 
of each flange splice plate shall at least be 
1.2Ry, f,Ar, where Aç is the area of the flange being 
spliced. 


7 COLUMNS 
7.1 Sections 


Only doubly-symmetric parallel flange standard 
rolled as per IS 808 or built-up sections, with flange 
width to thickness ratio, and web depth to thickness 
ratio less than the corresponding limits specified in 
Table 2, shall be used as columns. The flange to web 
weld in built-up beams shall be continuous. 


7.2 Slenderness 


The slenderness ratio of unbraced length of columns 
shall be less than 75. 
7.3 Bracing 


Columns shall be laterally braced at supports and at 
intermediate locations along the length of the column 


through the use of internal panel bracing without 
any external rigid support. 


7.3.1 Stiffness of Bracing 


The shear stiffness of the panel bracing system, in 
the direction perpendicular to the longitudinal axis 
of the columns shall be: 


3P, 
Lor 


Kor 2 


where 


P, = Maximum factored axial load; and 
Lpr = Unbraced length of the column. 


7.3.2 Strength of Bracing 


The shear strength of the panel bracing system shall 
at least be: 


Vor = 0.005P, 


7.3.3 Strength of Bracing Connection 


The connection of the bracing system to the column 
shall have design strength at least equal to: 


Pyr = 0.01P, 


subject to minimum design action on connection 
given in IS 800. 


7.4 Strength 


Columns shall have design strength more than the 
maximum demand arising from the following: 


a) Structural analysis based on load 
combinations specified in 5.5, and 


b) Maximum loads transferred to the column 
considering 1.2 times the strength of the 
connected members (beams, braces, etc) 
determined considering material strength 
uncertainty factor. 


7.4.1 Columns in both moment frames and braced 
frames that are common to intersecting frames 
aligned along two orthogonal directions, shall 
consider in design the potential for simultaneous 
inelasticity from all such frames for determination 
of the required axial strength, including the 
overstrength earthquake load or the capacity-limited 
earthquake load, as applicable. 


The direction of application of the load in each such 
frame shall be selected to produce the most severe 
load effect on the column. 


7.4.2 Columns in buildings designed to resist lateral 
loads shall not carry tensile forces. 


7.5 Splice 


Column splices shall be located in the middle third 
of the height of the columns, at least 1.0 m away 
from the beam-to-column moment connection. 

The design strength demand of column splices shall 
at least be that determined using 5.5. Further, the 
design strength of both flange and web splice plates 
shall at least be 1.2R, times of their respective 
strengths. 


8 BEAM-COLUMN JOINT 


At a beam-—column joint, the following design 
aspects shall be addressed: 

a) Column to beam strength ratio, 

b) Joint panel zone design, and 

c) Beam-—column connection design. 


8.1 Basis of Design 


Flexural plastic hinges are expected to be formed at 
the end regions of the beams away from the column 
face. Under this condition, the column and the beam- 
column joint, including the beam-column connection, 


IS 18168 : 2023 


is expected to remain elastic and shall be designed 
as capacity protected elements. 


8.2 Column to Beam Strength Ratio 


At a beam—column joint, the following strength ratio 
shall be satisfied: 


P, 

Z 1-4 

È Mpc _ »» bale pi) 
È Myo È 1.1RZpbfyb 


where Zpc and Zpp are the plastic section modulus 


> 1.4 


and fyc and fyp are the characteristic yield strength 
of column and beam cross-sections respectively, P, 
is the maximum factored axial compressive load and 
Pa is the design strength under axial compression, 
and Ry is the material uncertainty factor 


corresponding to the grade of steel in beams. 


8.2.1 The above requirement need not be satisfied at 
the roof level. 


8.3 Joint Panel Zone 


Shear yielding of joint panel zone (JPZ) shall be 
limited. Use of continuity and doubler plates is 
permitted (Fig. 1). 


Ss 


CONTINUITY PLATE 
(IF REQUIRED ) 


DOUBLER PLATE 
(IF REQUIRED ) 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL INTERIOR REINFORCED BEAM-COLUMN JOINT 


IS 18168 : 2023 


8.3.1 Panel Zone Demand 


The shear force demand at the face of the column 
flanges shall be taken as: 


: By 1.1RyfyZpb 
pzd 0.95dp 


8.3.2 Panel Zone Capacity 


The design shear strength capacity shall be: 


fy 
Vpzc = Brn (0.95d.)tpz 
m 
where 
tp, = thickness of the panel zone, including 
thickness of doubler plates if provided; 
and 


Ymo= 1-1. 
8.3.3 Panel Zone Thickness 


The individual thickness of the column web and 
doubler plates (when provided), shall be more than: 
dpz + Wp, 

90 

where 
dpz = dp — 2tpf of the deeper beam, in mm; 
and 
Wpz = de — 2t¢, in mm. 


8.3.4 Doubler Plate 


Doubler plates with plug welding shall be provided 
when the thickness of the column web within the 
panel does not satisfy the strength requirements. It is 
permitted to use doubler plates with or without 
continuity plates. When continuity plates are not 
provided, doubler plates shall extend at least 150 mm 
beyond the deeper beam flange levels on either sides 
of the panel zone. 


8.3.5 Continuity Plate 
Continuity plates shall be provided when: 


6.25 fytef 


E < 12K, fybottor 


When provided, thickness of continuity plate shall 


not be less than thickness of the thinner beam flange 
on either side of the column, and width not less than 
the distance of the tip of the wide beam flange from 
the face of the column web. If different grades of 
steel are used, appropriate values of fy shall be used 


on either side of the inequality. 


8.4 Beam-Column Connection 


Fully-restrained, reinforced beam-column 
connections shall be used in moment frames, 
capable of transferring at least a bending moment of 
1.1RyfyZpp, and shear demand determined based on 
capacity design principle considering, (a) beams 
bending in double curvature, (b) plastic hinges of 
strength 1.1R,fyZpp assumed to act at a distance 
d,,/2 from the end of the connection, and (c) gravity 


load required to be carried. 


8.4.1 Welded Beam-Column Connection 


In general, beam flanges shall be connected to 
column flanges using complete joint penetration 
groove welds, while beam web shall be connected to 
the column flange using either a complete joint 
penetration groove weld extending between weld 
access holes, or using a bolted single plate shear 
connection. 


A weld access hole detail shall be adopted to ensure 
that the location of maximum plastic strain does not 
occur at the interface between the beam web and 
beam flange but is entirely in the beam web (Fig. 2). 
Use of no weld access hole detail is not permitted. 
Removal of backing bar after welding and finishing 
of surface through grinding shall be ensured. 


In general, a cover plated welded flange connection 
with welded rib plates at both beam flange levels is 
preferable. 


9 COLUMN BASE 


Column bases may have any form of embedded 
connection or anchor bolted base plate connection. 
The degree of fixity offered by a connection should 
be established and used in structural analysis. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


BEAM FLANGE 


BEAM WEB 


BEAM WEB 


BEAM FLANGE 


NOTE — Typical details for rolled beam shapes welded from one side steel backing plates: 


1) Standard bevel; 
2) Angle not to exceed 25°; 
3) Radius not less than 10 mm; and 


4) Dimension not less than 3⁄4 tyr or 20 mm, whichever is greater. 


FIG. 2 WELD ACCESS HOLE 


9.1 Anchor Bolted Base Plate Connection 


Anchor bolted base plate connections at column 
bases shall be designed to prevent the following: 


a) Bearing failure of concrete under 
compression, 

b) Pullout cone failure of concrete due to 
tensile force in anchor bolts, 

c) Side face blowout failure of concrete due to 
tensile force in anchor bolts with headed or 
hooked ends, 

d) Wedge-cone failure of concrete due to shear 
force in anchor bolts, 

e) Pryout cone failure of concrete due to shear 
force in anchor bolts, and 


f) Bolt-concrete bond slip failure. 
9.2 Strength 


The required design strength of the steel elements at 
the column base, including base plate, anchor bolts, 


11 


stiffening plates, and shear lug elements shall be 
determined for the load combinations given in 5.5. 


9.3 Fixed Column Base 


Fixed column base connections and supporting 
foundation shall be designed to resist moment 
demand of 1.1R „Mpc and shear demand equal to 
2.2R, Mpc/He , where Mpc and H, are the plastic 
moment capacity and the clear height of the column 
between the connections, respectively. 


9.4 Pinned Column Base 


In lieu of detailed calculations establishing 
rotational stiffness (based on the degree of fixity) 
and bending moment strength characteristics, it is 
permitted to analyse and design anchor bolted base 
plate connections at column bases in buildings as 
pinned connection. In such cases, the connection and 
supporting foundation shall be designed for 


minimum moment of 0.5R,M. 


yMyc, where My, is the 


IS 18168 : 2023 


yield moment capacity of the column section, in 


addition to shear force demand equal to 
TAR, Moe) He: 
10 STRUCTURAL BRACES 


Structural braces may be used to impart lateral 
stiffness and strength to building frames. Such 
braces shall be provided in selected bays over the 
full height of the building frame. Braces part of 
concentrically braced frames (CBF) shall also 
conform to the requirements given hereunder. 


10.1 Sections 


Standard rolled or built-up sections or closed box 
sections, with flange width to thickness ratio and 
web depth to thickness ratio less than the limits 
specified in Table 2, shall be used as braces. The 
weld between the elements of built up section shall 
be continuous. 


10.2 Slenderness 


The effective slenderness ratio of braces shall be less 
than 160. In case of built-up braces, at least two 
connectors shall be provided at uniform spacing 
such that the slenderness ratio of individual plate 
elements between the connectors shall be less than 
0.4 times the governing effective slenderness ratio 
of the built-up brace. 


The sum of shear strengths of the connectors shall 
be greater than the expected tensile strength of each 
element, except when buckling of the brace about its 
critical buckling axis does not cause shear in the 
connectors. Connectors shall not be located within 
the middle one-fourth of the clear brace length. 


10.3 Effective Area 


Brace effective net area shall not be taken less than 
the gross cross-sectional area of the brace. Where 
reinforcement on braces is used, the following 
requirements shall apply: 


a) The characteristic yield strength of the 
reinforcement, when provided in the form 
of steel plates, shall be at least equal to the 
characteristic yield strength of the brace, 
and 


b) The connections of the reinforcement to the 
brace shall have sufficient strength to 
develop the reinforcement 


strength. 


expected 


10.4 Bracing Connection 


The required strength in tension, compression, and 
flexure of brace connections (including beam-to- 
column connections if part of the braced-frame 
system) shall be determined as required in the 
following. These required strengths are permitted to 
be considered independently without interaction. 


10.4.1 Tensile Strength 


The tensile strength of brace connections shall at 
least be the lesser of the following: 


a) The expected yield strength in tension of 
the brace, determined as maximum of 
1.1Ry fy Ag and Ru fa An; and 

b) The maximum load effect, indicated by 
analysis as in 5.6, that can be transferred to 
the brace by the system. 


10.4.2 Compressive Strength 


The compressive strength of brace connections shall 
at least be equal to the brace strength in compression, 
generally as governed by buckling. 


10.4.3 Accommodation of Brace Buckling 


Brace connections shall be designed to withstand the 
flexural forces and rotations imposed by brace 
buckling. Connections satisfying the following 
provisions are deemed to satisfy this requirement: 


a) Required Flexural Strength 


Brace connections designed to withstand the 
flexural forces imposed by brace buckling shall 
have a required flexural strength equal to 
1.1 times the expected brace flexural strength. 
The expected brace flexural strength shall be 
determined as Ryf,Z, of the brace about the 
critical buckling axis. 

b) Rotation Capacity 

shall be designed to 
withstand the rotations imposed by brace 


buckling. Inelastic rotation of the connection is 
permitted. 


Brace connections 


10.4.4 Gusset Plates 


To accommodate brace buckling, gusset plates shall 
be detailed to undergo out-of-plane bending and 
welds that attach a gusset plate directly to a beam 
flange or column flange shall be designed to have 


shear strength per unit length equal to Rhy where 


tp is the thickness of the gusset plate. 


11 SHEAR LINKS 


Shear links may be used as structural fuse in 
eccentrically braced frames (EBF) as specified in 
this standard. These links are expected to be 
subjected to combined action of bending moment 
and shear force and undergo yielding under 
earthquake effects. 


11.1 Sections 


Links shall be I-shaped cross sections (standard 
rolled wide-flange sections or built-up sections), or 
built-up box sections, with flange width to thickness 
ratio and web depth to thickness ratio less than the 
limits specified in Table 2. Hollow structural steel 
(HSS) sections shall not be used as links. Further: 


a) The web or webs of a link shall be single 
thickness. Doubler-plate reinforcement and 
web penetrations are not permitted; 

b) For links made of built-up cross sections, 
complete-joint-penetration groove welds 
shall be used to connect the web (or webs) 
to the flanges; and 

c) Links of built-up box sections shall have a 
moment of inertia, Jy, about an axis in the 
plane of the EBF greater than 0.671/,, where 
Ix is the moment of inertia of the link about 
an axis perpendicular to the plane of the 
EBF. 


11.2 Link Shear Strength 


The design shear strength of link shall be the lower 
value of the following: 


> 3 VoL 
a) For shear yielding: —— 
Ymo 


for P,/P < 0.15 


fyAwL Pu : ; 
z 1- (=) for P,/P, > 0.15 
y 


Aw. = 
(d — 2ts)ty for I-shaped link sections, 
2(d, — 2t,)ty for box link sections; 


P, = Factored axial load in the link; 

P y = f yÁgL> 

Ag, = Gross cross-sectional area of link; 
dı = Overall depth of link; 


IS 18168 : 2023 


te = Thickness of flange; 
ty = Thickness of web; and 


Ymo = 1.1 


é 7 2MpL 
b) For flexural yielding: —— 


eYmo 
where 
Mp. = 
fy2p1. for P,/P, < 0.15 
fyZp. f z =) for P,/P, > 0.15 l 
and 


Zp = Plastic section modulus of link about 


the bending axis. 
11.3 Length of link 
The length of link e shall be less than 1.6 My, /VpL. 


where Mp, and Vp, are the plastic bending moment 
capacity and plastic shear capacity of the link, as per 
11.2. Further, the following shall be satisfied: 


If P,/P, > 0.15, the length of the link shall be limited 
as follows: 


7 1.6 Mp. /Vp. for p <0.5 
e S (1.6 Mp (1.15 — 0.36)/Vp, for p> 0.5 
where 
_ _ Py/Py 
=e nd 
= fyAwL 
pa V3 ° 


11.4 Stiffeners for I-Shaped Link Sections 


Web of links shall be stiffened to prevent premature 
buckling. The required strength of fillet welds 
connecting a stiffener to the link web shall be f, Ag, 
where Ast is the horizontal cross-sectional area of 
the link stiffener. The required strength of fillet 
welds connecting the stiffener to the link flanges 
fyAst 

"E. 
11.4.1 End Web Stiffeners 


is 


Full-depth web stiffeners shall be provided on both 
sides of the link web at the diagonal brace ends of 
the link. These stiffeners shall have a combined 
width not less than (by — 2t,,) and a thickness not 
less than the larger of 0.75t,, or 10 mm, where bp 
and ty are the link flange width and link web 
thickness, respectively. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


11.4.2 Intermediate Web Stiffeners 


Links shall be provided with intermediate web 
stiffeners spaced at intervals not exceeding 
(30tw — 0.2d). 


11.5 Stiffeners for Box Link Sections 


Web of links shall be stiffened to prevent premature 
buckling. The required strength of fillet welds 
connecting a stiffener to the link web shall be f,As, 
where Ast is the horizontal cross-sectional area of 
the link stiffener. 


11.5.1 End Web Stiffeners 

Full-depth web stiffeners shall be provided on one 
side of each link web at the diagonal brace 
connection. These stiffeners are permitted to be 
welded to the outside or inside face of the link webs. 
These stiffeners shall each have a width not less than 


b : fos ; ; 
pi where b is the inside width of the box section. 


These stiffeners shall each have a thickness not less 
than the larger of 0.75t,, or 10 mm. 


11.5.2 Intermediate Web Stiffeners 


Box links shall be provided with full-depth 
intermediate web stiffeners welded either to the 
outside or inside face of the link webs as follows: 


a) When web depth-to-thickness ratio is greater 
than 19€/ Jh , full-depth web stiffeners 
shall be provided on one side of each link 
web, spaced at intervals not exceeding 
20t,, — (d — 2t,)/8; and 

b) When web depth-to-thickness ratio is less 
than or equal to 19€/ Jh , no intermediate 
web stiffeners are required. 

12 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS 


Special requirements of special moment resisting 
frame (SMRF), special concentrically braced frame 
(SCBF), and eccentrically braced frame (EBF), 
designed as lateral load resisting system in buildings, 
are provided hereunder. 


12.1 Special Moment Resisting Frames 


Special moment resisting frames (SMRFs) of 
structural steel shall be designed to satisfy the 
requirements of this section. 


12.1.1 Basis of Design 


Special moment resisting frames designed in accordance 


with these provisions are expected to provide 
significant inelastic deformation capacity through 
flexural yielding of the beams, limited yielding of 
panel zones, and little or no yielding of columns 
except at base. Special moment resisting frames 
may be used in any seismic zones except in 
buildings taller than 15 m in seismic zones IV and V 
[see IS 1893 (Part 1)] and for any buildings 
(importance factor values). Yielding of beam to 
column connections in SMRFs shall not be 
permitted by this standard. 


12.1.2 Analysis 


It is preferable to plan buildings to have independent 
planar lateral load resisting moment frames in each 
principal plan directions. In such cases, there are no 
special analysis requirements. But when two 
moment frames oriented in orthogonal directions 
intersect, the possibility of beam yielding in both 
orthogonal directions simultaneously shall be 
considered in the design of the common column. 


12.1.3 System Requirements 


The requirements given hereunder shall be satisfied 
by the building system. 


12.1.3.1 Beams 


Beams in SMRFs are permitted to carry gravity 
loads through composite action with reinforced 
concrete slab. For lateral load action, composite 
action shall not be considered. Further, abrupt 
changes in beam flanges, through actions like 
drilling of holes or trimming of flange width, and use 
of shear studs are prohibited in the beam end regions 
of length at least twice the depth of the beam where 
flexural plastic hinges are expected to be formed. 


12.1.3.2 Beam column connections 


Beam to column connections shall be capable of 
accommodating storey drift angle of 0.04 radians, 
without loss of strength exceeding 15 percent of the 
beam plastic moment capacity. 


12.1.3.3 Column to beam strength ratio 
The requirements specified in 8.2 shall apply. 
12.1.4 Member Requirements 


The requirements given hereunder shall be satisfied 
by the building component or member. 


12.1.4.1 Beams 
Requirements specified in 6 shall apply. 


12.1.4.2 Columns 

Requirements specified in 7 shall apply. 
12.1.4.3 Joint panel zone 

Requirements specified in 8.3 shall apply. 


12.1.4.4 Beam column connections 


Requirements specified in 8.4 shall apply. 
12.1.4.5 Protected zones 


The region at each end of a beam equal to twice the 
depth of the beam subjected to inelastic straining 
shall be designated as a protected zone. Steel headed 
stud anchors and other fabrication and erection 
attachments shall not be placed on beam flanges 
within the protected zone. 


12.1.4.6 Column splices 
Requirements specified in 7.5 shall apply. 
12.1.4.7 Demand critical welds 


The following welds shall be designed as demand 
critical welds: 


a) Groove welds at column splices; 
b)Welds at column-to-base plate connections, 
except when: 

1) column plastic hinge at, or near the base 
plate is precluded by conditions of 
restraint, or 

2) there is no net tension under load 
combinations including the 
overstrength earthquake load; and 

c) Welds in beam-column connections. 


12.2 Special Concentrically Braced Frames 


Special concentrically braced frames (SCBF) of 
structural steel shall be designed to satisfy the 
requirements given hereunder. Collector beams that 
connect SCBF braces shall be considered to be part 
of SCBF. 


12.2.1 Basis of Design 


In SCBFs, members shall be concentrically 
connected. But eccentricities less than the beam 
depth are permitted if the resulting member and 
connection forces are addressed in the design, and 
the eccentricities do not change the expected source 
of inelastic deformation capacity of the building. 
SCBF designed in accordance with these provisions 
are expected to provide inelastic deformation 
capacity primarily through brace buckling and 
yielding of the brace in tension. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


12.2.2 Analysis 


The following shall be satisfied in the analysis of 
SCBFs: 


12.2.2.1 The required strength of braces shall be 
determined based on the analysis required by 
IS 1893 (Part 1). Further, the required strength of 
braces shall not exceed the design strength in axial 
compression as per 7.1.2 of IS 800. 


12.2.2.2 The required strength of capacity-protected 
elements (columns, beams, struts, collectors and 
connections) shall be taken as the larger force 
determined from the following analysis: 


a) An analysis in which all braces are 
assumed to resist forces corresponding to 
their expected strength in compression or 
in tension; 


b) An analysis in which all braces in tension 
are assumed to resist forces corresponding 
to their expected strength and all braces in 
compression are assumed to resist their 
expected post-buckling strength; and 


c) For multi-tiered braced frames, analyses 

representing progressive yielding and 
buckling of the braces from weakest tier to 
strongest. Analyses shall consider both 


directions of frame loading. 
The expected tensile strength (Te) of braces in 
tension shall be taken as: 
Te = RyfyAg 
The expected compressive strength (Pe) of the 
braces shall be taken as: 


Pe = RyVmoPa 


where Pa is the design compressive strength as 
determined using 7.1.2 of IS 800. The expected 
post-buckling strength of the braces in compression 
shall be taken as 0.2 times the expected 
compressive strength (Pe) and the bracing 
connections shall be assumed to remain elastic. 


12.2.3 System Requirements 


The following system requirements shall be satisfied 
(see Fig. 3). 


12.2.3.1 Diagonal and X-braced frames 


Diagonal and X-braced frames are permitted to be 
used in SCBF. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


12.2.3.2 V- and inverted V-braced frame 


V- and inverted V-braced frames are permitted to be 
used in SCBF. In such systems, the beams that are 
intersected by braces away from beam-to-column 
connections shall satisfy the following requirements: 


a) Beams shall be continuous between 
columns and adequately braced to prevent 
lateral torsional buckling; and 


b) As a minimum, one set of lateral braces is 
required at the point of intersection of the 
V-type (or inverted V-type) braced frames, 
unless the beam has sufficient out-of-plane 
strength and stiffness to ensure stability 
between adjacent brace points. 


12.2.3.3 Continuity of load path 


For the purpose of this standard, a line of braces is 
defined as a single line, or parallel lines with a plan 
offset of 10 percent or less of the building 
dimension perpendicular to the line of braces 
interconnected adequately through rigid diaphragm. 
A diaphragm shall be considered to be rigid if the 
maximum lateral displacement measured from the 
chord of the deformed shape at any point of the 
diaphragm is less than 1.2 times the average 
displacement of the entire diaphragm. 


12.2.3.4 Lateral force distribution 


Braces shall be provided in alternate directions 
along each line of braces. Along any line of bracing, 
braces shall be provided such that for lateral loading 
in either direction, tension braces resist between 
30 percent to 70 percent of the total horizontal load. 


12.2.3.5 Multi-tiered braced frames 


A special concentrically braced frame is permitted 
to be configured as a multi-tiered braced frame 
(MT-SCBF) when the following requirements are 
satisfied: 
a) Braces shall be used in opposing pairs at 
every tier level. 


b) Struts shall satisfy the following 
requirements: 


1) Horizontal struts shall be provided at 
every tier level; 


2) Struts that are intersected by braces 
away from strut-to-column 
connections shall also meet the 
requirements stated in 12.2.2.2 (b). 
When brace buckling occurs 
out-of-plane, torsional moments 
arising from brace buckling shall be 
considered when verifying lateral 
bracing or minimum out-of-plane 
strength and stiffness requirements. 
The torsional moments shall 
correspond to 1.1RyM, of the brace 
about the critical buckling axis, but 
need not exceed forces corresponding 
to the flexural resistance of the brace 
connection, where M, is the plastic 
bending moment. 


c) Columns shall satisfy the following 


requirements: 


1) Columns shall be torsionally braced at 
every strut-to-column connection 
location. 


2) Columns shall have sufficient strength 
to resist forces arising from brace 
buckling. These forces shall 
correspond to 1.1RyM, of the brace 
about the critical buckling axis, but 
need not exceed forces corresponding 
to the flexural resistance of the brace 
connections. 


3) For all load combinations, columns 
subjected to axial compression shall be 
designed to resist bending moments 
due to second-order and geometric 
imperfection effects. As a minimum, 
imperfection effects are permitted to 
be represented by an out-of-plane 
horizontal notional load applied at 
every tier level and equal to 
0.006 times the vertical load 
contributed by the compression brace 
intersecting the column at the tier level. 


4) Lateral drift in each tier in a 
multi-tiered concentrically braced 
frame shall not exceed 0.4 percent of 
the tier height. 


12.2.3.6 K-braced frames 
K-braced frames shall not be used in SCBF. 


12.2.4 Member Requirements 


The requirements specified hereunder shall be 
satisfied by the component or member. 


12.2.4.1 Sections 


Columns, beams, braces and struts in multi-tiered 
concentrically braced in shall comply with the 
width-to-thickness 
Table 2. 


requirements specified in 


12.2.4.2 Braces 


Requirements specified in 10 shall apply. 


IS 18168 : 2023 


12.2.4.3 Protected zones 


The protected zone of SCBF shall satisfy 5.4, and 
shall include the following: 


a) For braces, the centre one-quarter of the 
brace length and a zone adjacent to each 
connection equal to the brace depth in the 
plane of buckling; and 


b) Elements that connect braces to beams and 
columns. 


12.2.4.4 Beams 


In addition to satisfying requirements of 6, beams 
shall be checked for axial load arising due to 
analysis case 12.2.2.2 (b). 


3A SINGLE DIAGONAL BRACED FRAME 


Ya 


3B V-BRACED FRAME 


Vi, 


3C INVERTED V-BRACED FRAME 


IS 18168 : 2023 


1) 


/ A 


3D X-BRACED FRAMES 


FIG. 3 CONCENTRICALLY BRACED FRAMES 


12.2.4.5 Beam-to-column connections 


Where a brace-gusset plate assembly connects to 
both members at a beam-to-column connection, the 
connection assembly shall be designed to resist 
beam moment taken equal to 1.1RyfybZpb. Also, 
the sum of the expected column flexural strengths 
shall exceed 1.1RyfybZpb- 


This connection moment shall be considered in 
combination with the required strength of the brace 
connection and beam connection, including the 
diaphragm collector forces determined using the 
over-strength earthquake load. 


12.2.4.6 Column splices 


Requirements specified in 7.5 shall apply. In 
addition, column splices shall be designed to 
develop at least 50 percent of the plastic flexural 
strength, Mp, of the smaller connected member, and 
have shear strength greater than }; Mp /He: 

where 


XM, = Sum of the plastic flexural strengths, 
at the top and bottom ends of the 
column; and 


He = Clear height of the column between 
beam connections. 


12.2.4.7 Demand critical welds 
See 12.1.4.7. 


12.3 Eccentrically Braced Frame 


Eccentrically braced frames (EBF) of structural steel 
shall be designed to satisfy the requirements given 
hereunder. 


12.3.1 Basis of Design 


These provisions are applicable to braced frames for 
which one end of each brace intersects a beam at an 
eccentricity from the intersection of the centrelines 
of the beam and an adjacent brace or column, 
forming a link that is, subject to shear and flexure 
(see Fig. 4). 


Eccentricities less than the beam depth are permitted 
in the brace connection away from the link if the 
resulting member and connection forces are 
addressed in the design and do not change the 
expected source of inelastic deformation capacity. 


EBF designed in accordance with these provisions 
are expected to provide significant 
deformation capacity primarily through shear (or 
flexural) yielding in the links. Links shall not be 
connected directly to columns. 


inelastic 


12.3.2 Analysis 


The requirements specified hereunder shall be 
satisfied in the analysis of EBFs. 


12.3.2.1 The shear demand on the links shall be 
determined based on the analysis required by 
IS 1893 (Part 1). 


IS 18168 : 2023 


Bii length 'e' 


V4, 


FIG. 4 ECCENTRICALLY BRACED FRAME 


12.3.2.2 The required strength of capacity-protected 
elements (columns, beams, diagonal braces and 
connections) shall be determined based on the 
expected over-strength capacity of the link to be 
taken as 1.1R,5; times the design strength of the 
link as per 11.2, where S, (a factor to account for 
strain hardening and strain rate) is equal to 1.25 for 
I-shaped links and 1.4 for box shaped links. 


Exception — When the link and beam have the same 
section and is continuous: 


a) the required strength of the beam outside the 
link shall be determined based on 0.9 times 
the expected link overstrength capacity; and 


b) the design capacity of the beam shall be 
calculated based on the expected material 
yield stress. 


12.3.3 System Requirements 


The requirements specified hereunder shall be 
satisfied. 


12.3.3.1 Link rotation angle 


The link rotation angle is the inelastic angle between 
the link and the beam outside of the link when the 
total story drift is equal to the design story drift. The 
link rotation angle shall not exceed 0.08 rad. 


12.3.3.2 Bracing of link 


Bracing shall be provided at both the top and 
bottom flanges of the link at the ends of the link for 
I-shaped sections. Such bracings shall have stiffness 
and strength as specified in 6.3.3. 


12.3.4 Member Requirements 


The requirements specified hereunder shall be 
satisfied. 


12.3.4.1 Basic requirements 


Brace members, beams outside the links and 
columns shall satisfy width-to-thickness limitations 
specified in 5.3. Apart from columns, the beams and 
braces in EBFs may be subjected to significant axial 
and bending forces; hence their design capacities 


IS 18168 : 2023 


shall be determined as for beam-column members as 
per IS 800. 


12.3.4.2 Links 


The link length e shall be considered to extend from 


brace connection to brace connection for centre links. 


In addition, requirements specified in 11 shall apply. 
12.3.4.3 Protected zones 


The protected zones of EBFs are the links. Use of 
shear studs on the links is prohibited. 


12.3.4.4 Beam-to-column connections 


Where a brace or gusset plate connects to both 
members at a beam-to-column connection, the 
connection assembly shall be designed to resist 
beam moment taken equal to 1.1Ry fypZpp- Also, the 
sum of the expected column flexural strengths shall 
exceed 1.1Ry fypZpp- 


This connection moment shall be considered in 
combination with the required strength of the brace 
connection and beam connection, including the 
diaphragm collector forces determined using the 
overstrength earthquake load. 


12.3.4.5 Braces 


Braces in EBFs shall be designed not to yield in 
tension or buckle in compression corresponding to 
shear force in link taken equal to 1.2R, times the 
design strength of connected link as per 11.2, and 
shall satisfy the requirements of 5.4. 


12.3.4.6 Brace connections 


When oversized holes are used, the required strength 
for the limit state of bolt slip need not exceed the 
earthquake load effect determined using the 


20 


overstrength earthquake load specified in 5.5. 
Connections of braces designed to resist a portion 
of the link end moment shall be designed as fully 
restrained. 


12.3.4.7 Column splices 
Requirements specified in 7.5 shall apply. 


In addition, column splices shall be designed to 
develop at least 50 percent of the plastic flexural 
strength, Mp, of the smaller connected member, and 
have shear strength greater than X; Mp/He. 


where 


XM, = Sum of the plastic flexural strengths, 
at the top and bottom ends of the 


column; and 
H, = Clear height of the column between 


beam connections. 


12.3.4.8 Demand critical welds 


The following welds shall be designed as demand 
critical welds: 


a) Groove welds at column splices; 
b) Welds at column-to-base plate connections, 
except when: 

1) Column plastic hinge at, or near the 
base plate is precluded by conditions 
of restraint, or 

2) There is no net tension under load 
combinations including the 
overstrength earthquake load; 

c) Welds in beam-column connections; 

d) Connections of braces designed to resist a 
portion of the link end moment; and 

e) In built-up beams, welds within the link 
connecting the webs to the flanges. 


IS No. 


IS 800 : 2007 


IS 808 : 2021 


IS 875 


(Part 1): 


(Part 2) : 


IS 1363 


(Part 1) 


(Part 2) 


(Part 3) 


IS 1364 


(Part 1) 


(Part 2) 


(Part 3) 


1987 


1987 


: 2019 


: 2018 


: 2018 


: 2018 


: 2018 


: 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 
General construction in 
steel — Code of practice 


(third revision) 


Hot rolled steel beam 
column channel and angle 
sections — Dimensions and 
properties 


Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) 
for buildings and structures: 


Dead loads — Unit weight 
of building material and 
stored materials (second 


revision) 


Imposed loads — Code of 
practice (second revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws 
and nuts of product grade 
Yt EG 

Hexagon head bolts (size 
range M5 to M64) (fifth 
revision) 

Hexagon head screws (size 
range M5 to M64) (fifth 
revision) 

(Style 1) hexagon nuts (size 
range M5 to M64) (fifth 
revision) 

Hexagon head bolts, screws 


and nuts of product grades A 
and B: 


Hexagon head bolts (size 
range M1.6 to M64) (fifth 


revision) 


Hexagon head screws (size 
range M1.6 to M64) (fifth 


revision) 


Hexagon nuts (style 1) (size 
range M1.6 to M64) 


21 


IS No. 
(Part 4) : 2003 


(Part 5) : 2002 


(Part 6) : 2018 


IS 1893 (Part 1): 


2016 


IS 2062 : 2011 


IS 3640 : 1982 


IS 3757 : 1985 


IS 4000 : 1992 


IS 5624 : 2021 


IS 6610 : 1972 


IS 6639 : 1972 


IS 6649 : 1985 


IS 18168 : 2023 


Title 
Hexagon thin nuts 
(chamfered) (size range 
M1.6 to M64) (fourth 
revision) 
Hexagon thin nuts — 
Product grade B 


(unchamfered) (size range 
M1.6 to M10) (fourth 


revision) 


Hexagon nuts (style 2) (first 
revision) 


Criteria for earthquake 
resistant design of structures: 
Part 1 General provisions 


and buildings (sixth revision) 


Hot rolled medium and high 


tensile structural steel — 
Specification (seventh revision) 


Specification for hexagon fit 
bolts (first revision) 


Specification for 
strength 


high 
structural bolts 


(second revision) 


High strength bolts in steel 
Code of 
practice (first revision) 


structures = 


Foundation bolts specification 
(second revision) 


Specification for heavy 


washers for steel structures 


Specification for hexagon 
bolts for steel structures 


Specification for hardened 
and tempered washers for 
high strength structural bolts 
and nuts (first revision) 


IS 18168 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Association of Consulting Engineers 
Bengaluru 


(India), 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Central Soils and Materials Research Station, 


New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants Private Limited, 
Ghaziabad 


CSIR - Central 
Roorkee 


Building Research Institute, 


CSIR - National Geophysical Research Institute, 
Hyderabad 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 


DDF Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Lucknow 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


PROF C. V. R. MURTY (Chairperson) 


SHRI SANDEEP SHIRKHEDKAR 
SHRI ASWATH M. U. (Alternate) 


SHRI L. R. BISHNOI 
DR ROSHAN A. D. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVI KUMAR 


DR SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
SHRI SHARAD GUPTA (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (D&DM) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR CMDD (E & NE) 
DIRECTOR EMBANKMENT (NW&sS) (Alternate) 


DRN. P. HONKANDAVAR 
DR MANISH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMANDEEP 
SHRI BARJINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


DR NAVJEEV SAXENA 
DR AJAY CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


DR N. PURNACHANDRA RAO 
DR SIMANCHAL PADHY (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI R. SREEKALA 
DR K. SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR K. G. BHATIA 


DR PRATIMA R. BOSE 
SHRI SADANAND OJHA (Alternate) 


DR G. G. SRINIVAS ACHARY 


DR SUDIP PAUL (Alternate I) 
Ms DIVYA KHULLAR (Alternate II) 


DR SANDEEP KUMAR 
DR RAMJIVAN SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPUL AHUJA 
SHRI RAJIV AHUJA (Alternate) 


22 


Organization 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar 


Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 


Indian Society of Earthquake 


Roorkee 


Technology, 
International Institute of Information Technology, 
Hyderabad 


Ministry of Earth Sciences, National Centre for 
Seismology, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building 


Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Disaster Management Authority, New 
Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Limited, 


Mumbai 


Corporation India 


Power Grid Corporation of India, Gurugram 


Risk Management Solutions Inc, Noida 


SD Engineering Consultants LLP, New Delhi 


IS 18168 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DR A. R. SANTHAKUMAR 
DR K. P. JAYA (Alternate) 


DR SURESH RANJAN DASH 


DR RAVI SINHA 
DR ALOK GOYAL (Alternate) 


DR DIPTI RANJAN SAHOO 
DR VASANT MATSAGAR (Alternate) 


DR AMIT PRASHANT 
DR MANISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR HEMANT B. KAUSHIK 
DR DURGESH C. RAI 
DR A. MEHER PRASAD 
DR RUPEN GOSWAMI (Alternate I) 
DR ARUN MENON (Alternate II) 
DR YOGENDRA SINGH 
DR MANISH SHRIKHANDE (Alternate I) 
DR B. K. MAHESHWARI (Alternate II) 


DR P. C. ASHWIN KUMAR (Alternate II) 


PRESIDENT 
VICE PRESIDENT (Alternate) 


DR PRADEEP KUMAR RAMANCHARLA 
DR O. P. MISHRA 
DR H. S. MANDAL (Alternate) 
SHRI P. N. OJHA 
SHRI BRIJESH SINGH (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANUP GHATAK (Alternate II) 
JOINT ADVISOR (MP & P) 
DR SUSANTA KUMAR JENA (Alternate I) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD JAVED IQBAL (Alternate II) 


DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
SHRI SAURABH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAGHUPATI ROY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. V. M. PRAKASH 
SHRI AKASH SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


DR SUSHIL GUPTA 


MS SANGEETA WIJ 


23 


IS 18168 : 2023 


Organization 


Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Vakil Mehta Sheth Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 
Nagpur 


In Personal Capacity (Row House 4, Sun City 
Housing Society, Vadgaon Budruk, Pune) 


In Personal Capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 
Road, Nagpur) 


In Personal Capacity (H-102, VVIP Addresses, 
Rajnagar Extn, Ghaziabad) 


In Personal Capacity (174/2 F, Solanipuram, 
Roorkee) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur 
Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


PROF MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI VINAY K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJUN C. R. 


Ms ALPAR. SHETH 
SHRIR. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


DR O. R. JAISWAL 


DRR. K. INGLE (Alternate) 


DR I. D. GUPTA 


SHRI L. K. JAIN 


DR A. K. MITTAL 


DR S. K. THAKKAR 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
[REPRESENTING 


HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR CHAUDHARY 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Composition of the Working Group for Steel Buildings, CED 39 / WG 10 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 


Nagpur 
R S Mandrekar Associates, Mumbai 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


Representative(s) 


DR RUPEN GOSWAMI (Convener) 
DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
DR DURGESH C. RAI 


DRL. M. GUPTA 


DR JASWANT N. ARLEKAR 


DR SUDIP PAUL 


24 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 39 (18640). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


