**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7599-1 (1975) : General requirements for engineer's 
comparators with stands. Part I: engineer's comparators 
[PGD 25: Engineering Metrology] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



oDc S31 713 , o 'S : 7599 ( Part I) - 1 975 

"°^ °^' ^^^ ( Second Reprint OCTOBER 1998 ) ( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



Indian Standard 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
ENGINEER'S COMPARATORS WITH STAND 
PART, I ENGINEER'S COMPARATORS 



CO 

w 

O 

Q 

Ui 

£' 

& 
E 
o 
u 

Ji 

3 



O 
O 

UI 

1 

E 
o 
U 

"3 

c 
o 

o 

« 
(0 

a» 

o 
o 

S 

C 

•c. 

s 

c 



1. Scope — Covers the requiremems of engineer's comparators used for external measurement having 
magnification factors of 250 and over. The requirements of the-comparator stand are covered in 
Part II of this standard. 

2. General Requirements 

2.1 Measuring Contact 

2.1.1 The measuring contact shall be of hardened steel having a hardness of 850 HV, Min ( 65 HRC 
approximately ) [ see IS : 1 501 - 1 968 Method for Vickers hardness test for steel ( first revision ) ] or of 
alternative material of comparable wearing properties. 

2.1.2 The face of the measuring contact shall normally be rounded (a minimum radius of 8 mm is 
recommended ). 

2.1.3 If a flat face is required, means shall be provided whereby the u^er is able to adjust the face of 
the contact so that the required degree of parallelism can be obtained between the measuring contact 
and the surface of the work-table. 

2.1.4 The measuring contact may be provided with a raising device. 

2.1.5 The force applied to the measuring contact to obtain zero reading on the instrument shall be in 
the order of 20 to 2'5N. 

2.1.6 The operating force shall be substantially constant throughout the working range and in no 
case shall the maximum force be more than 50 percent greater than the minimum, for instruments 
having magnification factor below 5 000 and not more^^han 15 percent greater than the minimum for 
instruments having magnification factor greater than 5 000. 

2.2 Pointer 

2.2.1 In dial reading instruments, the pointer shall be rigidly attached to its spindle in such a manner 
as to ensure that there will be no relative movement between them when the measuring contact is 
subject to rapid acceleration or deceleration, as in the event of the measuring contact being suddenly 
released and its motion arrested by a fixed stop. The pointer should be provided with a suitable 
damping device. 

2.2.2 The thickness of the pointer should be the same as or less than that of the scale marks. The 
design of the pointer and associated scale shall be such as to reduce to the lowest possible value any 
errors due to parallax. For instruments having pointers which pass over the scq^le, the pointer tip 
should overlap the scale marks by one-fifth to one-half of the length of the shortest scale marks. 

2.3 Scale 

2.3.1 The scale shall consist of black scale marks ( see Fig. 1 ) on a white back ground, or such 
other combination of contrasting colours as will show up with equal clarity, so that it can be 
conveniently read under ordinary good workshop lighting conditions. 

2.3.2 All scale marks shall have a clean sharp outline and be uniform in thickness. Line thickness 
should be not greater than one-fifth of the distance separating two scale intervals ( see Fig. 1 ). 

2.3.3 Both fifth and tenth scale intervals shall be extended. On single range scales at least every 
tenth interval shall be numbered, and the value of each scale interval clearly marked within the scale 
area, or be numbered at least every tenth interval and the half scale value be clearly marked at plus and 
minus ends of the scale. On multi-range scales at least each tenth interval shall be numbered and the 
value of each scale interval clearly marked within the scale area using a suitable code to identify scale 
and scale interval value. Rne sub-division of the scale is to be avoided. It is recommended that no 
two scale marks should be closer than 1 mm. 



Adopted 29 January 1975 © May 1975. BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DEUHI 110002 



IS: 7599 (Part I). 1975 



SCALE INTERVAL 



SCALE MARKS 
FIG. 1 SCALE 

2.3.4 The zero scale mark should preferably be at the centre of the scale. Scales requiring the zero 
position to be other than In the centre position shall be the subject of agreement between the purchaser 
and the manufacturer of the instrument. The relative movement of the pointer and scale should be such 
as to suggest to the observer the direction of movement of the measuring contact as the work is 
passed under it. For example, where the pointer moves over a fixed scale, an increase in the size of 
the work should be indicated by a movement of the pointer upwards ( on a vertical scale) or to the 
right ( on a horizontal scale ). If the scale is in the form of arc above the centre of rotation of the 
pointer, a clockwise movement of the pointer should indicate an increase in work size. Where the scale 
is in the form of an arc below the centre of rotation of ihe pointer, an anticlockwise movement of the 
pointer should indicate an increase in work size. 

2.3.5 The scale shall be boldly marked with plus and minus signs to indicate increase and decrease 
in the size of the measured work. 

3. Tests 

3.1 Accuracy ofSca/e — The accuracy of the scale of the instrument shall be tested by making readings 
on a suitable series of calibrated slip gauges, first over the positive half of the scale and then over the 
negative half of the scale, checking at each major division. No reading- shall have an error exceeding 
one percent of the reading ( plus or minus ) or the appropriate amount ( plus or minus ) given in col 2, 
Table 1, whichever is greater. 



Consistency of Reading— The consistency of reading of the comparator shall be examined by 
7ing out the following series of tests, the permissible errors being related to the magnification 

fnr 



3.2 

carrying out 
factor. 



3.2.1 When the instrument has been set to read on a workpiece and measuring head gently tapped 
the maximum change in reading shall not exceed one-half of the appropriate amount given in col 2, 
Table 1. 

3.2.2 When a true cylinder is passed under the measuring anvil ( cylinder shall not be rolled under 
the measuring anvil ) : 

from the front 
from the rear 
from the left-hand side 
from the right-hand side 
Maximum difference in reading found shall not exceed one-half of the values In col 2, Table 1. 

3.2.3 The readings obtained when sliding a slip gauge under the contact shall not differ from 
subsequent readings obtained by operating the trigger device, by more than the appropriate amount 
given in col 2, Table 1. 

4. Packing — The comparators shall be packed according to the best trade practice prevalent in the 
country. 

5. Marking — Each instrument shall be marked with the maker's name or recognized trade-mark, and 
with a serial number. 

5.1 ISI Certification Marl^ing — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution, 

2 



IS:7S99(Partl).l975 



TABLE 1 TOLERANCE ON SCALE READING 

( Clauses 3.1, 3.2.1, 3.2.2 and 3.2.3 ) 
Magnification Factor* of IVIeasuring Head Minimum Tolerance of Reading 

(1) (2) 

mm 

From 250 up to and including 500 0001 5 

Above 500 up to and including 1 000 O'OOOS 

1000 „ „ ., „ 2 000 0-000 5 

2 000 , , 5 000 0*000 3 

5 000 „ „ M „ 10000 00001 

,, 10 000 and above 0*000 03 

Note — In the case of a comparator fitted witii opticai or electrical means of amplification, precautions 
should be taken in the design to ensure that neither the zero setting nor the calibration of the instrument is 
disturbed by any heating effects arising from its lamp or electric coils or from any fluctuations of voltage or 
frequency in the electric supply. 

* The magnification factor is obtained by dividing the distance between the tv^fo graduation marks on the 
scale by the equivalent displacement of the measuring contact, for example, if the distance between the marks 
is 0*9 mm, and the corresponding displacement of the measuring contact is 0*001 mm, the magnification 
factor is 900. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

These instruments are known by the general name of comparators since they serve for measuring 
workpieces by comparing their sizes with slip gauges or other standard gauges of closely the same size, 
the comparison being made by Inserting the standard gauge and the workpiece under the measuring 
contact in turn and noting the difference between their sizes on the scale of the measuring head. 

The standard is intended to relate primarily to comparators of the vertical type, but may be 
adopted for horizontal types in so far as the requirements are applicable. 

This standard does not apply to comparators with measuring heads having a magnification of less 
than 250 or to comparators fitted with mechanically operated measuring heads of the dial indicator type 
in which the indicating pointer turns through several complete revolutions. Such dial indicators are 
dealt with IS : 2092-1962 ' Dial gauges'. 

In ttie preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from BS : 1054-1954 " Engineer's 
comparators for external measurement " and draft BS : 73/33653 " Engineer's mechanical comparators 
for external measurement" issued by the British Standards Institution. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



