( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 10312- 1982

lizdim Stundard
SAFETY CODE FOR POWERED TOW TRUCKS

Industrial
Chairman SIIIU K. C. UNNITIIAN Members

Trucks

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

MCPD

22

Macneill

& Magor

Ltd, Calcutta

Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, Ntw Delhi SHR~ 1. C. KX\XXA ( Alternate ) Escorts Ltd, Faridabad SHRI S. K. CHACJIMW SRRI L. R. CHAUDH: RY ( Alternate ) Indian Airlines, New Delhi SHRI M. S. EKBOTE SHRI YASHBIR KUM~R ( Alternate ) Bombay Port Trust, Bombay SHRI R. G. GOVINDARAJAN SHIZI Q. H. TA~FIQ ( Alternate ) SHRI V. D. JOHN Madras Port Truct, hladras SRRI M. CHANDRA~EIUXAX ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) Bcrc T. C. JOSEPH LT-COL R. SHIVD~SANI ( Alternate i SHRI V. KAUSIK Voltas Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. V. B-41.( Alternate ) SHI~I A. KOX~R Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta Ministry of Railways ( RDSO j, Lucknow SHRI J. S. MaRwAif_ SHRI K. L. NIRWAN ( Alternate ) SHRI G. D. MODI Gujarat Industrial Trucks Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. G. MODI ( Alternate ) Ssxr P. S. N.~GAS~NDAI~UI Ministry of Dcfenre ( Air Wing ) SHRI D. K. SHAI:MI ( Alternate ) SHI~I D. N. PRSTONJI Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd. Bomba) SHI<I H. F. RAGJKA ( Alternate ) SFIRI R. A. PIIAYADE Standard Batteries Ltd, Bombay SHXI M. F. GOVADI.~ ( Alternate ) Smr K. R. PUSAD Jost's Engineering Co Ltd, Bomba) SIIILI E. J. ~~~~~~~~~~ ( Alternate ) ( Co&wed on pqc 2 )

Shri K. C. Unnithan ) SHRI H. S. AGAKWAL SHR~ S. P. KOHLI ( Alter&e SRRI S. c. AN'ND

SHXI S. ROY C ~IO~DHUKY ( Alternate to

Ministry )

of Railways

( Railway

Board )> New Delhi

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTIO;\' or 1957 1 and This publicarlon is protected undL>r the in&n Copyright Act ( XIV reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission ol' the Imhllsher shall br deemrd to be an infringrment of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10312 - 1982 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members
SHRI V.

Representing

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) L. N. RAO S HRI S. DEVRAJAN ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & SHRI K. C. SAKSENA Labour Institute, Bombay SHRI A. At4G.4~ ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI K. SENCtJPT.4 New Delhi SHR~ S. K. GROSR ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHM B. R. StNGH SHRX S. CHITT.~RSNJAN ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oscio Member ) SHI~I P. S. D as. Director ( MCPD ) ( Secretary )

Forklift Convener
SHRI v.

Trucks

Subcommittee,

MCPD

22 : 1

Kausr~ Members

Voltas Ltd, Bombay

D. V. BAL ( Alternate to Shri V. Kausik ) SHRI S. C. ANAND
SHRI SHRI

SH~I I. C. KHANNA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow J. S. M~RWAH.~ S ITRIK. L. NIRWAX ( Alternate ) SIIRI D.N. PEiTOVJI Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. K. MEHTA ( Alternate ) SAJZI R. A. Pti4YIDE Standards Batteries Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. F. GOVADIA ( Alternate ) Jort's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. R. PR~SAD SHRI E. .J. TARAPORE ( Alternate ) Chief Inspectorate of Engineering, Ministry of SHRI V.L.N. RAO Defence ( DGI ) SHRI S. DEVI~AJAN ( Alternate ) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, SHRI S.K.SIRHA Calcutta SHEI A. K. J0.4RDAR ( Alternate ) Macneill & Magor Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. C. UNNWIIAR SHR~ S. ROY CHOWDHURY ( Alternate )

Directorate Delhi

General

of Supplies

& Disposals,

New

2

IS:10312

-1982

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR POWERED TOW TRUCKS

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 September 1982, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
operation specifies the safety requirements and maintenance of iow trucks. for the manufacture,

2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 Tow Trucks - A powered truck, with solid or pneumatic tyres, with three or more wheels with front or rear drive wheels, intended for towing or shunting one or several non-powered trucks or trailers, inside or outside building and under exceptional circumstances on public roads.
3. NOMINAL RATING

3.1 The nominal rating of two trucks shall be expressed by the maximum drawbar pull, in decanewtons, that can be developed at a specified coupling height while moving a load at a uniform speed not less than 1 percent of the maximum no load speed. 3.2 The drawbar pull shall be measured when the tow truck is travelling on a smooth, dry, horizontal, concrete surface, at the uniform test speed obtained after acceleration, with a horizontal towbar in the longitudinal axis of the vehicle, and with a driver weighing about 70 kg in the case of a sit on or stand-on tow truck. 4. STEERING CONTROL outline during etc.

4.1 All steering controls shall be confined within the plan view of the tow truck, or guarded to prevent injury to the operator movement of the controls when passing obstacles, walls, columns, 3

IS : 10312 - 1982
4.2 Where steering must be accomplished with one hand, steering knobs Steering knobs, when used, shall be are necessary for safe operation. mounted within the periphery of the steering handwheel and provision shall be made to prevent injury to the operator's hand. 4.3 When conditions of use would result in steering shocks being generated, the transmission of such shocks to the steering handwheel shall be limited to the extent necessary to avoid irtjury to the driver's hand or arm. 4.4 Where a steering handwheel and knob are used, either the ration shall be of a design which shall minimize the hazard spinning handwheel due to road reaction feedback, or the mechanism shall be of a type which prevents road reactions from the steering handwheel to spin. configufrom a steering causing

4.5 On all tow trucks on which the operator faces in the nominal line of travel and which are steered by means of a steering wheel ( horizontal, inclined or vertical ), a clockwise rotation of the steering wheel shall steer the tow truck to the right in the forward direction of travel. 4.6

Steering

Handle

4.6.1 The handle on the tongue shall be provided with suitable means to protect the operator's and against injury from swingin doors, walls, columns, etc.
4.6.2 Hand/rider tow trucks employing a steering tongue control which extends beyond the confines of the tow truck shall steer with the walking riding operator facing in the direction of travel, with the load trailing, clockwise movement of the steering tongue shall steer the truck clockwise. 5. TYRES

5.1 For
used.

smooth,

dry floor

operation,

smooth

tread

solid

tyres

may

be

5.2 If floor conditions shall be used. 5.3 Where

are wet and smooth, pneumatic

then tyres with nonskid

tread

floors are rough,

tyres shall be used.

6. SAFETY CONTROL AND BRAKES SIT-DOWN RIDER TOW TRUCKS 6.1 Means shall be provided to open when the operator leaves the tow truck.
4

ELECTRIC

POWERED
circuit

automatically

the travel

IS:10312 6.2 Travel

-1982

control shall be so arranged that the tow truck shall move only when the direction control is actuated and shall not move at a speed greater than inching speed unless control has been actuated for both speed and direction. Where no neutral position is provided, the tow trucks shall not move unless the speed control is activated. 6.3 The accelerator, if foot operated, the right foot and shall increase travel 6.4 Service pedal. brak-s, if foot operated, shall be located for operation speed when depressed. shall be applied by depressing by the

6.5 When a single pedal is used to control both the above functions ( that is acceleration and braking ), it shall be located for operation by the right foot and shall release the brakes and increase travel speed when depressed. Conversely it shall reduce travel speed and apply the brakes when released. 7. SAFETY

ENGINE

CONTROL AND BRAKES-INTERNAL COMBUSTION POWERED SIT-DOWN RIDER TOW TRUCKS

7 I. Travel control shall be so arranged that the tow truck shall move only when the direction control is actuated and shall not move at a speed greater than inching speed unless control has been actuated for both speed and direction. 7.2 Service pedal. brakes, if foot operate:l, shall be energized by depressing the pedal shall

7.3 If a combination clutch-and-brake pedal is used, the initial movement shall disengage the clutch and the final pedal movement apply the brakes, and the pedal shall be operated by the left foot. 7.4 The accelerator, if foot operated, shall increase

speed when depressed.

7.5 If a combination pedal controls both acceleration and brakes, depressing the accelerator portion shall increase speed and depressing the brake portion shall apply the brakes, and the combination pedal shall be operated by the right foot. 7.6 The clutch pedal, with the left foot. 8. SAFETY if used, shall disengage the clutch when depressed

STAND

CONTROL AND ON TOW TRUCKS

BRAKES-ELECTRIC
automatically

POWERED
the travel circuit

8.1 Means

shall be provided to open when the operator leaves the truck. 5

IS :

10312 - 1982

8.2 Means shall be provided so that the travel circuit can be activated only by releasing the parking brake and resetting the speed and/or directional control(s) when the operator assumes the driving position. 9. SAFETY ENGINE CONTROL POWERFD AND BRAKES-YNTFRNAL COMBUSTION STAND-ON TOW TRUCKS operated, shall increase the speed when

9.1The
depressed

accelerator, if foot with the right foot.

9.2 Travel control shall be zo arranged that the tractor will not move until the direction control has been actuated and will not move at a speed greater than inching speed unless control has been actuated for both speed and direction.

10.POWER

SYSTEMS

AND

ACCESSORIES tow trucks [ diesel, petrol and

10.1Internal combustion engine driven liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ) 1. 10.1.1 Exhaust and Cooling Systems

10.1.1.1 `l-he exhaust system shall be arranged with due consideration for the comfort and well-being of the operator and other personnel. The air flow through the cooling system shall also be arranged in a manner to avoid discomfort to the operator.
10.1.2

Fuel Tank
the engine. If the tank and/ and exhaust

10.1.2.1 A fuel tank shall not be located directly over a tank is within or contiguous to the engine compartment, or fill arrangement shall be isolated flom the electrical systems by a separate enclosures or by baffles.

10.1.2.2 The tank location and the facilities for filling shall be such that spillage or leakage will drain to the ground and not on to the engine or on to electrical or exhaust-system parts, or into the operator's compartment. Fuel spillage shall not be possible under operating conditions. 10.1.2.3 A fuel tank and its fitting shall be so located the possibility of c amage to the tank or its fittings. 10.1.3 as to minimize

Containers
The container(s) for LPG or quickly removable. 6 may be either permanently fixed.

10.1.3.1
on the truck

IS :10312-1982 10.1.3.2 Containers shall be fitted on the tow trucks in such a manner as to be protected against atomopheric corrosion and from corrosive action of the products handled by tile truck.
10.1.3.3 the fastening The containers shall be firmly secured shall be unaffected by vibration. to the tow truck, and

10.1.3.4 Containers, whether fixed or removable, shall be equipped with a device to prevent the sudden emission of a large volume of gas, particularly in the caje of a pipe failure. The fuel take-off on the container shall be equipped with an easily accessible, manually operated The fuel shall be taken off in liquid form unless the container valve. and the engine are sp-cially equipped for direct vapour withdrawal. 10.1.3.5 A suitable safety pressure-relief valve shall be connected to the vapour space of the container. Where such containers are fitted inside compartments of vehicles, the discharge side of the relief valve shall be piped to atmosphere. 10.1.3.6 Where containers are fitted inside compartments of vehicles, the discharge side of any maximum level indicating device which relies on bleeding qas to atmosphere shall terminate at a readily visible position on the outside of the vehicle. 10.1.3.7 If containers are installed in a compartment, this compartment shall have permanent openings at the top and bottom allowing adequate ventilation to outside atmosphere. 10.1.3.8 When containers are removable, their fa7tening shall permit easy handling and easy checking of installation after the exchange of containers.

10.1.4 Piping
10.1.4.1 Connecting piping and all associated parts shall be easily accessible, protected against damage and wear, and flexible enough to Pipework shall be so withstand vibration and deformation in service. arranged that damage or leak; are easily detectable and shall be installed in such a way that it cannot be damaged by the hot parts of the engine. Fully rigid pipes for connecting the container to equipment on the engine shall not be used. 10.1.4.2 Hoses and all connections ihdication of damage or deterioration. shall be replaced at the first

10.1.4.3 The container and its connections shall be installed in such .a way that there are no projections outside the overall contour of the Container connections shall be protected by a rigid guard. truck. 7

IS:10312

-1982 between against two shutexcessive

10.1.4.4 Any section of pipework containing LPG off valves, which may be closed, shall be protected pressure by means of a suitable pressure-relief valve. 10.2 Electric Tow Truck

10.2. I Battery, 10.2.1.1 An air space of at least 33 mm shall be provided above the live terminals of the battery, or the cover shall be provided with an insulated lining. 10.2.1.2 Ventilation container or compartment openings shall be above the cells. provided in the battery

10.2.1.3 If there are openings in the cover, they shaI1 be protected The cover shall be rigid enough against the entrance of foreign bodies. to obviate, in normal use, any distortion which might bring it into contact with live parts of the cells. 10.2.1.4 Batteries and containers shall be retained in the tow truck in such a manner as to prevent displacement during normaI use. 11. OPERATION 11.1 Capacity 11.1.1 The exceeded. Modifications manufacturer's and Markings rated capacity of the tow truck shall be

11.1.2 Any design modifications and additions liable to influence capacity and operating safety shall be effected only after tlke approval of the manufacturer. 11.1.3 Modifications arising from application of shall be performed in such a manner that safety accordance with the provisions of this safety code. and instruction plate, shall be changed accordingly. 11.1.4 in place 11.2 The user shall ensure that all name-plates and are maintained in a legible condition. and Storage ancillary attachment is not reduced and in Capacity, operation, and markings are

Fuel Handling

11.2.1 Trucks shall be refuelled only at locations designed for that The locations shall be ventilated to minimize the accumu1at;bt-r ~~r~~~mable fumes. LPG containers shall not be filled, and removable LPG containers shall not be exchanged near open pits, underground entrances, elevator shafts or other similar areas. 8

11.2.2 Smoking sh& be pr:rdhib-it&tin refuelling areas; which shall, be, ,.' indicated by Signs. $1.2.3 haidled Liquid fuel, not dispensed in closed containers. from approved pumps, shall be ,,

qJ.2.4 LFG containers shall be stored, and transporteg, with the service valve , closed and .the saf&y ! valve ,in tdirect communization, ;with the " The protective caps,prgvided sh+ be\ v;Fpour sRace, of the'c0ritaine.r. fitted on the co&e&ions when containers are stored. ,,11,2.5 LPG coxitaii&r~' shall be inspected to ,enspre that no vapour leakage exists bfoi-e recharging and/or reusing. Pal;ticulat: attentiori shall be given tq the.val`ves alid connections. Damaged coptainers shall not be used. Repa%' may'be made only by;authorized firms and tested I ??.d certified by competent authorit)n. 111.3 Battery &@nigdand Changing,

j 11.3.1 Batter); charging installations shall`be located in Teas, designated. for that purpose. Facilities shall be pnovided for flt@iqg and neuffalii@g spilled electroljtte, for fidre protection, for protecting `charging' apparatus from damage b3 tow tru'ck, and for adequate ventilation for I dispersal of fumes from gassing batteries. I i 11.3.2 SToking shill bB prohibited in charging areas; this shall be ,, indicated by iigns. ./ 1 11.3.3 Only trained Bnd authorized personnel shall charge ?r change Persons maintaining batteries shall wea,r pro!ective ,clothiyg. batteries. :i". , 11.3.4 All bittery cha@irit: shall be carried oyt in qqc;?rd,pnce wiih When reinstalling batteries, means &all be manufacturers instructions. provided for cqrrectfy cotinecting, positioning ;and ' securing batteries. , Tools and bther mktallic objects shall be kept pw,ay from the t?p of I uncovered batteries. 11.3.5 The battety of ati'electric tow truck shall not be, replaced by another j battery Having different voltage, weight or size, wlthout specific manufacturer of the tow truck, if authorization ( by' the "original possible ). 11.3:s ddly bat'teries meeting the tow truck rpanufacturer's specifica! tions .shall be `used. Means shall] be provided for t,he,eafe,changing of batteries. 12. Mk'fNTENANCE , 12.J Preventive maintenance,lIubrication and,inspectipn of, a11 powered tow trucks shall `be performed according , to. a sche,+Ied systkm in ._ 19

IS:10312

- 1982 with the manuthe tow trucks be permitted to

conformity with the following items and, in particular, facturer's recommendations, which should accompany when delivered. 12.2 Only qualified and authorized personnel maintain, repair, adjust and inspect tow trucks. shall

12.3. -&akes, steering mechanisms, control mechanisms, warning devices, fights; governors, shall be'maintained in a safe operating condition. controllers and contractors, limit switches, 12.4 Batteries, motors, electrical conductors and connections shall be protective devices, inspected and maintained in accordance with generally accepted good practice. Special attention shall be paid to the condition of electrical insulation. 12.5 Exhaust system and adjustments pump of internal combustion engine with regard to damage and Ieakage. of carburettor evaporator and fueI powered tow truck shall be checked

.

NOTE-During maintenance, the operation of internal combustion engines in Adequate ventilation is recommended confined areas can produce noxious substances. when internal combu# n engines are operated in such confined areas. ?

12.6 Pneumatic types shall be checked for wear and tear of bearing The inflation pressure specified by the surfaces, side walls and rims. tow truck manufacturers shall be maintained. Before demounting pneumatic tyres on split rims, precautions shall be taken to ensure that the internal pressure has been completely relived. 12.7 All information legible condition. and instruction plates shall be maintained in a

