IS

: `9012 - 1978' _ ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR SHOTCRETING
( Fourth Reprint NOVEMBER 1995 )

UDC

666.97.033~14

0 BUREAU
MANAK

Copyrighf 1979 INDIAN. STANDARDS
ZAPAR MAR0

OF
BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 5

May 1979

IS : 9012 - 1978

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR SHOTCRETING
Cement
Chairman DR H. C. VISVESVARAYA Members ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR, STANDARDS Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow (B&S) DEPUTY DIBEOTOR, STANDARDS ( B & S ) ( Alfcrnafe ) Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi SERI K. C. AGXJARWAL SHRI C. L. KASLIWAL ( Altnnate ) Cement Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI B. C. BANERJEE SHRI A. U. RIJHSIN~~ANI ( Alternate ) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. P. BANERJEE SHRI HARISH N. MALANI ( Alternate ) SHRI R. N. BANSAL Beas Designs Organization, Nangal Township SKRI T. C. GARCJ ( Alternate ) Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ),. Dn N. S. BHAL Roorkee CHIEF ENQINEER ( PROJECTS ! Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh DIRECTOR, IBRI ( Alfernnte ) DIRECTOR ( CSMRS ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( CSMRS ) ( Alternatt ) ENQINEER-IN-CHIEF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SUPERXNTENDINC) ENQINEER , DELHI CENTRAL CIRCLE No. 2 (Alternate ) SIIRI AVITABHA GEOSH National Test House, Calcutta SHRI E. K. RAMACHANDRAN ( Alternate) DR R. K. GHOSH Central Road Research Institute (CSIR), New Delhi; and Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi Sanr Y. R. PHULL ( Alternate I ) CentraJlhyoad Research Institute ( CSIR ), New SRRI M. D INAKARAN ( Alternate II ) Cent..eihRoad Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Cement

and Concrete

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

BDC 2

Research

Institute of India, New Delhi

( Continued on page 2 )

@I CoprigAt
BUREAU OF INDIAN

1979 STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Co@+ght AC: ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1s : 9012- 19%
( Continuedfrom page 1

)
Representing Engineer-in-Chief's New Delhi
( Ahmate )

Members Sun1 B. R. G~VIND Snnr G. R.
MIILCIIAXDANI

Branch,

Army

Headquarters,

SRRI A. k;. GUPTA DR R.R.HATTIANGA~I

Hydcrabad Asbestos Cement Products Ltd, Hyderabad The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay

Sunr P. J. JAGUS ( Alternafe ) Dn IQn.zL ALI
SHRI hf. ?'.I<ANSE Smr S. R. KTTLKARNI Snnr S. K. LAI~A SXRI B. T. UN~ALLA ( DR MORAN RAI

Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi M. N. Dastur & Co ( Pvt ) Ltd, Calcutta The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta Central Building Roorkee In Research Institute ( CSIR ),

Alternate )

DR S. S. REIISI ( Alternate ) Srrnr K. K. NA~IBIAR

Dn A. V. R. RAO Srrrtr K. S. SRISIVASAN ( Alternate ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI R. V. CITALAPATHI RAO SIIRI S. ROY ( Alternate ) Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SHRI T. N. S. RAO SIIRI S. R. PIN~IEIRO ( Alternate ) Central Board ofIrrigation and Power, New Delhi SECiLETAlLY
DEPUTY SIXRETARY SrmI N. SEN ( 1 ) (~k?VLde)

personal capacity ( ` Ramanalaya' 11 First Crescent Park Road, Gandhinagar, Adyar, Madras ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi

Roads Wing, Ministry of Shipping arfd Transport SJIILI J. R. K. PRAS.~~ ( Alternate) The India Cements Ltd, Madras SIZRI K. A. Subramaniam Ssnr P. S. RA~I-~CXANDRAN( Alternate ) S u P E 11I N T E N u I N o ENGINEER Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras ( Dmxors ) EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (S M&R DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi SHRI L. SWATlOOP Snnr A. V. RAXAXA ( Alternate ) The Concrete Association of India, Bombay SIIRI B. T. UNWALLA Snnr T. M. MENON ( Alternate ) SrrllI D. A.TITIrA SIYRA, Director General, BIS ( Ex-o&cio Member ) Director ( Civ Engg )

Secretary

SHRI M. N. NEELAKANDRAN Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

( conrinrud on PopI 19 )

2

IS:9012- 1978

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PRACTlCE FOR SHOTCRETING
0. FOKEWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 November 1978, after the dsat't finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Shotcrete is mortar or concrete conveyed through a hose and pneumatically projected at high velocity on to a surface. The force of the jet impinging on the surface compacts the material. Generally a relatively dry mixture is used, and so the material is capable of supporting even for vertical and overhead itself without sagging or sloughing, applications. 0.3 Shotcrete has been referred to generally as gunite, pneumatically applied mortar or concrete, sprayed concrete, spraycrete, air-blown mortar the term shotcrete and concrete, gunned concrete, e'tc. In this standard will be adhered to right through as it is internationally accepted and conveys the intended meaning implicitly. 0.4 Shotcrete is suitable for a variety of new construction and repair work, but its properties and performance are to a great extent dependent on the of the particular conditions under which it is placed, , the capability equipment selected, and in particular on the competence of the operating staff. Shotcreting work can be either plain or reinforced. 0.5 This standard covers the recommended practice for general shotcrete using two shotcreting processes, namely dry-mix process and wet-mix process. The practices recommended in this standard generally reflect the standards and practices prevailing in different countries and also the practices in the field in this country. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised).

3

IS : 9012 - 1978 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard processes, namely,

covers the recommended practice for two shotcreting dry mix process and wet mix process.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 Shotcrete - Mortar or concrete conveyed through a hose and projected at high velocity on to a surface; also known as air-blown mortar, also pneumatically applied mortar or concrete, sprayed mortar and gunned concrete. conveyed 2.2 Dry-Mix-Shotcrete - Pneumatically most of the mixing water is added at the nozzle. 2.3 Gunite ( Trade Name)
-

shotcrete dry-mix

in

which

Method

of applying

shotcrete.

wherein all ingredients, including 2.4 Wet-Mix Shotcrete - Shotcrete mixing water, are mixed in the equipment before introduction into the delivery hose; it may be pneumatically conveyed or moved by displacement. 3. MATERIALS
3.1 Cement-The

cement used shall be any of the following, with the prior approval of the engineer-in-charge: a) Ordinary or low heat Portlant cement conforming to IS: 2691976". b) Rapid hardening Portland cement conforming to IS : 804119781_. c) Portland slag cement conforming to IS: 455-1976$. d) Portland Pozzolana cement conforming to IS : 1489-19769. e) High strength ordinary Portland 197611. f) Hydrophobic cement conforming
PY`OTIT -

cement

conforming

to IS : 8112-

to IS : 8043-1978a.
shall be used

Low heat Portland cement conforming to IS : 269-1976* with adequate precautions with regard to removal of formwork, etc. *Specification $Specification SSpecification �Specification I/Specification aSpecificat/on for for for for for for

ordinary anJ low heat Portland cement (third rcuision ). rapid hardening Portland cement (jirst revision ). Portland slag cement ( third revism ). Portland Pozzolana cement ( second reuision ). high strength ordinary Portland cement. hydrophol?ic Portland cement (Jirst revision j,

4

IS : 9012 - 1978
3.2 Aggregates

3.2.1 Sand for shotcrete shall comply with the requirements given in IS :`383-197Q* and graded evenly from fine to coarse as per Zone II and Sand failing to satisfy this grading Zone I-II grading of IS : 383-1970*. may, however, be used if preconstruction testing ( see 6 ) establishes that it gives good results. Further, sand for finish or flash coats may be finer However, the use of finer sands will generally than the above grading. result in greater drying shrinkage, and coarse sands, in more rebound. 3.2.2 Coarse Aggregate - Coarse aggregates when used shall comply It shall, generally conform to one with the requirements of IS : 3-83-1970*. of the gradings given in Table 1.
TABLE IS SIEVE DESIGNATION 1 GRADiNG OF COARSE AGGREGATES PERCENTAGE BY MASS PASSING FOR AC~RECATE ox NOMINAL MAXIXUM SIZE h-I-___--_---7 c----------12'5 mm 10 mm 20 mm

20 12.5 10 +75 2.36 1.18

mm 25

(1)

(2)

(3) loo 90-100 40-70 o-15 o-5 -

(4) 100 90-100 20-55 O-10 o-5 -

100 85-100 10-30 O-10 o--5

3.2.2.1 All oversize pieces shall be rejected are likely to cause plugging of the hose. 3.3 Water --Water of IS: 456-1978t.

by screening,

since they

used for shotcrete shall conform to the requirements

3.4 AdmixtureAdmixture shall only be used when so specified. Admixture when used, shall meet the requirements of IS :.456-1978f and IS : 91Q3-1979$. 3.5 Reinforcement - Reinforcing bars if used'shall conform tti IS : 432 Welded wire fabric ( Part I )-1966� or IS : 1139-196611 or IS : 1786-19660. conforming to IS : 1566-1967** also may be used.
*Specification ( second feuision). for coarse and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete (third reoision ). $Specification for admixtures for concrete. &Specification for mrld steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement : Part I Mild steel and medium tensiic> steei bars ( second rcoision ) . IlSpecification for hot-rolled mild steel, medium tensile steel and high yield strength steel deformed bars for concrete reinforcement ( revised ). ISpecification for cold twisted steel bars for concrete reinforcement ( revised ). **Specification for hard-drawn steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcemrnt (,firsl rerisian ) .

5

IS t 9012 - 1978

4. SHOTCRETING

PROCESS processes are:

4.0 The two basic shotcreting a) Dry mix process, and 0) Wet mix process.

4.1 Dry Mix Process - In this process, a mixture of cement and moist sand is conveyed through the delivery hose to a nozzle where most of the mixing water is added under pressure. This process consists of the following steps: a) The cement and moist sand are thoroughly mixed; b) The cement-sand mixture is fed into a special mechanical feeder or gun referred to in this standard as delivery equipment ( see 7); c) The mixture is forced into the delivery hose by a feed wheel or distributor; d) The mixed material is carried in suspension by compressed air through the delivery hose to a nozzle, which is filled inside with a perforated manifold through which water is introduced under pressure and intimately mixed with the other ingredients; and e) The mortar is jetted from the nozzle at high velocity on to the surface to be shotcreted. 4.2 Wet Mix Process - In this process, all the ingredients including water are mixed before they enter the delivery hose. It consists of the following steps: a) All the mixed; ingredients ( including mixing water) are thoroughly of the

b) The mortar or concrete delivery equipment;

is introduced

into the chamber

c) The mixture is forced into the delivery hose and conveyed by compressed air or other means to a nozzle; d) Additional air is injected at the nozzle to increase the velocity and improve the shooting pattern; and e) The mortar or concrete is jetted from the nozzle at high velocity on to the surface to be shotcreted. 4.3 Shotcrete suitable for normal construction requirements may be produced by either process. However, difference in cost of equipment, maintenance and operational features may make one or the other method more attractive for a particular application. 6

IS I 9012 - 1978 5. PROPERTIES 5.1 Properly OF SHOTCRETE

applied shotcrete is a structurally adequate and durable material capable of excellent bond with concrete, masonry, steel and other materials. However, these favourable properties are contingent on proper planning and supervision, and on the skill and continuous attention by the operating staff. 5.2 The water cement ratio for shotcrete in place normally falls within the range of Q-35 to 0.50 by mass which is somewhat lower than for most conventional concrete mixes. In general the physical properties of sound shotcrete in place are comparable to those of conventional mortar or concrete of the same composition. Most reported values for 2%day It is recommended that strength are in the range of 20 to 50 N/mm". strength higher than 25 N/mms be specified only for the most carefully executed shotcrete jobs. 5.3 The drying shrinkage of shotcrete depends somewhat on the mix proportions used, but generally falls within the range of 0.06 to 0.10 percent. This is rather higher than for most low-slump conventional concrete, which is generally placed in heavier sections using larger `aggregate and leaner mixes. It will tend to give more shrinkage, cracking, and may require a closer joint spacing. The durability of shotcrete in laboratory tests and under field exposure has generally been good, 5.4 Shotcrete offers advantages over conventional concrete in a variety of new construction and repair work. It is frequently more economical because of the lesser forming requirements, and because it requires only a small, portable plant for manufacture and placement. 6. PRECONSTRUCTION

TESTING

6.1 The mix proportions, grading and quality of aggregate, amount and spacing of reinforcing steel, position of the work, design and condition of delivery equipment, and the quality of workmanship all affect the quality of shotcrete in place. A laboratory investigation shall, therefore, be carried out prior to the commencement of the work in order to check the operation of the equipment and the skill of the operating staff, and also to verify that the specified quality of shotcrete may be expected in the structure. The procedure for preconstruction testing shall be as recommended in 6.1.1 to 6.1.6.
6.1.1 Test panels simulating actual job by the operating staff, using the equipment, proposed for the job. conditions materials shall be fabricated and mix proportions

7

IS:9012

- 1978

6.1.2 For the dry mix process, the amount of water added at the nozzle is adjusted so that the in-place shotcrete appears to be adequately compacted and neither sags nor shows excessive rebound. Where justified by the size and importance of the job or lack of previous experience with the materials, it may be advisable to test two or three mixes, generally within the range of 1 part of cement to 3 to 4& parts of sand, before deciding on the final mix proportions.
6.1.3 The procedure for the wet mix process is similar to the dry mix process ( see 6.1.2 ) except that the entire mix is premixed to give a workability judged to be appropriate for the work, before it is introduced into the chamber of the delivery equipment. Tests on more than one mix design are usually recommended where it is desired to include coarse aggregate in the mix. Normally 20 to 40 percent of coarse aggregate is first tried, with subsequent mixes adjusted to reflect the results of the first trial. 6.1.4 The panels are fabricated by gunning on to a back form of plywood. A separate panel shall be fabricated for each mix design being considered, and also for each gunningposition to be encountered in the structure, that At least part of the panel shall is, slab, vertical and overhead sections. contain the same reinforcement as the structure, to show whether sound shotcrete is obtained behind the reinforcing rods. The panel shall be large enough to obtain all the test specimens needed, and also to indicate Generally what quality and uniformity may be expected in the structure. the size of panel shall be not less than 75 x 75 cm; The thickness shall he the same as in the structure except that it shall normally be not less than 7.5 cm. 6.1.5 Cubes or cores shall be taken from the panels for testing. The cores shall have a minimum diameter of 7.5 cm and a length-diameter ratio of at least 1, if possible. The specimens shall be tested in compression at the age of 7 or 28 days or both. 6.1.6 The cut surfaces-of the specimens shall he carefully examined and additional surfaces shall be exposed by sawing or breaking the panel when it is considered necessary to check the soundness and uniformity of the material. All cut and broken surfaces shall be dense and free from laminations and sand pockets. 7. EQUIPMENT

7.1 Dry Mix Process 7.1.1 Batching and Mixing Equipment-Batching by mass is to be preferred and is strongly recommended. Sand may be batched by volume if periodic checks are made to ensure that the masses are maintained within the required tolerance.

IS : 9012 - 1978
The moisture content of the sand shall be such that the sand-cement mixture wilt flow at a uniform rate, without sJugs, through the delivery hpse. The optimum moisture content will depend upon the delivery within the range of 3 to 6 eqtiipment being used, but it is generally percent. The sand shall be moistened or dried as required to bring the Fluctuations in moisture content moisture content to a satisfactory level. shall be avoided. The mixing equipment shall be capable of thoroughly mixing the sand and cement in sufficient quantity to maintain con?inuity of placing. The mixing time shall be not less than 1 minute in a drum-type mixer; where other mixers are proposed, satisfactory evidence shall be presented The mixer shall be self-cleanthat they are capable of thorough mixing. ing, capable of discharging all mixed material without any carryover from It shall be inspected and thoroughly cleaned one batch to the next. at least once a day ( and more often if necessary ) to prevent accumulations of batched material. 7.1.2 Delivery Equijment or Guniting Eqt$ment - The delivery shall comply with the requirements given in 6433-1972*. equipment

7.12 Air SupPLy - Properly operating air compressor of ample capacity The compressor shall is essential for a satisfactory shotcreting operation. be Jitted with a moisture extracter to keep up a supply of clean, dry air adequate for maintaining a sufficient nozzle velocity for all parts of the work while simultaneously operating a blow pipe for clearing away rebound. The operating pressure is the pressure driving the material from the delivery equipment into the hose, and is measured by a gauge near the material outlet of the gun. The air pressure shall be uniformly steady ( non-pulsating ). For lengths of hose up to 30 m, air pressure at the gun shall be O-3 N/mm2 or more. Where the length exceeds 30 m, the pressure shall be increased by 0.035 N/mms for each additional 15 m of hose required, and by O-035 N/mm* for each 7.5 m that the nozzle is raised above the gun. 7.1.4 M'ater supply - The water pressure at the discharge nozzle shall be sufficiently greater than the operating air pressure to ensure that the water is intimately mixed with the other materials. If the line water pressure is inadequate, a water pump shall be introduced into the line. The water pressure shall be uniformly steady ( non-pulsating ). *Specjfication for guniting equipment. 9

IS:9012-

1978

7.2 Wet Mix Process
7.2.1 Batching and Mixing Equipment -Batching by mass is- to be Aggregates may be batched by preferred and is strongly recommended. volume if periodic checks, are made to ensure that the masses are mainWater may be batched either by mass tained within a required tolerance. or by volume.

The mixing equipment shall be capable of thoroughly mixing the specified materials in sufficient quantity to maintain continuous placing. The required mixing time will depend on the mix being used and the Delivery of concrete at the desired workability efficiency of the mixer. and uniformity from batch to batch is essential to a good shotcreting operation especially in vertical and overhead applications. pneumatic feed type of wet mix delivery 7.2.2 Delivery Equipment -The equipment is capable of applying high quality, low-slump mortar or concrete with the reliability needed for general construction and repair work. From a pressurised vessel in the equipment, the premixed materials The material and compressed air are discharged into the delivery hose. and air pass throygh the hose to the gunning nozzle which is fitted with an air ring for injecting additional compressed air. The wet mix delivery equipment shall be of a design and size which, It shall be capable of delivering have given good results in similar work. the premixed materials accurately, uniformly, and continuously through :ie6pl&;y hose. The size of the hose is generally within the range of 32 Recommendations of the equipment manufacturers shall be followed with regard to the type and size of nozzle to be used, and the cleaning, inspeciion, and maintenance of the equipment. 7.2.3 Air &pPly -The air compressor shall be capable of keeping up a supply of clean air adequate for maintaining sufficient nozzle velocity for all parts of the work and for simultaneous operation of a blow pipe for clearing away rebound. 8. APPLICATION
OF SHOTCRETE

8.1 Preparation of Surface - A good base or foundation is necessary Where the shotcrete is for proper and successful application of shotcrete. to be placed against earth surfaces as in canal linings, such surfaces shall Shotcrete first be thoroughly compacted and trimmed to line and grade. shall not be placed on any surface which is frozen, spongy, or where there is frep water. The surface shall be kept damp for several hours before a,pplying shotcrete.

8.1.1 material

In the case of repairs to existing deteriorated concrete, all unsound shall be first removed. Chipping shall continue until there are

IS : 9012 - 1978 no offsets in the cavity which will cause an abrupt change of the repaired surface. No square shoulders shall be left The final cut of the cavity; all edges shall be tapered. critically examined to make sure that it is sound and Improper preparatory work is more often responsible shotcrete in repair work than any other single factor. in the thickness at the perimeter surface shall be properly shapeu. for failures of

8.1.2 After it has been ensured that the surface ( whether concrete, masonry or steel ) to which shotcrete is to be bonded is sound, it shall be cleaned of all loose and foreign materials. If necessary, the surface shall be chiseled or sand-blasted to make it rough to receive shotcrete. Exposed reinforcement shall be cleaned free of rust, scales etc. Porous surfaces shall be kept damp for several hours before shotcrete is applied. 8.2 Formwork - The forms shall be plywood sheating or other suitable material, true to line and dimension. They shall be adequately braced to protect against excessive vibration, and shall be constructed so as to permit the escape of air and rebound during the gunning operation; this is of particular importance in the case of thick structural members. Short removable bulkheads may be used at intersections. Forms shall be oiled or dampened, and they shall be cleaned just before gunning. Adequate and safe scaffolding shall be provided so that the operatcr can hold the nozzle at the optimum angle and distance from the surface for all parts of the work as described in 8.5. The scaffolding shall be also given easy access to the shotcrete surface for screeding and finishing, if such is specified. Scaffolding shall be constructed to permit uninterrupted applications of the shotcrete wherever possible. 8.3 Reinforcement - The soundest shotcrete will be obtained where the ' reinforcing steel is designed and placed to cause the least interference with placement. Depending on the thickness and nature of the work, reinforcement may consist of either round bars, or welded wire fabric. Small sizes of bars shall be used, a 16 mm diameter bar being the normal maximum size. Where large bars are necessary, exceptional care shall be taken in encasing them with shotcrete. 8.3.1 Suficient clearance shall be provided around the reinforcement to permit complete encasement with sound concrete. The clearance needed depends on the maximum size of aggregate in the mix and the size of reinforcement. The minimum clearance between the reinforcement and the form or other backup material may vary between 12 mm for the case of a mortar mix and wire fabric reinforcements to 50 mm for the case of a concrete mix and 16 mm diameter reinforcing bars. The minimum wire mesh spacing shall be 50 mm by 50 mm. Clear spacing between parallel bars shall be at least 65 mm. Minimum cover to reinforcement shall be

11

IS t 9012 - 1978 as fier IS': 456:1978*. As far as possible to permit shooting from opposite side. the bars shall be arranged so as

8.3.2 Laps for bars and wire fabric shall receive special attention to prevent weak sections in the shotcrete. Lapped reinforcing bars shall not be tied together; they shall be separated by at least 50 mm, wherever possible. Wire mesh shall be lapped 14 squares in all directions. A continuous chair shall not follow along directly underneath a reinforcing bar since this will probably result in a sand pocket under the bar. The minimum requirements of lap length shall be as specified in IS : 456-1978*. 8.3.3 For repair work, the reinforcement shall be fixed to existing masonry and concrete by wiring to nails driven into walls and secured rigidly so that the vibration resulting from the deposition of shotcrete will not impair or displace them. 8.4 Alignment Control - Adequate ground wires shall be installed to establish thickness and surface planes of the shotcrete build-up. Both horizontal and vertical ground wires shall be installed at corners and offsets not clearly fixed by the formwork, for example, at exterior corners of walls, column or beam corners, and other locations. They may also be used as screed guides. Ground wires shall be tight and true to line, and placed in such a manner that they may be further tightened. 8.5 Placing the Shotcrete - Each layer of shotcrete is built up by makThis ing several passes or loops of the nozzle over the working area. may be done by moving the nozzle rythmically in a series of loops from side to side and up and down (see Fig. 1 and 2 ). The shotcrete shall emerge from the nozzle in a steady, uninterrupted flow. If the flow becomes intermittent due to any cause, the operator shall direct it away from the work until it again becomes constant. The distance of the nozzle from work (usually between 0.5 and I.5 m) shall be such as to give the best results for the working conditions. The nozzle shall be held perpendicular to the surface of application. However, when gunning through and encasing reinforcing bars, the nozzle shall be held closer and at a slight angle from the perpendicular. Also the mix shall be little wetter than normal, but not so wet as to cause sloughing behind the bar. This procedure forces the plastic shotcrete behind the bar while preventing build-up on the front face of the bar. Where bars are closely spaced, Fig. 3 shows effects more than one bar may be shot from each position. of correct and incorr'ect nozzle operation in encasing reinforcement with shotcrete. *Code of practice for plain and reinforced 12 concrete ( third reoision ).

IS : 9012 - 1978

600

TO 1200mm

FIG. 1

CORRECTUSE OF THE NOZZLE

60 TO 150mm 450 TO 600mm

FIG. 2

APPROXIMATE SIZE OF TNE LOOP

13

IS : 9812- 1978

ky--`-`2-, ggy5;s;,7; ,I

GUXITE F@F?CFD BEtilND BAR BY HlGH VELOCITY AND VARiATiGN OF DlRECTlGli

__-.__-gp -! !
dFACE 3A

BACK

OF BAR

FULLY

ENCASED

`"7 -p-`,Ty-7y-;r?yI FREE OF BUILD-UP :.' ,`,( y,.:/,:; >: , .' I
PERFECT

OF BAR STILL

ENCASEMENT

Correct

Nozzle

Operation

SCFT UNIDIRECTIONAL IMPACT CAUSE BUILD-UP ON BAR

L--+f-A

HEAVY

BUILD-UP

L;$--i

SAND

POCKET

FORMING

SHRINKAGE CRACK FORMS AT WEAKENED SECTION

38 FIG.

Incorrect

Nozzle

Operation

3

THE EFFECT OF CORRWT AND INCORRECT NOZZLE OPERATION IN ENCASING REINFORCING BARS WIT& SHOTCRETE

14

t8 t

90111.1978

8.5.1 For walls, columns and beams, the application shall begin at the bottom, The first layer shall at least completely embed reinforcement adjacent to the form. The thickness of layer is governed mainly by the requirement that the shotcrete shall not sag. Where thick layers are applied, it is important that the top surface is maintaiued on a 45" slope approximately, and that rebound is kept out of the work. Fig. 4 shows a shotcreting operation on a vertical wall, the top surface of the shotcrete is kept at 45" so that the rebound falls clear of the work. In shooting slabs, the nozzle shall be held at a slight angle from the perpendicular SO that rebound is blown on to the completed portion from where it can be removed.

FALLING

CLEAR

FIG. 4

SHOTCRETING

ON

VERTICAL WALL FROM BOTTOM TO TOP

8.6 Rebound -

Rebound is aggregate and cement paste which ricochets surface during the application of shotcrete due to collision with the hard surface, reinforcement, or with the aggregate particles themselves. The amount of rebound varies with the position of the work angle of the nozzle, air pressure, cement content, water content, size and grading of aggregate, amount of reinforcement and thickness of layer. Depending on the position of the work, the variation in the amount of rebound may be as below:

off the

Surface Floor or slabs Sloping and vertical walls Overhead work

Percentage

of Rebound

5-15 15-30 25-50

Figure 5 indicates the effects of the angle at which the shotcrete hits A small circular motion with the the wall on the percentage of rebound. gun held in such a way as to provide 90" impact provides minimum Initially the percentage of rebound is large, but it rebound ( see Fig. 6 ),

15

IS I9011 - 1978
becomes less after a plastic cushion has been built up. Rebound is much leaner and coarser than the original mix. The cement content of the inplace shotcrete is, therefore, higher because of rebound; this increases the strength but also the tendency towards shrinkage cracking.

HIGH REBOUND

LOW REBOUND

Fro, 5

EFFECT OF NOZZLE ANGLE ON REBOUND

SMALL

CIRCULAR

MOTION

Fm. 6

METHOD OF SHOTCRETINGOPERATION FOR MINIMUM REBOUND

If it 8.6.1 Rebound shall not be worked back into the construction. Rebound shall not does not fall clear of the work, it shall be removed. be salvaged and included in later batches because of the danger of contamination; also it may affect the cement content, state of hydration, and the grading of the aggregate. 8.7 Construction Joints - Construction joints are generally tapered to a thin edge over a width of about 300 mm. A joint of somewhat better appearance is constructed by sloping the shotcrete surface to a shallow

16

ISt9012-1978 edge form; usually a 25 mm thick board laid flat. Ordinary square construction joints are generally avoided in shotcrete construction because they form a trap for rebound. However, when the joint is likely to be required; in subjected to compressive stress, square joints are commonly such a case steps shall be taken to avoid or remove trapped rebound at the joint. The entire joint shall be thoroughly cleaned and. wetted prior to the application of additional shotcrete. 8.8 Preparation for Succeeding Layers - Where a layer of shotcrete is to be covered by a succeeding layer, it shall first be allowed to take its initial set. Then all laitance, loose material and rebound shall be removed by brooming. Any laitance which has attained final set shall be removed by sand-blasting and the surface cleaned with an air water jet. In addition the surface shall be thoroughly sounded with a hammer for drummy areas resulting from rebound packets or lack of bond. Drummy areas, sags, or other defects shall be carefully cut out and replaSurfaces to be shot shall be damp. ced with the succeeding layer. 8.9 Finish&g - The natural gun finish is normally preferred from both the structural and durability considerations. There is danger that further finishing may disturb the section, harming the bond between the shotcrete and reinforcement, and between the shotcrete and the underlaying Additional finishing may material, and creating cracks in the shotcrete. also be difficult to accomplish, especially for the drier mixes. 8.10 Suspension of Work in condition of

8.10.1 The application of shotcrete shall be suspended likely exposure to high winds, freezing or rain.

.

8.10.2 At the end of each day work, or on stopping work for any other reason, the shotcrete shall be slopped off to a thin edge and then the work shall be resumed on next day after cleaning the surface. 8.11 Curing -- Good curing is particularly important for the very thin sections, rough surfaces, and mixes of low workability normally associated with shotcrete. It is generally recommended that surfaces be kept continuously wet for at least 7 days ( see IS : 456-1978* ). 8.12 Quality Control - Quality control of shotcrete is more dificult than for conventional concrete since it is affected not only by the accuracy of batching but also by the skill and continued care of the crew applying shotcrete. 8.12.1 It is generally not feasible obtain specimens for regular control or desirable to core the structure to Therefore small unreinforced tests.
concrete ( third revision ).

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced

17

IS

I

9012

-

1978
75 mm Lhick, jl~;lll tic p~ri~.~lic:ill\ f01' coniI~r',~.,i, (. test5 :1.1d viau;t!
CcJUll)lt'td LVOI~I~ as cJft?n

test panels, at least 30 cm square and gunned, and cores or cubes extracted examination ( see 6 ).

8.12.2 Test cores shall also be taken from tile as necessary to ensure that the control tests reflect in the structure.

the quality

of i:laterial

8.12.3 Concrete cubes prepared by directly gunning into 15 cm cul)e In SUCll moulds may also be used for day to day quality control tests. cases, the results should be correlated to the results from tests of' cubes made from panels (see 8.12.1 ). 8.12.4 1:requency of sanip!in control shall be as agreed upon contractor. g of shotcrete he:ween the for tile purpose engineer-in-charge of qualit) and the

8.13 Inspection - The shotcreting operation shall be continuously inspected by a qualified supervisor who shall check materials, forms reinforcing, ground wires, deliver), equipment, application 01' mat~ri:ll, curing, Exh layc'r of ShOtCrCte and protection against high or IOW tempera!,ure. a hamrncr to cheek for drummy shall be systernaticallv sounded with areas. Cores shall be' taken fl,om the structural shotcrcte: such cores shall be taken as early in the job as practicable so that the data obtained GUI be used to effect improvements in later work. 8.13.1 The permissible tolerance by shotcrete shall be ;T: mm. 9. SKILL OF OPERATOR on the thickness of the iyork executed

9.1 The quality of shotcrete depends to a great extent on the skill of the operator in much the same wav as the quality of a weld depends on the welder. The foreman, nozzlehan, and delivery equipment operator shall for a sufficient period to be fully be experienced in similar capacities qualified to perform his duties. 9.2 A method used for checking the qualifications of a nozzleman is to gun test panels 60 cm or 90 cm square, and 50 mm or more thick, using Compressive strength tests are made on typical reinforcement for the job. When the test panel is cubes of various sizes sawed from these panels. cored, cut up, or broken open, it will indicate not only the strength, but also of suitability of the mix, the electiveness of the reinforcement, and the skill of the nozzleman.

18

IS : 9012 - 1978
( Continutd from page 2 )

Concrete
~fembers Snnr C. I<. ALIMCIJANDANI

Subcommittee,

BIX

2 :2

Rrprcwrling

Ltd, Bombay SIII:I M. C. TANDON ( nllernnte ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SI~RI D. CJI~\I~RAVARTY Designs and Standards Organization D E P u T Y DIILECTOR, STANDARDS Research, ( Ministry of Railway-s ), Lucknow (B&S, ASSIS~~ANT DIRECTOR, ST.\NUiZI:IX3 ( M/C ) ( 24&7nate) Engineering Rcscnrch Laboratories, Hyderabad DIRIXT~R Central Water Commission, I%cw Delhi Dr~t~c~o~t ( C & MDD ) DEPUTY DII~ECTOR ( C & MDD ) ( dltcrnnte ) Structural Engineering ResLtirch Centre ( CSIR ), SITRI V. K. GHANEICAR Roorkee SHRI .A. S. PRASAD~ RAO ( Alternate ) Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR), New DR R. K. GI~OSH Delhi SITTtIM. R.. CIIaTTERJEE ( /ihWUZte ) Engineer-in-Chief's Eranch, Army Headquarters, SIIRI V. 1~. GUPTA i\lew Delhi SIIRI S. V. TIQARE (Alternate ) Associated Consulting Services, Bombay SKRI J. S. HINCORANI SIIRI A. P. REMEDIOS ( Alternate ) The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay SIIRI P. J. ,Jacus Snxr M. R. VINAYAICA ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SIIRI G. C. M,~TIIUR Sunr G. T. BRIDE ( Alternate) In personal First capacity ( ` Ramanalaya ' II SHRI Ii.E;. NAiW3IAx
SHRI

Stup Consultants

) Snnr R. P. SIKKA ( Alternate) Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SIrRI T. iY. S. Rr\o SIIRI S. R. PINI~EIRO ( Alternate ) Public Works and Housing Departmrnt, Bombay S~rnr R4. I'. GAJAPATRY Rao Central Public Works Department, n'ew Delhi SoPERtNTENnING ENGINEER, DELIII CENTR,YL CIRCLE No. 2 SIIRI S. G. VAIDYA ( Alternate ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR C. A. TANEJA Roorkee Srrrtr B. S. GUPTA ( Alternate) The Concrete Association of India, Bombay Suns B. T. UNWALLA Su13r T. M. MENON ( Alternate) Cement Research Institute of India, lYew Delhi DR H. C. VISVESVARAYA Dn A. K. MULLICK ( Alternate)

N. S. RA~I~\SWA>IY

Roads Wing Transport

Crescent Park Road,

( Ministry

Gandhinagar,

of

Adyar,

Shipping

Madras

and

)

19

BUREAU
Heedquarters Telephones Regional Central * Eastern Northern Southern t Western Branch :

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002

: 331 01 31

Telegrams

: Manaksanetha

331 13 75 Offices :

(Common to all Offices) Telephone 331 01 31 t 33": ;63 :25 531640 2352315 632 92 95

: Manak Bhavan, 9. Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C.I.T. Campus. IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaia, E9 MIDC. Marol. Andheri (East). BOMBAY 400093 Offices : 380001

t

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD Peenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 462003

2 63 48 39 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 19 96 41137 201083 521374 21 68 78 5 5507 26 23 05

Plot No. 21. Satvanaaar, BHUBANESHWAR 751007 Kalai Kathir .Building,-6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No 43, Sector 16A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane. -GUWAHATI 781003 S-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg. ( Nampally Station Road ) HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR House No. 561/63. 226005 Estate, PATNA 208005 Plot No: A-9, LUCKNOW Sindhu Nagar. Kanpur Road, 800013

Patliputra industrial

C/o Smt. Sunita Mirakhar, 66 D/C Annexe, Gandhi Nagar, JAMMU (TAWI) 180004 T. C, No. 14/1421, University P. 0.. Palayam. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 inspection Offices (With Sale Point) 6 21 04

:
62 61 71 5 24 35

Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411005
`Sales

Office Cakutta is at 5 Chowringhee P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA $ Sales Office BANGALORE Unitv Building.

Approach,

27 99 65 309 65 28 22 39 71

t

Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY
is st

Narasimharaja

Square,

Printed at Dee Kay Printers. New Delhi. India

