**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9001-10 (1975) : Guidance for Environmental Testing, Part 
10: Mould Growth Test [LITD 1: Environmental Testing 
Procedure] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



'2*S> W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART X MOULD GROWTH TEST 



First Reprint JUNE 1989 
( Incorporating Amendment No. 1 ) 



UDC 621-31 : 62019382 



Copyright 1989 




BUREA-U^OF INBITN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVflN, 9 J^JjAOUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

niJm3elhi 110002 

Gr 3 December 1975 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART X MOULD GROWTH TEST 

Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee, LTDC 2 

Chairman Representing 

Brio D. Swaroop Instrumentation Ltd, Kota 

Members 

Shri H. K. L. Arora All India Radio & Electronics Association, 

Bombay 
Shri R. O. Keswami ( Alternate I ) 
Shri A. K. Ghosh ( Alternate II ) 
Shri H. R. Bapu Seetharam Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri P. S. K. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. S. Bhaihjri National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. P. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Director Standards ( S & T ) Research, Designs & Standards Organization, 

Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 
Joint Director Standards 
( S & T )-I ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. N. Dutta Directorate General of Observatories ( Ministry 

of Tourism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 
Dr P. K. Dutta Philips India Limited, Bombay 

Shri S. P. Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
General Secretary Society of Environmental Engineers, Bangalore 

Shri T. G. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ghasita Singh Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute ( CS1R ), Pilani 
Shri G. R. Ghosh Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri Sardul Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. G. Jain Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' 

Association, Bombay 
Shri K. S. Sodhi ( Alternate ) 
Shri John Francis Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi 

Cdr R. K. Mathur Naval Headquarters, Ministry of Defence 

Cdr J. J. Baxi ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. A. Murari Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras 

Shri B. K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Col E. S. K. Murthy Controllcratc of Inspection SPL Vehicles, 

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Maj Dai.bir Singh ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1989 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) 
and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written per- 
mission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright 
under the said Act. 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri D. V. Petkar Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri A. Pinto National Radio & Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. Sandell All India Instrument Manufacturers' & Dealers' 

Association, Bombay 

Shri H. C. Verma ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. T. Sastry Directorate of Technical Development Produc- 

tion ( Air ), Ministry of Defence 

Shri R. Somasundaram ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Shanbhooue Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri A. Sathyanarayana ( Alternate ) 
Dr Y. V. Somayajulu National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 

Shri P. Suryanarayana ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. V. A. Subramanian Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri G. C. Saxkna ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Coi. T. R. K. Sundaram Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri K. N. Tiwari Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri P. K. Shukla ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) ( Secretary ) 

Panel for Mould Growth Test, ETDC 26 : PI 

Convener 

Shri G. R. Ghosh Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Members 

Shri Saroul Singh ( Alternate to 
Shri G. R. Ghosh ) 
Shri S. S. Nioam Defence Research Laboratory ( Materials ), 

Ministry of Defence (R&D), Kanpur 
Shri P. S. K. Prasad Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Dr P. L. N. Rao In personal capacity ( Indian Institute of 

Science, Bangalore ) 
Shri K. N. Tiwari Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri P. K. Shukla ( Alternate ) 



IS : 9001 ( Part x ) - 1975 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART X MOULD GROWTH TEST 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Tndian Standard ( Part X ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 10 October 1975, after the draft finalized by the Environ- 
mental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard has been largely based on IEC Publication 68-2-10A 
( 1969 ) 'First supplement to Publication 68-2-10 ( 1968 ) Basic environ- 
mental testing procedures, Part 2: Tests — Test J: Mould growth' issued 
by International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.3 This standard ( Part X ) should be read in conjunction with IS : 9000 
(PartX)-l979*. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express* 
ing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-19601*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part X ) deals with the guidance on details of the test 
for mould growth on equipment and components ( both electronic and 
electrical ). 

2. MECHANISMS OF CONTAMINATION 

2.1 Fungi grow in soil and in, or on, many types of common materials. 
They propagate by producing spores which become detached from the 
main growth and later germinate to produce further growth. 

2.2 These spores are very small and readily carried in moving air. They 
also adhere to dust particles and enter with them into equipment. 



•Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items s 
Part X Mould growth test. 

t Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

2.3 All parts of an equipment to which air may penetrate may thus be 
contaminated with mould spores carried in that air. 

2.4 Contamination may also occur due to handling. Spores may be 
deposited by the hands or in the film of moisture left by the hands. 

2.5 Contamination may in addition be caused by mites, capable of 
penetrating into very small gaps ( down to 25 p ) and carrying mould 
spores on their bodies. The bodies and excreta of the mites collect and 
may provide a film of nutrient and moisture which may favour the 
propagation of mould from the spores. 

3. GERMINATION AND GROWTH 

3.1 Moisture is essential to allow the spores to germinate and where a 
layer of dust or other hydrophilic material is present on the surface, 
sufficient moisture may be abstracted by it from the atmosphere. 

3.2 When the relative humidity is below 65 percent, no germination or 
growth will occur. Growth will be more rapid the higher the humidity 
above this value. Spores may, however, survive prolonged periods of very 
low humidity and even though the main growth has died, they will 
germinate and start a new growth as soon as the humidity again becomes 
favourable. 

3.3 In addition to high humidity in the atmosphere, the spores require 
that there shall be on the surface of the item a layer of material which 
absorbs moisture. Provided this damp layer is present, most organic 
materials will supply sufficient nutrient to support at least a little growth. 
When dust is present, this contains ample nutrient for the purpose. Mould 
growth is encouraged by stagnant air spaces and lack of ventilation. 

3.4 The optimum temperature of germination for the majority of moulds 
likely to give trouble in equipment lies between 20°C and 30°C. Rare 
types may however, germinate below 0°C and some as high as 40C. 

3.5 Many spores are not damaged by prolonged exposure to subzero 
temperatures, nor by exposure to high temperatures up to 80 C. 

3.6 To kill spores by heat treatment, it is necessary to expose them for at 
least 30 minutes to a moisture saturated atmosphere at 120°C ( autoclave ) 
or for 2 to 3 hours in a dry atmosphere at 140 to 180°C. 

4. EFFECTS OF GROWTH 

4.1 Primary Effects 

4.1.1 Moulds live on most organic materials, but some of these materials 
are much more susceptible to attack than others. Growth normally occurs 
only on surfaces exposed to the air, and those which absorb or adsorb 
moisture will generally be more susceptible to attack. 



IS : 900! ( Part X ) - 1975 

4tl,2 Even where only a little direct harmful attack on a material 
occurs, the formation of an electrically conducting path across the surface 
due to a layer of wet mycelium may drastically lower the insulation 
resistance between electrical conductors supported by an insulating 
material* 

4.1.3 When the wet mycelium grows in a position where it is within the 
electromagnetic field of a critically adjusted electronic circuit, it may cause 
a serious variation in the frequency-impedance characteristics of the circuit. 

4.1.4 Among the materials very susceptible to attack are leather, wood, 
textiles, cellulose, silk and other natural materials. Most plastic materials 
arc less susceptible, but are also attacked. Where a synthetic resin is not 
itself appreciably attacked but contains a plasticizer, organic filler, or 
pigment, which is a nutrient for fungi, a copious growth may occur on the 
surface where this secondary material is exposed. 

4.1.5 Mould attack on materials usually results in a decrease of mechani- 
cal strength and change in other physical properties. Because this attack 
is always on the exposed surfaces, the seriousness of the cfTcct will depend 
upon their geometric shape. A film, for example would be rapidly des- 
troyed while the life of a thick section would not be noticeably diminished. 

4.1.6 Some plastic materials depend for their satisfactory life on the 
presence of a small proportion of plasticizer. This plasticizer may 
migrate and if it is readily digested by fungi as soon a^ it migrates to the 
surface, the main material may fail rapidly due to continuous migration 
and extraction of the plasticizer. 

4.2 Secondary Effects 

4.2.1 The growing mould on the surface of a material may yield acid 
products and other ionized substances which will cause a secondary attack 
on the material. This attack may lead to electrolytic or ageing effects, and 
even glass may lose its transparency due to this mechanism. Oxidation 
or decomposition may be facilitated by the presence of catalysts secreted 
by the mould. 

4.2.2 The presence of a mass of mycelium may provide a saturated 
sponge which will maintain a high humidity within an item even when the 
humidity has fallen to a low level outside it. This leads to failure of 
components due to humidity alone. 

4.2.3 The presence of mould growth will be aesthetically distasteful due 
both to poor appearance and to the aroma which frequently accompanies 
the mould. 

4.3 Effects Associated with Equipment — Due to the modular design 
and inter-connection of much modern equipment, mould growth in one 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

area of an equipment may have quite severe effects in another sub-unit or 
module which in itself may not permit the growth of mould. The possible 
effects on the performance as a whole shall, therefore, be asessed when 
con idering primary or secondary effects on individual sub-units or com- 
ponents. 

4.3.1 ft should also be remembered that some equipment may contain 
components and/or sub-assemblies which, for various reasons, may not 
have been designed to be resistant to mould growth, and the overall 
performance of the equipment may be affected by the limited resistance of 
these items. 

5. PREVENTION OF MOULD GROWTH 

5.0 The following procedures have been used with varying degrees of 
success in combating the harmful effects of mould growth: 

a) Complete sealing of the equipment/component with a dry clean 
atmosphere within is the most effective technique for preventing 
mould growth. 

b) Continuous harming within an enclosure will ensure a sufficiently 
low humidity to avoid mould growth. 

c) Operation of an equipment/component within a suitably controlled 
atmosphere ( air-conditioned room ) may prevent harmful growth 
of fungi. 

d) Regularly replaced dessicants within a partially sealed enclosure 
will maintain a humidity sufficiently low to prevent harmful growth 
of fungi. 

e) Periodic and careful cleaning of an enclosed equipment, removing 
most of and accumulated growth and dust ( nutritive layer ), will 
hold deterioration in check. 

f) Fungicides, carried, for example, in varnishes, included in tablets, 
or sprayed directly, will prevent mould growth for a time ( see 8 
for guidance on fungicides ). 

g) Ultra violet radiation of sufficiently high intensity will prevent 
mould growth and also kill existing mould growth. In practice, it 
is difficult, because of shadows and other problems, to sterilize 
equipment effectively by means of ultra-violet radiation. 

h) Ozone at adequate concentration may, under suitable circum- 
stances, kill existing mould growth. For example, ozone concentra- 
tion in the vicinity of corona discharges or high-voltage discharge 
lamps may be high enough for the purpose. 

j) Natural air circulation tends to deposit dust to a much greater 
extent than forced circulation and consideration shall be given to 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

the areas in an equipment in which dust is likely to be deposited. 
It should also be noted that air currents of adequate velocity 
flowing over the parts will retard the development of mould growth. 

k) Pesticides may be used to control the action of mites. 

5.1 All insulating materials used should be chosen to have as great a 
resistance to mould growth as possible, thus maximizing the time taken for 
mycelium to grow, and minimizing any damage to the material consequent 
upon such growth. 

5.2 The use of lubricants during assembly, varnishing finishing, etc, 
should be avoided wherever practicable. Even if it is shown that the 
lubricants do not support mould growth, they may attract and collect dust 
which in turn will support mould growth. However the use of products 
containing fungicides is often recommended for the protection of some 
materials. 

5.3 Moisture traps which may be formed during the assembly of an 
equipment and in which mould's grow shall be avoided. Examples of 
such less obvious traps are — between unsealed mating plugs and sockets or 
between printed circuit cards and edge connectors in particular attitudes. 

6. APPLICABILITY OF THE MOULD GROWTH TEST 

6.1 Mould growth testing of an equipment should normally be limited to 
verifying, where necessary, that suitable components and materials have 
been used, as any mould growth tests involving the complete equipment 
will often be prohibitively expensive or may yield results of rather 
doubtful value. Most of the required information may usually be more 
readily and accurately obtained from tests on materials, sub-assemblies, 
small composite sections, components, parts, etc. 

6.2 The testing of materials for resistance to mould growth is a specialized 
technique, requiring both mycological knowledge and access to a wide 
collection of cultures. Such testing shall, therefore, be performed by a 
station specially equipped for the work, and the manufacturer should 
choose his constructional materials on the basis of test reports issued by 
such an authority. 

6.3 The mould growth test is intended as an overall check that where a 
wise choice of previously tested materials has been made at the design 
stage, any mould growth which will occur under very adverse conditions 
will not have too serious an eflect on the item. 

6.4 This test is not a substitute for a proper choice of materials, and it is 
impossible to devise a simple test which replaces careful pretesting of 
materials and expert assessment of the results. 

6.5 The wise choice of previously tested materials is the most important 
single precaution to take when designing items to operate in humid 



IS : 900! ( Part X ) - 1575 

environment. Where severe contamination of the insulating surfaces will 
not occur, such a choice is often the only precaution which needs to be 
taken and will prove adequate for all but the most severe conditions. 
Where the item operates under conditions which favour mould growth for 
only a small proportion of the total life, or where some measure of 
protection is given, as, for example, enclosing and heating continuously to 
reduce internal humidity, there should be no necessity to employ the mould 
growth test provided materials have been correctly chosen and good 
constructional principles have been employed. Jf such principles have not 
been employed, test for mould growth is not adequate to find all possible 
sources of trouble. 

6.6 Mould growth test, as a final overall check on well-deigned items 
intended to operate under conditions strongly favouring mould growth, 
employs only a small selection of cultures chosen to attack those materials 
used in industry which are fairly resistant to mould growth. It will 
indicate, therefore, the nature of any trouble to be encountered on well- 
designed items. On items with bad design and unsuitable materials, this 
test will not locate all the faults which may be encountered in service, 
because the testing procedure has been simplified to make it practicable 
for performance in an environmental test laboratory. 

6.7 Three basic types of effect are catered for in this test: 

a) Extent of growth and attack on the surface after 28 days exposure — 
This is probably the form of test which will be of most frequent use. 
The extent of growth checks whether resistant materials have been 
used. The location of growth will indicate areas in which trouble 
may be expected, and where greatest clearances or creepage 
distances should have been allowed. Attack on the surface will 
indicate locations where physical damage is likely to result from 
mould growth- 

b) Effect on performance while still damp after 84 days exposure — This 
test gives an indication of the order and nature of performance varia- 
tion to be expected where items operate under conditions in which 
mould is growing. The presence of humidity will itself result in 
variation of performance and it is essential to perform two sets of 
measurements, one on items without fungus infection and the other 
with fungus infection. The difference between the two will be the 
effect of the presence of wet mycelium- 

Accurate assessment of the difference may be difficult, since on 
samples without fungus infection mould may grow spontaneously 
because the fresh air also contains mould spores. To prevent 
spontaneous mould growth, particular precautions arc necessary. 

c) Effect on performance after recovery of 24 hours following 84 days 
exposure — This gives an indication of the order and nature of 

8 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

performance variation due to the presence of mycelium which has 
grown during a period of non-operation and is present at low 
humidity. This provides for items which are stored in conditions 
where mould growth will be profuse but which are later installed 
and operated in an air-conditioned room. For this also, two series 
of measurements are necessary to discriminate between permanent 
effects due to humidity exposure, and those due to the presence of 
mycelium. 

6.8 Under special conditions or where equipment is very expensive, it may 
be decided when writing a specification to vary the standard procedures 
of the test for mould growth. This is, of course, always possible at the 
discretion of the user, but in the opinion of those devising this routine any 
amelioration of this procedure would render the test uneconomical, 
although it might reduce the immediate cost. This is an expensive test 
procedure and should only be employed when the information is essential. 
To reduce the conditions would make the results so meaningless that it 
would be better to omit the test altogether where he cost of the full 
procedure is not justified. 

6.9 Finally it should be remembered that, in the natural environment, 
mould spores are usually wind-borne whilst for test purposes it is necessary 
to introduce them in an aqueous suspension and spraying is used to intro- 
duce the aqueous suspension. Particularly in the case of equipment, the 
method and degree of penetration may, therefore, be totally different. 

7. DANGER TO PERSONNEL 

7.1 The moulds specified for this test arc not normally considered a serious 
hazard for human handling. 

7.2 It is possible for an individual to be allergic to one of them and, for 
this reason, it is wise to exercise care when performing the test. Surgical 
gloves may be worn to protect the hands, and care should be taken not to 
splash the suspension on other areas of the skin or on clothes. 

7.3 It is also possible, during the incubation period in the test chamber 
for a foreign mould, present as an unintentional intruder, to develop; 
some of these moulds, thus present as native to some testing locations, may 
be injurious to the human system. For this reason there is a possibility 
that the items after exposure may be a hazard and they should be handled 
with care. 

7.4 The greatest danger, if some hazardous foreign mould is present on 
exposed items, is that small, dry, detached particles may become air-borne 
and be carried into the lungs. This is only likely to happen after the item 
has dried out; if it is carried quickly from the test chamber to a normal 
chemical fume-cupboard before it has time to dry, the flow of air does not 
reach the aperator and detached fragments will not enter the nasal passages. 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

7.5 Detached portions of growth may be so small that no protection is 
offered by wearing a gauze mask, and only a special respirator for sub- 
micron particles is effective. The use of a fume-cupboard as suggested 
in 7.4, however, is considered an adequate precaution when performing 
this test. 

7.6 Where the test location may contain such a harmful mould, vestiges 
of it may well remain in the test chamber and present a similar danger 
when it is being cleansed. The preferred cleansing treatment with high 
temperature steam will render the chamber completely harmless. Where, 
however, fumigation with propylene oxide is adopted, it will be noted that 
the test calls for fumigation prior to wa hing; this will ensure that all 
residues washed from the chamber are completely harmless. 

7.7 When it is desired to preserve an item for future reference, it too 
should be fumigated with propylene oxide or sterilized in steam. 

8. USE OF FUNGICIDES 

8.0 A technique often used to give equipment an additional resistance to 
harmful mould growth is to use a suitable fungicidal material to inhibit or 
prevent the growth of fungi. 

8.1 Application — Four different methods have been widely used foi 
applying fungicides. 

8.1.1 Incorporation into an organic resin during manufacture or 
processing. A typical example of this practice is the inclusion of such a 
material in the formulation of flexible PVC compounds. 

8.1.2 Impregnation of a susceptible material with a fungicide during 
fabrication. A typical example of this is treatment of cellulose threads 
during the spinning process. 

8.1.3 Inclusion of fungicidal material in a lacquer which is later used 
to spray the interior surfaces of an equipment. 

8.1.3.1 When a fungicide has been incorporated in a lacquer and used 
for spraying an equipment, it is essential that the lacquer itself shall not 
encourage fungus growth because after a prolonged period the major 
portion of the fungicide will have evaporated out of it. 

8.1.4 Placing of a tablet of fungicidal material inside an enclosure. 
Such tablets are often enclosed within sensitive indicating instruments. 

8.2 Limitation of Use — When choosing a fungicide which will be 
enclosed in equipment, certain principles shall be borne in mind. The 
most important are given in 8.2.1 to 8.2.3 

10 



IS : 9001 ( Part X ) - 1975 

8.2.1 The fungicide shall not give rise to a toxic atmosphere which 
would harm personnel opening up the equipment to service it. 

8.2.2 The volatile products of the fungicide shall not lead to deterioration 
of component parts of the equipment, such as poisoning of selenium 
rectifiers by mercury compounds, electrolytic corrosion of metallic parts, 
lowering of insulation resistance or breakdown voltage over the surface of 
insulators, formation or deposition of an insulating film on the contacts of 
relays, switches, etc. 

8.2.3 Where light-sensitive components, such as photo-cells are included 
in the equipment, the volatile products of fungicide shall not give light- 
absorbing layers on the windows of the component. 

8.3 Permanence of Fungicidal Action — While a fungicide shall be 
sufficiently volatile to allow a suitable concentration to be maintained 
wherever mould growth might give rise to harmful effects, the following 
points shall also be borne in mind. 

8.3.1 It should be stable and durable at the highest temperature likely 
to be experienced inside the equipment. 

8.3.2 It shall resist leaching by repeated condensation of moisture over 
the internal surfaces. 

8.3.3 It shall not be so volatile that it will be completely expanded in a 
few months. 

8.3.4 To check the permanence of the fungicide, it may be necessary to 
carry out tests at high temperature, at high humidity and, possibly, under 
solar radiation, before making the mould growth test. Where such a 
programme is considered necessary it should be stated in the relevant 
specification. 

8.4 Purpose 

8.4.1 A fungicide may be chosen to give either extreme protection for 
a few months during transit through humid environments or a moderate 
protection over a prolonged period. When it is used to give short period 
protection during transit, test for mould growth should be performed with 
the active fungicide in place. 

8.4.2 Even when a fungicide is intended to give prolonged protection, 
normal evolutionary variation tends to select a variant of the mould which 
m resistant to the fungicide used. It is desirable, therefore, when perpetual 
protection is required, that not only should the fungicide be renewed 
periodically, but that it should be replaced by fungicide of a different type. 

8.4.3 Where a fungicidal varnish is used, and where the equipment 
may be required to continue functioning after the fungicide has lost its 
effectiveness, test for mould growth should be performed on an equipment 
sprayed with a varnish identical in composition except that it contains no 
fungicide. 

11 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 1 10002 
Telephones : 3 31 01 31, 33113 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices: 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
NEW DELHI 110002 

♦Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, 
Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, 
CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, 
MADRAS 6001 13 



t Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 

BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices: 

*Pushpak\ Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 
AHMADABAD 380001 

tPccnya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalorc-Tumkur Road, 

BANGALORE 56C058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 

BHOPAL 402003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANFSHWAR 751002 
53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 

GUWAHATl 7810C3 
5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 

HYDERABAD 500001 
R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 
T.C No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam, 

TRIVANDRUM 695034 
Inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ) : 
Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 

PUNE 411005 



Telephone 
I 331 01 31 

1 331 13 75 

36 24 99 

J 2 18 43 

13 1641 

f41 24 42 

< 41 25 19 

L41 29 16 

6 32 92 95 



f2 63 48 

1 2 63 49 

J38 49 55 

I 38 49 56 

6 67 16 

5 36 27 
3 31 77 

23 10 83 



{ 



6 34 71 
6 98 32 

68 76 

82 92 

6 23 05 

6 21 04 

6 21 17 



2 51 71 
5 24 35 



♦Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep 27 68 00 
Street, Calcutta 700072 

fSalcs Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road. 89 65 28 

Bombay 400007 

{Sales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja square, 
Bangalore 560002 22 39 71 

"Printed at PrintwdTFr inters, Delhi, India 



