Wdta Ah IS 14534 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Reh — eieh gent d gt: ITT 
ii UA: see — RAAST 


(FAT GRIT ) 


Plastics — Recovery and Recycling 
of Plastics Waste — Guidelines 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 83.080.10 


© BIS 2023 


Teds gier SAT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 geet MTE pt op, Ag ect - 110002 
w ` ANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2023 Price Group 8 


Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Plastics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division 
Council. 


In 2008, the ISO Technical Committee on Plastics, ISO/TC 61 formulated ISO 15270 Plastics — Guidelines for 
the recovery and recycling of plastics waste, which had been referred in IS 14534 : 2016 by adopting all clauses 
except clause 7- and modifications to clauses to suit Indian requirements. Working group 5 (WG 5) of ISO TC 
61/SC14 is in the process of revamping ISO 15270 into different parts based on types of recycling, however as 
per ISO process of standardization, different parts of revised ISO 15270 may be finalized only around 2024-25. 


In line with agenda for sustainable development goals and plastics waste management rules issued by Government 
of India, it is imperative to provide appropriate guidelines for recycling of plastics waste by different modes by 
following the relevant technologies. 


Plastics Sectional committee had proposed to WG 5 of ISO TC 61/SC14 to draft a new ISO Standard on “Testing 
and characterization of mechanically recycled polypropylene (PP) and polyethylene (PE) for intended use in 
different plastics processing techniques”, which has been published as ISO 5677 : 2023. 


However, IS 14534 is due for revision considering Indian context and policy directives issued related to Single 
use plastics, mandatory mixing of recycled plastic with virgin plastic in gradually increasing proportion in 
packaging applications, as a part of Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR). Therefore, Plastics Sectional 
committee decided to revise and update the IS 14534 keeping in view the technology scenario for Plastics waste 
recycling globally and governmental directives, as issued from time to time, to be followed by all stakeholders. 


Plastic Waste Management (Second Amendment) Rules, 2021, notified on September 17’2021 states that “carry 
bags made of recycled plastic or products made of recycled plastic can be used for storing, carrying, dispensing, 
or packaging ready to eat or drink food stuff subject to the notification of appropriate standards and regulation 
under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India”. 


Based on the above-mentioned amendment, in this revision, the clause which prohibits the use of recycled plastics 
in contact with food products, pharmaceuticals and drinking water has been modified. 


Therefore, only those recycled/reprocessed plastics materials and articles for which standards and guidelines are 
notified by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India may be used for food contact applications and 


drinking water. 


As required, environmental terms related to the scope of this document, being developed under standardization 
activity of ISO/ TC 61/SC14 ‘Environmental aspects’ may also be referred. 


During the preparation of this Indian Standard, the considerable assistance has been derived from the standards 
listed in Annex E. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard listed in Annex F. 


IS 14534 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


PLASTICS — RECOVERY AND RECYCLING OF 
PLASTICS WASTE — GUIDELINES 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes guidelines for the 
recycling of plastics waste/scrap by different 
techniques based on technological trends and policy 
directives issued for the plastics waste management 
in India. The process stages, requirements, 
recommendations and terminology presented in this 
standard are intended for general applicability. The 
scope of this standard does not cover product related 
specifications or requirements including statutory 
guidelines, issued from time to time and as 
applicable. 


1.2 The guidelines shall help manufacturers of 
plastic products who wish to use recycled material 
along with virgin material in deciding about quality 
and marking requirements based on percentage of 
recycled content used in the finished product. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standard listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this document, in addition to the 
terms listed in Annex B, the terms and definitions 
given in IS 2828 shall apply. 


4 SOURCE 


Plastics material for recovery and /or recycling may 
be obtained from various sources, including the 
following. 


4.1 Pre-Consumer Sources of Materials 
4.1.1 Plastics Producers 


Floor sweeping, start-up, machine waste, long-ends 
and any such process waste which are not 
processable into a finished product 


4.1.2 Plastics Processors 
a) Processing purge material and scrap; and 


b) Scrap products, parts and semi-finished 
products. 


4.1.3 Others 


Industrial and commercial products made of, or 
containing, plastics, including packaging and 
containers. 


4.2 Post-Consumer Sources of Materials 
4.2.1 Disposables 


a) Personal goods; and 

b) Type of packaging materials, products as 
classified in Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) 
notification on EPR including woven and 
non-woven products. 


NOTE — Such disposables may be recovered by sorted 
municipal collection systems or by specific consumer 
incentive systems on containers or by any other 
organized/unorganized individual or group of individuals 
for economic benefits. As per Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, Government of India 
(MoEF&CC) notifications issued from time to time, Brand 
owners, plastics packaging producers, importers of plastics 
products, plastics waste processors are also required to 
organize collection of plastics waste directly or in 
association with local authorities or other organizations for 
its recycling as per Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) 
notified by Government of India. 


4.2.2 Durable Goods 


a) Domestic appliances, utensils, upholsteries, 
carpets, curtains and covers etc.; 

b) Electronic/electrical equipments; 

c) Automotive and transportation equipments; 

d) Construction products; 

e) Industrial equipments; 

f) Household items; 

g) Agricultural products; and 

h) Building and construction products. 

NOTE — End-of-life products such as electronic 

equipment or automobiles may be returned by the consumer 

to specialized operators for recovery. Similarly, during 


building demolition operations, plastics materials and 
products may be segregated and recovered. 


5 RECOVERY 
5.1 General 


Selection of the appropriate recovery option will 
depend on many factors, such as segregation, 
quality/type and design of the plastic product, 
quantity and availability of the plastics waste, the 
availability and capability of existing technologies 


IS 14534 : 2023 


and equipment and the relevant recovery targets in 
terms of material or energy content requirements. 
When the target is disposal of the waste, compliance 
of emissions and other relevant environmental 
norms specified by the regulatory authorities, is to 
be ensured. Relevant selection criteria include the 
relative costs, competitiveness and environmental 
performance of the available options (see Annex C). 
Access to markets for recovered materials or energy 
is also an important consideration. 


NOTE — Concepts and definitions of recovery are 
continually evolving. The basic principle of recovery lies in 
the transformation of an input (waste) into an output 
(product). Recovery is complete when secondary materials, 
fuels or products have been manufactured, or energy has 
been generated, in accordance with consensus- standardized 
criteria. Plastics recyclates with specified properties 
(secondary raw material) is a product, and recovery is 
accomplished when this product has been produced and has 
become commercially available, or energy has been 
generated (see Annex C and Annex D). 


5.2 Material Recovery 
5.2.1 General 


Material recovery of plastics waste encompasses 
three distinct recycling routes: Mechanical 
recycling, feedstock or chemical recycling and 
biological or organic recycling. 


5.2.2 Mechanical Recycling 
5.2.2.1 Sequence of operations 


5.2.2.1.1 The mechanical recycling option generally 
comprises of the following sequence of operations, 
some of which may occur simultaneously, that are 
carried out as part of the recyclate preparation and 
production process: 


Collection — Identification — Sorting/Separating 
(Into types and forms of plastic) — 
Grinding/Shredding — Washing — Drying 
—Agglomerating/Mixing 
—Extruding/Compounding —Pelletizing 


5.2.2.1.2 Over the years, technology and machinery 
for mechanical recycling have significantly 
improved with automation, process control, higher 
output to produce good quality of recyclates, which 
can be used in plastics processing or product 
manufacturing techniques. 


NOTES 


1 In practice, many plastics processors or recyclers use 
plastics recyclates in the form of flake, eliminating the need 
for a prior pelletization step. 


2 Plastics waste of all categories of plastics packaging as 
defined in MoEF&CC notification for EPR need to be 
effectively sorted, washed and cleaned by utilizing 
appropriate machinery and equipment. 


3 Plastics waste for mechanical recycling may be offered in 
the form of bulk waste as collected, or in a value-added 
grade such as sorted, cleaned, standardized for weight etc. 


4 For testing and characterization of mechanically recycled 
polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene (PP), ISO 5677) shall 
be used. 


5 For recycling of waste from engineering plastics (ABS, 
PC, Nylon variants), PVC, PET and all other plastics 
including mixed waste recycling, proven technology of 
machinery and processes from India or outside India shall 
be used to produce processable recycled material in 
conventional plastics processing, as applicable for products 
with desired specification. 


5.2.2.2 Pre-treatment 


Depending on the intended application of the 
recyclate and the characteristics of the waste stream, 
a preparatory step may be used to decontaminate the 
collected material, as far as practically possible and 
to optimize their handling characteristics for 
shipping, processing and other downstream 
operations. 


In the absence of homogeneous plastics waste 
consisting of materials of similar grade or type, 
material identification, sorting and separation steps 
become critical, such as in specialized sorting, 
washing and cleaning for household packaging or 
end-of-life electrical and electronic equipment. 


Wherever possible, these pre-selective operational 
steps should be carried out prior to any downstream 
mixing (commingling) with other waste streams. In 
some cases, particularly affecting post-consumer 
sources and at higher quantity operation level, 
attainment of this objective may require automated 
separation and sorting unit operations. In the 
absence of such automatic process control, precise 
identification of the sources of the components of 
the waste may be of crucial importance. 


NOTE — In order to optimize the recovery efficiency of 
plastics products and component parts, it is desirable to 
design for ease of disassembly and material identification as 
well as for minimization of variety in the types of plastic 
used in their manufacture. Such criteria may evolve as a 
function of the future development and implementation of 
technical options for resource recovery. 


5.2.2.2.1 Identification 


5.2.2.2.1.1 The implementation of product 
identification code on both rigid and flexible plastics 
products facilitate in mode of separating materials, 
by type of plastics, at any point in the process, 
including the post-consumer stage, during manual or 
automatic sorting at the collection facility, and 
during disassembly of durable goods. With known 
and regular source of waste and with the 
involvement of experienced manual operators, 
identification in local level / decentralized 
segregation systems achieve the desired level of 
efficiency. 


5.2.2.2.1.2 For large scale operation, various in-line 
analytical methods using techniques such as infrared 
analysis and trace-element tracking are available for 


the identification of specific types of plastic and 
associated additives, thus permitting their efficient 
downstream separation and segregation. 


NOTE — In case of unknown or new source material, 
polymer characterization of waste should be carried out for 
identification of input waste by Differential Scanning 
Calorimetry (DSC), Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) or 
Chemical analysis in laboratory. 


5.2.2.2.2 Separation and sorting 


Plastics separation and sorting operations, which are 
generally required in all material recovery 
processes, may be carried out manually or 
automatically or combination of both systems using 
appropriate means of identification. The more 
accurate and efficient the means of identification, 
sorting and separation, the better is the quality of the 
recovered product obtained. Depending on specific 
circumstances, a compaction process such as 
crushing or baling to reduce size may be necessary 
to ensure easier handling. In manual sorting, risk of 
chemical, microbiological and ergonomic problems 
due to repetitive work can appear. Therefore, if 
manual sorting cannot be avoided, the workplace 
shall be designed to minimize such problems. 


NOTES 

1 Pre-consumer products can generally be sorted by type of 
plastic to permit their re-use in the production process. Re- 
use of post-consumer products is generally rendered more 
complex because of their contamination by adventitious 
heterogeneous plastics waste. 

2 Some post-consumer materials may consist of plastics 
fractions with different material properties such as different 
melt flow rates, densities or colours. Separation of the waste 
according to their colour, flow rate is very important for 
achieving high quality recyclate. In some cases, it may not 
be practically or commercially viable to achieve the desired 
levels of separation or cleanliness, in such cases these inputs 
should preferably be diverted for alternative recovery 
process like mixed waste recycling or feedstock/chemical 
recycling. If the input plastics waste is commingled, choice 
of recycling process should be carefully made. 

3 Recycling of reinforced plastics may be carried out in 
some cases without separating the polymeric matrix from 
fibre reinforcements. When sufficiently efficient separation, 
as required for the desired property profile of the recyclate, 
is not feasible at the preparatory process stage, appropriate 
preliminary operations should be conducted at the next 
regenerating step. 


5.2.2.3 Recyclates production process 


5.2.2.3.1 The commercial production of plastics 
recyclates or granules or pellets through mechanical 
recycling comprises sequence of operations, 
including the separation of materials, efficient 
removal of contaminants by washing or other 
methods, drying where appropriate, handling, 
constitution of lots, storage, packaging and 
shipment. In addition, other processes, such as 
grinding, additional sorting, homogenizing, 
extruding, pelletizing, micronizing or dissolution in 
solvent, may be necessary in order to regenerate the 
plastics material. 


IS 14534 : 2023 


5.2.2.3.2 Recyclates are usually conditioned as 
agglomerate or regrind in the form of fluff, flake, 
chips, pellets or powder. Addition of modifiers or 
stabilizers may also be carried out in order to 
enhance the value of recyclates for subsequent use. 
NOTE — All separated contaminants, such as those 
entrained in waste water, should be taken into account and 
handled properly during these preparatory steps. 
5.2.2.4 Use of plastics waste in partial substitution 
of bitumen for asphalt road construction 


5.2.2.4.1 Use of plastics waste in partial 
replacement of bitumen for the construction of 
asphalt road has multiple benefits: improvement of 
the quality of the road, reduction of cost and 
scientific disposal of otherwise abandoned plastics 
waste — especially flexible plastics waste. 


5.2.2.4.2 Plastics waste blended bitumen road offer 
better binding property, higher softening point, 
ability to withstand higher temperature, lower 
penetration value, higher Marshal Stability value - 
resulting in increased strength of the road and better 
water resistance. All these benefits lead to longer life 
of the road and that too at reduced cost. 


5.2.2.4.3 Types and size of plastics waste and the 
mixing process have been described in the 
guidelines published by Indian Roads Congress 
(IRC): IRC: SP: 98: 2020 “Guidelines for the use of 
waste plastic in hot bituminous mixes (dry process) 
in wearing courses (first revision)” based on 
laboratory as well as field performance 
studies/investigations carried out in India. 


5.2.3 Feedstock or Chemical Recycling 


5.2.3.1 Using various processes, well-known within 
the petrochemical industry, plastics can be 
depolymerized by pyrolysis process and equivalent 
process and fed back into the cracking process to 
form into their basic monomeric chemical 
constituents or into hydrocarbon fractions. These 
chemicals can then be used either as polymerization 
feedstock or in other useful applications and 
chemical processes. 


5.2.3.2 Waste generated out of mixed plastics, 
commingled plastics and plastics materials made out 
of a combination of different plastic materials are 
generally difficult for normal recycling (mechanical 
recycling). 


5.2.3.3 Mixed plastics including thermosetting 
plastics can be converted in to Light Diesel Oil 
(LDO) range of oil having useful applications. 
Evolved methane gas can be trapped and be used to 
produce electricity or be used as gaseous fuel. 


IS 14534 : 2023 


NOTES 


1 The depolymerization technique has already been 
demonstrated, for Example: PET obtained from post- 
consumer packaging sources such as collected commingled 
plastic bottles where the PET is sorted and subsequently 
depolymerized, generating monomer feedstock for 
polymerization and the subsequent manufacture of products 
such as bottles and fibres. In the case of some acrylic 
polymers, such as methyl methacrylate, monomer obtained 
by depolymerization also provides feedstock for 
commercial polymerization processes. 

2 Reducing agent in blast furnace for production of iron — 
Waste plastics are used as reducing agent in the blast 
furnace for the manufacture of iron from its ore. Use of coke 
in the blast furnace provides only one type of reducing agent 
— Carbon Mono-oxide (CO). In contrast, use of plastics 
waste provides one additional reducing agent — Hydrogen 
(H) apart from Carbon Mono-oxide. The process also 
reduces generation of ‘ash’. 


5.2.4 Biological or Organic Recycling 


Biodegradation is a viable option for the treatment 
of certain types of plastics waste in what is referred 
to as organic or biological recycling. Such plastics 
may be treated by aerobic or anaerobic 
decomposition processes, after collection and 
separation of non-biodegradable materials. 
Biodegradable/organic waste content inside such 
compostable plastics bags, need to be separated 
from the compostable plastic bags because organic 
wastes decompose within few days/weeks in the 
open environment, whereas compostable plastics 
start decomposing only after few months in 
industrial composting conditions. During this 
period, organic wastes do not get proper condition 
for decomposition causing uncertain/undesirable 
environmental conditions. In the context of 
mechanical recycling, however, such plastics may 
themselves constitute contaminants if they are likely 
to be subjected to thermal degradation and 
decomposition at the prevailing recycling operating 
temperature. 


5.3 Energy Recovery 


5.3.1 Energy recovery is a viable option for 
consideration with plastics materials in the same 
way as the other recovery options discussed in this 
standard. The direct combustion or co-combustion 
of plastics wastes in systems such as Plasma 
Pyrolysis Technology (PPT), municipal solid-waste 
incinerators operating in compliance with regulatory 
requirements for emissions and ash are notable 
examples of energy recovery. 


5.3.2 Co-Processing in Cement Kilns 


One of the most effective methods of recycling of 
plastics waste for recovery of energy is its use as an 
alternative fuel in cement kilns. The high 
temperature used in the cement kilns gives a scope 
for use of some types of plastics waste contaminated 
with toxic chemicals like pesticides and some other 
hazardous materials without creating any increased 


emissions in the air or water. All types of plastics 
without segregation or proper cleaning can be fed 
after necessary resizing process (usually done at the 
cement kiln site). 


NOTE — Since most plastics waste is hydrocarbon in 
nature, it possesses an inherently high calorific value. 
Because of this, the final utilization of the recovered plastics 
stream as a fuel can be very effective, provided that 
adequate attention is given to the control of factors such as 
combustion by-products. This is demonstrated by the 
successful application of this recovery option in industrial 
processes and systems for steam generation, in electricity 
co-generation as well as in lime and cement kilns. 


6 QUALITY REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 General 


Selection of any one of the available recycling 
options should be based on compliance with the 
following requirements: 


a) To minimize adverse environmental 
impact; 

b) To enhance the circular recycling of 
plastics; 

c) Prior demonstration of ` sustainable 
commercial viability; 

d) Secure access to viable systems for 
collection and quality control; and 

e) Access to appropriate recycling 
technologies, if recyclates are intended to 
be used in food contact material, as per 
guidelines issued from time to time. 


NOTE — A suitable traceability system for the target market 
may be set up based on appropriate standards from the 
IS/ISO 9000 and IS/ISO 14000 series. If relevant, 
provisions of IS/ISO 14021 concerning self-declared 
environmental claims should also be met. 


6.2 Contamination 


6.2.1 Contaminants in recyclates may be polymeric 
in nature (for Example: the inclusion of different 
polymers or of different grades and compounds of 
the same polymer) or  non-polymeric 
(for Example: the presence in the original polymers 
of various functional additives, fillers and 
reinforcing materials? such as are defined in 
ISO 1043-2 and ISO 1043-3). They may also be 
undefined as in the case of adventitious 
contaminants such as labels, label inks, closures, 
metal inserts, foreign matter including dirt and 
residual contents of plastics containers or packaging. 


NOTES 

1 Relevant information about composition, additives, 
colorants, fillers and reinforcing materials are also 
summarized in the material designation in international 
standards. Excessive levels of contamination may degrade 
the quality of recyclates to the extent of rendering the 
recovered materials useless because of problems such as 
deterioration of their physical properties, incompatibility 
and unacceptability of odour. Contamination levels may be 
minimized by the following: 


a) Clear identification and efficient sorting of 
materials and products; 


b) Careful handling in the collection, separation and 
sorting phases; 

c) Effective separation and super cleaning washing 
processes; 

d) Magnetic separation of metal parts; and 

e) Theuse of melt filtering or other filtering systems, 
where appropriate. 


2 In some cases, contaminants, if present in airborne dust 
for example, may necessitate special treatment during 
recovery operations in order to ensure observance of 
industrial health and safety requirements; and 

3 When the recyclate is intended to be used in food contact 
material, the process and end material shall comply to 
relevant regulatory requirement such as the guidelines 
issued by Food Safety & Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI). 


6.3 Visual and Aesthetic Aspects 


6.3.1 In most cases, provided adequate controls and 
good manufacturing practices are employed, visual 
and aesthetic properties such as colour, transparency 
and cleanliness should be provided when dealing 
with recyclate generated from industrial sources of 
pre-consumer material. 


6.3.2 In the case of recovered material obtained from 
post-consumer sources, however, visual and 
aesthetic aspects often present major difficulties, 
especially when the recovered materials or products 
consist of a wide variety of containers and 
disposables from diverse sources and applications. 
However, if such post-consumer sourced material is 
segregated before the process of recycling based on 
the colour, transparency and cleanliness, the 
aesthetics of resultant recyclates may become 
relatively easier. 


6.4 Properties of Recyclates 


6.4.1 The properties of plastics recyclate may be 
affected by previous exposure to a wide variety of 
service environments as well as by other factors 
such as the presence of contaminants and chemical 
or structural changes occurring during processing 
and recycling. 


6.4.2 Application of proper sorting techniques, 
advanced cleaning techniques, minimization of 
contaminant levels as well as the observance of 
appropriate recovery practices will minimize 
adverse effects on the properties of the recyclate. 
When the recyclate is intended to be used in food 
contact material, the decontamination process 
employed must be capable of removing the 
contaminants and migrants as specified by the 
regulatory agencies (Example FSSAI). To achieve 
this, only approved recycling processes as notified 
by regulatory bodies of Governmental of India 
should be employed in such recycling. 


6.4.3 Further, the properties of the recyclates may be 
monitored by conducting tests appropriate to the 
requirements of the intended application. Specific 
material properties of plastics recyclates may be 
enhanced by the addition of property modifying 


IS 14534 : 2023 


additives, including virgin plastics material. Any 
compounded additives and virgin plastic material 
that were added and are present should be disclosed 
in material specifications as well as in the material 
safety data sheets required by the regulator. 


6.5 Criteria for Acceptance 


The criteria for the acceptance of recyclate for a 
specific application are governed by the 
requirements of the application and by the 
agreement between the supplier and the user. These 
may include information such as: 


a) Proper identification, including the batch 

numbers of the identified polymer; 

b) Data on additives, fillers, colours and 
pigments, if any, reinforcements and 
composition, such as the nature and 
concentration of contaminants and the 
content of identified polymers and 
recyclates; 

c) Mechanical, physical and chemical 
properties and packaging requirements; 
and 

d) For recyclates that is proposed to be used in 
food contact applications, shall qualify to 
Standards/Regulations prescribed by 
Government Authorities from time to time, 
to address any potential food & health 
safety issue. 

NOTE — The performance based properties of specified 

recyclates will have to satisfy the requirements of any 

specific product application. This requirement is of critical 


importance in order to promote and develop the use of 
recycled plastics. 


7 GUIDELINES FOR MARKING 


7.1 This prescribes guidelines to the manufacturers 
of plastic products with regard to the marking to be 
used on the finished product in order to facilitate 
identification of the basic raw material. It will also 
help in identifying whether the material used on the 
end product is virgin, recyclate or a blend of virgin 
and recyclate. 


7.2 Identification Marking 


7.2.1 The manufacturers of plastics end products 
from either virgin or recycled plastics shall mark the 
symbol at the time of processing in order to help the 
re-processors to identify the basic raw material. The 
symbols defined by Society of the Plastic Industry 
(SPI), USA and adopted in the 
Plastics Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
2011 are as follows: 


D D DA DA DA A 
WA 


IS 14534 : 2023 


NOTE — PET — Polyethylene terephthalate, HDPE — 
High density polyethylene, V — Vinyl (PVC), LDPE — 
Low density polyethylene, PP — Polypropylene, PS — 
Polystyrene and other means all Other resins and multi- 
materials, like ABS (Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene), PPO 
(Polyphenylene oxide), PC (Polycarbonate), PBT 
(Polybutylene terephthalate), etc. 


While marking the symbol 7, the name of respective 
basic raw material like ABS, PPO, PC, PBT, etc, and 
any blend or alloy shall be indicated below the 
symbol. 


7.2.2 In addition to the symbol indicated at 7.2.1, the 
product made from ` recycled/reprocessed 
plastics/regranulated plastics should be marked with 
appropriate symbol or marking of percentage of 
recycled material used based on certification of 
recycled content as per procedure given in this 
document (Example: the product containing 
25 percent shall be marked with R25). 


Audit and certification of manufacturing facilities 
shall be required for traceability or use of specified 
percent of recycled content in the production of 
plastic products to claim their recycled content and 
use the above Codification. 


Traceability of the material in different process steps 
must be verified throughout the whole chain of 
custody of the material in order to make a claim of 
recycled content in final products. Available ISO 
and EN Standards shall be specifically referred for 
the Audit, as referred in this document to certify the 


Product 
Trash/Garbage bags 
Carry bags 


Office supplies - File folders, binder covers, presentation folders, etc. 
Containers for detergents, petroleum products, pallets, including reusable 


packaging containers 


Containers for eggs, fruits and vegetable 


Horticultural supplies — Planters, trays, flowerpots, nursery bags. tarpaulin 
Building products — Wood substitute such as fencing, shingles, etc. 

Municipal supplies — Garbage bins, wheel burrows, etc. 

Carpets and floor mats, playground equipment’s, jacket, T-shirts, sports-wear, geo- 


textiles, tool handles, footwear, luggage, etc. 


Recreational equipment — Garden furniture, etc., 
Twine (Sutli), box strapping for packaging 


Pipes and fittings for cable, ducts/conduits SWR, drainage, agricultural 


Shoes, Sleepers 
Film, sheet 
Furniture (Kitchen, shoe rack wardrobes etc.) 


recycled content by certification bodies as 
recognized by BIS. 


NOTE — ISO 22095 and EN 15343 may be referred for 
traceability of the material and chain of custody 
respectively. 


7.3 To prevent pollution, appropriate measures shall 
be taken to dispose off the effluent and emission 
generated as a result of any operation of recycling 
and the provision of Pollution Control Acts, 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and any rules 
framed thereunder shall be complied. 


7.4 Variants of all types of Degradable polymers 
(Biodegradable, Compostable or other degradable 
products) shall not be mixed with normal plastics for 
recycling. Such plastics shall be segregated and 
isolated before recycling. 


Identification of degradable plastics — Waste 
plastic collectors may not be able to identify 
degradable (PLA, PBAT, PHAs etc) and non- 
degradable polymeric products unless they are 
appropriately labelled Hence, it is necessary to 
suitably identify the product or article with label or 
marking, “bio-degradable” or “compostable”, as the 
case may be, for the products made with such type 
of plastics as per guidelines issued from time to 
time. 


7.5 A typical suggested end products using 
appropriate types of recycled/reprocessed plastics 
waste/scrap is as follows: 


Material 
PE 
PE 
PVC, PE, PP 
PE, PP, PS, PET 


PE, PP, PS, PET 
PE, PVC, PP PS 
PS, PVC, PC 
PE, PP 
PE, PP, PET, PS 


PE, PP 
PP, PE, Nylon 
PVC, PE, PP) 
PVC 
PET, PVC, PE, PP 
PET 


NOTE — Product Applications as Food Contact Material, Pharmaceutical, Cosmetics shall be governed by prevailing regulatory 


directives and applicable national standards. 


IS No./Other 
Publication 


IS 2828 : 2019/ISO 
472 : 2013 


ISO 1043-2 : 2011 


ISO 1043-3 : 2016 


ISO 5677 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Plastics — Vocabulary (second 
revision) 


Plastics — Symbols and 
abbreviated terms Part 2: 
Fillers and reinforcing 
materials 

Plastics — Symbols and 
abbreviated terms 


Part 3: Plasticizers 


Testing and characterization of 
mechanically recycled 
polypropylene (PP) and 
polyethylene (PE) for intended 
use in different plastics 
processing techniques 


IS No./Other 
Publication 


ISO 14021 : 2016 


ISO 22095 : 2020 


EN 15343 : 2008 


IS 14534 : 2023 


Title 


Environmental labels and 
declarations — Self-declared 
environmental claims (Type II 
environmental labelling) 


Chain of custody — General 
terminology and models 


Plastics — Recycled Plastics 
— Plastics recycling 
traceability and assessment of 
conformity and recycled 
content 


IS 14534 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 3) 


TERMINOLOGY 


B-1 Aerobic Biodegradation — Biodegradation 
under aerobic conditions. 


B-2 Agglomerate — Shredded and/or granulated 
plastics material in the form of particles which cling 
together. 


B-3 Anaerobic Biodegradation — Biodegradation 
under anaerobic conditions. 


B-4 Anaerobic digestion — Biological conversion 
of biodegradable materials by micro-organisms in 
the absence of oxygen creating two main products: 
biogas and digestate. 


B-5 Baling — Process in which plastics waste is 
compacted and secured as a bundle to facilitate 
handling, storage and transportation. 


B-6 Batch — Quantity of material regarded as a 
single unit and having a unique reference. 


B-7 Bio-Based Plastic — Plastic partly or wholly 
derived from biomass. 


B-8 Biodegradation — Degradation caused by 
biological activity, especially by enzymatic action, 
leading to a significant change in the chemical 
structure of a material. 


B-9 Biological Recycling — Aerobic (composting) 
or anaerobic (digestion) treatment of biodegradable 
plastics waste under controlled conditions using 
micro-organisms to produce, in the presence of 
oxygen, stabilized organic residues, carbon dioxide 
and water or, in the absence of oxygen, stabilized 
organic residues, methane, carbon dioxide and 
water. 


B-10 Blow Moulding — Manufacturing process of 
forming a molten tube (parison or preform) of 
thermoplastic material and placing it within a mould 
cavity and inflating the tube with compressed air, to 
take the shape of the cavity and cool the part before 
removing from the mould. 


B-11 Blown Film Extrusion — Manufacturing 
process that involves extruding a tube of molten 
polymer through a die and inflating it to several 
times its initial diameter to form a thin film bubble 
which is then collapsed and used as a lay-flat film. 


B-12 By-Product — Co-product from a process that 
is incidental or not intentionally produced and which 
cannot be avoided. 


B-13 Calender — Machine that has a series of 
heated rolls, arranged in pairs, the rolls in each pair 
turning in opposite directions. 


B-14 Catalyst — Substance used in small 
proportion, that augments the rate of a chemical 
reaction, and in theory remains unchanged 
chemically at the end of the reaction. 


B-15 Chemical Recycling — Conversion to 
monomer or production of new raw materials by 
changing the chemical structure of plastics waste 
through cracking, gasification or depolymerization, 
excluding energy recovery and incineration. 


B-16 Circular Economy — A circular economy 
aims to maintain the value of products, materials, 
and resources for as long as possible by returning 
them into the product cycle at the end of their use, 
while minimizing the generation of waste 


B-17 Closed Loop Recycling — Process in which 
post-consumer or industrial waste is collected and 
recycled preserving the value of the material so that 
it can be used again to make the same product 
category with minimal loss of quality or function. 


B-18 Collection — Logistical process of moving 
plastics waste from its source to a place where it can 
be recovered. 


B-19 Commingled Plastics — Mixture of materials 
or products consisting of different types of plastics. 


NOTE — The term “mixed plastics” is used synonymously. 


B-20 Commodity Plastics — Plastics that are used 
in high volume usually known for their low costs 
making them popular in especially mass 
productions. 


B-21 Compatibilizer — Substance used in polymer 
blends to enhance the blend properties while 
increasing adhesion between the phases, reducing 
the interfacial tension and stabilizing morphology. 


B-22 Compostable Plastic — Plastic that 
undergoes degradation by biological processes 
during composting to yield CO2, water, inorganic 
compounds and biomass at a rate consistent with 
other known compostable materials and leave no 
visible, distinguishable or toxic residue. 


B-23 Compounding — Process of melt blending or 
mixing of polymers and additives essentially with a 
goal to achieve a homogeneous blend. 


B-24 Compression Moulding — Method of 
moulding thermosetting or thermoplastic resins in 
which the material, generally preheated, is first 
placed in an open, heated mould cavity which is then 
closed with a top force or plug member and exposed 


to pressure to force the material into contact with all 
mould areas, while heat and pressure are maintained 
until the moulding material has solidified. 


B-25 Contaminant — Unwanted substance or 
material. 


NOTE — The term “impurity” is a deprecated synonym of 
contaminant and should not be used. 


B-26 Converter — Specialized operator capable of 
shaping plastics raw material to make a usable semi- 
finished or finished product. 


B-27 Copolymer — Polymer derived from more 
than one species of monomer. 


B-28 Degassing — Removal of contained or 
dissolved gases, vapours, water or monomer 
residues in the processing of a plastic material to 
avoid voids or other imperfections in the final 
product. 


B-29 Degradability — Ability to degrade within a 
fixed period of time and under the influence of 
specified environments. 


B-30 Degree of Biodegradation — Mass fraction 
of an original polymeric item that is biodegraded 
under specified conditions as measured through 
specified techniques. 


B-31 Depolymerization — Chemical reversion of a 
polymer to its monomer(s) or to a polymer of lower 
relative molecular mass. 


B-32 Disposal — Any controlled operation, that is 
not recovery, e. g. by destroying or storing damaged, 
used or other unwanted plastic waste (Including 
incineration without energy recovery and controlled 
landfill). 


B-33 Durability — Ability of a material to exist for 
a long period of time while retaining its original 
qualities and properties. 


B-34 Elastomer — Macromolecular material which 
returns rapidly to its initial dimensions and shape 
after substantial deformation by a weak stress and 
release of the stress. 


B-35 End-of-Life — Point at which a product or 
component is taken out of use. 


B-36 Energy Recovery — Production of useful 
energy through direct and controlled combustion. 


B-37 Environmental Aspect — Element of an 
organization’s activities, products or services that 
interacts or can interact with the environment 


B-38 Environmental Impact — Change to the 
environment, whether adverse or beneficial, wholly 
or partially resulting from an _ organization’s 
environmental aspects. 


IS 14534 : 2023 


B-39 Extrusion — Process whereby heated or 
unheated plastic forced through a shaping orifice 
becomes one continuously formed piece. 


B-40 Feedstock Recycling — Same as Chemical 
recycling. 


B-41 Filler — Relatively inert solid material added 
to a plastic to modify its strength, permanence, 
working properties or other qualities, or to lower 
costs. 


B-42 Flake — Plate-like regrind. 


NOTE — The shape of regrind depends both on the plastics 
being processed and the manner of processing. 


B-43 Floatation/Float-Sink — Process for 
separating plastics from mixed plastics waste 
streams where the plastics are in a fluid that has 
density in between the materials making it possible 
for less dense material to float and heavier to sink. 


B-44 Fluff — Filament-like regrind. 


NOTE — Common usage of the term “fluff” also includes 
shredder residue fractions produced in the commercial 
recycling of durable goods such as automobiles. 


B-45 Fragmentation — Breakdown of a polymeric 
item to tiny particles regardless of the mechanism. 


B-46 Gasification — Transformation of organic 
materials into carbon monoxide, hydrogen and 
carbon dioxide by reacting the materials at high 
temperatures (>700 °C), without combustion, with 
controlled amount of oxygen and/or steam. 


B-47 Granulation — The process of forming grains 
or granules from solid plastic, suitable for later 
compounding or recompounding in a plastics 
manufacturing or plastics conversion process. 


B-48 Hazardous Waste — Waste that is suspected 
to have one or more hazardous properties and that 
must be handled in a specific way (according to 
precautionary actions) because it can be poisonous, 
explosive, corrosive, radioactive, harbour disease- 
causing microorganisms, or is hazardous for any 
other reason. 


B-49 Homogenizing — Processing to improve the 
degree to which a constituent and/or property is 
uniformly distributed throughout a quantity of 
plastics material. 


B-50 Homopolymer — Polymer derived from a 
single species of monomer. 


B-51 High Quality Recycling — Recycling of 
relatively pure streams of waste plastics requiring 
only minimal sorting to remove any impurities that 
can deliver high-quality recycled materials with 
desired properties. 


IS 14534 : 2023 


B-52 Incineration — Controlled burning of waste 
products or other combustible materials in an 
incinerator or similar apparatus. 


B-53 Industrial Composting — Composting 
process performed under controlled conditions on 
industrial scale with the aim of producing compost 
for the market. 


B-54 In-House Recycling — Recycling of 
materials left over from product manufacturing in 
the same facility. 


B-55 In House Scrap — Materials Scrap produced 
within the original manufacturing process and 
commonly reused by industry as normal practice. 


NOTE — In-house scrap is not recycled material. 


B-56 Injection Moulding — Process of moulding a 
material by injection under pressure from a heated 
cylinder through a sprue into the cavity of a closed 
mould. 


B-57 Landfill — Waste disposal site for the deposit 
of waste on to or into land under controlled or 
regulated conditions. 


B-58 Life cycle — Consecutive and interlinked 
stages of a product system, from raw material 
acquisition or generation from natural resources to 
the final disposal. 


B-59 Litter — Solid object disposed of or 
abandoned in the environment. 


B-60 Lot — Definite quantity of some material 
manufactured or produced under conditions that are 
presumed uniform. 


B-61 Masterbatch — Well-dispersed mixture of a 
polymer and high percentages of one or more 
components (colorants and/or other additives) in 
known proportions for use in blending in appropriate 
amounts with the basic polymer in the preparation 
of a compound. 


B-62 Material Recovery — Material processing 
operations including mechanical recycling, 
feedstock (chemical) recycling and organic 
recycling, but excluding energy recovery. 


B-63 Maximum Level of Biodegradation — 
Degree of biodegradation of a chemical compound 
or organic matter in a test, above which no further 
biodegradation takes place during the test 


B-64 Mechanical Recycling — Processing of 
plastics waste into secondary raw material or 


products without significantly changing the 
chemical structure of the material. 
B-65 Melt Flow Rate — Quantity of 


thermoplastic material extruded in a given time 
under specified test condition. 


B-66 Micronization/Micronizing — Process by 
which a material / plastic is grind into a fine powder. 


B-67 Microplastic — Any solid plastic particle 
insoluble in water with any dimension between | um 
and 1 000 um (= 1 mm). 


B-68 Monomer — Chemical compound, usually of 
low molecular mass that can be converted into a 
polymer by combining it with itself or with other 
chemical compounds. 


B-69 Natural Polymer — Polymer obtained from 
biomass, in which the polymer retains the original 
chemical structure and composition present in 
biomass. 


B-70 Organic Recycling — Same as biological 
recycling. 


B-71 Plastics — Material which contains as an 
essential ingredient a high polymer and which at 
some stage in its processing into finished products 
can be shaped by flow. 


NOTE — Elastomeric materials, which also are shaped by 
flow, are not considered as plastics. 


B-72 Plasticizer — Substance of low or negligible 
volatility incorporated in a plastic to lower its 
softening range and to increase its workability, 
flexibility or extensibility. 


B-73 Plastics Leakage — Unintentional release of 
plastics into the environment. 


B-74 Plastic Pollution — Plastic present in the 
environment that adversely affects the environment. 


B-75 Plastic Waste — Any plastic material or 
plastic object which the holder discards, or intends 
to discard, or is required to discard. 


B-76 Post-Consumer Plastics — Descriptive term 
covering plastic waste, generated by the end-users of 
products, that has fulfilled its intended purpose or 
can no longer be used as originally intended 
(including plastics returned from within the 
distribution chain). 


B-77 ` Pre-Consumer _Plastics/Post-Industrial 
Plastics — Plastic material diverted during a 
manufacturing process. This term excludes re- 
utilized materials such as rework, regrind or scrap 
generated in a given process and is capable of being 
reclaimed within the same process. 


B-78 Pretreated Waste — Waste that has been 
treated to make it more suitable for recovery or 
disposal. 


B-79 Purge Material — Material resulting from the 
passing of polymer through plastics processing 
equipment for the purpose of cleaning the equipment, 


or when changing from one polymer to another, or 
when changing from one colour or grade of polymer 
to another. 


B-80 Pyrolysis — Irreversible chemical 
decomposition caused solely by a rise in 
temperature. 


B-81 Recovered Material — Plastics material that 
has been separated, diverted or removed from the 
solid-waste stream in order to be recycled or used to 
substitute virgin raw materials. 


B-82 Recovery — Processing of plastics waste 
material for the original purpose or for other 
purposes, including energy recovery. 


B-83 Recyclate — Plastics material resulting from 
the recycling of plastics waste. 


NOTES 


1 The terms “plastics secondary raw material”, “recycled 
plastics” and “regenerate” are sometimes used 


synonymously. 

2 As soon as the used plastics material has been treated in 
such a way that it is ready to replace a virgin product, 
material or substance in a production process, it loses its 
characteristics as waste. 


B-84 Recycled Plastic — Plastic prepared by 
processing in a production process from plastics 
waste materials for the original purpose or for other 
purposes but excluding energy recovery. 


B-85 Recycling — Processing of plastics waste 
materials for the original purpose or for other 
purposes, excluding energy recovery. 


B-86 Regeneration — Plastic recovery process that 
enables to produce granules including 
compounding. 


B-87 Regranulated plastic — Recycled plastic 
granules made from production waste. 


NOTE — Should not be confused with recyclates that refer 
to post-consumer waste. 


B-88 Regrind — Shredded and/or granulated 
recovered plastics material in the form of free- 


11 


IS 14534 : 2023 


flowing material. 


NOTE — The term “regrind” is frequently used to describe 
plastics material in the form of scrap generated in a plastics 
processing operation and re-used in-house. This term is also 
used to describe fine plastics powder used as filler in the 
recovery of plastics. 


B-89 Regulated Plastic Product — Product or 
component, which is specifically regulated by any 
regulatory body, Example, medical device, item in 
food contact, etc. 


B-90 Reuse — Use of a product more than once in 
its original form. 


NOTE — In view of the fact that a re-used product has not 
been discarded, re-use does not constitute a recovery option. 


B-91 Service Life — Period of time during which a 
product in use meets or exceeds the performance 
requirements. 


B-92 Shredding — Any mechanical process by 
which plastics waste is fragmented into irregular 
pieces of any dimension or shape. 
NOTE — Shredding usually signifies the tearing or cutting 
of materials that cannot be crushed by fragmentation 


methods applicable to brittle materials, as typically carried 
out in a hammer mill. 


B-93 Sorted Plastic Waste — Plastic waste sorted 
by polymer type or polymer family ready to be used 
in recovery or recycling process. 


B-94 Toxicity— Ability of a substance to produce 
an adverse effect upon a living organism. 


B-95 Virgin Plastic — Plastic material in the form 
of pellets, granules, powder, floc, etc., that has not 
been subjected to use or processing other than that 
required for its initial manufacture. 


B-96 Waste — Any material or object which the 
holder discards, or intends to discard, or is required 
to discard. 


B-97 Waste-to-Energy Process — Combustion of 
waste, with the primary goal of energy recovery. 


IS 14534 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.1) 
(Informative) 


INDICATIVE SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF SOME PLASTICS RECOVERY OPTIONS 


Input 


l 


Plastic 
Waste 


Option 


Process 


Collect and 


Mechanical recycling | á 


Material 
recovery 


Feedstock recycling 


Biological recycling 


Output 


Results of process 


Examples of products 


Recyclates 
Semi-finished or finished 
products 


— 


Chemical raw materials 
(monomers or other 
chemicals in gas, liquid or 
solid form) 


> 


Energy 
recovery 


Direct and controlled 


eee» || Heat 


Co-processing in Cement Kiln 


—> | Compost 


— >» | Methane 


IS 14534 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 5.1) 


(Informative) 


PLASTICS RECOVERY AND INTEGRATED RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 


Utilization Production and recovery Use Disposal 


Semi-finished 
products 


Feedstock/ Recycled 
chemicals products 


Recycled/ 
secondary Processing 
raw material 
Compost/ Recovered 
humus energy 


Raw material 


Products 
for re-use 


Waste for 

recovery 

Discarded 
waste 


Emissions 
to 


Consumer/ 


last owner AIR 


WATER 
SOIL 


NATURAL RESOURCES 


LANDFILLED 
MATERIAL 


IS 14534 : 2023 


IS/TSO/Other 
Publication 


ISO 1043-1: 
2011 


ISO 1043-2: 
2011 


ISO 1043-3 : 
2016 


IS/ISO 9000 


ISO 11469 


IS/ISO 
14001:2004 


IS/ISO 17088 


ISO 18601 


ISO 18602 


ISO 18603 


ISO 18604 


ISO 18605 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Title IS/1ISO/Other 
Publication 
Symbols and abbreviated terms ISO 18606 
— Part 1: Basic polymers and 
their special characteristics 
ISO/TR 
Plastics — Symbols and 23891 
abbreviated terms — Part 2: 
Fillers and reinforcing materials EN 15342 
Plastics — Symbols and 
abbreviated terms — Part 3: 
Plasticizers EN 15343 
Quality management systems 
— Fundamentals and 
vocabulary 
EN 15344 
Plastics — Generic 
identification and marking of 
plastics products 
Environmental management EN 15345 
systems — Requirements with 
guidance for use 
EN 15346 
Specifications for compostable 
plastics 
Packaging and the environment EN 15347 
— General requirements for the 
use of ISO standards in the field 
of packaging and the EN 15348 
environment 
Packaging and the environment 
— Optimization of the 
packaging system CEN/TR 
15353:2007 
Packaging and the environment 
— Reuse 
CEN/TS 
Packaging and the environment 16010 : 2013 


— Material recycling 


Packaging and the environment 
— Energy recovery 


CEN/TS 1601 
: 2013 


Title 


Packaging and the environment 
— Organic recycling 


Recycling and Recovery — 
Necessity of standards 


Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Characterization of polystyrene 
(PS) recyclates 


Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Plastics recycling traceability 
and assessment of conformity 
and recycled content 


Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Characterization of 
polyethylene (PE) recyclates 


Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Characterization of 
polypropylene (PP) recyclates 
Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Characterization of poly(vinyl 
chloride) (PVC) recyclates 


Plastics — Recycled plastics — 


Characterization of plastics 
wastes 

Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Characterization of 
poly(ethylene terephthalate) 
(PET) recyclates 


Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Guidelines for the development 
of standards for recycled 
plastics 

Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Sampling procedures for testing 
plastics waste and recyclates 


Plastics — Recycled plastics — 
Sample preparation 


IS 14534 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 


Organization 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology 
(CIPET), Chennai 


All India Plastics Manufacturers Association (AIPMA), 
New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Chemical and Petrochemical Manufactures Association 
(CPMA), New Delhi 


Coca-Cola India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Consumer Association of India (CONCERT), Chennai 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 


CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicological Research (IITR), 
Lucknow 


CSIR- National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune 


Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals & Fertilizers, New Delhi 


Food Corporation of India (FCI), Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAD, 
New Delhi 


GAIL (India) Ltd, Noida 


Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 


HMEL, Noida 


Representative(s) 


PROF (DR) SHISHIR SINHA (Chairperson) 
DRS. N. YADAV (Alternate I) 
DR SMITA MOHANTY (Alternate II) 


SHRI DEEPAK BALLANI 


Ms DIVYA SINHA 
SHRIC. K. DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI UDAY CHAND 
SHRI VIRENDRA LANDGE 
SHRI RAJENDRA DOBRIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI G. SANTHANARAJAN 
SHRI M. R. KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. MATCHE 
SHRI KESHAVA MURTHY. P. (Alternate) 


DR V.P. SHARMA 
DR A.B. PANT (Alternate) 


DR P. R. SURESHA 
DR R. V. GUNDLOORI (Alternate I) 


SHRIMATI SANGEETA HAMBIR (Alternate II) 


SHRI O. P. SHARMA 
SHRI V ARUN SINGH POONIA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAGOPAL. A 
SHRI A. K. U. B. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI CHIRAG GADI 


SHRI MANISH KHANDELWAL 


SHRI RAJ K. DATTA 
SHRI SUVOMOY GANGULY (Alternate) 


SHRI VINEET KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI ALAKESH GHOSH (Alternate) 


IS 14534 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


Huhtamaki Paper Product Ltd (HPPL), Hyderabad SHRI MUTHUSAMY CHOCKALINGAM 
SHRI AISHWARYA VANGE (Alternate) 


IFCA, Mumbai SHRI ATINDRA N. CHAUDHURI 


Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment (ICPE), SHRI T.K. BANDOPADHYAY 


Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP), Mumbai DR TANWEER ALAM 
DR BABU RAO GUDURI (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), New Delhi SHRI ANUP K. GHOSH 
Indian Oil Corporation, R&D Centre, Faridabad DR G. S. KAPOOR 
SHRI RAJA PODDAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUMIT BASU (Alternate II) 
Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad DR JAI PRAKASH 
DR MANOJ KUMAR PANDEY (Alternate) 
Indian Plastic Institute (IPI), Mumbai SHRI V. B. LALL 
SHRI MIHIR BANERJI (Alternate) 
Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF), SHRI SATYENDRA KUMAR 
New Delhi SHRI AMIT LOVE (Alternate) 


National Committee on Plasticulture Applications in SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 
Horticulture (NCPAH), Ministry of Agriculture & SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR KAUSHAL (Alternate) 
Farmers Welfare, Govt of India, New Delhi 


ONGC Petro Additions Ltd (OPAL), Gujarat SHRI VIVEK MEHTA 


Organization of Plastics Processors of India, Mumbai DR SATYAPRASAD BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI DEEPAK LAWALE (Alternate) 


Plastindia Foundation, Mumbai DR E. SUNDARESAN 
SHRI HITEN BHEDA (Alternate) 


Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL), Mumbai SHRIS.V. RAJU 
SHRI AMIT SHAH (Alternate) 


SABIC Innovative Plastics, Bengaluru DR SUMANDA BANDYOPADHYAY 
SHRI SUNIL RAUTO (Alternate) 


Shivalik Agro-Poly Products Ltd, Mohali SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR MAHAJAN 
DRG. D. TYAGI (Alternate) 


Technical Training and Research Centre (TTRC), Lohia SHRIR. K. DWIVEDI 
Group, Kanpur 


IS 14534 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer SHRIM. A. U. KHAN 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi SHRI H. WADHWA (Alternate) 


BIS Director General SHRIMATI MEENAL PASSI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED 
PRODUCTS) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)| 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SHIVAM DWIVEDI 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISITANT DIRECTOR 
(PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED PRODUCTS), BIS 


Panel responsible for Preparing the Standard PCD 12/Panel 1 


Organization Representative(s) 


Technical Training and Research Centre (TTRC), SHRIR. K. DWIVEDI (Convenor) 
Lohia Group, Kanpur 


Coca-Cola India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI RAJENDRA DOBRIYAL 

IFCA, Mumbai SHRI ATINDRA N. CHAUDHURI 

Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment (ICPE), SHRI T.K. BANDOPADHYAY 
Mumbai 

Indorama Corporation SHRI PANKAJ SINHA 

Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL), Mumbai DR SHREERAM WADEKAR 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.co.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 12 (20504). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` ` 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


