IS 1641 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


ANGI Td» 
qa (TARA) pl sit Eran: sha AN sie 
iow d GWA Rae — Va wfedr 
(ZIRT galiero ) 


Indian Standard 


FIRE SAFETY OF BUILDINGS (GENERAL): GENERAL 
PRINCIPLES OF FIRE GRADING AND 
CLASSIFICATION — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.120; 13.220 


€ BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


July 2013 Price Group 6 


Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A series of Indian Standards covering fire safety of buildings in general principles of fire grading details of 
construction, exit requirements and exposure hazards have been formulated. This standard covers general principles 
of fire grading and classification, which has been adopted in various Indian Standards in respect to fire safety 
aspects. This standard was first published in 1960. Based on considerable research done in field of fire protection 
in the past years in advanced countries like USA, UK and Canada, the method of classification of building has 
been revised and covered in this revision. In this revision, for determination of fire loads and fire load density for 
arriving at the classification of occupancy hazard, guidance including the calorific values of some common 
materials and a broad classification of industrial and non-industrial occupancies into low, moderate and high 
hazard classes is given, for guidance. Further the provisions have been aligned with SP 7 : 2005 ‘National Building 
Code of India 2005'. 


Now intelligent buildings are also coming up wherein various automation systems are installed. For fire protection 
of electronic processing units, circuits and other installations, reference of IS 12456 : 2004 *Fire protection of 
electronic data processing installation — Code of practice' shall be made. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1641 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


FIRE SAFETY OF BUILDINGS (GENERAL): GENERAL 
PRINCIPLES OF FIRE GRADING AND 
CLASSIFICATION — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Code covers the general principles of fire 
grading of buildings and classification. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
given below. 


IS No. Title 


1642 : 2013 Fire safety of buildings (general): 
Details of construction — Code of 
practice (second revision) 
Recommendations for fire 
precautionary measures in the 
construction of temporary structures 
and pandals (first revision) 

Code of practice for fire safety in 
petroleum refineries and fertilizer 
plants 

National Building Code of India 


8758 : 2013 


15394 : 2003 


SP 7 : 2005 


3 GENERAL PRINCIPLE 
3.1 Classification Based on Fire Load 


Fire load is the amount of heat in kilocalories which is 
liberated per square metre of floor area of a 
compartment by the combustion of the contents of the 
building and any combustible parts of the building 
itself. This amount of heat is used as the basis for 
classification of occupancies. 


3.2 The fire load is determined by multiplying the 
weight of all combustible materials by their calorific 
values and dividing the figure by the floor area under 
consideration. 


3.3 Different materials having the same weight and 
same calorific value may present different hazards on 
account of their other properties, such as ease of 


ignition, speed of burning, and liberation of heat and 
fumes. Thus, some materials are more readily ignited 
than others, again, some burn more rapidly than others, 
some materials when heated on fire liberate dangerous 
fumes, and some may readily cause ignition of other 
materials. 


3.4 The content of a building are rarely distributed 
uniformly over the whole floor area. From the fire 
protection point, it would be undesirable to have all 
combustible material concentrated on a fraction of the 
floor area, as the average taken over the whole area 
would not give a true representation of the actual 
conditions, and the resulting effects on the structure 
immediately surrounding would be out of all proportion 
to these expected on the basis of average fire load. 


4 CLASSIFICATION OF BUILDING BASED 
ON OCCUPANCY 


4.1 General Classification 


All buildings whether existing or hereafter erected 
should be classified, according to the use or the 
character of occupancy in one of the following groups: 


Group A Residential 
Group B Educational 
Group C Institutional 
Group D Assembly 
Group E Business 
Group F Mercantile 
Group G Industrial 
Group H Storage 
Group J Hazardous 


4.1.1 Minor occupancy incidental to operations in 
another type of occupancy should be considered as part 
of the main occupancy and should be classified under 
the relevant group for the main occupancy. Examples 
of buildings in each group are given in 4.1.1.1 to 4.1.1.9. 


4.1.1.1 Group A Residential buildings 
These should include any building in which sleeping 


IS 1641 : 2013 


accommodation is provided for normal residential 
purposes, with or without cooking or dining or both 
facilities, except any building classified under Group C. 


Buildings and structures under Group A should be 
further subdivided as follows: 


Sub-division A-1 Lodging or rooming houses 


Sub-division A-2 One or two-family private 
dwellings 


Sub-division A-3 Dormitories 
Sub-division A-4 Apartment houses (flats) 
Sub-division A-5 Hotels 

Sub-division A-6 Hotels (Starred) 


a) Sub-division A-1 Lodging for rooming houses 
— These should include any building or group 
of buildings, in which separate sleeping 
accommodation for total of not more than 40 
persons, on transient or permanent basis, with 
or without dining facilities, but without 
cooking facilities for individuals, is provided. 
A lodging or rooming house should be 
classified as a dwelling in sub-division A-2, 
if no room in any of its private dwelling units 
is rented to more than three persons. 

b) Sub-division A-2 One or two-family private 

dwelling — These should include any private 
dwelling which is occupied by members of a 
one or two families and has a total sleeping 
accommodation for not more than 20 persons. 
If rooms in a private dwelling are rented to 
outsiders, these should be for accommodating 
not more than three persons per room. 
If sleeping accommodation for more than 20 
persons is provided in any one residential 
building, it shall be classified as a building in 
sub-division A-3 or A-4 as the case may be. 


c) Sub-division A-3 Dormitories — These should 
include any building in which group sleeping 
accommodation is provided, with or without 
dining facilities, for persons who are not 
members of the same family, in one room or a 
series of closely associated rooms under joint 
occupancy and single management, for 
example, school and college dormitories, 
students and their hostels, and military barracks. 

d) Sub-division A-4 Apartment houses (flats) — 
These should include any building or structure 
in which living quarters are provided for three 
or more families, living independently of each 
other and with independent cooking facilities, 
for example, apartment houses, mansions and 
chawls. 


e) Sub-division A-5 Hotels — These should 
include any building or group of buildings 
under single management, in which sleeping 
accommodation with or without dining 
facilities, is provided for hire to more than 40 
persons who are primarily transient, for 
example, hotels, inns, clubs and motels. 

f) Sub-division A-6 Hotels — These shall include 
the hotels duly approved by the concerned 
authorities as Five Star and above Hotels 


4.1.1.2 Group B Educational buildings — These shall 
include any building used for school, college, other 
training institutions for day-care purposes involving 
assembly for instruction, education or recreation for 
not less than 20 students. 


Buildings and structures under Group B shall be further 
sub-divided as follows: 


Sub-division B-1 Schools up to senior secondary 
level 


Sub-division B-2 All others/training institutions 


a) Sub-division B-1 Schools up to senior 
secondary level — This sub-division shall 
include any building or a group of buildings 
under single management which is used for 
students not less than 20 in number. 

b) Sub-division B-2 All others/training 
institutions — This sub-division shall include 
any building or a group of buildings under 
single management which is used for students 
not less than 100 in number. 

In the case of temporary buildings/structures which are 
utilized for educational purposes, the provisions of 
IS 8758 shall apply. 


If residential accommodation is provided in the 
schools/institutions, that portion of occupancy shall be 
classified as a building in sub-division A-3. 


4.1.1.3 Group C Institutional buildings — These should 
include any building or part thereof, which is used for 
purposes, such as medical or other treatment or care 
of persons suffering from physical or mental illness, 
disease or infirmity; care of infants, convalescents or 
aged persons and for penal or correctional detention 
in which the liberty of the inmates is restricted. 
Institutional buildings ordinarily provide sleeping 
accommodation for the occupants. Buildings and 
structures under Group C should be further subdivided 
as follows: 


a) Sub-division C-1 Hospitals and sanatoria — 
This sub-division include any building or a 
group of buildings under single management, 
which is used for housing persons suffering 
from physical limitations because of health 


or age, for example, hospitals, infirmaries, 
sanatoria and nursing homes. 

b) Sub-division C-2 Custodial institutions — 
This sub-division should include any building 
or a group of buildings under single 
management, which is used for the custody 
and care of persons, such as children 
convalescents and the aged, for example, 
homes for the aged and infirm, convalescent 
homes and orphanages. 

c) Sub-division C-3 Penal and mental 
institutions — This sub-division should 
include any building or a group of buildings 
under single management, which is used for 
housing persons under restraint, or who are 
detained for penal or corrective purposes, in 
which the liberty of the inmates is restricted, 
for example, jails, prisons, mental hospitals, 
mental sanatoria and reformatories. 


4.1.1.4 Group D Assembly buildings — These should 
include any building or part of a building, where 
number of persons not less than 50 congregate or gather 
for amusement, recreation, social, religious, patriotic, 
civil, travel and similar purposes, for example, theatres, 
motion picture houses, assembly halls, auditoria, 
exhibition halls, museums, skating rinks, gymnasiums, 
restaurants, places of worship, dance halls, club rooms, 
passenger stations and terminals of air, surface and 
marine public transportation services, recreation piers 
and stadium, banquet hall etc. This includes inns, clubs, 
motels and guest houses where kitchen is provided. 


Buildings under Group D should be further subdivided 
as follows: 


a) Sub-division D-1 — This sub-division should 
include any building primarily meant for 
theatrical or operatic performance and 
exhibitions, and which has a raised stage, 
proscenium curtain, fixed or portable scenery 
or scenery loft, lights, motion picture booth, 
mechanical appliances or other theatrical 
accessories and equipment, and which is 
provided with fixed seats for less than 1 000 
persons. 

b) Sub-division D-2 — This sub-division should 
include any building primarily meant for use 
as described for sub-division D-1, but with 
fixed seats for over 1 000 persons. 

c) Sub-division D-3 — This sub-division should 
include any building, its lobbies, rooms and 
other spaces connected thereto, primarily 
intended for assembly of people, but which 
has no theatrical stage or permanent theatrical 
and/or cinematographic accessories, and has 
accommodation for more than 300 persons, 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


J) 


k) 


IS 1641 : 2013 


for example, dance halls, night clubs, halls 
for incidental picture shows, dramatic, 
theatrical or educational presentation, lectures 
or other similar purposes, having no theatrical 
stage except a raised platform and used 
without permanent seating arrangement; art 
galleries, exhibition halls, community halls, 
marriage halls, places of worship, museums, 
lecture halls, libraries, passenger terminals; 
heritage and archeological monuments; and 
buildings used for educational purposes for 
less than 8 h per week. 

Sub-division D-4 — This sub-division should 
include any building primarily intended for 
use as described in sub-division D-3; but with 
accommodation for less than 300 persons with 
no permanent seating arrangements. 
Sub-division D-5 — This sub-division should 
include any building or structure permanent 
or temporary meant for outdoor assembly of 
people not covered by sub-divisions D-1 to 
D-4, for example, grand-stands, stadium, 
amusement park structures, reviewing stands 
and circus tents. 

Sub-division D-6 — This sub-division shall 
include any building for assembly of people 
provided with multiple services/facilities like 
shopping complex/malls cinema theatres and 
restaurants, for example, multiplexes. 
Sub-division D-7 — This sub-division shall 
include any building or structure permanent 
or temporary meant for assembly of people 
not covered by D-1 to D-6, for example, 
underground or elevated railways. 


Sub-division D-8 — Airport terminal building 
— A structure used primarily for air passenger 
enplaning or deplaning, including tickets 
sales, flight information, baggage handling 
and other necessary functions in connection 
with air transport operations. This term 
includes any extensions and satellite buildings 
used for passenger handling or aircraft flight 
service functions. Aircraft loading walkways 
and mobile lounges are excluded. 
Sub-division D-9—Stadium — A place where 
sports or other competitive activities take 
place in the open air and where 
accommodation has been provided for 
spectators, consisting of artificial structures 
or of natural structures artificially modified 
for the purpose. 

Sub-division D-10—Marine terminal — A 
facility comprising one or more berths, slips, 
piers, wharves, loading and unloading areas, 
warehouses and storage yards used for 


IS 1641 : 2013 


transfer of people and/or cargo between water 
borne carriers and land. 

m) Sub-division D-11—Railway station — A 
place designated for the purpose of loading 
and unloading passengers, including patron 
service areas and ancillary spaces associated 
with the same structure. 

n) Sub-division D-12—Bus stations — A place 
designated for the purpose of loading and 
unloading passengers, including patron 
service areas and ancillary spaces associated 
with the same structure. 


4.1.1.5 Group E Business buildings — These should 
include any building or part of a building which is used 
for transaction of business (other than that covered by 
Group F and parts of buildings covered by 4.1.1) for 
keeping of accounts and records and similar purposes, 
professional establishments, service facilities, etc. City 
halls, town halls, court houses and libraries should be 
classified in this group so far as the principal function 
of these is transaction of public business and keeping 
of books and records. 


Business buildings should be further sub-classified as 
follows: 


a) Sub-division E-1 — Offices, banks, 
professional establishments, like offices of 
architects, engineers, doctors, lawyers and 
police stations etc. 

b) Sub-division E-2 — Laboratories, research 
establishments and test houses. 

c) Sub-division E-3 — Electonic Data Processing 
Installations 


d) Sub-division E-4 — Telephone exchanges. 

e) Sub-division E-5 — Broadcasting stations, 
T.V. stations, Film studios and T.V. serial 
studios. 


4.1.1.6 Group F Mercantile buildings — These should 
include any building or part of a building, which is 
used as shops, stores, market, for display and sale of 
merchandise, either wholesale or retail. 


Mercantile buildings should be further sub-classified 
as follows : 


a) Sub-division F-1 — Shops, stores, malls, 
departmental stores, markets with area up to 
500 m°. 

b) Sub-division F-2 — Shops, stores, malls, 
departmental stores, markets with area more 
than 500 m°. 


c) Sub-division F-3 — Underground structures 
(excluding occupancy type J). 


Storage and service facilities incidental to the sale of 


merchandise and located in the same building should 
be included under this group. 


4.1.1.7 Group G Industrial buildings — These should 
include any building or part of a building or structure, 
in which products or materials of all kinds and 
properties are fabricated, assembled, manufactured or 
processed, for example, assembly plants, laboratories, 
dry cleaning plants, power plants, pumping stations, 
smoke houses, laundries, gas plants, refineries, dairies 
and mills. 


The hazard of occupancy, for the purpose of the Code 
should be the relative danger of the start and spread of 
fire, the danger of smoke or gases generated the danger 
of explosion or other occurrence potentially 
endangering the lives and safety of the occupants of 
the buildings. 


Hazard of occupancy should be determined by the 
authority on the basis of the character of the contents 
and the processes or operations conducted in the 
building, provided, however, that the combustibility 
of the building, the flame spread rating of the interior 
finish or other features of the building or structure are 
such as to involve a greater than the occupancy hazard, 
the greater degree of hazard should govern the 
classification. 


Where different degrees of hazard of occupancy exist 
in different parts of a building, the most hazardous of 
those should govern the classification for the purpose 
of this Code, except in as far as hazardous areas are 
segregated or protected as specified in the Code. 


Buildings under Group G shall be further sub-divided 
as follows: 


a) Sub-division G-1 — This sub-division should 
include any building in which the contents are 
of such low combustibility and the industrial 
processes or operations conducted therein are 
of such a nature that there are no possibilities 
for any self propagating fire to occur and the 
only consequent danger to life and property 
may arise from panic, fumes or smoke, or fire 
from some external source. 

b) Sub-division G-2 — This sub-division should 
include any building in which the contents or 
industrial processes of operations conducted 
therein are liable to give rise to a fire which 
will burn with moderate rapidity or result in 
other hazardous situation and may give off a 
considerable volume of smoke, but from 
which neither toxic fumes nor explosions are 
to be feared in the event of a fire. 

c) Sub-division G-3 — This sub-division should 
include any building in which the contents or 
industrial processes or operations conducted 


therein are liable to give rise to a fire which 
will burn with extreme rapidity or result in 
other hazardous situation or from which 
poisonous fumes or explosions are to be 
feared in the event of a fire. For fire safety in 
petroleum and fertilizer plant, IS 15394 may 
be referred. 


4.1.1.8 Group H Storage buildings — These should 
include any building or part of a building used primarily 
for the storage or sheltering (including servicing, 
processing or repairs incidental to storage) of goods 
wares or merchandise (except) those that involve highly 
combustible or explosive products or materials, 
vehicles or animals, for example, warehouses, cold 
storage, freight depots, transit sheds, storehouses, truck 
and marine terminals garages, hangars (other than 
aircraft repair hangars) grain elevators, barns and 
stables. 


Storage properties are characterized by the presence 
of relatively small number of persons in proportion to 
the area. Any new use which increases the number of 
occupants to a figure comparable with other classes of 
occupancy should change the classification of the 
building to that of the new use, example, hangars used 
for assembly purposes, warehouses used for office 
purposes, garage buildings used for manufacturing. 


4.1.1.9 Group J Hazardous buildings — These should 
include any building or part of a building which is used 
for the storage, handling, manufacture or processing 
of highly combustible or explosive materials or 
products are liable to burn with extreme rapidity and/ 
or which may produce poisonous fumes or explosions 
for storage, handling, manufacturing or processing 
which involve highly corrosive, toxic or noxious 
alkalis, acids or other liquids or chemicals producing 
flame, fumes and explosive poisonous irritant or 
corrosive gases; and for the storage, handling or 
processing of any material or corrosive gases; and for 
the storage, handling or processing of any material 
producing explosive mixtures of dust which result in 
the division of matter into fine particles subject to 
spontaneous ignition. Examples of buildings in this 
class are those buildings which are used for: 


a) Storage, under pressure of more than 
0.1 N/mm’ and in quantities exceeding 70 m? 
of acetylene, hydrogen, illuminating and 
natural gases, ammonia, chlorine, phosgene, 
sulphur dioxide, carbon dioxide, methyloxide 
and all gases subject to explosion, fume or 
toxic hazard, cryogenic gases, etc; 

b) Storage and handling of hazardous and 
flammable/toxic liquids and gases like LPG, 
rocket propellants, etc; 


IS 1641 : 2013 


C) Storage and handling of hazardous and highly 
flammable or explosive materials, other than 
liquids; and 

d) Manufacture of artificial flowers, synthetic 
leather, ammunition, explosives and fireworks. 


NOTE — A list of hazardous substances giving 
quantities, for which or exceeding which owners 
handling such substances are required to be covered 
under the Public Liability Insurance Act, has been 
notified under Government of India, Ministry of 
Environment and Forests Notification No. G.S.R. 
347(E) dated 1 August 1996. 


For determination of fire loads and fire load density 
for arriving at the classification of occupancy hazard, 
guidance including the calorific values of some 
common materials is given at Annex A. 


A broad classification of industrial and non-industrial 
occupancies into low, moderate and high hazard classes 
is given at Annex B, for guidance. Any occupancy not 
covered in Annex B, shall be classified in the most 
appropriate class depending on the degree of hazard. 


A certificate of occupancy shall be necessary, as 
required under Part 2 ‘Administration’ of SP 7, before 
any change is effected in the character of occupancy 
of any building. 


4.2 Any building not covered by the above should be 
classified in the group which most nearly resembles 
its existing or proposed use. 


4.3 Where change in the occupancy of any building 
places it in a different group or in a different subdivision 
of the same group, such building should be made to 
comply with the requirements of the code the new 
group or its sub-division. 


4.4 Where the new occupancy of any building is less 
hazardous, based on life and fire risk than its existing 
occupancy, it should not be necessary to conform to 
the requirements of the Code for the new group or its 
sub-division. 


5 FIRE ZONES 
5.1 Demarcation 


The city or area should for the purpose of the Code, be 
demarcated into, distinct zones, based on fire hazard 
inherent in the buildings and structures according to 
occupancy (see 4), which should be called the ‘Fire Zones’. 


5.2 Number and Designation of Fire Zones 


5.2.1 The number of fire zones in a city or area under 
the jurisdiction of the authority, depends upon the 
existing layout, types of building construction, 
classification of existing buildings based on occupancy 
(see 3) and the expected future development of the city 
or area. In large cities on areas, three fire zones may 


IS 1641 : 2013 


be necessary, while in smaller ones, one or two may be 
adequate. 


5.2.2 The fire zones should be made use of in the land 
use development plan and should be designated as 
follows: 


a) Fire Zone No. 1 — This should comprise areas 
having residential (Group A), educational 
(Group B), institutional (Group C), assembly 
(Group D), small business (Sub-division E- 
1) and retail mercantile (Group F) buildings, 
or areas which are under development for such 
occupancies. 

b) Fire Zone No. 2 — This should comprise 
business (Sub-divisions E-2 to E-5) and 
industrial buildings (Sub-divisions G-1 and G- 
2) except high hazard industrial buildings 
(Sub-division G-3 ) or areas which are under 
development for such occupancies. 

c) Fire Zone No. 3 — This should comprise areas 
having high hazard industrial buildings 
(Sub-division G-3), storage buildings 
(Group H) and buildings for hazardous uses 
(Group J) or areas which are under 
development for such occupancies. 


5.3 Change in the Fire Zone Boundaries 


When the boundaries of any fire zone are changed, or 
when it is intended to include other areas or types of 
occupancies in any fire zone, it should be done by 
following the same procedure as far promulgating new 
rules. 


5.4 Overlapping Fire Zones 


5.4.1 When any building is so situated that it extends 
to more than one fire zone, it should be deemed to be 
in the fire zone in which the major portion of the 
building or structure is situated. 


5.4.2 When any building is so situated that it extends 
equally to more than one fire zone, it should be deemed 
to bein the fire zone having more hazardous occupancy 
buildings. 


5.5 Temporary Buildings 


5.5.1 Temporary buildings should be permitted only in 
Fire Zones No. 1 and 2 as the case may be, according 
to the purpose for which these are to be used, by special 
permit from the authority for a limited period and 
subject to such conditions as may be imposed in the 
permit. 


5.5.2 Such buildings should be completely removed 
on the expiry of the period specified in the permit. 


5.5.3 Adequate fire precautionary measures in the 
construction of temporary structures and pandals shall 
be taken in accordance with IS 8758. 


5.6 Restrictions on Type of Construction for New 
Buildings (see IS 1642) 


5.6.1 Buildings erected in Fire Zone No. 1 should 
conform to construction of Type 1, 2, 3 or 4. 


5.6.2 Buildings erected in Fire Zone No. 2 should 
conform to construction of Type 1, 2 or 3. 


5.6.3 Buildings erected in Fire Zone No. 3 should 
conform to construction of Type 1 or 2. 


5.7 Restrictions on Existing Buildings 


5.7.1 The existing buildings in any fire zone shall not be 
required to comply with the requirement of the Code 
unless these are altered, or in the opinion of the Authority, 
such building constitutes a hazard to the safety of the 
adjacent property or the occupants of the building itself 
or is an unsafe building. In the event of alteration, it 
shall be necessary to obtain permission of the Authority 
for such alteration consistent with fire hazard. 


5.7.2, Alterations/modifications/renovations shall be 
accomplished so as to ensure conformity with all the 
safety requirements of the new buildings. Such alterations 
shall not in anyway bring down level of fire and life 
safety below that which existed earlier. Any addition or 
alterations or construction of cubicles or partitioning for 
floor area exceeding 500 m2 for all high rise buildings 
shall be with approval of local fire authority. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.1.1.9) 


CALORIFIC VALUES OF COMMON MATERIALS AND TYPICAL 
VALUES OF FIRE LOAD DENSITY 


A-1 The calorific values of some common materials are given in Table | for guidance. 


Table 1 Calorific Values of Common Materials 


IS 1641 : 2013 


Material Calorific Value Wood Material Calorific Value Wood 


(10? kJ/kg") » Equivalent (10? kJ/kg") » Equivalent 
(kg/kg) (kg/kg) 
(1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3) 
Solid Fuels Rubber 37.4 2.13 
Anthracite 28.6 1.66 Straw 13.2 0.75 
Bituminous coal 30.8 1.75 Tallows 37.6 2.14 
Charcoal 28.4 1.61 Tan bark 20.9 1.19 
Coke (average) 21.5 1.56 Tar (bituminous) 35.2 2.00 
Peats 20.9 1.19 Wool (raw) 21.6 1.23 
Sub-bituminous coal 22.0 125 Wool (scoured) 19.6 1.11 
Woods (hard or softwood) 17.6 1.00 Foodstuffs 
Hydrocarbons Barely 14.1 0.80 
Benzene 39.6 2.25 Bran 11.0 0.63 
Butane 47.1 2.68 Bread 9.9 0.56 
Ethane 49.1 2.79 Butter 29.5 1.68 
Ethylene 47.7 2.71 Cheese (Cheddar) 18.1 1.03 
Fuel oil 41.6 2.36 Corn meal 14.1 0.80 
Gas oil 42.9 2.44 Flour 14.1 0.80 
Hexane 44.9 2.55 Margarine 29:5 1.68 
Methane (natural gas) 52.8 3.00 Oatmeal 15.8 0.90 
Octane 45.3 2.58 Rice 13.9 0.79 
Paraffin 39.6 — 44.0 2.3 — 2.5 Soya been flour 16.1 0.91 
Pentane 46.0 2.61 Sugar 15.4 0.88 
Propane 47.3 2.69 Whole wheat 14.3 0.81 
Propylene 46.2 2.63 Miscellaneous 
Alcohols Acetone 29.7 1.69 
Ethyl alcohol 28.4 1.61 Acetaldehyde 25.1 1.43 
Methyl alcohol 21.1 1.20 Formaldehyde 17.6 1.00 
Propyl alcohol 31.9 1.81 Hydrogen 134.2 7.63 
Polymers Magnesium 24.0 1.36 
Casein 23.1 1.31 D 1 KJ is approximately equal to 1 Btu so the figures in the 
Cellulose 16.5 0.94 tables are also equivalent to Btu/kg. 
Cellulose acetate 17.8 1.01 —ə—h '>,> -.nÑə. s - s s++s+soÜ-Á h.Q C.. OO  21n. . . 
Polyethylene 48.4 2.75 A-2 The typical values of fire load density for arriving 
Polypropylene 48.4 2.75 : : TEE : 
Pd cene 413 2.48 at the classification of occupancy hazard is given in 
ysty I 
Polyvinylchloride 20.9 1.19 Table 2 for guidance. 
Polymethylmethacrylate 24.6 1.40 
Polyurethane 35.2 2.00 Table 2 Typical Values of Fire Load Density 
Polyamide (nylon) 22.0 1.25 
Polyester 22.0 1.25 SI Building Type Fire Load Density 
Common Solids No. (Expressed as 
Wood Equivalent) 
Asphalt 38.3 2,13 kg/m? 
ni m m go E É 
Dion (dry) 15.8 0.90 Ay Residential (A-1 & A-2) 25 
Flax 143 081 ii) Residential (A-3 to A-5) I 25 
Pars sad skins 187 1.06 iii) Institutional and Educational 25 
Hair (animal) 20.9 1.19 A (Bac) 
Leather 17.6 1.00 m) cob ee 
I v) Business (E) 25-50 
Ozokerite (wax) 43.3 2.46 vi) Mercantile (F) Up to 250 
Paper (average) 15.4 0.88 vii) Industrial (G) Up to 150 
Paraffin wax 40.9 2.33 viii) Storage and Hazardous (H & J) Up to 500 
Pitch 33.0 1.88 


IS 1641 : 2013 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.1.1.9) 


BROAD CLASSIFICATION OF INDUSTRIAL AND NON-INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCIES INTO 
DIFFERENT DEGREE OF HAZARD 


B-1 LOW HAZARD OCCUPANCIES 
Abrasive manufacturing premises 

Aerated water factories 

Agarbatti manufacturing premises 
Analytical and/or Q.C. Laboratories 

Areca nut slicing and/or Betel nut factories 
Asbestos steam packing and lagging manufacturers 
Assembly buildings small (D-4 and D-5) 
Battery charging and service stations 
Battery manufacturing 

Breweries 

Brickworks 

Canning factories 

Cardamom factories 


Cement factories and/or asbestos or concrete products 
manufacturing premises 


Ceramic factories, crockery, stoneware pipe 
manufacturing 


Clay works 

Clock and watch manufacturing 

Clubs 

Coffee curing, roasting and grinding factories 


Condensed milk factories, milk pasturising plants and 
dairies 


Confectionary manufacturing 
Dwellings, lodges, dormitories, etc 
Educational and research institutions 


Electric lamps (incandescent and fluorescent) and T.V. 
tube manufacturing 


Electroplating works 

Engineering workshops 

Fruits and vegetables dehydrating and drying factories 
Fruits products and condiment factories 


Glass and glass fibre manufacturing 


Godowns and warehouses (non-combustible goods) 
Gold thread/gilding factories 

Gum and/or glue and gelatin manufacturing 

Ice candy and ice-cream and ice factories 

Ink (excluding printing ink) factories 

Mica products manufacturing 

Office premises 

Places of worship 

Pottery works 

Poultry farms 

Residential buildings (A-1 to A-4) (except hotels A-5) 
Salt crushing factories/refineries stables 

Sugar candy manufacturing 

Sugar factories and refineries 

Tanneries 

Umbrella assembling factories 

Vermicelli factories 


Water treatment/filtration plants and water pump 
houses 


Zinc/copper factories 


B-2 MODERATE HAZARD OCCUPANCIES 
Airport and other transportation terminal buildings 
Aluminium factories 

Assembly buildings (D-1, D-2 and D-3) 

Atta and cereal grinding 

Bakeries and biscuit factories 

Beedi factories 

Bobbin factories 

Book-binders, envelopes and paper bag manufacturing 
Camphor boiling 

Candle works 

Carbon paper/typewriter ribbon makers 


Card board box manufacturing 


Carpenters, wood wool and furniture makers 
Carpet and durries factories 
Cashewnut factories 


Chemical manufactures (using raw materials having 
FP > 23°C) 


Cigar and cigarette factories 
Coir factories 

Cold storage premises 
Computer installations 


Cork products manufacturing (coir, carpets, rugs and 
tobacco) (hides and skin presses) 


Dry cleaning, dyeing and laundries, cable manu- 
facturing 


Electric substations/distribution stations 

Electrical generating stations except u/g powerhouses 
Enamelware factories 

Filler and wax paper manufacturing 

Flour mills 

Garment makers 

Ghee factories (other than vegetable) 


Godowns and warehouses (other than non-combustible 
goods) 


Grains and seed disintegrating or crushing 
Grease manufacturing 
Hosiery, lace, embroidery and thread 


Hospitals including ‘X’ ray and other diagnostic clinics 
(institutional buildings) 


Incandescent gas mantle manufacturers 


Industrial gas manufacturing (only halogenated 
hydrocarbons/inert gases) 


Man-made yarn/fibre (except acrylic fibre/yarn) 


Manure and fertilizer works (blending, mixing and 
granulating only) 


Mercantile occupancies (departmental stores, shopping 
complex, etc) 


Mineral oil blending and processing 


Museums, archives, record rooms 
Oil and leather cloth factories 


Open storage of flammable liquids (in drums, cans, 
etc) 


IS 1641 : 2013 


Oxygen plants 

Paper and cardboard mills (except raw material yard) 
Piers, wharves, dockyards 

Plastic goods manufacturing 

Plywood/wood veneering factories 

Printing press premises 

Pulverizing and crushing mills 

Residential apartments, hotels, cafes, restaurants 
Rice mills 

Rope works 

Rubber goods manufacturing 

Rubber tyres and tubes manufacturing 

Shellac factories 

Silk filatures 

Soaps and glycerine factories 

Spray painting 

Starch factories 

Tea factories (including blending packing of tea) 
Telephone exchanges, garages 

Textile mills 

Tobacco chewing and pan masala making 
Tobacco re-drying factories 

Woolen mills 

B-3 HIGH HAZARD OCCUPANCIES 

A) 

Aircraft hangers 

Aluminium/magnesium powder plants 
Bitumanized paper/hessian cloth/tar felt manufacturing 
Bulk storage of flammable liquids (tank farm, etc) 
Celluloid goods making 


Chemical manufacturers (where raw materials have a 
EP. < 23°C) 


Cigarette filter manufacturing 

Cinema films and T.V. production studios 

Coal, coke and charcoal ball and briquettes making 
Collieries, steel plants 


Cotton seeds cleaning and delinting factories 


IS 1641 : 2013 


Cotton waste factories 

Distilleries 

Duplicating/stencil paper making 

Fire works manufacture 

Foamed plastic and/or converting plants 


Godowns of warehouses (combustible/hazardous 
goods) (H) 


Grass, hay, fodder and bhoosa (chaff) 
Hazardous occupancy buildings (J) 


Industrial gas manufacturing (except halogenated 
hydrocarbon gases/inert gases) 


Industrial units (G-3 occupancies) 

Jute mills and jute presses 

Linoleum factories 

Man made fibres (only acrylic fibre/yarn making) 
Match factories 

Mattress and pillow makings (foam plastics) 


Metal or tin printers (if more than 50 percent is 
engineering, shift to ordinary hazard) 


Oil mills 


Oil extraction plants 


10 


Oil terminals/depots 

Paints/varnish factories 

Paper and cardboard mills (only raw material yard) 
Pressing factories 

Printing ink making 

Resin, lamp black and turpentine manufacture 
Saw mills 

Surgical cotton manufacturing 

Tarpaulin and canvas proofing factories 
Turpentine and resin distilleries 

Type retreading and resoling factories 
Underground shopping complexes (F 3) 

B) 

Ammonia and urea synthesis plants 
Explosive factories 

LPG bottling plants 

Petrochemical plants 


Petroleum refineries 


NOTE — In case of complexes having segregated plants with 
varying degrees of hazards, the competent authority having 
jurisdictions shall be consulted to decide the level of protections 
to be provided. 


IS 1641 : 2013 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


Organization 


Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Pune 
Council of Architecture, New Delhi 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & Labour Institute, 
Mumbai 


Electricity Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum, New Delhi 


Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 
Engineering Industrial Technical Section, Ministry of Industry, 
New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


GAIL, New Delhi 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Lloyd Insulations (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 


Reliance Refineries Limited, Jamnagar 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, Delhi 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. C. SHARMA (Chairman) 
Suri A. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TANDLE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr M. P. SINGH 
Dn Suvir SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri C. S. KASANA 
Suri P. C. KuREEL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL (FIRE) 
Suri S. L. NAGARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYA PRAKASH BARNWAL 
SHRI ASHOK Kumar GOEL (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Dr K. C. WapHwa (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. Hepat 


Lr-Cor B. T. MANJUNATH 
Suri M. B. PARADKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. R. RAMANATHAN 
Suri GIRISH Misura (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI TRIPTA KHURANA 


Suri A. K. GANGULY 
Suri S. P. BANDOPADHYAYA (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


Suri A. K. Ray 
Suri S. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. SUNKARIA 
Suri K. C. Maruur (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND KUMAR 
Ms ALPANA Srivastava (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT CHAKRABORTY 
Suri T. K. KUMAR 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. Mirra 
SHRI SANJEEV ANGRA (Alternate) 


SHRI OM PRAKASH 
Suni D. K. SHAMI (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suni D. K. SURYANARAYAN 


SHRI S. C. Gupta 
Suni B. R. GADEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VARADENDRA Koti 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 1641 : 2013 


Organization 
State Bank of India, Mumbai 
In personal capacity P/4 Belgacuta, Kolkata 
In personal capacity K-33-A Green Park, New Delhi 
In personal capacity C-127 Kendriya Vihar, Noida 


In personal capacity 305, SJR Verity, Amrita College Road 


Kasavanahalli, Bangalore 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri J. S. GAHLAUT 
Suri S. N. KUNDU 
Suri S. K. DHERI 
Suri H. S. KAPARWAN 
Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


Suri A. K. Saint, Scientist ‘F’ & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. CHATURVEDI 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 36 (7632). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


