Waa Wah IS 302-2-75 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Mey sit warm fagdtar soar 


cat RAT 
amt 2 fasry sen 
Gas 75 afte ware sia wd dfen asi 


Safety of Household and Similar 
Electrical Appliances 


Part 2 Particular Requirements 


Section 75 Commercial Dispensing Appliances and 
Vending Machines 


ICS 13.110;97.030 


© BIS 2018 


aR AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 gN AHL HM, Ae fercit-110002 
Veet MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2018 Price Group 7 


Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee, ETD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2/Sec 75) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electro technical Division Council. 


This standard covers the safety requirements of commercial dispensing appliances and vending machines. 


It has been assumed in the drafting of this standard that the execution of its provisions is entrusted to appropriately 
qualified and experienced persons. 


This standard recognizes the internationally accepted level of protection against hazards such as electrical, 
mechanical, thermal, fire and radiation of appliances when operated as in normal use taking into account the 
manufacturer’s instructions. It also covers abnormal situations that can be expected in practice and takes into 
account the way in which electromagnetic phenomena can affect the safe operation of appliances. 


This standard takes into account the requirements of IS 732 : 1989 ‘Code of practice for electrical wiring installations 
(third revision)’ as far as possible so that there is compatibility with the wiring rules when the appliance is connected 
to the supply mains. However, in case of any deviation, wiring rules take precedence. 


If an appliance within the scope of this standard also incorporates functions that are covered by another Part 2 of 


IS 302, the relevant Part 2 is applied to each function separately, as far as is reasonable. If applicable, the influence 
of one function on the other is taken into account. 


When Part 2 standard does not include additional requirements to cover hazards dealt with in Part 1, Part 1 applies. 
NOTE — This means that in such a case, it has been decided that for the Part 2 standards that it is not necessary to specify particular 


requirements for the appliance in question over and above the general requirements. 
This standard is a product family standard dealing with the safety of appliances and takes precedence over horizontal 
and generic standards covering the same subject. 


NOTE — Horizontal and generic standards covering a hazard are not applicable since they have been taken into consideration when 
developing the general and particular requirements for the IS 302 series of standards. 
An appliance that complies with the text of this standard will not necessarily be considered to comply with the 
safety principles of the standard if, when examined and tested, it is found to have other features which impair the 
level of safety covered by these requirements. 


An appliance employing materials or having forms of construction differing from those detailed in the requirements 
of this standard may be examined and tested according to the intent of the requirements and, if found to be 
substantially equivalent, may be considered to comply with the standard. 


This standard is to be read in conjunction with the latest edition of IS 302-1 ‘Safety of household and similar 
electrical appliances : Part 1 General requirements’ and its amendments. This standard was prepared on the basis 
of IS 302-1: 2008. 
NOTE — When ‘Part 1’ is mentioned in this standard, it refers to IS 302-1. 
This Part 2 supplements or modifies the corresponding clauses in IS 302-1, so as to convert that standard into the 
Indian Standard: Particular requirements for Commercial Dispensing appliances and Vending machines. 
When a particular subclause of Part 1 is not mentioned in this Part 2, that subclause applies as far as is reasonable. When 
this standard states “addition”, “modification” or “replacement”, the relevant text in Part 1 is to be adapted accordingly. 
NOTE — The following numbering system is used: 


a) subclauses, tables and figures that are numbered starting from 101 are additional to those in Part 1; 
b) unless notes are in a new subclause or involve notes in Part 1, they are numbered starting from 101, 
including those in a replaced clause or subclause; and 
c) additional annexes are lettered AA, BB, etc. 
This standard is based on IEC 60335-2-75 : 2012 (Ed. 3.0). As this standard refers to IS 302-1, the differences 
of IS 302-1 from IEC 60335-1 would apply. Leakage current limits in this Part have been modified to align with 
those in IS 302-1. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY OF HOUSEHOLD AND SIMILAR 
ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES 


PART 2 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS 


Section 75 Commercial Dispensing Appliances and Vending Machines 


1 SCOPE 
This clause of Part | is replaced by the following: 


This Indian Standard deals with the safety of electric 
commercial dispensing appliances and vending 
machines for preparation or delivery of food, drinks 
and consumer products, their rated voltage being not 
more than 250 V for single-phase appliances and 480 V 
for other appliances. 


NOTE 101 — Examples of appliances that are within the scope 
of this standard are: 


a) bulk tea or coffee brewing machines; 

b) cigarette vending machines; 

c) coffee grinders; 

d) commercial liquid heaters; 

e) coffee makers with or without integrated coffee grinder; 
f) coffee makers with cooling systems; 

g) hot and cold beverage vending machines; 

h) hot water dispensers; 

j) ice cream and whipped cream dispensers; 

k) ice dispensers; 

m) newspaper, audio or video tape or disc vending machines; 
n) packaged food and drink vending machines; and 


p) refrigerated merchandisers. 


Appliances can have more than one function. 


NOTE 102 — Other standards may be applicable for some 
functions such as 

a) refrigeration (IS 302-2-24); 

b) heating by microwaves (IS 302-2-25). 


This standard also deals with the hygiene aspects of 
appliances. 


As far as is practicable, this standard deals with the 
common hazards presented by appliances that are 
encountered by users and maintenance persons. 
However, in general, it does not take into account young 
children playing with the appliance. 

NOTE 103 — Attention is drawn to the fact that: 

a) for appliances intended to be used in vehicles or on board 


ships or aircraft, additional requirements may be necessary; 


b) in many countries, additional requirements for appliances 
incorporating pressure vessels are specified; and 


c) in many countries, additional requirements are specified by 


the national health authorities, the national authorities 
responsible for the protection of labour, the national water 
supply authorities and similar authorities. 


NOTE 104 — This standard does not apply to 

a) appliances intended to be used exclusively for household 
purposes; 

b) appliances intended to be used exclusively for industrial 
purposes; 

c) appliances intended to be used in locations where special 
conditions prevail, such as the presence of a corrosive or 
explosive atmosphere (dust, vapour or gas); 


d) commercial electric boiling pans; 

e) commercial electric bains-marie; 

f) amusement machines and personal service machines; 
g) appliances solely used for dispensing money; 

h) display cabinets; and 


j) appliances incorporating electrode-type water heaters. 


2 REFERENCES 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
Addition: 


IS No. 
1401 : 2008 


Title 
Protection of persons and 
equipment by enclosures — 
Probes for verification 


3400 (Part 6) : Methods of test for vulcanized 


2018 rubbers: Part 6 Determination of 
the effect of liquids 

12032 (Part 2) : Graphical symbols for diagrams 

1987 in the field of electrotechnology: 


Part 2 Symbols elements, 
qualifying symbols and other 
symbols having general 
application 

Appliance couplers for household 
and similar general purposes : 
Part 1 General requirements 
Switches for appliances : Part 1 
General requirements 


IS/IEC 60320-1 : 
2001 


IS/IEC 61058-1: 
2000 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows: 


3.1.9 Replacement: 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


Normal Operation — Operation of the appliance under 
the following conditions: 


The appliance is operated in the standby mode until 
steady conditions are established and then under the 
most unfavourable dispensing procedure. The appliance 
is refilled when necessary in accordance with the 
instructions for use, or the instructions for maintenance, 
and the next operating period started as soon 
as possible. 


Lids and covers of appliances of the professional type 
and of appliances of the supervised type are placed in 
their intended positions. 


Coffee makers are operated with their container filled 
with the rated capacity of water, or connected to the 
water mains, if applicable. Coffee makers with a heated 
surface intended to keep the liquid warm are operated 
with or without the container, whichever is the more 
unfavourable. 


3.6.2 Replacement: 


Detachable Part — Part that can be removed without 
the aid of a tool, a part that is removed in accordance 
with the instructions for use or the instructions for 
maintenance, even if a tool or access key is needed for 
removal, or a part that does not fulfill the test of 22.11. 


NOTES 


1 Ifa part has to be removed for installation purposes, this part 
is not considered to be detachable even if the instructions state 
that it is to be removed. 


2 A part that can be opened is considered to be a part that can 
be removed. 


3.7.3 Replacement: 


Thermal cut-out — Device that during abnormal 
operation limits the temperature of the controlled part 
by automatically opening the circuit, or reducing the 
current, and is constructed so that its setting cannot be 
altered by the user or the maintenance person. 


3.8.5 Replacement: 


Maintenance Operation — Operation performed in the 
maintenance area or user area, such as preparing the 
appliance for new products or new operating methods, 
cleaning, price changing, replenishing, coin collecting 
and setting of controls or similar operations. 


NOTE — Maintenance operation does not include operations 
performed in the service area. 


3.101 Rated Pressure — Pressure assigned to the 
pressurized parts of the appliance by the manufacturer. 


3.102 Standby Mode — State of the appliance when 
filled as intended with ingredients or products, 
energized and ready for use, cash boxes and overflow 
containers being empty. 


3.103 Access Key — Key or other means that gives 
access to the maintenance area but does not give access 
to the service area. 


NOTE — “Other means” includes a too/ or operation by codes 
or signals produced by optical or electro-magnetic sources. 


3.104 Override Key — Key or other means that is 
used to render an interlock inoperative. 


3.105 Dispensing Appliance — Appliance intended 
to deliver or make available food, drinks or other 
consumer products. 


NOTES 
1 The appliance may also prepare the products. 


2 The dispensing operation may be initiated manually or by 
means such as coins or credit cards. 


3.106 Vending Machine — Dispensing appliance that 
is operated by coins, credit cards or other means of 
payment. 


3.107 Instructions For Maintenance — Instructions 
explaining how to carry out cleaning, replenishing, coin 
collecting, setting of controls and similar operations. 


3.108 Maintenance Person — Person who maintains 
the appliance in accordance with the instructions for 
maintenance. 


3.109 User Area — Area where access is gained 
without the use of an access key or a tool. 


NOTES 


1 The user area of appliances of the supervised type is 
determined with detachable parts and other movable parts, such 
as doors and lids, in position as in normal use. 


2 Appliances of the professional type have no user area. 
3.110 Maintenance Area — Area where access can 
only be gained by the use of an access key. 


3.111 Service Area — Area where access cannot be 
gained by the use of an access key alone. 


3.112 Appliance of the Professional Type — 
Dispensing appliance that is only intended to be used 
by trained personnel such as kitchen or bar staff. 


3.113 Appliance of the Supervised Type — 
Dispensing appliance that is intended to be maintained 
by trained personnel but may be used by other persons 
in a location where its use is overseen. 


NOTE — Dining rooms in restaurants are examples of such 
locations. 


3.114 Potentially Hazardous Food — Food which 
includes natural or synthetic ingredients that are capable 
of supporting rapid and progressive growth of 
pathogenic or toxin producing micro-organisms. 


NOTES 

1 Examples of potentially hazardous food are milk, eggs, meat, 
poultry, shellfish, crustaceans, and their products, either raw 
or heat treated, as well as food of plant origin that is ready for 


consumption without the need for any further preparation or 
processing. 


2 Food may become potentially hazardous food during 
processing, for example when powdered ingredients are mixed 
with water or when food is stored at incorrect temperature. 


3 Potentially hazardous food does not include: 

a) candy, nuts, gum and similar confectionery; 

b) cookies, crackers and similar bakery products; 

c) instant-coffee, chocolate, cocoa and sugar; 

d) food having a pH level of not greater than 4.6 or a water 
activity (Aw) value not greater than 0.85 at 25 °C; 
e) food maintained at a temperature not exceeding 5 °C for 
periods specified by the producer, but for not more than 
5 days; 
f) food maintained at a temperatures above 65 °C or below 
-18 °C; 


g) food in hermetically sealed containers; and 


h) food that has been processed to prevent spoilage. 


3.115 Espresso Coffee Maker — Coffee maker in 
which water is heated and forced through the ground 
coffee by steam pressure or by means of a pump. 


NOTE — Espresso coffee makers can have an outlet for 
supplying steam or hot water. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENT 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


5 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR THE TESTS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


5.2 Addition: 


If the test of 15.102 has to be carried out, three 
additional samples are required. 


5.6 Replacement: 


Controls or switching devices in the user area are 
adjusted to the most unfavourable setting. 


Controls, switching devices or other parts in the 
maintenance area are adjusted to the most unfavourable 
setting within limits stated in the instructions for 
maintenance. Controls or switching devices in the 
service area are not adjusted. 


5.9 Addition: 


When alternative software is made available by the 
appliance manufacturer, the appliance is tested with the 
software that gives the most unfavourable results. 


5.10 Addition: 


NOTE 101 — Access keys and override keys can be supplied 
separately from the appliance. 


Appliances are installed in accordance with the 
instructions provided with the appliance before testing. 


If the instructions state that the appliance may be 
installed together with other appliances, the effect of 
this combination is taken into account. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


5.101 Appliances intended to be connected to the water 
mains are supplied with water having a temperature of 
15 °C + 5 °C and the most unfavourable pressure 
specified in the instructions. For appliances that are 
manually filled with water, the temperature of the water 
is 15°C 45°C. 


For appliances intended to cool water, the temperature 
of the water is 25 °C +5 °C. 


5.102 The requirements of this standard for the 
maintenance area are applicable when the instructions 
for maintenance are being followed. If an access key is 
provided for access to the maintenance area, it is used 
before a test is carried out if this is more unfavourable. 


5.103 When reference is made to the application of 
test probe B, test probe 18 of IS 1401 is also applied in 
the user area. 


5.104 Appliances of the professional type and 
appliances of the supervised type are tested as heating 
appliances even if they incorporate a motor. If these 
appliances do not contain heating elements, they are 
tested as motor-operated appliances. 


6 CLASSIFICATION 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


6.1 Modification: 


Appliances shall be class I, class II or class HI. 


6.2 Addition: 


Appliances intended for outdoor use shall be at least 
IPX4. 


Appliances that may be cleaned by water jets, or 
installed where water jets are liable to be used, shall be 
at least IPXS. 


7 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


7.1 Addition: 
Appliance shall be marked with: 


a) their rated pressure, in megapascals, if 
applicable; and 

b) the maximum permissible water pressure, in 
megapascals, for appliances intended to be 
connected to the water mains. 


Appliances intended to be filled by hand shall have 
means that indicate when the required level for correct 
operation has been reached. 


NOTE 101 — A level mark or an audible or visual signal are 
suitable means. 


For appliances incorporating a socket outlet, the 
voltage, nature of the supply and current or power 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


output shall be marked in the vicinity of the socket 
outlet. 


Appliances intended to be partially immersed in water 
for cleaning shall be marked with the maximum level 
of immersion and with the substance of the following: 


Do not immerse beyond this level. 
7.3 Addition: 


The requirement also applies when the adjustment has 
to be made by the maintenance person. 


7.8 Addition: 


Terminals for equipotential bonding shall be indicated 
by symbol 02-15-05 of IS 12032 (Part 2). 


This symbol shall not be placed on screws, removable 
washers or other parts that can be removed when 
conductors are being connected. 


7.12.1 Addition: 


The installation instructions for appliances intended to 
be connected to the water mains shall specify the means 
of connection and draw attention to any national rules 
that may be applicable. 


The installation instructions shall state if the appliance 
is suitable for outdoor use. 


The installation instructions shall state the maximum 
and minimum ambient temperatures for correct 
operation. 


For appliances that are not at least IPX5, the instructions 
shall state that the appliance is not suitable for 
installation in an area where a water jet could be used. 


The installation instructions shall state the maximum 
tilt of the appliance for safe operation. A tilt of less 
than 2° need not be stated. An instruction such as “the 
appliance has to be placed in a horizontal position” is 
sufficient. 


The installation instructions for appliances of the 
professional type shall state that the appliance is only 
to be installed in locations where its use and 
maintenance is restricted to trained personnel. 


The installation instructions for appliances of the 
supervised type shall state that the appliance is only to 
be installed in locations where it can be overseen by 
trained personnel. 


The installation instructions for class I appliances of 
the professional type that are intended to be 
permanently connected to fixed wiring, and have a 
leakage current that may exceed 10 mA, shall state that 
the installation of a residual current device (RCD) 
having a rated residual operating current not exceeding 
30 mA is advisable. 


7.12.101 If it is necessary to take special precautions 
during maintenance operations, details of these shall 
be supplied. The instructions for maintenance shall state 
how to gain access to the maintenance area including 
how to use the access key and the override key. They 
shall not include instructions on how to gain access to 
a service area. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.12.101.1 The instructions for maintenance shall 
specify the method and frequency of cleaning. They 
shall include details for descaling, disinfecting, flushing 
and removal of any residual cleaners, sterilizers or 
descalers from the appliance, if applicable. 
Recommended cleaning or disinfecting agents shall be 
specified, and they may be identified by their chemical 
denomination. 


If the appliance is not at least IPX5, the instructions 
for maintenance shall state that the appliance must not 
be cleaned by a water jet. 


The instructions for maintenance for appliances 
incorporating an appliance inlet, and intended to be 
partially or completely immersed in water for cleaning, 
shall state that the connector must be removed before 
the appliance is cleaned and that the appliance inlet 
must be dried before the appliance is used again. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.12.101.2 If the use of an override key allows access 
to moving parts, a suitable warning shall be given in 
the instructions for maintenance. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.12.101.3 The instructions for maintenance shall list 
any accessories that may be used with the appliance. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.12.101.4 The instructions for maintenance shall state 
the maximum and minimum ambient temperatures for 
correct operation. 


For appliances using water, the instructions for 
maintenance shall give details concerning the 
prevention of freezing or how to ensure safe operation 
if freezing occurs. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.12.101.5 The instructions for maintenance for 
appliances containing pressurized gas shall give details 
on the safe handling of the pressurized containers and 
of the gas. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.12.101.6 The instructions for maintenance shall 
specify the types of food for which the appliance is 


suitable, and give details on how to ensure hygienic 
operation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.12.101.7 The instructions for maintenance for 
appliances intended for dispensing potentially 
hazardous food, when the safety of the food depends 
upon the temperature and duration of storage, shall 
include details for the safe handling of the food. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.12.102 The instructions shall state that access to the 
service area is restricted to persons having knowledge 
and practical experience of the appliance, in particular 
as far as safety and hygiene are concerned. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


8 PROTECTION AGAINST ACCESS TO LIVE 
PARTS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


9 STARTING OF 
APPLIANCES 


MOTOR-OPERATED 


This clause of Part 1 is not applicable. 


10 POWER INPUT AND CURRENT 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


11 HEATING 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


11.2 Modification: 


Appliances normally fixed to the floor, and those having 
a mass greater than 40 kg and not provided with casters 
or rollers, are installed in accordance with the 
instructions. If no instructions are provided, the 
appliance is placed on the floor as close to the walls as 
possible. 


Other appliances, except fixed appliances, are placed 
on the floor as near to the walls as possible. 


11.4 Addition: 


Heating appliances with electronic circuits controlling 
the power input are operated as combined appliances. 


If the temperature rise limits are exceeded in appliances 
incorporating motors, transformers or electronic 
circuits, and if the power input is lower than the rated 
power input, the test is repeated with the appliance 
supplied at 1.06 times the rated voltage. 


11.6 Addition: 


Combined appliances without electronic power controls 
are operated as heating appliances. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


11.7 Replacement: 


The appliance is operated under normal operation until 
steady conditions are established, the appliance being 
refilled when necessary. 


NOTE 101 — Refilling can require the use of an access key. 


11.8 Addition: 


The temperature rise of the surfaces in the user area 
shall not exceed the limits specified for handles, knobs, 
grips and similar parts that are held for short periods 
only. This does not apply to the surface of parts that 
need to be hot in order for the appliance to fulfil its 
function. 


The temperature rise limits of motors, transformers and 
components of electronic circuits, including parts 
directly influenced by them, may be exceeded when 
the appliance is operated at 1.15 times the rated power 
input. 

11.101 Appliances incorporating refrigerating 


equipment, and having motor-compressors, are also 
tested at an ambient temperature of 


a) 32°C, for appliances for temperate countries; 
and 
b) 43 °C, for appliances for tropical countries. 


Other parts of the appliance are operated to produce 
the most unfavourable conditions in the refrigerating 
system. 

Temperature rises of parts of the appliance, other than 
the motor-compressor, are not determined. 


The temperature of windings and the enclosure of 
motor-compressors shall not exceed the following 
values: 
a) 140 °C, for windings of motor-compressors 
with synthetic insulation; 
b) 130 °C, for windings of motor-compressors 
with cellulosic insulation; and 
c) 150 °C, for external enclosures of motor- 
compressors. 


12 VOID 


13 LEAKAGE CURRENT AND ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH AT OPERATING TEMPERATURE 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


13.2 Modification: 


For stationary class I heating appliances, the leakage 
current shall not exceed the following values: 


e for appliances of the 1 mA per kW rated 
professional type intended to power input of the 
be permanently connected to appliance, with no 
fixed wiring; maximum; 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


e for other appliances of the 1 mA per kW rated 
professional type power input of the 


appliance, with a 
maximum of 10 
mA; 


0.21 mA or 0.21 
mA per kW rated 
power input of the 
appliance, 
whichever is higher 
with a maximum of 
1.5 mA. 


e for other heating 
appliances 


14 TRANSIENT OVERVOLTAGES 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


15 MOISTURE RESISTANCE 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
15.1.1 Addition: 


Appliances of the professional type classified IPX3 or 
lower, and intended to be placed on a kitchen floor, are 
subjected to a test in which water under pressure is 
indirectly splashed onto the appliance. The splash 
apparatus is shown in Figure 101. The bowl is placed 
on the floor and the water pressure adjusted so that the 
water splashes to a height of 150 mm above the bottom 
of the bowl. The apparatus is moved around the 
appliance in order to splash it from all directions for a 
total of 5 min. 


15.2 Replacement: 


Appliances subject to spillage of liquids or solids in 
normal use shall be constructed so that spillage does 
not affect their electrical insulation. The electrical 
insulation shall not be affected by cleaning, disinfecting, 
descaling and similar operations. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 15.2.101 
to 15.2.113. 


Water used for the tests shall contain approximately 1 
percent NaCl. 


Appliances with type X attachment, except those having 
a specially prepared cord, are fitted with the lightest 
permissible type of flexible cord of the smallest cross- 
sectional area specified in Table 11 of Part 1. 


Appliances incorporating an appliance inlet are tested 
with or without an appropriate connector in position, 
whichever is more unfavourable. 


Before each test, the appliance is operated in the 
standby mode. Containers that are connected to the 
water mains are prefilled with saline solution. 


After each overfilling or application of liquid, the 


appliance shall withstand the electric strength test 
of 16.3 and inspection shall show that there is no trace 
of liquid or solids on insulation that could result in a 
reduction of clearances and creepage distances below 
the values specified in 29. All residues are then removed 
and the appliance is dried. 


Detachable parts in the user area are removed or placed 
in the most unfavourable position. 


Detachable parts in the maintenance area are placed in 
their normal position following a maintenance 
operation. 


15.2.101 Containers for ingredients or products in 
powdered or granulated form are filled with dry 
granulated sugar, ignoring any level indication. A 
further quantity equal to 15 percent of the total capacity 
of the container is then poured in steadily over a period 
of 1 min. 


Containers that are intended to be filled outside the 
appliance are replaced without removing any excess 
sugar from the outside of the container. Lids are 
replaced after overfilling. 


15.2.102 Liquid containers that are filled manually are 
filled with saline solution and a further quantity equal 
to 15 percent of the total capacity of each container or 
0.25 litre, whichever is the greater, is poured in steadily 
over a period of | min. 


15.2.103 The outlets of liquid mixing containers are 
blocked and the containers are filled with saline 
solution. A further quantity equal to 15 percent of the 
total capacity of each container or 0.25 litre, whichever 
is the greater, is poured in steadily over a period 
of 15 s. Ifthe container has more than one independent 
outlet, they are blocked in turn. 


15.2.104 Drains for liquid waste containers are blocked 
and the containers are filled with saline solution. A 
further quantity equal to 15 percent of the total capacity 
of each container or 0.25 litre, whichever is the greater, 
is poured in steadily over a period of 15 s. If the 
container has more than one independent drain, they 
are blocked in turn. If there is more than one container, 
they are tested in turn. 


15.2.105 Drain taps of containers used during 
maintenance operations are adjusted in turn to the most 
unfavourable position. The appliance is supplied at 
rated voltage and operated under normal operation until 
the flow of saline solution stabilizes. 


15.2.106 Failure of the inlet valve of appliances 
connected to the water mains is simulated. Water is 
allowed to flow for 1 min after the first evidence of 
overflow unless the inflow stops automatically. The 
failure of only one device is tested at a time. 


15.2.107 Appliances dispensing liquid into a serving 
container, such as a cup or jug, are tested by rapidly 
pouring 0.5 litre of saline solution over the surface 
where the container is filled, transported and removed 
by the user. 


15.2.108 Appliances with accessible openings, 
including slots for coins or cards, other than appliances 
of the professional type and appliances of the 
supervised type, are tested by slowly pouring 0.25 litre 
of saline solution into each opening. If the opening is 
in a vertical surface, the solution is projected towards 
the opening. 


15.2.109 Appliances having external surfaces on which 
it is possible to place a vessel, such as a cup or jug, are 
tested by rapidly pouring 0.5 litre of saline solution 
over the surface. The quantity of saline solution is 
increased to 5 litre for appliances of the professional 
type if their highest surface is lower than 1.5 m. The 
test is carried out even if the appliance does not dispense 
liquid. If there is more than one surface, they are tested 
in turn. 


For espresso coffee maker of the professional type, the 
amount of water is increased to 5 litre only if the highest 
surface after installation is lower than 1.2 m. 


15.2.110 Appliances delivering pre-packed products are 
tested to simulate leakage from the package over any 
area where the package is stored or transported. 


Leakage from liquid products is simulated by rapidly 
pouring a quantity of saline solution, equal in volume 
to the largest pre-packed product that can be delivered 
from the appliance, over the area. 


Leakage from dry products is simulated by rapidly 
pouring a quantity of dry granulated sugar, equal in 
volume to the largest pre-packed product that can be 
delivered from the appliance, over the area. This test is 
not applicable to appliances intended to deliver only 
solid products such as newspapers, films or cigarettes. 


15.2.111 Maintenance operations involving the use of 
liquids are carried out three times. 


15.2.112 Parts liable to be cleaned are wiped with a 
sponge, having dimensions approximately 150 mm x 
75 mm x 50 mm, saturated with saline solution. The 
sponge is applied without appreciable force for 
approximately 10 s to each surface. This test is not 
applied to surfaces in the maintenance area for which 
cleaning instructions are given. 


15.2.113 Appliances subject to descaling are descaled 
10 times in accordance with the instructions for 
maintenance. The appliance is then operated in the 
standby mode. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


15.3 Addition: 


If it is not possible to place the appliance in the humidity 
cabinet, electrical parts are tested separately. 


15.101 Appliances having a tap that provides water for 
filling or cleaning shall be constructed so that the water 
cannot come into contact with live parts or affect 
electrical insulation. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The appliance is connected to the water mains, the 
pressure being adjusted to the maximum water 
pressure marked on the appliance. Tiltable and 
movable parts, including lids, are placed in the most 
unfavourable position. The tap is fully opened for 
1 min, swivel outlets being adjusted to direct the 
water in the most unfavourable direction. The 
appliance shall then withstand the electric strength 
test of 16.3. 


15.102 Appliances intended to be partially or 
completely immersed in water for cleaning shall have 
adequate protection against the effects of immersion. 


Compliance is checked by the following tests, which 
are carried out on three additional appliances. 


The appliances are operated under normal operation at 
1.15 times rated power input, until the thermostat 
operates for the first time. Appliances without a 
thermostat are operated until steady conditions are 
established. The appliances are disconnected from the 
supply, any appliance connector being withdrawn. They 
are then completely immersed in water containing 
approximately 1 percent NaCl and having a temperature 
between 10 °C and 25 °C, unless they are marked with 
the maximum level of immersion, in which case they 
are immersed 50 mm deeper than this level. 


After 1 h, the appliances are removed from the saline 
solution, dried and subjected to the leakage current test 
of 16.2. 


This test is carried out four more times, after which the 
appliances shall withstand the electric strength test 
of 16.3, the voltage being as specified in Table 4 of 
Part 1. 


The appliance having the highest leakage current after 
the fifth immersion is dismantled and inspection shall 
show that there is no trace of liquid on insulation that 
could result in a reduction of clearances and creepage 
distances below the values specified in 29. 


The remaining two appliances are operated under 
normal operation at 1.15 times rated power input for 
240 h. After this period, the appliances are disconnected 
from the supply and immersed again for | h. They are 
then dried and subjected to the electric strength test 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 
of 16.3, the voltage being as specified in Table 4 of 
Part 1. 


Inspection shall show that there is no trace of liquid on 
insulation that could result in a reduction of clearances 
and creepage distances below the values specified in 29. 


16 LEAKAGE CURRENT AND ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
16.2 Modification: 


For stationary class I heating appliances, the leakage 
current shall not exceed the following values: 


e for appliances of 2 mA per kW rated 
the professional power input of the 
type intended to be appliance, with no 
permanently maximum; 
connected to fixed 
wiring; 


e for other appliances 2 mA per kW rated 
of the professional power input of the 
type appliance, with a 

maximum of 10 mA; 

heating 0.21 mA or 0.21 mA 
per kW rated power 
input of the appliance, 
whichever is higher 
with a maximum of 1.5 
mA. 


17 OVERLOAD PROTECTION OF 
TRANSFORMERS AND ASSOCIATED CIRCUITS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


e for other 
appliances 


18 ENDURANCE 
This clause of Part 1 is not applicable. 
19 ABNORMAL OPERATION 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows: 


19.1 Addition: 


Appliances are also subjected to the tests of 19.101 
and 19.102, if applicable. 


Detachable parts in the user area are removed or placed 
in the most unfavourable position. 


Detachable parts in the maintenance area are placed in 
their normal position following a maintenance 
operation. 


Containers are filled to the most unfavourable level. 


Appliances having a control that limits the pressure 
during the tests of 11 are subjected to the tests of 19.4 
with this control rendered inoperative. 


19.2 Addition: 


NOTE 101 — Examples of achieving restricted heat dissipation 
are 

a) operating without water; 

b) switching off the fan;and 


c) covering ventilation openings. 


19.4 Addition: 


Ifa control also performs other functions, only the part 
controlling the temperature or pressure is rendered 
inoperative. 


19.11.2 Modification: 


The fault conditions are simulated until steady 
conditions are established. 


19.13 Addition: 
During the tests, molten plastic shall not be emitted. 


Liquid having a temperature above 80 °C, steam or 
solid objects shall not be emitted from unexpected 
places in a way likely to cause injury to persons. 


After the tests, compliance with 15.1 and 15.2 shall 
not be impaired. The electric strength test of 16.3 shall 
be carried out after each test if it is expected that the 
electrical insulation could be affected. 


19.101 The appliance is supplied at rated voltage and 
operated under normal operation. Any fault condition 
or unexpected operation likely to occur during use of 
the appliance is introduced. 


If operation without water in the appliance is considered 
to be a more unfavourable condition, the tests are 
carried out with the water supply valve closed. The 
water supply valve is not closed during the dispensing 
operation. 


NOTES 


1 Damaged components or parts can be replaced after each 
test. 


2 Examples of fault conditions or unexpected operation are 
a) defects in the appliance: 
i) a programmer stopping in any position; 
ii) disconnection and reconnection of one or more 


phases of the supply mains during any part of 
the programme; 


iil) open-circuiting or 
components; 


short-circuiting of 


iv) locking the main contacts of a contactor in the 
“on” position if they are used for energizing 
heating elements. However, this defect is not 
introduced if at least two independent sets of 
contacts are provided. This can be achieved by 
two contactors operating independently of each 
other or by one contactor having two independent 
armatures operating two independent sets of main 
contacts; 


v) failure of a magnetic valve; 


vi) failure of a pneumatic or hydraulic control; and 


vii) blocking the coin or product channels. If 
blockage can be noticed from the outside of the 
appliance, further delivery is not attempted, 
otherwise the appliance is operated until no 
further delivery is possible. The wrapping of 
products in conductive materials has to be taken 
into account. 


b) faulty operation by users or maintenance persons: 


i) incorrect actuation of knobs, handles, switches 
or push-buttons; 
ii) interrupting the dispensing operation by available 
facilities; 
iii) incorrect opening or closing of doors or lids; 


iv) improper application of the instructions for 
maintenance; 


v) incorrect routine cleaning. The sponge test of 
15.2.112 is applied to all surfaces in the user area. 
It is also applied to all surfaces in the 
maintenance area, except those for which 
cleaning instructions are given; 


vi) setting controls, switches or programmers in the 
most unfavourable position; 


vii) incorrect loading; and 
viii) incorrect coin collection. 
c) abuse by users: 
i) obstructing dispensing openings; and 


ii) blocking moving parts. 


3 In general, tests are limited to the fault conditions 
that may be expected to give the most unfavourable 
results. 


19.102 Appliances incorporating a thermal cut-out of 
the capillary type are tested as specified in 19.4 but 
with the capillary tube ruptured. 


20 STABILITY AND MECHANICAL HAZARDS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows: 


20.1 Modification: 


The appliance is tested with doors, lids and similar parts 
in the maintenance area placed in the normal position 
of use. 


The test with the appliance tilted to 15° is not carried 
out. 


Addition: 


The test is repeated with doors, lids and similar parts 
in the maintenance area placed in the most unfavourable 
position, however, the appliance is only tilted to an 
angle of 5°. 


20.2 Addition: 


Covers over moving parts having a kinetic energy 
exceeding 4 J shall be interlocked so that it is only 
possible to remove them when the parts are stationary 
unless they are only removable with the aid of a tool. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


21 MECHANICAL STRENGTH 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows: 


21.1 Addition: 


The impact energy of 0.5 J is applied in the maintenance 
area. In the user area, the value of the impact energy is 
1.0 J. 


22 CONSTRUCTION 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows: 


22.6 Addition: 


Parts that withstand the aging test of Annex AA are not 
considered to be parts where leakage could occur. 


Drain holes in coffee makers shall be at least 5 mm in 
diameter or 20 mm? in area with a width of at least 
3 mm. 


Compliance is checked by measurement. 


22.7 Addition: 


Pressure relief devices shall be constructed so that they 
cannot be rendered inoperative or set to a higher 
pressure without the aid of a tool that is normally only 
available to the manufacturer. 


Appliances incorporating pressurized systems are 
subjected to the following test. 


All pressure regulating devices are rendered inoperative 
and the system is filled with water. The pressure is then 
raised hydraulically until the pressure relief device 
operates. 


The pressure shall not exceed 1.2 times the rated 
pressure and the appliance shall be fit for further use. 
The pressure relief device is then rendered inoperative 
and the pressure again raised until twice the rated 
pressure is attained. The pressure is maintained at this 
value for 5 min. 


The system shall not rupture and there shall be no 
permanent deformation. However, an intentionally weak 
part may rupture after the pressure has attained 1.5 times 
the rated pressure as long as it does not give rise to a 
hazard. In this case, the weak part is replaced and the 
test repeated. Rupture shall occur in the same way. 


If fluid cannot circulate freely throughout the 
pressurized system, separate tests can be carried out 
on individual parts of the system. 


If more than one pressure relief device operates on the 
same part of the system, they are rendered inoperative 
together. 


This test is not made on refrigerating systems. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


The appliance shall then withstand the electric strength 
test of 16.3. 


22.14 Addition: 


The requirement also applies in the maintenance area 
to parts liable to be touched during maintenance 
operations. 


22.33 Addition: 


Ingredients and products shall not be in direct contact 
with live parts or, for class I construction, with basic 
insulation. 


22.47 Addition: 


All pressure regulating devices are rendered 
inoperative. 


22.101 Appliances shall be constructed so that 
interlocks cannot be rendered inoperative without using 
an override key if they are necessary for compliance 
with the standard. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by manual test 
and by applying test probe B of IS 1401. 


22.102 It shall not be possible to gain access to the 
service area by only using the access key for the 
maintenance area. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual 
test. 


22.103 Appliances shall be constructed so that scalding 
by steam is prevented when a lid is opened. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of 19. 


22.104 Appliances shall be constructed so that 
dispensed products cannot be contaminated by 
substances such as lubricants and debris. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.105 Appliances shall be constructed so that it is not 
possible to inadvertently open draw-off taps and drain 
valves or withdraw drain plugs. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual 
test. 


Valves that return automatically to the closed position 
when released, those of the wheel type or those placed 
in a recess are considered to comply with this 
requirement. 


22.106 Coin boxes and containers for other payment 
means shall be positioned or protected so that 
overfilling cannot cause a hazard. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


10 


22.107 Appliances intended to be connected to the 
water mains shall be constructed for a water pressure 
not less than 0.6 MPa. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.108 Appliances shall be protected in such a manner 
that moisture, grease and products used in the appliance 
will not accumulate so that clearance and creepage 
distances are affected. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.109 Lights indicating a warning against a hazard 
shall only be coloured red. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.110 Appliances having pressurized containers shall 
be constructed so that the lid cannot be removed while 
the pressure within the container is excessive. They shall 
incorporate a means to release the pressure to a value 
such that the lid can be removed without risk. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The appliance is operated as specified in 11 until the 
pressure regulator operates for the first time. 


The appliance is then disconnected from the supply 
and the pressure allowed to decrease until the pressure 
is 4 kPa. A force of 100 N is applied to the most 
unfavourable point where the lid or its handle can be 
gripped. It shall not be possible to remove the lid. 


The internal pressure is then gradually reduced, the 
force of 100 N being maintained. There shall be no 
hazardous displacement of the lid when it is released. 


This test is not carried out on appliances when the lid 
is secured by screw clamps or other devices that ensure 
that the pressure is automatically reduced in a controlled 
manner before the lid can be removed. 


22.111 Appliances for dispensing potentially hazardous 
food shall incorporate means to prevent the dispensing 
of the food if it has been adversely affected by storage 
or process temperatures. This requirement does not 
apply to coffee makers of the professional type and 
coffee makers of the supervised type. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.112 Surfaces of food areas and splash areas shall be 
cleanable so that all unwanted matter can be removed. 
If necessary, food areas shall be capable of being 
disinfected. 


The food area comprises surfaces in contact with the 
food and surfaces that the food may contact during 
preparation of the product. The splash area comprises 
surfaces on which part of the food may splash or flow 
during normal use but this food does not become part 
of the product. 


Compliance is checked by inspection after having 
operated the appliance as in normal use and then 
cleaning and disinfecting it in accordance with the 
instructions for maintenance. 


22.113 Non-food areas that are not adequately 
separated from food areas of appliances that dispense 
food shall be constructed so that the retention of 
moisture or unwanted matter, and the ingress of vermin, 
is prevented. When this is unavoidable, the surfaces of 
the non-food areas shall be cleanable in accordance 
with 22.112. 


This requirement does not apply to splash areas and 
appliances that dispense food in sealed containers such 
as cans and bottles. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


22.114 An espresso coffee maker shall be constructed 
so that it is not possible to remove the coffee filter by a 
simple operation while there is a hazardous pressure 
within the container. This requirement is considered to 
be met if the coffee filter can only be removed after it 
has been rotated through an angle of at least 30°. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 
23 INTERNAL WIRING 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


23.3 Modification: 


The requirement also applies to maintenance 
operations. 


The number of flexings is 


a) 200 000, for conductors flexed during normal 
use; and 
b) 10 000, for conductors flexed during 


maintenance operations. 


23.101 Anchorages for internal wiring that can easily 
be replaced shall be constructed and located so that 


a) the wiring cannot touch the clamping screws 
of the anchorage if these screws are accessible, 
unless they are separated from accessible 
metal parts by supplementary insulation. 

b) the wiring is not clamped by a metal screw 
that bears directly on the wiring. 

c) for class I appliances, the anchorages are of 
insulating material or are provided with an 
insulating lining, unless failure of the 
insulation of the wiring does not make 
accessible metal parts live. 

d) for class II appliances, the anchorages are of 
insulating material, or if of metal, they are 
insulated from accessible metal parts by 


supplementary insulation. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


23.102 Internal wiring that is accessible in the 
maintenance area and is moved during normal operation 
shall comply with 25.13, 25.14, 25.15 and 25.21. 


Compliance is checked by the relevant tests. 


24 COMPONENTS 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 
24.1.5 Addition: 


For appliance couplers incorporating thermostats, 
thermal cut-outs or fuses in the connector, 
IS/IEC 60320-1 is applicable except that 


a) the earthing contact of the connector is 
allowed to be accessible, provided that this 
contact is not likely to be gripped during 


insertion or withdrawal of the connector. 


b) the temperature required for the test of 18 is 
that measured on the pins of the appliance inlet 
during the heating test of 11 of this standard. 

c) the breaking-capacity test of 19 is carried out 
using the inlet of the appliance. 

d) the temperature rise of current-carrying parts 


specified in 21 is not determined. 


Thermal controls are not allowed in connectors 
complying with the standard sheets of IS/IEC 60320-1. 


24.2 Modification: 


Switches and automatic controls operating at safety 
extra-low voltage may be fitted in interconnection cords 
in the maintenance area. 


24.101 Connecting devices of interconnection cords 
shall be identified if they are interchangeable with other 
connecting means in the appliance, if this could result 
in a hazard. 


NOTE — Colour coding can be used for identification. 
Compliance is checked by inspection. 


24.102 Interlock switches shall comply with 
IS/IEC 61058-1 as far as is reasonable and shall ensure 
all-pole disconnection. However, single-pole 
disconnection is allowed for protection against 
mechanical hazards. 


Compliance is checked by testing the switch in 
accordance with the relevant clauses of IS/IEC 61058-1, 
the number of cycles of operation for the test of 17 
being 10 000. However, if the switch is operated once 
per delivery, the number of cycles of operation is 
100 000. This requirement only applies to interlock 
switches necessary for compliance with this standard. 


24.103 Thermal cut-outs incorporated for compliance 
with 19 shall not be self-resetting. They shall have a 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


trip-free mechanism if they disconnect heating elements 
and if they disconnect motors, the unexpected starting 
of which may cause a hazard to the user or maintenance 
person. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 


25 SUPPLY CONNECTION AND EXTERNAL 
FLEXIBLE CORDS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable as follows: 


25.7 Addition: 


Supply cords of appliances intended for outdoor use 
shall be polychloroprene sheathed and not be lighter 
than ordinary polychloroprene sheathed cord. 


25.15 Addition: 


When the test is carried out on internal wiring, the pull 
force is 30 N and the torque 0.1 Nm, irrespective of 
the mass of the appliance. 


For internal wiring, a push force of 30 N is applied 
when pushing the wiring into the appliance. 


26 TERMINALS FOR EXTERNALCONDUCTORS 
This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


27 PROVISION FOR EARTHING 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


27.2 Addition: 


Stationary class I appliances of the professional type 
intended to be installed in kitchens shall incorporate a 
terminal for the connection of an external equipotential 
bonding conductor. This terminal shall be connected 
to all accessible metal parts of the appliance and shall 
allow the connection of a conductor having a nominal 
cross-sectional area of 2.5 mm? to 10 mm”. It shall be 
located so that the conductor can be connected after 
installation of the appliance. This requirement does not 
apply to small parts such as nameplates. 


12 


28 SCREWS AND CONNECTIONS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


28.1 Addition: 


The requirement also applies to screws that may be 
removed during maintenance operations. 


The test also applies to screws likely to be tightened 
during maintenance operations. 


28.3 Addition: 


The requirement also applies to screws operated by the 
maintenance person. 


29 CLEARANCES, CREEPAGE DISTANCES 
AND SOLID INSULATION 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows. 


29.2 Addition: 


The microenvironment is pollution degree 3 unless the 
insulation is enclosed or located so that it is unlikely to 
be exposed to pollution during normal use of the 
appliance due to 


a) 
b) 


condensation produced by the appliance, and 


the use of liquids and solids, such as 
ingredients, products or cleaning agents. 


30 RESISTANCE TO HEAT AND FIRE 

This clause of Part 1 is applicable except as follows: 
30.2.2 Not applicable. 

31 RESISTANCE TO RUSTING 

This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


32 RADIATION, TOXICITY AND SIMILAR 
HAZARDS 


This clause of Part 1 is applicable. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Key 
A — bowl 
Fic. 101 SPLASH APPARATUS 
101 TESTS type tests and shall be carried out on a sample selected 
preferably at random from regular production lot 
101.1 Type Tests 


(see 5.3). Before commencement of the tests, the water 
The tests specified in Table 101 shall constitute the heater shall be visually examined and inspected of 


Table 101 Schedule of Type Tests 
(Clause 101.1) 


SI No. Tests Ref to Clause 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) Protection against access to live parts 8 

ii) Power input and current 10 
iii) Heating 11 
iv) Leakage current and electric strength at operating temperature 13 
v) Transient over voltages 14 
vi) Moisture resistance 15 
vii) Leakage current and electric strength 16 
viii) | Overload protection of transformers and associated circuits 17 
ix) Abnormal operation 19 
x) Stability and mechanical hazards 20 
xi) Mechanical strength 21 
xii) Construction 22 
xiii) Internal wiring 23 
xiv) Components 24 
xv) Supply connection and external flexible cords 25 
xvi) Terminals for external conductors 26 
xvii) Provision for earthing 27 
xviii) Screw and connections 28 
xix) Clearances, creepage distances and solid insulation 29 
XX) Resistance to heat and fire 30 
xxi) Resistance to rusting 31 
xxii) Radiation, toxicity and similar hazards 32 


13 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


components, parts and their assembly, constructions, 
mechanical hazards, marking provision of suitable 
terminals for supply connections, earthing and the 
effectiveness screws and connection. The external 
surface finish shall be even and free from finishing 
defects. 


101.1.1 Criteria of Acceptance 


Sample shall successfully pass all the type tests for 
proving conformity with the requirements of the 
standard. If the sample fails in any of the type tests, the 
testing authority at its discretion, may call for fresh 
samples not exceeding twice the original number and 
subject them again to all tests or to the test (s) in which 
failure (s) had occurred. No failure should be permitted 
in the repeat test (s). 


101.2 Acceptance Tests 


The following shall constitute the acceptance tests: 


SI Tests Ref to 

No. Clause 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Protection against access to live parts 08 
ii) Power input and current 10 
iii) Heating 11 
iv) Leakage current and electric strength 13 

at operating temperature 

v) Moisture resistance 15 
vi) Leakage current and electric strength 16 
viii) Provision for earthing 27 


NOTE — For the purpose of acceptance tests, the humidity 
treatment shall be done for 24 h while conducting the test for 
moisture resistance (see 15). 


ANNEXURE 


The Annexures of Part 1 are applicable except as follows. 


ANNEX AA 
(Normative) 


AGING TEST FOR ELASTOMERIC PARTS 


The aging test on elastomeric parts is carried out by 
measuring their hardness and mass before and after 
immersion in water at elevated temperature. 


The test is carried out on at least three samples of 
each part. The samples and test procedure are as 
specified in IS 3400 (Part 6) with the following 
modifications. 


5 TEST LIQUIDS 
The test is carried out with water. 


Care is taken to ensure that the total mass of the test 
pieces immersed does not exceed 100 g for each litre 
of water, that the test pieces are completely immersed 
and that their entire surface is freely exposed to the 
water. During the tests, the test pieces are not exposed 
to direct light. Test pieces of different compounds are 
not immersed at the same time in the same solution. 


6 TEST PIECES 
6.4 Conditioning 


The temperature is 23 °C + 2 °C and the relative 


14 


humidity is (50 + 5) percent. 


7 IMMERSION IN THE TEST LIQUID 


7.1 Temperature 


The water is heated within 1 h with the test pieces 
immersed, to a temperature of 75 R °C and maintained 


at this value. Water at the same temperature is added to 
compensate for evaporation. 


7.2 Duration 
The test pieces are immersed for a total period of 
48 +l h. 


The test pieces are then immediately immersed in fresh 
water that is maintained at ambient temperature. The 
pieces are immersed for 45 min + 15 min. 


After removal from the water, the test pieces are dried 
with blotting paper. 


8 PROCEDURE 


8.2 Change in Mass 


The increase in mass of the test pieces shall not 
exceed 10 percent of the value determined before 
immersion. 


IS 302-2-75 : 2018 


8.6 Change in Hardness 

The micro-test for hardness applies. 

The hardness of the test pieces shall not have changed 
by more than 8 IRHD. Their surface shall not have 
become sticky and shall show no crack visible to the 
naked eye or any other deterioration. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 32 (11039). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


