WAT UTE IS 16341 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


am EJE SID! 
arfer aid A fa at & 


Geosynthetics — Standard Practice 
for Exposure and Retrieval of 
Samples to Evaluate Installation 
Damage of Geosynthetics 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ada AMA AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
® HAF HAT, 9 SERRA WAL HM, ae feeeit-110002 
a rch a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2015 Price Group 3 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


In the preparation of this standard assistance has been drawn from ASTM D5818 — 11 ‘Standard practice for 
exposure and retrieval of samples to evaluate installation damage of geosynthetics’, issued by the American 
Society for Testing and Materials, USA. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16341 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — STANDARD PRACTICE FOR 
EXPOSURE AND RETRIEVAL OF SAMPLES TO 
EVALUATE INSTALLATION DAMAGE OF 
GEOSYNTHETICS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This practice covers standardized procedures for 
obtaining samples of geosynthetics from a test section 
for use in assessment of the effects of damage 
immediately after installation caused only by the 
installation techniques. The assessment may include 
physical testing. This practice is applicable to any 
geosynthetic. 


1.2 This practice is limited to full-scale test 
sections, and does not address laboratory modelling 
of field conditions. This practice does not address 
which test method(s) to use for quantifying 
installation damage. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards and special publication are 
necessary adjuncts to this standard: 


IS No. Title 
13321 (Part 1): Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: 


1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
properties 
SP 45 : 2014 Handbook on glossary of textile 
terms 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions and those given in SP 45 and IS13321 
(Part 1) shall apply. 


3.1 Geosynthetic — A planar product manufactured 
from polymeric material used with soil, rock, earth, or 
other geotechnical engineering-related material as an 
integral part of a man-made project, structure, or 
system. 


3.2 Sample — (a) A portion of material that is taken 
for testing or for record purposes; (b) a group of 
specimens used, or of observations made, which 
provide information that can be used for making 
statistical inferences about the population(s) from 
which the specimens are drawn. 


3.3 Test Section — A distinct area of actual or 
simulated full-scale construction. 


4 SUMMARY OF PRACTICE 


4.1 Damage to geosynthetics from installation 
operations may be quantified by evaluating specimens 
from a sample(s) exhumed from a full-scale 
installation. The sample(s) should be installed using 
project specific procedures and materials. When project 
specific materials and/or procedures are unknown, 
generally accepted, representative materials and 
procedures, should be used and thoroughly 
documented and reported. Addressed within this 
practice are: amount of geosynthetic sample(s) to install 
procedures for installing the geosynthetic sample(s); 
procedures for exhuming the geosynthetic sample(s); 
procedure for obtaining control sample(s) and report 
preparation guidelines. The sample(s) should be 
retrieved immediately after installation to minimize 
potential aging of the geosynthetic. Comparison of test 
results on exhumed and control specimens may be used 
to assess effects of installation. Tests to perform are 
not addressed herein, and will vary with the type and 
function of geosynthetic and project requirements. 


5 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


5.1 The ability to maintain design function (for 
example, reinforcement, separation, barrier, etc) or 
design properties (for example, tensile strength, 
chemical resistance, etc), or both, of a geosynthetic 
may be affected by damage to the physical structure 
of the geosynthetic due to the rigors of field installation. 
The effect of damage may be assessed by analyzing 
specimens cut from sample(s) retrieved after 
installation in a representative test section. Analysis 
may be performed with visual examination or 
laboratory testing of specimens from the control 
sample(s), and from the exhumed sample(s). 


5.2 A uniform practice for installing and retrieving 
representative sample(s) from a test section is needed 
to assess installation damage using project specific or 
generally accepted, representative materials and 
procedures. Damage of a specific grade and type of 
geosynthetic under specific installation procedures may 
be assessed with sample(s) exhumed from a full-scale 
test section. 


IS 16341 : 2015 


6 PROCEDURE 


6.1 Objective 


Geosynthetic and soil placement techniques shall 
model the methods anticipated during construction but 
may also be designed to model hypothetical conditions 
such as various degrees of compaction, lift heights, 
drop heights, equipment operations, and/or types of 
fill material. 


6.2 Exhumed Sample 


6.2.1 The amount of geosynthetic to install in and 
retrieve from a test section is a function of the type 
and number of laboratory tests to be conducted for 
assessment of damage. An amount of material 
sufficient to obtain 20 tests on representative specimens 
for each type of test should be installed for each set of 
installation conditions. 


6.2.2 The test sample should be marked prior to 
installation and exhumation, or a template made, 
showing the exact location where specimens for testing 
are to be obtained. They shall also be labeled with 
sufficient information to assure identification of the 
exposed sample and associated exposure conditions, 
such as: geosynthetic and fill type. Machine and 
transverse machine direction of specimens shall be 
designated. Designation of specimen locations is 
recommended to eliminate potential bias in specimen 
selection after the geosynthetic has been damaged. 
Alternate areas may also be designated in the event 
the primary specimen area is damaged by exhumation. 


6.3 Control Sample 


6.3.1 Control or base line (un-installed) sample(s) of 
the geosynthetic being investigated shall be from the 
same roll of material that is to be installed in the test 
section. Sample(s) from each roll of geosynthetic shall 
be gathered in cases where multiple geosynthetic rolls 
are used in the test section. Document all control 
sample information pertinent to sample such as: date 
of manufacture, manufacturer or supplier, geosynthetic 
grade and type, machine and transverse machine 
directions, and roll and lot number, if available. These 
control samples shall be handled and stored in such a 
manner to eliminate, or minimize, damage or 
degradation (for example, exposure to ultraviolet light). 


6.3.2 The orientation of the exhumed sample(s) and 
control sample(s) are to be documented. That is, the 
left and right hand sides of each sample shall 
correspond. It is also recommended that the control 
sample should be a direct continuation of the exhumed 
sample so as to minimize differences in control and 
exhumed specimen properties due to inherent product 
variability. 


6.3.3 The positions of the test specimens on the control 
sample, relative to roll edge, should correspond with 
the positions of the exhumed sample. 


6.4 Installation Procedure 


6.4.1 The soil subgrade or initial lift on which the 
geosynthetic(s) will be placed shall be constructed to 
specified conditions of soil type, moisture content and 
compaction. Construction equipment used should be the 
same as to be used to construct overlying lifts, unless 
otherwise requested. The geosynthetic should be 
installed in accordance with project specific procedures. 
When project specific procedures and/or materials are 
not known, representative equipment, materials and 
procedures should be used and thoroughly documented. 


6.4.2 The material to be placed above the geosynthetic 
under investigation will typically be a soil or rock fill, 
or another geosynthetic material(s) with soil then 
placed upon it. In the case of another geosynthetic, it 
also shall be placed in accordance with project specific 
procedures. When project specific procedures and/or 
materials are not known, representative equipment, 
materials and procedures should be used and 
thoroughly documented. 


6.4.3 Fill placement above the geosynthetic shall model 
expected field conditions. Construction equipment 
used in fill placement should be the same as that to be 
used in subsequent construction of the earth structure. 
Equipment shall be operated in accordance with project 
specific procedures. When project specific equipment, 
procedures and/or materials are not known, 
representative equipment, materials and procedures 
should be used and thoroughly documented. 


6.4.4 Spread fill into lifts above the geosynthetic 
modelling expected field conditions. Construction 
equipment used in fill spreading should be in accordance 
with project specific procedures.When project specific 
equipment, procedures and/or materials are not known, 
representative equipment, materials and procedures 
should be used and thoroughly documented. 


6.4.5 Fill lift compaction above the geosynthetic shall 
model expected field conditions. Construction 
equipment used in soil compaction should be in 
accordance with project specifications. When project 
specific equipment, procedures and/or materials are not 
known, representative equipment, materials and 
procedures should be used and thoroughly documented. 


NOTES 


1 Commonly used procedures include the following: 200 mm 
soil lifts compacted to >90 percent Modified Proctor density 
using a minimum 4500 kg (total) vibratory steel roll (single or 
tandem). Typical soils/ aggregates include coarse gravel (GP, 
d50 > 20 mm) concrete sand (SW d50 > 1.0 mm) or silty sand 
(SM d50 > 0.4 mm). 


2 Following placement and compaction for the lift, procedures 
could include the simulation of post construction traffic such 
as loaded trucks moving transversely over the test section. 


6.5 Exhuming of Samples 


6.5.1 Samples from the test section should be exhumed 
within 48 h after installation. 


6.5.2 Method(s) employed to exhume the samples shall 
prevent or minimize additional damage to the 
geosynthetic. Document the method (s) used to exhume 
samples. 


NOTE — Extreme caution should be exercise if using 
mechanical equipment to remove soil covering the geosynthetic. 
Careful ‘hand’ removal methods are preferred near the 
geosynthetic. 


6.5.3 Areas of the geosynthetic damaged during 
removal shall be identified (for example, spray painted) 
and designated as being non-representative of 
installation damage. 


6.5.4 Exhumed samples shall be handled and stored in 
such a manner to eliminate, or minimize further 
damage or degradation (for example, exposure to 
ultraviolet light). 


7 REPORT 
7.1 Report the following information: 


7.1.1 The construction equipment, procedures and 


IS 16341 : 2015 


materials used for the test section(s) including, but not 
limited to, equipment types, equipment operation, 
subgrade and fill types and gradation, maximum 
particle size, fill placement, compaction requirements, 
fill compaction control technique(s), and the 
exhumation system employed. 


7.1.2 Geosynthetic material(s) identification such as 
manufacturer or supplier, style number, roll numbers, 
material grade and type, if available. 


7.1.3 Laboratory test(s) to be conducted on both 
exhumed and control samples. 


7.1.4 Conditioning of samples prior to testing (for 
example, washing and removing of soil, drying, etc). 


7.1.5 Identify any specimens rejected and alternative 
specimens added due to unrepresentative damage. 


7.1.6 Test section construction quality control 
measurements such as lift thickness, density, moisture 
content, gradation curves, number of soil lifts, type 
and number of passes of construction equipment and 
the number of passes of the compactor. 


7.1.7 Typical photographs of test section construction. 


7.1.8 Detail sequence of photographs depicting the 
geosynthetic before and after exposure process should 
be provided in the final report. 


IS 16341 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


National Institute of Research on Jute and Allied Fibre 
Technology, Kolkatta 

Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 

Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 

Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Pati (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RITIKA Gupta (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Jont Director (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri MANISH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr SwAPAN GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


Suri S. Masoop HusAIn 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNi 
Suri S. J. Cuirnis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri KousHik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri Y. K. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. KHASTAGIR (Alternate) 


Dr Gautam Bose 
Dr Sanjoy DEBNATh (Alternate) 


Suri AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALUCHAMY (Alternate) 


Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Dr SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


Dr ManisHa MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


IS 16341 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai SHRI PRASHANT BHAVE 
In personal capacity (104 Kanchanban A.W. Vartak Marg, Suri V. N. GORE 


Vile Parle (East), Mumbai-400 057) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist “E” and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1180). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


