Waa Wah IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


wet aret Ua wae 
uR rarat 
qm 11 SA fas 
agm 6 YA SA 
(ZAT FAO ) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
River Valley Projects 
Part 11 Hydrology 


Section 6 Groundwater 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2018 


mA AM SRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF WH, 9 Fees BHC APT, Ae fercit-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 5 


Groundwater and Related Investigations Sectional Committee, WRD 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Groundwater and Related Investigations Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Water Resources 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1985. It was subsequently revised in 1994 wherein certain definitions were 
modified and definitions relating to field practice were included. This revision has been taken up to bring in 
further modifications/improvements in the light of experience gained while using the earlier version of the standard. 


This standard has been prepared by deriving assistance from the groundwater part in ISO 772 : 2011 ‘Hydrometric 
determination — Vocabulary and symbols’. IS 1191 : 2016 ‘Hydrometry — Vocabulary and symbols (third revision)’ 
covers vocabulary and symbols in the field of Hydrometry excluding those relating to groundwater. 


Further in this standard the following three principles as adopted in ISO 772 were followed, wherever possible: 


a) to standardize suitable terms without perpetuating unsuitable ones. 

b) to discard any term used with differing meanings and to replace that term by one which has an unequivocal 
meaning. 

c) to exclude terms which are self-evident. 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO 
RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
PART 11 HYDROLOGY 


Section 6 Groundwater 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 11/Section 6) covers definitions of 
terms relating to groundwater. 


2 GENERAL TERMS 


2.1 Absorbed Water — Water and/or dissolved matter 
incorporated within the structure of solid, soil or 
mineral particles. 


2.2 Abstraction — Removal of water from a borehole 
or well. 


2.3 Access Tube, Dip Tube — Pipe inserted into a well 
to permit safe installation of instruments, thus 
safeguarding them from touching or becoming 
entangled with the pump or other equipment in the well. 


2.4 Acoustic Impedance — Product of seismic velocity 
and density of a layer. 


NOTE — The reflection of a seismic wave depends on the 
contrast in acoustic impedance. 


2.5 Adhesive Water — Water forming a film around 
soil particles, over absorbed water, and held by forces 
of molecular attraction after gravity water has drained, 
but having less strength than adsorption water and 
without perceptible emission of heat. 

NOTE — Adsorbed water is entirely fixed, whereas adhesive 


or pellicular water may move from one particle to another. This 
water can’t be abstracted under normal conditions. 


2.6 Adsorbed Water — Water held on the surface of 
individual soil particles by the forces of molecular 
attraction, with emission of heat (heat of wetting). 


2.7 Air Lifting — Method of producing a discharge of 
water from a borehole by the injection of compressed air. 


2.8 Air Line — Water-level measuring device 
consisting of an open-ended tube of small diameter, 
fixed in position, that is accessible from the top of the 
casing and extends to below the water level in a well 
where pressurized air measurements can be used to 
determine the depth of the water. 


2.9 Anisotropy — Variation in physical property with 
direction of measurement. 


NOTE — In the electrical resistivity method, micro-, macro- 
and pseudo-anisotropy are involved. 


2.10 Annual Depletion Rate — The average rate over a 
period of years at which withdrawals in excess of recharge 
deplete the storage depth HI a groundwater reservoir. 


2.11 Anomaly (Groundwater) — Any deviation in a 
physical property from a uniform regional trend, caused 
by variations in the character of target (due to the 
presence of a causative body at the subsurface). 


2.12 API Unit — Unit or counting rate used for scaling 
gamma-ray logs and neutron logs. 


NOTE — API is the abbreviation for the American Petroleum 
Institute. 


2.13 Apparent Resistivity — Ratio of the measured 
voltage to the input current, multiplied by the geometric 
factor of the electrode configuration. 

NOTE — It would be true resistivity if the subsurface is 


homogeneous (scale of homogeneity referred to the dimension 
of the electrode geometry). 


2.14 Apparent Velocity of Groundwater — Apparent 
distance covered per unit time by groundwater in the 
saturated zone. 

NOTE — It is defined as the product of the coefficient of 


permeability and hydraulic gradient, divided by the porosity of 
the porous medium through which the groundwater is moving. 


2.15 Aquiclude — Stratum or group of strata which, 
although porous and capable of absorbing water slowly, 
will not transmit water rapidly enough to furnish a 
sufficient supply for a well or spring, even under 
saturated conditions. 


2.16 Aquifer — Stratum, group of strata, or part of a 
strata containing sufficient saturated permeable material 
to yield significant quantities of water to wells, 
boreholes, or springs. 


2.17 Aquifer Loss — Head loss at a pumped or 
overflowing well associated with groundwater flow 
through the aquifer to the well face. 


2.18 Aquifer Properties — Properties of an aquifer 
that determine its hydraulic behaviour and its response 
to abstraction. 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


2.19 Aquifer Test — A test involving the withdrawal 
of measured quantities of water from or addition of 
water to, a well and measurement of resulting changes 
in head of the aquifer both during or after the period of 
discharge or addition. 


2.20 Aquifuge — Impermeable stratum which has no 
interconnected openings and hence cannot absorb or 
transmit water. 


2.21 Aquitard — Saturated but poorly permeable 
stratum that impedes groundwater movement and does 
not yield water to a well, but that may transmit 
appreciable water to and from adjacent aquifers. 


2.22 Area of Artesian Flow — A land or water surface 
which lies below a piezometric surface. It is an area in 
which the water of some underlying aquifer is under 
sufficient pressure to rise above the surface. 


2.23 Argillaceous — Containing clay minerals. 


2.24 Artesian Basin — Areal extent of a confined 
aquifer. 


2.25 Artesian Flow — Natural flow above the ground 
from wells and springs in an artesian basin. 


2.26 Artesian Head — The height above the bottom 
of the upper confining formation, to which the water in 
a confined aquifer would rise, if free to do so. 


2.27 Artesian Pressure — The pressure exerted by a 
body of water confined in a water bearing geologic 
formation, against a superimposed impermeable or less 
permeable formation, the pressure usually being due 
to the fact that the free water level of the sub-surface 
water body stands at a higher level than that of the 
bottom of the upper confining formation. 


2.28 Artesian Spring — Water emerging under artesian 
pressure, generally through some fissure or other 
opening, in the confining bed that overlies an aquifer. 


2.29 Artesian Water — Sub-surface water under 
sufficient pressure to cause it to rise above the bottom 
of the superimposed confining formation, if afforded 
an opportunity to do so. Flowing artesian wells are 
produced when the pressure is sufficient to force the 
water above the land surface. 


2.30 Artificial Recharge — Augmentation of the 
natural infiltration of precipitation, or surface water, 
into underground strata by some method of 
construction, spreading of water, or by artificially 
changing natural conditions. 


2.31 Base Flow — The sustained or dry weather flow 
of streams resulting from the outflow of permanent or 
perched groundwater and from the draining of large 
lakes and swamps. 


2.32 Bed Resolution — Minimum bed thickness that 
can be resolved. 


2.33 Blind Zone — Layer having a seismic velocity 
less than that in the layer overlying it. 


2.34 Bonding — Seal between a borehole lining/casing 
and the geological formation. 


2.35 Borehole, Well — Hole, usually vertical, bored 
to determine ground conditions, extract water or 
measure groundwater level. 


2.36 Bouguer Anomaly — Anomaly obtained after 
applying latitude, terrain, and elevation (free air and 
Bouguer) corrections to the observed gravity value and 
finally subtracting it from the measured value at some 
particular station in the survey area. 


2.37 Bouguer Correction — Correction made to 
observed gravity data to account for the attraction 
(gravitational) of the rock between the datum and the 
plane of measurement. 


2.38 Cable Boom — Rigid support from which the 
geophysical sonde and cable are suspended. 


2.39 Calibration Tail — Section of field log carrying 
information on sonde calibration. 


2.40 Capillary Fringe, Capillary Zone — Zone 
immediately above the water table extending up to the 
limit of capillary rise of water. 
NOTE — It may consist solely of capillary water or it may be 
combined with gravity water in transit to the water table. All 


pores are filled, but the water is at a lower pressure than 
atmospheric pressure. 


2.41 Casing — Tubular retaining structure which is 
installed in a drilled borehole or excavated well to 
maintain the borehole opening. 

NOTE — Plain (unscreened) casing prevents the entry of water 


and fine material into the well, while open screened (see 2.204) 
casing allows water ingress but should exclude fines. 


2.42 Casing String — Set of lengths of casing 
assembled for lowering into a borehole. 


2.43 Cavern Water — Water in large, tubular or 
cavernous openings. 


2.44 Coefficient of Permeability — Specific discharge 
under a unit hydraulic gradient at a specified 
temperature. 


2.45 Column Pipe — Part of the rising main within 
the well. 


2.46 Composite Log — Several well logs of the same 
or similar types, suitable for correlation. 


2.47 Cone of Depression — Portion of the 
potentiometric surface that is perceptibly lowered as a 
result of abstraction of groundwater from a well. 


2.48 Confined Aquifer — An aquifer overlain by 
sufficiently impermeable strata to inhibit free hydraulic 


connection with overlying aquifer, except at the 
recharge area. 
NOTE — Groundwater in confined aquifer moves under the 
pressure caused by the difference in head between recharge 
area and discharge areas of the confined aquifer and is under 


sufficient pressure to rise above the bottom of the upper 
confining bed, if given an opportunity to do so. 


2.49 Confining Bed, Confining Lyer, Confining 
Statrum — Impermeable bed/strata adjacent to an 
aquifer that restricts or reduces the natural flow of 
groundwater to or from the aquifer. 


2.50 Connate Water — Water which has entered a 
rock formation and has been entrapped in the interstices 
of the rock material (either sedimentary or extrusive 
igneous) for a geologically long period of time, and 
which has therefore been out of contact with the 
atmosphere for an appreciable part of a geologic period. 


2.51 Contact Resistance — Electrical resistance 
developed between an electrode planted in the ground 
and the ground material immediately surrounding it. 


NOTE — Contact resistance is reduced by putting water at the 
electrodes. 


2.52 Core — Section of geological formation obtained 
from a borehole by drilling. 


2.53 Critical Velocity of Groundwater — The 
maximum velocity under which laminar flow can occur 
in porous media. 


2.54 Curve Matching (Borehole Geophysics) — 
Comparison of individual borehole data in graphical 
form with standard or control data, including pumping 
test analysis. 


2.55 Curve Matching (Surface Geophysics) — 
Technique of interpretation in which a field (observed) 
curve (apparent resistivity, chargeability, etc) is 
graphically matched with the theoretical curve 
computed for a known layer arrangement comprising 
various thicknesses and physical properties. 


NOTE — A good match indicates that the modelled arrangement 
may match the field conditions. 


2.56 Darcy’s Law — Law expressing the 
proportionality of the specific discharge flowing 
through a porous medium to the hydraulic gradient 
under laminar flow conditions. 


NOTE — It is expressed as 
q = Ki 
or Q = KAi 
where 


Q isthe quantity of water flowing through the aquifer; 


K isa constant depending on the porosity and permeability 
of the aquifer material and on the properties of the water, 
called hydraulic conductivity; 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


i is the loss of head per unit length (or hydraulic gradient); 
q is the specific discharge of water in the aquifer material; 
A is the cross-sectional area of aquifer material through 
which the water flows. 
2.57 Dar Zarrouk Parameters — Longitudinal unit 
conductance and transverse unit resistance of a 
geoelectrical layer. 


2.58 Deconvolution — Process of inverse filtering 
to nullify the undesired effect of an earlier filter 
operation. 


2.59 Dipole-Electrode Configuration — 
Configuration in which the spacing between the current 
electrode pair and that between the potential electrode 
pair is considerably reduced in comparison to the 
distance between these two pairs. 


2.60 Discharge of Groundwater — The outflows of 
water from subsurface to surface. 


2.61 Dispersion (Groundwater) — Process by which 
liquid substance introduced into a groundwater system 
spreads as it moves through the system. 


2.62 Diurnal Correction — Correction applied to 
magnetic data to compensate for daily fluctuations of 
the geomagnetic field. 


2.63 Drawdown — The reduction in static head within 
the aquifer resulting from abstraction though a well. 


2.64 Drift Correction — Quantitative adjustment to 
account for a uniform change in the reference value 
with time. 


2.65 Drilling Circulation — Movement of drilling 
fluid, such as air, foam or liquid, used to clear the 
borehole during drilling. 


2.66 Effective Porosity — It is the ratio of 
interconnected interstitial volume and the total volume 
of a water bearing formation. 


2.67 Effective Velocity, Actual Velocity, True 
Velocity, Field Velocity of Groundwater — The 
velocity measured by the volume of groundwater 
passing per unit time through unit cross sectional area 
divided by effective porosity of the water transmitting 
material. 


2.68 Effluent Stream, Gaining Stream — A stream 
or a stretch of a stream which receives water from 
groundwater in the zone of saturation. The water surface 
of such a stream stands at a lower level than the water 
table, or piezometric surface of the groundwater body, 
from which it receives water. 


2.69 Equipotential Line — Line connecting points 
having the same potentiometric head. 


2.70 Field Capacity, Specific Retention — The 
amount of water held in the soil after the excess 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


gravitational water has drained away and after the rate 
of downward movement of water has materially 
decreased. Essentially the same as ‘specific retention’, 
it is a more general term used in studies of groundwater 
which covers all types of strata. Furthermore, field 
capacity is usually expressed as percentage of weight 
whilst specific retention is generally given as percentage 
by volume. 


2.71 Field Coefficient of Permeability — Coefficient 
of permeability at the prevailing temperature of water. 


2.72 Filter Pack — Granular material introduced into 
a borehole between the aquifer and a screen or 
perforated lining to prevent or control the movement 
of particles from the aquifer into the borehole. 


2.73 Fishing Tool — Grappling equipment used to 
locate and recover items from within a borehole. 


2.74 Fissure Water, Fault Water — Water, in open 
fractures, joints, faults in rock formations, which is 
usually in abundance only near the ground surface. 


2.75 Flow Lines — Lines showing the path of flow of 
groundwater. 


2.76 Flownet — Net of intersecting equipotential lines 
and flow lines. 


2.77 Fluctuation of Water Table — The upward and 
downward movements of the water table due to periods 
of recharge and discharge of water in the zone of 
saturation. 


2.78 Fluid Column — Part of a borehole filled with 
fluid. 


2.79 Flushed Zone — Zone at a relatively short radial 
distance from the borehole, immediately behind the 


mud cake, where all of the pore spaces are filled with 
borehole fluid. 


2.80 Foot Valve — Non-return valve fitted at the 
bottom of a suction pipe of a pump. 


2.81 Formation — Geological unit or series of units. 


2.82 Fracture Porosity — This is porosity associated 
with a fracture system or faulting. This can create 
secondary porosity in rocks that otherwise would not 
be reservoirs for hydrocarbons due to their primary 
porosity being destroyed or ofa rock type not normally 
considered a reservoir. 


2.83 Eddy Current (Geophysics) — Current induced 
in a conductive body by the primary electromagnetic 
(EM) field. 


NOTE — The secondary EM field produced by the eddy current 
opposes the primary field. 


2.84 Electric Tape, Dipper, Dip-meter — Water-level 
measuring device that uses an electrical signal, sent 


through a cable with fixed distance marks, to determine 
the water-level relative to a fixed reference point. 


NOTE — The electrical signal, which is induced when the 
sensor makes contact with the water surface, activates an 
indicator (typically a light, buzzer or needle). 


2.85 Equivalence (Geophysics) — Function of product 
or ratio of two parameters (for examble bed thickness 
and resistivity) where variation in the parameters 
keeping the ratio or product constant can yield almost 
the same response. 


2.86 Filtering (Geophysics) — Process which 
eliminates some part of the information (typically noise) 
entering the system. 


NOTE — Filtering is mostly done on the basis of frequency. 
There are high-frequency cut (low-pass) and low-frequency cut 
(high-pass), band pass and band elimination (cut) filters used 
in seismic and other data acquisition and processing. 


2.87 Free-Correction — Correction applied to gravity 
data to account for the fact that current flow 
measurements are made at different elevations. 


NOTE — Free-air gravity anomaly is obtained after applying a 
free-air correction for the latitude and elevation. 


2.88 Geoelectrical Layer — Sub-surface layer 
characterized by uniform electrical resistivity. 


2.89 Geohydrology — The study of that branch of 
hydrology relating to sub-surface or subterranean water 
in its geological context. 


2.90 Geometric Factor — Numerical value dependent 
upon the arrangement of electrodes which, when 
multiplied by the measured voltage-to-current ratio, 
gives the apparent resistivity. 


2.91 Geophone — Instrument which detects seismic 
energy and converts it into electrical voltage. 


NOTE — Relative motion between a suspended coil and a 
magnet, caused by a seismic wave, generates a voltage in the 
coil whose amplitude is proportional to the velocity of the 
exciting seismic disturbance. 


2.92 Geophysical Log — Continuous record of a 
physical or chemical property, plotted against depth or 
time. 


2.93 Geyser — A thermal spring from which hot water 
steam is intermittently thrown vertically to a 
considerable height. 


2.94 Gradient Configuration — Variation of the 
Schlumberger configuration where the current 
electrodes are kept at a great distance from one another 
and central space is scanned by a small potential dipole. 


2.95 Graduated Steel Tape — Water-level measuring 
device consisting of a flat measuring tape with 
permanently fixed distance marks that can be wound 
on a reel. 


NOTE — It is only used for measuring in shallow water tables. 
2.96 Groundwater — Water within the saturated zone. 


2.97 Groundwater Balance — Concept according to 
which all inputs of water in a defined space and time 
are equal to the sum of all outputs of water, and the 
changes of water storage, in the same space and time. 


2.98 Groundwater Basin — Physiographic or 
geological unit containing at least one aquifer of 
significant areal extent capable of furnishing a 
substantial water supply. 


2.99 Groundwater Budgeting — A detailed estimate 
of the amount of water added to the groundwater reservoir 
of a given area (recharge) balanced against estimates of 
amounts of withdrawals from the groundwater reservoir 
of the area during a specified period. 


2.100 Groundwater Cascade — Descent of 
groundwater on a steep hydraulic gradient to a lower 
and flatter water table slope. 


NOTE — A cascade can occur below a groundwater barrier or 
dam, and at the contact of less permeable material with more 
permeable material, downslope. 


2.101 Groundwater Dam, Groundwater Barrier, 
Subsurface Dyke — Natural or artificial body of 
material of low permeability which impedes the 
horizontal movement of groundwater. 


2.102 Groundwater Decrement or Discharge — 
Water abstracted from the groundwater reservoir by 
evaporation, transpiration, spring flow and effluent 
seepage, pumping wells and outflow of groundwater 
under the area within consideration. 


2.103 Groundwater Divide — Perceived line/area on 
a water table or potentiometric surface, on either side 
of which the water table slopes downwards. 


2.104 Groundwater Hydrology — Branch of 
hydrology relating to subsurface or subterranean water. 


2.105 Groundwater Increment, Groundwater 
Accretion — Water added to the groundwater reservoir 
in any given time interval from all sources, influent 
seepage from streams, rainfall, irrigation and inflow of 
groundwater from outside the area under consideration. 


2.106 Groundwater Mound — Elevated area on a 
water table or on a potentiometric surface, resulting 
from recharge. 


2.107 Groundwater Recharge, Recharge of an 
Aquifer — Replenishment or addition of water to the 
groundwater storage by natural processes or artificial 
methods. 


2.108 Groundwater Storage — Volume of 
groundwater available at any instance of time. 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


2.109 Groundwater Trench — A trench-shaped 
depression of the water table caused by effluent seepage 
into a drainage ditch, drainage pipe, or stream or by 
movement of groundwater to the thalweg underlying a 
stream and by artificial pumping by battery of wells. 


2.110 Groundwater Turbulent Flow — Turbulent 
flow which occurs in large openings in the zone of 
saturation under high velocities. 


2.111 Grout — Mixture of cement, bentonite or other 
additive and water. 


2.112 Half-Configuration — Configuration in which 
one of the current electrodes is kept at infinity (large 
distance) and need not be collinear with the other three 
electrodes. 


NOTE — It can be used for soundings along radial lines. 


2.113 Homogeneity (Groundwater) — Characteristic 
of a formation with uniform physical property or 
properties. 


NOTES 


1 It is a function of the scale of measurement in relation to the 
uniformity in physical property. 

2 Inhomogeneity or heterogeneity indicates non uniformity or 
dissimilarity in physical property with reference to the scale of 
measurement. 


2.114 Hydraulic Conductivity — Volume of water, 
at the existing kinematic viscosity, that will move in 
unit time under a unit hydraulic gradient through a unit 
area measured perpendicularly to the direction of flow. 


NOTES 
1 See also Darcy’s law as given in 2.56. 


2 This definition assumes an isotropic medium in which the 
pores are completely filled with water. 


2.115 Hydraulic Gradient — The change in hydraulic 
head of the aquifer per unit distance in the direction of 
flow. 


2.116 Hydraulic Head — Height of potentiometric 
surface (for confined aquifer) or water table (for 
unconfined aquifer) at a particular location above a 
datum. 


2.117 Hydrogeology — A branch of earth science 
dealing with the sub-surface distribution of rock 
formations and their ability to receive, store and 
transmit water. 


2.118 Hydrograph (Groundwater) — Groundwater 
level graph showing the depth to water level in a well 
with respect to time. 


2.119 Hydro Isopleth Map — A map showing 
fluctuation of water table with respect to time and space. 


2.120 Hydraulic Profile of an Aquifer — A vertical 
section of the piezometric surface or the water table of 
an aquifer. 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


2.121 Impermeable Material — Material that does 
not permit water to move though it at perceptible rates 
under the hydraulic gradients normally present. 


2.122 Incompetent Stratum — Stratum unable to 
stand without support. 


2.123 Induced Recharge of an Aquifer — Discharge 
of water from a stream into an aquifer induced by 
lowering of the water table by artificial means. 


2.124 Infiltration Rate — The rate at which infiltration 
takes place expressed in depth of water per unit of time, 
usually in millimeters per hour. 


2.125 Infiltration Rate Curve — Curve showing the 
actual rate of infiltration with respect to time. 


2.126 Infiltrometer — A device to measure rate of 
infiltration in experimental observations. 


2.127 Influent Percolation — Movement of water, in 
the zone of aeration, from the ground surface toward 
the water table under the force of gravity. 


2.128 Influent Stream, Loosing Stream — A stream 
or stretch of a stream which contributes water to the 
zone of saturation. The water surface of such a stream 
stands at a higher level than the water table, or 
piezometric surface, of the groundwater body to which 
it contributes water. 


2.129 In-(Geophysics) — Component of a secondary 
electromagnetic (EM) field with the same phase angle 
as that of the exciting primary EM field. 


NOTE — The in-phase component attains maxima and minima 
in step with the primary field. 


2.130 Intake Area (Recharge Area) of an Aquifer 
System — The surface area where the water gets 
absorbed from perception or surface flow, which 
eventually reaches the zone of saturation of an aquifer. 


2.131 Intermediate Vadose Water — Water in the 
intermediate vadose zone. 


2.132 Intermediate Vadose Zone — It is the portion 
of the zone of aeration which lies between the lower 
edge of soil water zone and the upper limit of 
capillarism. 


2.133 Invaded Zone — Portion of formation 
surrounding a borehole into which drilling fluid has 
partially penetrated. 


2.134 Isopiestic Line, Pressure Surface Contour — 
A line on a map connecting all points of equal elevation, 
to which water pressure in a water-bearing formation 
would rise if free to do so; a line connecting all points 
of equal pressure in a water-bearing formation under 
pressure; or a line connecting all points of equal altitude 
on the upper surface of an unconfined aquifer. 


2.135 Jig — Calibrating device for logging sondes. 


2.136 Kinematic Viscosity, v — Ratio of the absolute 
viscosity of a liquid to its specific gravity at the 
temperature at which the viscosity is measured. 


2.137 Laminar Flow — Flow of a fluid in which the 
viscous forces are predominant and in which, in channel 
flow, the fluid particles move in approximately definite 
and relatively smooth paths with no significant 
transverse mixing. 


NOTE — The Reynolds number is smaller than 500 to 2 000 
in flow channels and smaller than 1 to 10 in flow through porous 
media. 


2.138 Land Surface Datum, Ground Level — 
Average altitude of land surface at a monitored well. 


2.139 Latitude Correction (Geophysics) — 
Correction applied to take into account the variation in 
gravity values from the equator to the pole. 


2.140 Leachate — Liquid that has percolated through 
solid waste. 


2.141 Leaky Aquifer — Aquifer overlain and/or 
underlain by a relatively thin semi-pervious layer, 
through which flow into or out of the aquifer can take 
place. 


2.142 Lee-Configuration — Variation of the Wenner 
array where one additional electrode is placed at the 
centre between the potential electrodes. 


NOTE — Potential difference between the central electrode 
and either of the two other potential electrodes is measured. 


2.143 Lining — A tube or wall used to support the 
sides of a well, and sometimes to prevent the entry of 
water. 


2.144 Lining Tube — Preformed tube used as the lining 
for a well. 


NOTE — See also casing as given in 2.41 and screen as given 
in 2.204. 


2.145 Lithology — Physical character and 
mineralogical composition that gives rise to the 
appearance and properties of a rock or sediment. 


2.146 Lithosphere — The solid part of the earth as 
distinguished from the hydrosphere and the 
atmosphere. This part of the earth is predominantly 
composed of rocks (either coherent or incoherent, and 
including the disintegrated rock materials known as 
soil and subsoil), together with everything in this rocky 
crust. 


2.147 Logging — Recording of data. 


2.148 Longitudinal Conductance — Ratio of the 
thickness of a geoelectric layer to its resistivity. 


2.149 Magnetic Permeability — Ratio of magnetic 
induction (flux density) in a body to the strength of the 
inducing magnetic field. 


2.150 Magnetic Susceptibility — Ratio of the intensity 
of magnetization produced in a body to the strength of 
the magnetic field. 


2.151 Measuring Point, Dipping Datum 
(Groundwater) — Permanent reference marked on 
well casing. 


2.152 Migration (Geophysics) — That part of the 
processing of seismic reflection data required to plot 
the dipping reflections at their correct position. 


2.153 Mud Cake — Residue deposited on the borehole 
wall during drilling. 


2.154 Natural Recharge — It is that portion of water 
which gravitates to the zone of saturation under natural 
conditions. 


2.155 Observation Well — Well used for observing 
groundwater level and/or quality. 


2.156 Non-Polarizing Electrode (Geophysics) — 
Electrode which is not affected by the electrochemical 
potential generated between the electrode and ground 
material in which it is planted. 


2.157 Normal Moveout — Effect of variation of the 
shot-geophone distance on the time of arrival of seismic 
reflection. 


2.158 Off-Wenner Configuration — Modification in 
Wenner configuration to remove or minimize the effect 
of lateral in-homogeneities. 


2.159 Open Borehole — Unlined borehole. 


2.160 Overburden — Part of the host medium which 
lies above the target and is usually of no interest in 
exploration, but has physical properties that affect the 
measurements. 


2.161 Overflowing (Artesian or Flowing) Well — 
Well from which groundwater is discharged at the 
ground surface without the aid of pumping. 


2.162 Packer — Device placed in a borehole to seal 
or plug it at a specific point. 


2.163 Perched Groundwater — Groundwater 
occurring in a limited area in an unsaturated zone 
separated from the main body of the groundwater by 
an impervious stratum. 


2.164 Perched Spring — A spring whose source of 
water supply is a perched water body. 


2.165 Perennial Spring — A spring that discharges 
continuously at all seasons of the year. 


2.166 Permeability — Characteristic of a material that 
determines the rate at which fluid pass through it under 
the influence of differential pressure. 


NOTE — In the case of water, referred to as hydraulic 
conductivity (see 2.114). 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


2.167 Permeable Material — Material that permits 
water to move through it at perceptible rates under the 
hydraulic gradients normally present. 


2.168 Pellicular Water — see 2.5. 


2.169 Phasor Diagram — Graph obtained by plotting 
in-phase and quadrature components of secondary 
electromagnetic (EM) field for different frequencies 
of the primary EM field. 


2.170 Phreatic Cycle, Cycle of Fluctuation — The 
total time occupied by a period of rise and a succeeding 
period of decline of a water table. The most common 
kinds of cycles are daily, seasonal, annual, and secular. 


2.171 Phreatic Surface — Upper boundary of an 
unconfined groundwater body, at which the water 
pressure is equal to the atmospheric pressure. 


2.172 Phreatic Water — Groundwater occurring in 
the zone of saturation of unconfined aquifer. 


2.173 Physical Yield Limit, Potential Yield — The 
greatest rate of artificial withdrawal from an aquifer, 
which can be maintained throughout the foreseeable 
future without regard to cost of recovery. The physical 
yield limit is, therefore, equal to the present recharge, 
or that anticipated in the foreseeable future, less the 
unrecoverable natural discharge. 


2.174 Piestic Interval — The difference in static level 
between two isopiestic lines or lines of equal pressure. 


2.175 Piezometric Surface, Pressure Surface — It 
is an imaginary surface to which the water in a 
confined aquifer would rise if afforded an opportunity 
to do so. 


2.176 Piping — Internal erosion of a foundation or 
embankment caused by seepage. 


2.177 Plummet — Plumb bob used for determining 
the apparent depth of a borehole. 


2.178 Plus-method, Hagedoorn Method — 
Interpretation of seismic refraction data using reversed 
refraction profiles with shots at opposite ends and the 
addition and subtraction of travel times for various 
locations between the shots to indicate refractor depth 
and velocity. 


2.179 Polar Diagram (Geophysics) — Method of 
plotting resistivity sounding data. 
NOTE — The apparent resistivity values of the radial soundings 


conducted at a point are plotted for various current electrode 
separations. Results can be used to infer fracture orientations. 


2.180 Pore Pressure — Pressure of water in the 
interstices or voids between the grains of a rock or soil 
mass. 


2.181 Pore Water — Water in the interstices or voids 
of the formation. 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


2.182 Porosity — Ratio of the volume of pore space 
in a sample to the bulk volume of that sample. 


2.183 Potential Yield — The maximum rate of artificial 
withdrawal from an aquifer, which can be maintained 
throughout the foreseeable future without regard to cost 
of recovery. The potential yield is, therefore, equal to 
the present recharge, or that anticipated in the foreseeable 
future, less the unrecoverable natural discharge. 


2.184 Potentiometric Surface — Surface that 
represents the static head of groundwater. 


2.185 Primary Porosity — The porosity developed at 
the time of formation of geological strata. 


2.186 Profile of Water Table — The line formed by 
the intersection of the water table with a vertical plane. 
The term is also applied to a graphical representation 
of such a line. 


2.187 Proton Precession Magnetometer — Nuclear 
precession magnetometer instrument for measuring the 
magnetic field normal to the earth’s magnetic field. 


2.188 Pumping Test — A test which is conducted to 
determine aquifer or well characteristics. 


2.189 Quadrature — Out-of-phase or imaginary 
component of secondary electromagnetic field. 


2.190 Radius of Influence — Radius of the cone of 
depression. 


2.191 Reflector — Interface which separates two layers 
of contrasting acoustic impedance giving rise to 
reflection. 


2.192 Refractor — Layer along which the refracted 
or head wave travels at a velocity that is higher than 
that in the overlying layer. 


2.193 Remnant Magnetization — In-situ residual 
magnetization remaining in rock after removal of the 
inducing field. 


2.194 Rest Water Level — Water level in the pumped 
well observed under equilibrium when the pump is off. 


2.195 Recuperation — Recovery of water table after 
cessation of pumping or withdrawal of water. 


2.196 Rising Main — Pipe carrying water from within 
a well to a point of discharge. 


2.197 Rock — Natural mass of one or more minerals 
that may be consolidated or loose (excluding top soil). 


2.198 Rugosity — Degree of roughness of the borehole 
wall. 


2.199 Running Plot — A graph of a variable against 
elapsed time continually updated as measurements are 
taken. 


2.200 Safe Yield — The maximum rate at which water 
can be artificially withdrawn from an aquifer throughout 
the foreseeable future without impairing the aquifer. 


2.201 Saline Interface — Boundary between waters 
of different salt content. 


2.202 Saturated Zone — The part of an aquifer in 
which interstices of geological formations are filled 
with water at a pressure above atmospheric pressure. 


NOTE — The lower limit of pressure is the water table. 


2.203 Schlumberger Configuration — Collinear four- 
electrode configuration of current and potential 
electrodes in which potential electrodes are kept close 
to the centre of the configuration. 


2.204 Screen — Type of lining tube, with apertures 
designed to permit the flow of water into a well or 
borehole while preventing the entry of aquifer or filter 
pack material. 


2.205 Secondary Porosity — Porosity developed 
subsequent to the formation of geological strata. 


NOTE — Secondary porosity is produced due to weathering 
and/or tectonism. 


2.206 Seepage — Slow movement of water through 
pores and interstices of rock and unsaturated soil 
material into a surface of water such as a river, canal, 
reservoir, open ground surface or subsurface. 


2.207 Sidewalling — Running a log up or down a 
borehole with the sonde in contact with the borehole 
wall. 


2.208 Skin Depth — Depth of penetration of the 
electromagnetic (EM) field in a medium, where the 
intensity of the EM reduces to about 37 percent of its 
original value at the surface of the earth. 


2.209 Slurry — Mixture of fluid and rock fragments 
formed when drilling or developing a borehole. 


NOTE — Slurry can be used as an admixture when drilling. 


2.210 Snell’s Law — Law applied when a seismic wave 
encounters a boundary between two media having 
different velocities. 


2.211 Soil Water — The suspended water in the 
uppermost layer of soil of the zone of aeration and lying 
near enough to the surface to be discharged into the 
atmosphere by the transpiration of plants or by 
evaporation from the soil (includes hygroscopic, 
capillary and non-capillary water ). 


2.212 Soil Water Zone — Part of the zone of aeration 
that consists of soil and other materials near the ground 
surface, capable of discharging water into the 
atmosphere by transpiration of plants or by evaporation. 
The zone extends from the ground surface to major 


root zone and the thickness varies with the soil type 
and vegetation cover. 


2.213 Sonde — Cable-suspended probe or tool 
containing a sensor. 


2.214 Spring — Concentrated discharge of 
groundwater appearing at the ground surface as a 
current of flowing water. 


2.215 Specific Capacity — Rate of discharge of water 
from the well divided by the drawdown within the well. 


2.216 Specific Discharge — The rate of flow ofa fluid 
through a unit cross-section of a porous media. 


2.217 Specific Retention — The ratio of the volume 
of water that a given body of rock or soil will hold 
against the pull of gravity to the total volume of the 
body itself. 


2.218 Specific Yield — Volume of water released from 
storage by gravity from a unit area of the aquifer per 
unit decline of the hydraulic head. 


2.219 Stacking — Process of compositing data, for 
the same parameter, from various data sets for the 
purpose of eliminating noise. 


2.220 Statics — Correction applied to seismic data to 
nullify the effect of elevation differences encountered 
along profiles, as well as the effect of a low-velocity 
weathered layer. 


2.221 Static Water Level — The water level in a non- 
pumping well outside the area of influence of any 
pumping well. This level registers one point on the 
water table in a water table well or one point on the 
pressure surface in a confined water well. 


2.222 Static Head — The height, relative to an arbitrary 
reference, level, or a column of water that can be 
supported by the static pressure at a given point. 


2.223 Steady Flow (Groundwater) — Flow in which 
parameters, such as velocity, pressure, density and 
temperature, do not vary sufficiently with time to affect 
the required accuracy of measurement. 


2.224 Storage Coefficient — Volume of water released 
from storage in a confined aquifer per unit area of the 
aquifer per unit decline in hydraulic head. 


2.225 Sub-Surface Water — Water that occurs 
beneath the surface of the earth (in the lithosphere), It 
may be in liquid, solid, or gaseous state. It is also called 
undergroundwater or subterranean water. 


2.226 Subterranean Stream — Body of flowing water 
that passes through a very large interstice, such as a 
cave or cavern, or a group of large communicating 
interstices. 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


2.227 Suppressed Layer — Layer lacking a response 
because of its small thickness and/or contrast in physical 
property with the surrounding environment. 


2.228 Suspended Water — Water in the zone of 
aeration. 


2.229 Terrain Correction — Correction applied to 
measured gravity data to nullify the effect of irregular 
topographic relief in the immediate vicinity of the 
station of measurement. 


2.230 Transition — Linear or exponential variation 
of a physical property with depth. 


2.231 Transmissivity, 7— Rate at which water of the 
prevailing kinematic viscosity is transmitted through a 
unit width of the saturated aquifer under a unit hydraulic 
gradient. 


2.232 Transverse Resistance — Product of the 
thickness and resistivity of a geo-electrical layer. 


NOTE — Conventionally written as T= h x r (ohm.m’). 
where 


T is the transverse resistance; 

h is the thickness; and 

r is the resistivity. 
2.233 Turbulent Groundwater Flow — Fluid flow, 
which is not laminar or streamline flow and for which 
the Reynolds number is greater than 10 for flow through 
porous media. 


2.234 Two-(Pole-) Configuration — Configuration in 
which one current and one potential electrode are kept 
at infinity (more than 10 times the distance between 
active electrodes) and perpendicular to the profile along 
which the other two active electrodes are moved. 


2.235 Unconfined Aquifer — Water bearing 
geological formation with a water table or phreatic 
surface. 


2.236 Unconsolidated Rock — Rock that lacks natural 
cementation. 


2.237 Uniform Flow (Groundwater) — Flow in 
which the magnitude and direction of flow at a given 
moment are constant with respect to distance. 


2.238 Unsaturated Zone — Soil or rock material 
between the ground surface and the water table. 


2.239 Vadose Water — Water in the unsaturated zone 
(see also 2.228). 


2.240 Vibroseis — Seismic survey in which a vibrator 
is used as a non-destructive source, instead of an 
explosive, to generate controlled-frequency seismic 
waves in the ground. 


2.241 Viscosity — Property ofa fluid whereby it tends, 
within itself, to resist relative motion. 


IS 4410 (Part 11/Sec 6) : 2018 


2.242 Washout — Cavity formed by the action of drilling. 


2.243 Water Table — Surface of the saturated zone at 
which the water pressure is atmospheric. 


2.244 Well Development — Physical and chemical 
treatment of a well to achieve minimum resistance to 
movement of water between well and aquifer. 


2.245 Well Discharge — Volumetric flow rate into or 
from a well or borehole. 


2.246 Well Efficiency — Measure of the performance 
of a production well. 


2.247 Well Loss — Head loss resulting from the flow 
of groundwater across the well face, including any part 
of the aquifer affected by drilling and any filter pack or 
lining tube, into the well and up or down the well to the 
pump. 

2.248 Well Storage — Volume of water released from 
within the well itself during a reduction in head. 


10 


2.249 Wenner Configuration — Collinear four- 
electrode configuration of potential and current 
electrodes in which all the electrodes are equidistant. 


2.250 Zone of Fluctuation of Water Table, Zone of 
Phreatic Fluctuation — Zone through which the water 
table fluctuates from its highest to its lowest level within 
the formation, in response to the discharge and recharge 
conditions. 

NOTE — Depending upon the position of the water table in 


the zone, part of the zone will lie in the zone of aeration and 
the other part will lie in the zone of saturation. 


2.251 Zone of Saturation, Saturated Zone — Zone 
in which interstices of rock or other materials are filled 
with water at a pressure above atmospheric pressure. 


NOTE — The lower limit of pressure is the water table. 


2.252 Zone of Weathering — Layer of superficial 
deposits or bedrock subject to weathering and broadly 
coinciding with the belt of soil water. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 03 (0634). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


