SIRA AMG IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


ITATAAN GAT UT HAH 


UM 3 TATTTISAT ch Gates oh fad aa, wat 
AR Ran deman At aat — MATURE 


Assurance Engagement Standard 


Part 3 Competence of Individual, Firms and 
Reporting Entities for Conducting 
Assurance Engagements — Requirements 


ICS 03.100.01 


© BIS 2022 


anda NAK YO 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR NGA, 9 TAKANG TH HM, 4 Rei - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2022 Price Group 9 


Social Responsibility Sectional Committee, MSD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Social Responsibility Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division 
Council. 


This Indian Standard is published in three parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part1 Conducting assurance engagements for all matters other than statutory financial 
information — Requirement 
Part2 Conducting assurance engagements for all matters other than Statutory financial 


information — Guidance 


Annex À defines the subject topics and related subject matters pertaining to assurance engagements. Annex B 
details eligibility criteria for individuals to quality as auditors. The composition of the Committee responsible 
for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


INTRODUCTION 


The task of providing an assurance service has to be done wholeheartedly, sincerely and earnestly with 
consideration of appropriate due diligence, by persons who have the actual competence on the subject matter. It 
is therefore imperative that professionals who are in possession of appropriate educational qualification, technical 
understanding, knowledge, expertise and skill-set conduct such engagements. 


The emanating pressure from various peers and relevant stakeholders in conjunction with relevant business 
and regulatory requirements have been encouraging organizations in India to periodically disclose various 
non-financial based information such as, water acidification, ground water recharged, health and safety matters, 
green-house gas emitted, matters specific to sustainability/green bonds, environmental pollution burden, 
environmental or social externalities, social benefits to communities, environmental-social-governance, medical 
negligence cases, cyber security, non-financial compliances, etc. In Indian context, organizations are capturing 
information of such non-financial subject matters and reporting on the same in alignment with the requirements 
of various Global and National standards, such as Global Reporting Initiative, United Nation’s Global Compact, 
UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, Department of Public Enterprise’s Sustainability and CSR Guidelines, 
SEBI’s Business Reporting and Sustainability Reporting (BRSR) framework, National Guidelines on Responsible 
Business Conduct (NGRBCs), Integrated Reports as per IIRC (International Integrated Reporting Council) 
framework, CSR performance as per CSR Rules, etc. 


A lot of such advanced level non-financial, with an emphasis on science-based information facilitates in 
decision making, primarily for the customers, communities, investors and regulators, apart from other relevant 
stakeholders. In order to instill confidence in the mind of such specific stakeholders, organizations these days 
are seeking a third-party opinion for such reported performance. These have in turn resulted in the surge of 
assurance/audit services of non-financial performance, which are currently being conducted by various firms 
in India on the basis of various international assurance based standards, inclusive of the standards released 
by International Organization for Standardization (ISO), such as ISO 14064 (Greenhouse gas series), 
ISO 14046 (Environmental management — Water footprint series), ISO 14016 (Environmental management — 
Guidelines on the assurance of environmental reports), etc. 


These days, in order to be able to take informed decisions, progressive customers, investors, regulators and other 
interested stakeholders lay a lot of emphasis on non-financial performance that are reported by organizations to 
understand and get a grasp of the organization’s ability to sustain as a business entity. Such interested stakeholders 
therefore put a high level of reliance and emphasis on internal and or external audit opinions issued, on the basis 
of an appropriate assurance standard for subject matters and information that are of specific relevance to them. 
These assurance standards will provide consistency and uniformity for conducting non-financial based assurance 
engagements by appropriate professionals/firms. 


In this standard various competency requirements for individuals, firms and reporting entities have been described 
and the criteria for empanelment of as auditors have been defined. In this standard the following verbal forms are 
used: 


a) “Shall” indicates a requirement; 

b) “Should” indicates a recommendation, 

c) “May” indicates a permission, and 

d) “Can” indicates a possibility or capability. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


ASSURANCE ENGAGEMENT STANDARD 


PART 3 COMPETENCE OF INDIVIDUAL, FIRMS AND REPORTING ENTITIES 
FOR CONDUCTING ASSURANCE ENGAGEMENTS — REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) provides competency 
requirements for individuals, firms and reporting 
entities for the purpose of conducting internal and or 
external assurance engagements. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standard contains provision, which 
through reference in this text constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


26001 : 2020 Corporate social responsibility — 


Requirements 


26002 (Part 1) : 
2021 


Assurance engagement standard: 
Part 1  Conducting assurance 
engagements for all matters 
other than statutory financial 
information — Requirements 


26002 (Part 2) : 
2021 


Assurance engagement standard: 
Part 2  Conducting assurance 
engagements for all matters 
other than statutory financial 
information — Guidance 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions as given in IS 26002 (Part 1) shall apply. 


4 SUBJECT TOPIC AND SUBJECT MATTER 


4.1 Areportingentity reports qualitative and quantitative 
performance of various subject matters. The different 
kind of key subject matters, across respective subject 
topic are given in Annex A of this standard. To be 
able to conduct an assessment, estimation, evaluation, 
monitoring and review of the reported qualitative and 
quantitative performance of the subject matter, it may 
require specific type of basic educational qualification, 
knowledge, skill-set, competence and professional 


expertise. Depending on the primary qualification that 
would be required for audit of Subject Matter and its 
related information, two select categories have been 
identified and delineated in Annex A, which are as 
follows: 


a) Category 1 — General sustainability (GS) based 
subject matters, whereby, all auditors are eligible 
to conduct audit; and 

b) Category 2 — Specialized sustainability. (SS) 
based Subject Matters, whereby, auditors with 
specific basic educational qualification, expertise 
and competence are eligible to conduct audits. 


4.2 While, the subject matters specific to general 
sustainability may not require the application of science, 
the subject matter specific to specialized sustainability 
may often require the application of core subject matters 
of science/engineering in the audit of the subject matter 
and its information. Further, in some cases, there may 
arise the need for expertise in subject matters relevant 
to medical science, information technology, etc. For 
the audit of such subject matters relevant to medical 
science, information technology, etc., Subject Matter 
Expert(s) (SME) shall be engaged, depending on the 
requirements specific to an assurance engagement. 


5 COMPETENCE REQUIREMENTS OF 
INDIVIDUAL(S) INTENDING TO QUALIFY 
AS AUDITOR(S) 


5.1 General Competence Requirements 


An individual intending to qualify as an auditor for 
audit of subject matter and its information shall have: 


a) Competence to conduct basic level due diligence 
about the reporting entity, by collecting 
information that are sufficient to understand how 
the Subject Matter and its information could be of 
relevance to the reporting entity. 


b 


wm 


Knowledge of legal requirements that may have 
a connotation with the Subject Matter and the 
information that is being audited. 


[0] 


— 


Knowledge to determine whether the reporting 
entity has identified its past, current and 
potential risks and (opportunities, and the 
methods/techniques that have been applied for 
identification and assessment of the significance 
of the risks and opportunities of the Subject 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Matter that its information, with special emphasis 
on matters that are of material importance to the 
reporting entity. 

d 


— 


Knowledge of the processes, procedures and 
the relevant documentations and management 
information systems that could be developed 
and applied for implementation, monitoring, 
evaluation and communication of the Subject 
Matter and the its information. 


5.2 Subject Matter Specific Technical Competence 
Requirements 


An individual intending to qualify as an auditor, for 
audit of subject matter and its information shall have: 


a) Good understanding of the requirements specified 
in all the three parts of IS 26002 and comply with 
their requirements. 


b 


wm 


Knowledge of various site/individual/project 
related factors that may have an effect on the 
subject matter and its information. Such factors 
could be attributed to various matters arising from 
environmental, social, information technology, 
medical science, developmental/corporate social 
responsibility or other business activities. 


Technical understanding of the various 
national/international frameworks/technical 
References and the various methods and 
techniques that are applied for estimating and 
evaluating the qualitative and quantitative 
contents and performance of the Subject Matter 
and its information. 


c 


— 


d) The appropriate educational qualification and 
technical knowledge, supported by adequate 
skills, expertise and competence gained through 
experience during the professional journey of an 
individual. These set of requirements have been 
mentioned in Annex B for respective type of 
auditors. 


6 COMPETENCE REQUIREMENTS OF AN 
AUDITING FIRM AND REPORTING ENTITY 


6.1 A firm is authorized to conduct both internal and 
external assurance engagements; and a reporting 
entity is authorized to conduct only internal assurance 
engagements. 


6.2 A firm or reporting entity intending to conduct an 
internal and or external assurance engagement shall be 
in possession of the following requirements. 


6.3 In addition to the above, the competent authority 
may request for additional information, if felt 
necessary. 


7 REQUIREMENT OF ATTENDING LEAD 
AUDITORS TRAINING PROGRAM (LATP) 
FOR INDIVIDUAL(S) INTENDING TO 
QUALIFY AS AUDITOR(S) 


7.1 All individual applicants, except a few highly 
experienced professionals shall have to undertake Lead 
Auditor's Training Program (LATP) for qualifying 
as an auditor for conducting audit of respective 
category (Category 1 and or 2) of Subject Matter and 
its information. Annex B prescribes the eligibility 
requirements for an individual to become eligible as 
an auditor for conducting assurance engagements as 
per IS 26002 (Part 1). The following provides a broad 
overview of the eligibility requirements. 


7.1.1 Eligibility Criteria to Qualify as a LEAP without 
LATP 


Highly experienced individuals, who have an 
appropriate educational qualification, substantial 
knowledge and expertise in sustainability, corporate 
social responsibility and allied subject matter and 
services and have already conducted sufficient 
assurance engagements, issued a sizeable number of 
dated and signed assurance reports and are already in 
possession of sufficient knowledge and experience, 
in the respective two categories of subject matters 
(as prescribed in Annex B) are exempted from 
attending the LATP. 


7.1.2 Eligibility Criteria to Qualify as a LEAP, LIAP, 
Senior Auditor and Associate Auditor with LATP 


Individuals who do not fall under the purview of 7.1 
(a), shall attend a specific LATP and meet the other 
eligibility requirements, as mentioned in Annex B. 


7.2 For an individual, who has qualified as an auditor 
for conducting audit of ‘general sustainability’ and or 
‘specialized sustainability’ based projects; and intends 
to act as an authorized auditor for IS 26001 The Indian 
CSR Standard (Requirements), such an individual 
shall also have to attend a LATP specific to IS 26001. 
NOTE — Any individual who is a member of the drafting 


committee of IS 26001 standard is exempted from attending 
such a LATP. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Key Requirements Firm Reporting Entity 


a) Registration/incorporation certificate with Applicable Applicable 
mention of the date of incorporation, the details 
of its address and contact co-ordinates 


b) Engagement of lead assurance practitioner who Engagement of at Engagement of at least 
is qualified to issue an assurance report on the | least one lead external | one lead internal assurance 
relevant categories (Category 1 and or 2) of | assurance practitioner practitioner (LIAP) 
subject matter (LEAP) 

c) Documentation and implementation of a quality Applicable Applicable 


control system (QCS) as per the requirements 
specified in IS 26002 (Part 1) 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.1 ) 


THE SUBJECT TOPICS AND ITS RELATED SUBJECT MATTER 


(based on select Information/Performance Reported by Reporting Entities) 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) based Subject Topics and Subject Matters, 
for which all Auditors are Eligible to Conduct Audit N! 


Subject Topic 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) Subject Matters ‘°°! 


Stakeholder Engagement 
and Consultation (SEC) 
and Social Capitalization 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to SEC and Social Capitalization. 


b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) Identification of stakeholders, with an emphasis on stakeholders 
impacted or who could impact the operations of a reporting entity; 


2) Methodology to engage and consult with various targeted stakeholders 
and beneficiaries to identify their justified concerns and expectations 
and the risks and opportunities and implications on the reporting entity; 


3) Assessment of the baseline of the quantitative and qualitative 
performance, setting up of scientifically analyzed SMART 
(specific-measurable-achievable-recordable-time bound) targets; 


4) Measures and strategies taken to eliminate, reduce and control the 
risks and impacts; and accordingly improve the performance to the 
expectations of the targeted stakeholders; 


5 


— 


Improving the relationships with key stakeholders, with a focus on 
social capitalization and the trust and willingness to build, strengthen 
and protect the brand and reputation ofthe reporting entity and its social 
license to operate; and 


6 


wm 


Assessment of implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of 
the concerns and expectations identified, with a focus on the outcomes 
achieved vis a vis planned outcomes, the lessons learnt, the Social 
Returns on Investment, etc. 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Human Rights 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to human rights. 


b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 

1) Human rights reviews or impact assessments, such as operations that 
have been subjected to human rights review; 

2) Employee training on human rights policies or procedures; significant 
investment agreements and contracts that include human rights clauses 
or that underwent human rights screening; etc. 

3) Child labor and forced/compulsory related matters; 

4) Supplier’s right to freedom of association and collective bargaining that 
may be at risk, etc.; and 

5) Rights of indigenous peoples; impacts identified; remedial actions 
taken; cases of violations reported, etc. 

c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) Subject Matters ~% ' 


Customer Rights 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to customer rights of a reporting entity. 


b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) Non-compliance related to environmental, health, safety and social 
impacts of the products and services of the reporting entities, 


2) Ethical and responsible selling, marketing, storage, disposal of 
waste products, marketing and labeling of shelf life, incidences of 
non-compliance; penalties imposed, customer recall, etc.; 


3) Eco or green or sustainability labeling; producer claims about 
environmental attributes of their product; 


4) Breaches of customer privacy and losses of customer data. Monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting of health and safety related matters of the 
products and services of a reporting entity; 


5) Assessment of the risks to the brand/image of a reporting entity 
on account of health, safety and social related risks emerging from 
the products and services of the reporting entity that are material its 
customers, and the impacts it could have on them and on the reporting 
entity; 

6) Measures and strategies taken to curb and minimize such risks, inclusive 
of the cost involved in mitigating such risks, the outcomes followed 
by estimation, assessment, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of 
outcomes and impacts emanating from such matters; and 


7) The external certifications that the products and services are subjected 
to. 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Business Integrity 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to customer rights of a reporting entity. 


b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) Defining organization’s values, principles, standards, norms of behavior; 
internal and external mechanisms, such as, seeking advice about ethical 
and lawful behavior, organizational integrity; reporting concerns about 
unethical or unlawful behavior; organizational integrity, etc. 


2) Identifying risks arising from matters related to corruption, lack of 
business ethics and integrity, lack of competitive behavior; legal actions 
for anti-competitive behavior, anti-trust and monopoly practices; and 
the impacts these matters have on the reporting entity, 


3) Information related to communication and training about anti-corruption 
policies and procedures; confirmed incidents of corruption and actions 
taken; outcomes of actions taken, etc. 


4) Measures and strategies taken to curb and minimize such risks, followed 
by estimation, assessment, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of 
outcomes and impacts emanating from such business integrity matters. 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) Subject Matters ~% ' 


Occupational Health and 
Safety (OHS) 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to OHS. 


b) 


Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


5) 


Workers representation in formal joint management; types of injury and 
rates of injury, occupational diseases, lost days, and absenteeism, and 
number of work-related fatalities; workers with high incidence or high 
risk of diseases related to their occupation and nature of risks; health 
and safety topics covered in formal agreements with trade unions; etc. 


Organization's purpose, value or mission statements, strategies, 
policies and goals related to OHS topics; evaluating the governance 
body’s performance and role in identifying and managing OHS issues 
and their impacts, risks, and opportunities-including its role in the 
implementation of due diligence processes; reviewing the effectiveness 
of the organization’s risk management processes for OHS topics, etc. 


The OHS criteria applied for screening of suppliers; risks and 
opportunities that the suppliers create on the business; measures 
identified to mitigate the risks identified; actions taken to capitalize on 
the opportunities; the actions implemented, the outcomes; etc. 


Hazards and risks emanating from the business activities/operations 
related to occupational health and safety (OHS); OHS risk and hazard 
assessment and analysis; scientific analysis of improving the business 
activities to reduce the impact and improve the OHS performance; 
identification of measures to eliminate, reduce and control impacts; 
assessment of implementation and evaluation of the process and 
procedures; 


Understanding and application of national and global frameworks which 
are relevant to such a subject topic. 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Human Capital 


a) 


b) 


Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to human capital of a reporting entity. 


Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) 


2) 
3) 


4) 


5) 


6) 


Strength of employees, nature of employment, total number of 
employees by employment contract (permanent and temporary), by 
gender, percentage and nature of the organization’s activities which are 
performed by workers who are not employees, etc.; 


Employment benefit provided to employees; etc. 


Training that the organization's employees have undertaken or proposed, 
such as hours of training; nature of training; security personnel trained 
in human rights policies or procedures; outcome of trainings, programs 
for upgrading employee skills and transition assistance programs; etc. 


People’s competencies, capabilities and experience, and their 
motivations to innovate, including their alignment with and support for 
an organization’s governance framework, risk management approach, 
and ethical values; ability to understand, develop and implement an 
organization’s strategy; and loyalties and motivations for improving 
processes, goods and services, including their ability to lead, manage 
and collaborate; etc. 


Procurement from local, regional and other suppliers; procurement 
policy; etc. 

Gender equality; Diversity of governance bodies and employees; ratio 
of basic salary and remuneration of women to men; etc. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) Subject Matters ‘°°! 


7) Labor/Management Relations, Freedom of Association and Collective 
Bargaining, minimum notice periods regarding operational changes, 
etc.; operations in which the right to freedom of association and 
collective bargaining may be at risk, etc. 


8) Incidents of discrimination, working conditions and corrective actions 
taken: the outcomes; etc. 


9) Assessment of the risks to the reporting entity on account of human 
capital matters, followed by assessment of measures and strategies 
taken to curb and minimize such risks, inclusive of the cost involved in 
mitigating such risks, the outcomes followed by estimation, assessment, 
monitoring, evaluation and reporting of outcomes and impacts emanating 
from such matters: 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Global Concerns 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to global matters and the implications on a reporting 
entity. 

b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) Identification of the global concerns, such as pandemic or geo-political 
conflicts/instability in some parts of the world, or environmental 
concerns, health disparities and income inequality, food insecurity, lack 
of access to quality education, navigating regional regulations, privacy 
of information , etc. elsewhere in the globe or in the host country that 
could have a direct bearing and impact on the reporting entity’s ability 
to produce the goods and services in a particular nation; 


2) Estimation and assessment of the impacts on the sustenance of the 
reporting entity and its financial stability and overall sustenance; 


3) Identification of risks arising from such aforementioned matters, 
measures and strategies taken to curb and minimize such risks, followed 
by estimation, assessment, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of 
outcomes and impacts emanating from such global concerns for averting 
such risks. 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Intellectual capital 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to intellectual capital earned by a reporting entity. 


b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) Information pertaining to organizational, knowledge-based intangibles, 
including, intellectual property, such as patents, copyrights, software, 
rights and licenses; “organizational capital” such as tacit knowledge, 
systems, procedures and protocols; etc. 


2) Identification of risks arising from such aforementioned matters, 
measures and strategies taken to curb and minimize such risks, followed 
by estimation, assessment, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of 
outcomes and impacts emanating from such intellectual capitals. 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) Subject Matters ~% ' 


Donations 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to donations made by a reporting entity, which do not 
find its coverage under any legal requirement. 

b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 

1) Political contributions made directly and indirectly, employee benefit, 
etc. 

2) Identification of risks arising from such aforementioned matters, 
measures and strategies taken to curb and minimize such risks, followed 
by estimation, assessment, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of 
outcomes and impacts emanating from such donations made. 

c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
Category. 


Developmental and 
Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to developmental/CSR. 
b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 
1) Methodology of identification of developmental/CSR projects and 
implementing agencies, stakeholder engagement and consultation, 
material issues and objectives identified: 


2 


— 


Analysis of the baseline and targets to be achieved; developmental 
action plans chalked out; the programs implemented; 


3 


— 


Risks and opportunities identified; the actual and potential positive and 
adverse impacts of the projects; measures taken to mitigate the risks; 


4 


5) Assessment of actual and potential positive and negative impacts on 
targeted beneficiaries; 


— 


The cost of mitigation of the risks; the programs implemented, 


6) Assessment of the developmental action plans chalked out and the 
programs implemented; the outcomes achieved vis a vis planned 
outcomes; 


7 


— 


Detailed understanding of Social Returns on Investment; Social Impact 
Investment; the lessons learnt etc. 


8) The monitoring, evaluation and reporting of the projects; 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) Subject Matters ~% ' 


Circular Economy 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks related to Circular Economy. 


Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for the 
following: 


1) Concept of *waste of one industry becoming the raw material for another 
industry” either as a by-product or recovered resource for another 
industrial process or as regenerative resources for nature; 


2) Reuse, sharing, repair, refurbishment, remanufacturing and recycling 
to create a closed-loop system, minimizing the use of resource inputs; 
maintenance and up-keeping of products, equipment and infrastructure 
in use for longer, thus improving the productivity of these resources; 


3) Business models that are closing, narrowing, slowing, intensifying and 
dematerializing loops, to minimize the resource inputs into and the 
waste and emission leakage out of the organizational system; recycling 
measures (closing), efficiency improvements (narrowing), use phase 
extensions (slowing), a more intense use phase (intensifying), substitution 
of products by service and software solutions (dematerializing); 

4) Strategies achieved through the purposeful design of material recovery 
processes and related circular supply chains; and 


5) Systems-thinking approaches in designing solutions; regenerate or at 
least conserve nature and living systems; policies, taxes and market 
mechanisms that encourage product stewardship. 


Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Non-financial 


(environment, health, safety 
and social) based laws 
notified by the Govt. of 


India 


b) 


d) 


Understanding and application of the key legal requirements, obligations 
and responsibilities of various non-financial laws pertaining to environment, 
health, safety and social that have been notified by the Govt. of India that 
finds its applications in various non-financial matters of reporting entities. 


Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) Identification of specific risks for not being in compliance with the 
legal requirements and the associated impacts and implication on the 
reporting entity; 

2) Scientific analysis and measures carried out to eliminate, reduce and 
control the risks and impacts; and 


3) Assessment of compliance with respect to implementation and 
evaluation of the legal requirements. 


Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) Subject Matters ~% ' 


Environmental, Social and 
Governance (ESG) ~% ! 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks related to identification, estimation, assessment, monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting, of ESG based matters. 


Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for the 
following: 


1) Relevance of reported subject matters to the sustenance of the 
organization, 


2) Governance structure ofthe organization - its composition, responsibility 
and decision-making pertaining to ESG matters. 


3) Identifying organization's purpose, its value or mission statements, 
strategies, policies and goals related to ESG matters, review of 
statements of senior decision-maker (such as CEO, chair, or equivalent 
senior position); evaluation of the governing body's ESG performance, 


4) Consultation between stakeholders and the highest governance body, 
the feedback mechanism, 


5) Identifying and managing ESG risks and material matters and 
opportunities and their effect/impact on the reporting entity; reviewing 
the effectiveness of the organization's ESG risk management policy 
and framework; assessment of implementation and evaluation of the 
outcomes and impacts; and 


6) Screening of suppliers based on their ESG performance. 


Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Climate Change and 
Green House Gas (GHG) 
Emissions N ! 


b) 


c) 


Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks related to Climate Change and Green-House Gas (GHG) 
emissions. 


Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for the 

following: 

1) Environmental sustainability, ecological balance, impact on food 
security due to climate change; protection of flora and fauna, animal 
welfare, agroforestry, conservation of natural resources and maintaining 
quality of soil, air and water. 


2) Energy security; nature of energy consumption — renewable and non- 
renewable. 

Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 

category. 


Green, Social, 
Sustainability Bonds ' 


b) 


c) 


Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to green, sustainability, social bonds. 


Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 


1) Issuance of green, social and sustainability bonds; financing of 
investments that provide environmental and social benefits; 

2) Nature of the bond, the risks and impacts on the project or is likely to 
create; the method of managing and mitigating the risk; the outcomes of 
mitigating and managing such risks; 

Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 

category. 


10 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic 


Category 1: General Sustainability (GS) Subject Matters ‘°°! 


Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) ' 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to EPR. 


b) Broad understanding of the processes and procedures applied for: 
1) Matters pertaining to product design and marketing, 


2) Responsible behavior in reducing toxicity and waste, reuse, buyback, 
or recycling programs, considering waste management costs into 
product price, promote innovation in recycling technology, Obligation 
of producers, importers and/or sellers to internalize waste management 
costs in their product prices and ensure safe handling of products, 
delegation of appropriate responsibilities to third parties (producer 
responsibility organization) for used-product management, and 


3) Implementation of EPR the form of Mandatory, Negotiated and 
Voluntary. 


d) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category 


Any other non-financial 
based performance 


Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to such stand-alone parameter: the targeted stakeholders: 
significant impacts on targeted stakeholders assessed and the reporting entity on 
account of the parameter, the programs identified, the action plans and projects 
implemented, the outcomes achieved vis a vis planned outcomes, the lessons 
learnt; etc. 


NOTE 1 Subject matters, specific to the subject topic that requires basic educational qualification, knowledge, competence, skill-set, 
experience and application of core science/engineering for the purpose of identification, assessment, estimation, analysis, monitoring 
and evaluation of the related qualitative and quantitative performance that is reported/informed by the reporting entity, shall not be 
covered in “Category 1 - General Sustainability’. 


11 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Category 2: Specialized Sustainability (SS) based Subject Matters, whereby, Auditors with Specific 
Educational Qualification, Skill-set, Expertise and Competence are Eligible to Conduct Audits ? 


Subject Topic 


Category 2: Specialized Sustainability (SS) Subject Matters ‘°°? 


Environmental, Social and 
Governance (ESG) 


a) All Subject Matters that are prescribed in General Sustainability (GS). 


b) Specific knowledge of advance science/ engineering that is required for 
assessment of specific Environmental based matters of the reporting entity, 
inclusive of the process and procedures applied for: 


1) Identification of specific environmental based risks and its impacts; 
2) Scientific analysis and measures carried out to eliminate, reduce and control 


the environmental impacts; assessment of implementation and evaluation 
of the same; and 
3) Specific understanding of subject Matters that are relevant for identification, 
assessment, estimation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of 
environmental parameters. 
c) Any other Subject Matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Climate Change and 
Green House Gas (GHG) 
emissions 


Rural Watershed 
Management and Water 
Recharge 


a) All Subject Matters that are prescribed in General Sustainability (GS). 


b) Specific knowledge of advance science/engineering that is required for 
assessment of specific GHG based matters of the reporting entity, inclusive of 
the processes and procedures applied for the: 

1) Identification, estimation, assessment, monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions; 


2) Identification of specific risks posed by climate change that have the potential 
to generate substantive changes in operations, revenue, or expenditure, 
inclusive of implications of the risk or opportunity before action is taken; 


3 


— 


Scientific analysis and strategies for identification of measures to eliminate, 
reduce and control the GHG emissions and its impacts; assessment of 
implementation and evaluation of the process and procedures applied for 
the same; 


4 


wa 


Financial implications that are engaged in actions taken to manage the risk 
or opportunity; the outcomes; the challenges faced; lessons learnt; etc.; and 


5 


wm 


Specific understanding and application of national and global frameworks 
that are relevant for estimation and evaluation of GHG parameters. 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


a) Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to watershed management programs made by a reporting 
entity. 

b) Specific knowledge of advance science/engineering that is required for the 
following matters by a reporting entity for Rural Watershed Management and 
Water Recharge inclusive of the broad understanding of the processes and 
procedures applied for matters pertaining to various types of water recharge 
and management programs implemented in the urban and rural sectors: 


1) Methods applied in assessment of water recharge; the ground water 
recharged; the outcomes of the programs implemented; the challenges 
faced and lessons learnt; and 

2) Water security; water recharged, with a focus on integrated water 
management projects; impacts on local community; supply and demand 
side water usage, etc. 

c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


12 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic 


Category 2: Specialized Sustainability (SS) Subject Matters N“? 


Environmental 
Performance, Discharges 
and Bio-Diversity 


Green, Social, 
Sustainability Bonds 


a) 


b) 


c) 


b) 


Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
frameworks relevant to environmental performance, discharge, etc. made by 
a reporting entity. 

Specific knowledge of advance science/ engineering that is required for the 
following matters by a reporting entity for Environmental Performance, 
Discharges and Bio-Diversity inclusive of the broad understanding of the 
processes and procedures applied for: 


1) Release of various forms of environmental pollutants and discharges in 
the form of emissions, effluents and wastes by quality and destination; 
type of treatment applied, recyclable, reusable and disposal methods 
applied, spills, hazardous wastes, water/land bodies affected by water 
discharges and/or runoff; etc. 


2) Materials made up of renewable or non-renewable products; quantity 
recycled, reused, reclaimed; efficiency in packaging, etc. 


3) Water-Water withdrawal by source; communities which are significantly 
affected by withdrawal of water; water recycled and reused; Positive 
water balance, water neutrality, etc. 


4) Bio-diversity — Threats to biodiversity; types and importance of 
bio-diversity; operational sites owned, leased, managed in, or adjacent 
to, protected areas and areas of high biodiversity value outside protected 
areas; biodiversity value; significant impacts of activities, products, and 
services on biodiversity; habitats protected or restored; national and 
international conservation list of species with habitats in areas affected 
by operations, etc. 


5) Energy consumption; energy security; nature of energy consumption 
— renewable and non-renewable; the measures taken to reduce energy 
consumption; the outcomes; the challenges faced; lessons learnt; etc. 


6) Identification of risks arising from ineffective implementation of such 
aforementioned matters, measures and strategies taken to curb and 
minimize such risks, followed by estimation, assessment, monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting of outcomes and impacts emanating from such 
matters. 


Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 

All subject matters that are prescribed in General Sustainability (GS); 
Specific understanding of subject Matters that are relevant for identification, 
assessment, estimation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of specific 


environmental science/engineering-based matters in the space of Green, and 
Sustainability bonds domain. 


Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) 


c) 


All subject matters that are prescribed in General Sustainability (GS); 


Specific understanding of subject matters that are relevant for identification, 
assessment, estimation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of specific 
environmental science/engineering-based matters in the space of Green, and 
Sustainability bonds domain. 


Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


13 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Subject Topic Category 2: Specialized Sustainability (SS) Subject Matters N? 
Developmental and a) All subject matters that are prescribed in General Sustainability (GS). 
Corporate Social b) Specific knowledge of subject matters that require application of core science/ 


Responsibility (CSR) engineering for estimation, assessment, monitoring, evaluation and reporting 


of developmental/CSR based qualitative and quantitative performance. 


c) Any other subject matter that is relevant to the adjacent subject topic for this 
category. 


Any other Non-financial | Understanding and application of key and prominent national/international 
based Performance frameworks relevant to such stand-alone parameter; the targeted stakeholders; 
significant impacts on targeted stakeholders assessed and the reporting entity on 
account of the parameter; the programs identified; the action plans and projects 
implemented; the outcomes achieved vis a vis planned outcomes; the lessons 
learnt; etc. 


NOTE 2 No such auditor who has not qualified for conducting assurance engagements pertaining to “Category 2 — Specialized 
Sustainability’, shall conduct any such specific assurance engagement — otherwise, an opinion issued by such an auditor shall be 
considered as null and void. 


14 


2022 


IS 26002 (Part 3) 


"SIR uu yoolqns per? 10 pue 
sjoofoid [pejueuido[pAe(q PISI 10 pue 
Ayıpıgeurejsng Jo ploy ou ur * „19419984 
221A49$ JIPND/AIUDANSSD UD SD '221A198 
yipnvjaoupanssp fo 1d12224, UL oq pinoys 
oouoLpdxo Jo SIBIÁ ç Jo umuimurur e 
YITYM Jo ‘sıopew 3oofqns ponpe Jo pue 
sjoofoud YS) /[ejusuido[oAo(q 10 pue 
K3i[rqeurejsng Jo p[oy aY) ur oouonodxo 
Jo s1eoÁ QT Jo ununu e seg :q uondO 

'SIojjeui 3oofqns parje 10 pue 
sjoofoud yeyuoudopaAsq/ysSo JO pue 
AyJIQRUIBISNS JO poy ou UL ‘ 43 p14 01d 


(q 


"SII EW 'sIopeu jsalqns 
siojreur | pore 10 pue sjaford | porge 10 pue sjoofoid | 291498 P SD “2014.95 Ipnp/aoupAnssp 
pore 10 pue sjoofoad | jejuouidopoAa(q/dSO | [euouidopoaoq ws | PU? “osıapp Jo xnu p Bupiaoad, ut oq 
jequoudopaaagyys_ | 10 pue Ayfgeureisng | Jo pue KAupgeureysng | PI'!ouseououodxojo SIBAK c jo umuurumu 'S1ojjeur joofqns pore 
10 pue Ariqeureysng | pia. — spop ven | gr — sop — jeg | ? PIU JO "soeur polgns porre 10 pue Jo pue sjoofoid [ejuouido[o^o(]/4 SO 
QA sep jem | uoNezrueS10 ue jo | uoneziuegio ue zo | PAGA YSO/leweudojaasq 10 pue Jo pue Ayyiqeureysng jo pjog ay 
uonezrue1o ue | juouredop/uonoung | usunsedapuonouny | ^!IIIqeureisng Jo poy ou ur oouonrodxo Ul “2014425  JIPND/2DUDANSSD — pun 
jo uopounp Aue ur | Aue ur oouonodxo jo | Aue ur oouonodxo jo | JO t9 8 jo umumumu e seH :vuondO (v | Ciosapp Sup oud m ,,dapiaoud 
oouondxo Jo SIBIÁ c | SIBIÁ c jo umururur | sıeoA g jo umunu :g 9 y suondo Surwo][[0] | 2214428 € se *oouonmdxo Jo sieak Ç] 
ojdn jo uorssessod uy | e jo uorssossod uy |e jo uorssossod uf | dy} jo Aue ur uogeogi[enb jo uorssessod uy | Jo umururu e jo uoıssossod uy IDU Y 
‘JOH oy) JO Juawer]ieg ou) Jo JOY ue Aq peziugooor st yey) uonesyıpenb juo[eA mbo 19430 AUY ‚NO, ?rpug Jo Areo199S 
Kueduio;) Jo oqnjnsug oy; Woy A1e3o19og Aueduio;) NO, (TVIAOD ?tpug Jo sjuejyunooo y uouo Zeuen pu? 3807) Jo oynsug 94} Wo7 Aouejunooo Y 
Jusumsdeuep pu? 3807) ‚YO, ?rpug Jo Aouejunoooy PAIIHIBYI Jo oN SUT ou Wor Aouejunoooy poJoj1eq;) :suopeogi[en() [euorssojoaq TOO (E 
‘ToD Aq peziusoooi sí yey} uoneogi[enb uonenpe13-3sod 
juo[pAmbo 19040 Auy NO, ?ipu[ JO “JAOL) tuoneonpg [eorugoo, 10} [Iouno?) erpu]-[|V oy) Aq pazru3o9aJ si yey) uoneogipen() ojenpedo-soq 
NO, ?Ipu[ JO “JAOD) oy} Aq pazıugoosı SI yey} Aısıoarun Aue WON 99139 S,1ojseJA| oumn-31ed/youmn-|[nq :uopeogmgen() uoHenpesy-jsog (7 
(T05) erpug Jo 3407) ay} Aq poztusodsal sr yey} uoneogi[enb 3uo[eA mbo 19040 Auy ‚YO, BIPU] JO JAOD) oy} Aq pozrusooo1 
SI yey) AısıoArun Aue Jo ojnjnsur Aue woy osinoo 22139] S 1o[ouoeg ourn-j1ed/oumm-[[ng :uoneogi[en() IIA s, Jo[oupoeg/ojenpeasaopu] (1 uoneogienQo) 
(enop uorjeogipenb umnururjA) :£ 10 z JO [ ‘suondo SurtMo[[0] oq Jo Aue jo uorjo[duroo [njssooons jo uorssessod uy | TeuonesnpA 


(SD) &npiqeuriejsng [LIUN :] Á1039]8) 0) Surure).rod 19938] 329[qng Jo Jıpne 103 1031pne ue se Api]enb 03 81.193119 Ajiiqiom ‘T 


JOJIPNy AJELDOSS Y 


AJONPNY 101498 


dVIT 


(TIMO) AVAT 


(T Ano) dq VII 


uondo paseq dLVT 


uondo poseg d. LV T-UON 


sguswaambay 


3 N3 ds 


SAOLIANV SV AATIVAO OL STVNGIAIANI XOA VINALIYI ALITIJSISITA 


CTL pun 7's sasnpj) ) 
4 XANNV 


15 


2022 


IS 26002 (Part 3) 


au ajpradouddo up jo Apsoyjny Juajaduos ay] Aq pagpitunuwoo aq pinoys qy T 241 fo Smp ay] 


019 'SV000T VV “000€ 


AVSI (1 Hed) Z0097 SI “se yons 
*prepuejs soueinsse poziugoool 


[fPuoneuiojur /[euoneu Aue iod 
se ‘sıoyew joofíqns por[[p JO 
pue ÁAj[mqeurejsng [e1ouor) 0j 
ogr»eds UONEULIOFUT/SIONEITPUI 
ooueuirloj1od uo (40j1pnp sulusis 
ay] fo 2]04 ay] ul aq jou dpu 40 
Apu yaıym) 1opeo| wed} DY) se 
sjuourpgeguo  —ooueunsse/pne 
(199148) c | Jo ununu e Surpeo 
jo oouoriedxo ue seg - [| 4 uod) 


"019 'SV000I VV 


‘000€ AVSI “(1 Hed) 70097 SI 
“se ons ‘sprepuejs ooueinsse 


peziuSooo1[vuoneuiojur /[euorjeu 
lod se sioyeur joofqns pore 10 
pue Aymgeurejsns [e1ouor) 0j 
ogr»eds UONEULIOFUT/SIONEITPUT 
oouguiro]1od uo ‘IoyIpne 
Sulusis oy} se sjlodai jmne 
[eoueinsse pajep jo sioqunu 
(u3) oT JO umuiurmu e ponssı 
pue yo pousis sey - 1 4 uond( 


(q 


(e 


"prepueis sip Jo (SD) ‘II 10 | suondo J9s-IIPIS 

KjifIqeurejsng [eJouor) :] A103890 0] oyroeds (J LYT) ure18o4q SUIUTRIL, s, JOJPN Y pe] Jo uone[duroo [njssooong | SULMOJ[OJ 9y} Jo Aue Jo uorssassod uy | pue ospaodxq 

Jojmny 9jerossy | 10jIpny Joruos dVIT (z INOM dVAT (T moy) qa VT sjuoumboy 
uondo poseq d LVI uondo pase g d LV T-U0N 2y ads 


16 


LI 


Specific 
Requirements 


Non-LATP Based option 


LATP based option 


LEAP (Route 1) 


LEAP (Route 2) LIAP 


Senior Auditor 


2. Eligibility criteria to qualify as an auditor for audit of Subject Matter pertaining to Category 2: ‘Specialized Sustainability’ (SS) 


Associate Auditor 


Educational 
Qualification 


In possession of successful completion 
of any of the following options 1 or 2: 


a) 


b) 


Option 1 - Undergraduate/ 
Bachelor's Degree 
Qualification: Full-time/part- 
time Bachelor's Degree course in 
B.E./B.Tech. from any institute of 
any University that is recognized 
by the Govt. of India “OR” Any 
other equivalent qualification 
that is recognized by the Govt. of 
India. 


Option 2 - Post- 
Graduation Qualification: 
Full-time/part-time Master's 


Degree in ME./M.Tech. from any 
University that isrecognized by the 
Govt. of India ‘OR’ Post-Graduate 
Qualification in Management that 
is recognized by the All India 
Council for Technical Education, 
Govt. of India in subjects of 
Sustainability/ Environment/ 
Energy or equivalent subjects 
‘OR’ any other equivalent 
post-graduation qualification that 
is recognized by the Govt. of 
India. 


In possession of successful completion of any of the following options A or B: 


c) Option A — Undergraduate/Bachelor’s Degree Qualification: Full-time/part-time Bachelor’s Degree 
course in B.Sc./B.E./B.Tech. from any institute of any University that is recognized by the Govt. of India 
“OR” Any other equivalent qualification that is recognized by the Govt. of India. 

d) Option B - Post-Graduation Qualification: Full-time/part-time Master's Degree in M.Sc./ME./M. 
Tech. from any University that is recognized by the Govt. of India “OR” Post-Graduate Qualification in 
Management that is recognized by the All India Council for Technical Education, Govt. of India in subjects 
of Sustainability/Environment/Energy or equivalent subjects “OR” Any other equivalent post-graduation 


qualification that is recognized by the Govt. of India. 


Experience 


Same criteria of experience as mentioned against ‘Eligibility criteria to qualify as an auditor for audit of Subject Matter pertaining to Category 
1 - General Sustainability (GS) 


T707 : (€ Hed) 70097 SI 


81 


Specific 
Requirements 


Non-LATP Based option 


LATP based option 


LEAP (Route 1) 


LEAP (Route 2) 


LIAP 


Senior Auditor 


Associate Auditor 


Expertise and 
Skill-set 


In possession of any of the following 
options I or II: 


a) 


b) 


Option # I - Has signed off 
and issued a minimum of 
10 (ten) numbers of dated 
assurance/audit reports as the 
signing auditor, on performance 
indicators/information specific to 
Specialized Sustainability (SS) 
andoralliedsubjectmatters, asper 
national/international recognized 
assurance standards, such as, 
IS 26002 (Part 1), ISAE 3000, 
AA 1000AS, etc. 


Option # II - Has an experience of 
leading a minimum f 15 (fifteen) 
audit/assurance engagements 
as the team leader (which may 
or may not be in the role of the 
signing auditor) on performance 
indicators/information specific 
Specialized Sustainability (SS) 
and or allied subject matters, 
as per national/ international 
recognized assurance standards, 
such as, IS 26002 (Part 1), ISAE 
3000, AA 1000AS, etc. 


Successful completion of Lead Auditor's Training Program (LATP) specific to Category 2: Specialized 


Sustainability (SS) of this standard. 


The details of the LATP should be communicated by the competent authority at an appropriate time. 


“in the table presented above, ‘service provider’ refers to the one providing the service in the role of an external advisor/consultant/auditor, and ‘service receiver” refers to one who has been in receipt of a 


service from an external advisor/consultant/auditor 


7707 : (€ Bd) Z0097 SI 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Social Responsibility Sectional Committee, MSD 10 


Organization 


In personal capacity 
AROH Foundation, NOIDA 
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Sahibabad 


Cargill, New Delhi 


Cement Manufacturers” Association, New Delhi 


Centre for Responsible Business, New Delhi 
Charities Aid Foundation India, New Delhi 
Coca Cola India, Gurugram 

Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP 


Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry, New Delhi 


Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of CA, 
F and PD, New Delhi 


Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institute (FASLI), New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, New Delhi 
FICCI, New Delhi 


Hyderabad Business School GITAM, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs, 
(Ministry of Corporate Affairs), Manesar, Haryana 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Infosys BPO Ltd, Bangaluru 

Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
Institute of Company Secretaries of India 
L & T, Mumbai 


Management Development Institute, Gurugram 


Ministry of Corporate Affairs, New Delhi 


19 


Representative(s) 


Dr BHASKAR CHATTERJEE (Chairman) 
Dr NEELAM GUPTA 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
Ms Ekta BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


Ms DIPANWITA CHAKRABORTY 


SHRI ASHWANI PAHUJA 
DR S. K. SAXENA (Alternate I) 
DR RACHANA SHARMA (Alternate II) 


DR BIMAL ARORA 
SHRI RIJIT SENGUPTA (Alternate) 


Ms MEENAKSHI BATRA 
SHRI AVIJEET KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ISHTEYAQUE AHMED 
Ms SHUBHA SEKHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT MAKHIJA 
SHRI SAURABH KHOSLA (Alternate) 


Ms JYOTI YADAV 
Ms TANU SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI DHARMESH MAKWANA 
SHRI A. K. PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI ZAKARIA KHAN YUSUFZAI 
SHRI BINOD KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT ROY 
SHRI KUNAL SHARMA (Alternate) 


COL SANDEEP ACHARYYA 
SHRI P. LOKANATH SAO (Alternate) 


Ms RITA ROY CHOUDHURY 
Ms SHRUTI (Alternate) 


Ms Divya KIRTI GUPTA 


SHRI MUKESH KUMAR 


SHRI BIBHUTI PRADHAN 
SHRI RAJEEV THYKATT 
CA PRAMOD JAIN 

CS Mamta BINANI 


SHRI N. SATHYAN 
SHRI P. SATHISH (A/ternate) 


SHRI ANKUR ROY 


SHRI K. M. S. NARAYANAN 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Organization 


Ministry of Labour, New Delhi 


Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, 
New Delhi 


QCI, New Delhi 


SBI, Mumbai 

Steel Authority of India, Ranchi, Jharkhand 

Tata Institute of Social Sciences 

The Energy Research Institute (TERI), New Delhi 
Yes Bank, Mumbai 


Inspired4 Accounting and Advisory Services LLP 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 

In personal capacity, New Delhi 

In personal capacity, New Delhi 

In personal capacity, New Delhi 

BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. K. SAMANTARAY 


SHRI SANJEEV CHAWLA 
SHRI PIYUSH AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr Hari PRAKASH 
Dr S. K. MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI KARNAM SEKAR 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR 
PROF RAHUL SAPKAL 
Dr ANNAPURNA VANCHESWARAN 


SHRI SHAILESH BANTA 
Ms KRITI KUKSAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJIB KUMAR DEBNATH 
Ms RADHIKA RALHAN 

SHRI SANDEEP SAXENA 

SHRI DINESH AGARWAL 

DR LALIT KUMAR 


Ms SNEH LATA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (MSD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms SHALU VARSHNEY 
SCIENTIST *D' (MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEMS), BIS 


Panel for Extra-financial Assurance Standard, MSD 10/P-7 


Organization 


Inspired Accounting and Advisory Services LLP, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 

Cargill, New Delhi 

Centre for Responsible Business, New Delhi 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP 


Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy 


Industries and Public Enterprises, New Delhi 
FICCI, New Delhi 


GITAM University 
GIZ 
Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs, 


(Ministry of Corporate Affairs), Manesar, Haryana 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Institute of Chartered Accountant, New Delhi 


20 


Representative(s) 
SHRI RAJIB KUMAR DEBNATH (Convener) 


Dr BHASKAR CHATTERJEE (Chairman) 
Ms DIPANWITA CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI RIJIT SENGUPTA 


SHRI SUMIT MAKHIJA 
SHRI SAURABH KHOSLA (Alternate) 


Dr MADHUKAR GUPTA 


Ms Rita Roy CHOUDHURY 
Ms HIMANI KULSHRESHTHA (Alternate) 


Dr Divya KIRTI GUPTA 
Ms SEEMA CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MUKESH KUMAR 


SHRI BIBHUTI PRADHAN 
CA SANJAY VASUDEVA, FCA 


Organization 
KPMG (Sustainability and CSR Advisory) 


Management Development Institute, Gurugram 
MSCD, BIS, New Delhi 
TERI 


United Nations Global Compact Network India, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 


21 


IS 26002 (Part 3) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANTHOSH JAYARAM 
SHRI PRATHMESH RAICHURA (Alternate) 


Dr ANKUR ROY 
Suri U. S. P. YADAV 
DR ANNAPURNA VANCHESWARAN 


LATE SHRI KAMAL SINGH 


MR HEMANT SABHARWAL 


SHRI DINESH AGARWAL 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 10 (15736). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


