( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard
DIRECTLY HEATED POSITIVE STEPFUNCTION TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT THERMISTORS - GENERIC SPECIFICATION
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard, which is identical with IEC Pub 73%l/QC 440000 ( 1982 ) `Directly heated positive step function temperature coefficient thermistors-Part 1 : Generic specjfication', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission, was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Resistors Sectional Committee ( LTD 14 > and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The text of the IEC standard has been approved as suitable for pubhcation as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma practice Standard' appear referring to this standard, Standards, they

( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

the current

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards are for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standards Corresponding Standard Indian Degree of Equivalence Identical

Basic IEC Pub QC 001001 : 1986 rules of the IEC quality assessment system for electronic components ( I=Q ) 1EC Pub QC,!001002 : 1986 Rules of procedure of the IEC quality assessment system for electronic components ( IECQ ) IEC Pub 294 : 1969 Measurement of the dimensions of a cylindrical having component two axial terminations

IS QC 001001 : 1988 Basic rules of the IEC quality assessment system for electronic components ( IECQ ) TS' QC 001002 : 1988 Rules of procedure of the IEC quality assesselectronic for system ment components ( IECQ ) IS 13554 : 1992 Measurement of the dimensions of a cylindrical having two axial component terminations

Identical

Identical

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provision of 1EC 62 ( 1974 ), IEC 63 ( 1963 ), IEC 68 and IEC 410 ( 1973 ), referred in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. This standard is intended primarily for use under the IECQ System. A regular for this component could be different, identical or similar to this standard. Only the English Language it in this Indian Standard. text in the International Standard has been retained Indian while Standard adopting

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS QC 440000 IEC QC 440000

: 1994 : 1982

INTRODUCTION

The present thermistors".

standard

covers

"directly

heated

positive

step-function

temperature

coefficient

This designation applies to thermally sensitive resistors, whose resistance increases substantially with increasing temperature, at least within a specified range of temperature. They are generally intended for applications where a considerable change of resistance is required as a function of temperature, or of dissipated power, for example:
-

Temperature Compensatory Time-delay

indication. circuits.

control

or alarm.

of relays.

Circuit protection. Indication, measurement or detection of fluid levels, flow, etc.

SECTION

ONE -

GENERAL

1. Scope

_

This standard is applicable to directly heated positive temperature coefficient thermistors, insulated or non-insulated, having a resistance temperature characteristic which approximates to a step-function. Typically they are made of ferro-electric semi-conductive materials.

2.

Object The object of the present standard is to:
-

-

define the terminology for the thermistors covered by this standard; specify the conditions for approval, acceptance and continuous quality control; define the `methods of test.

3

IS QC 440000 IEC QC 440000 3. Related

: 1994 : 1982

documents

This standard Publication 62:
( 1974)

shall be used in conjunction

with other IEC

Publications,

such as:

Marking Codes for Resistors and Capacitors. Preferred Number Series for Resistors and Capacitors. Basic Environmental Testing Procedures. of a Cylindrical Component

Publication 63 :
( 1963)

Publication 68: Publication 294: ( 1969) Publication 410: (1973) Publication QC 001001: (1981) Publication QC 001002: (1981)

Measurement of the Dimensions Having Two Axial Terminations.

Sampling Plans and Procedures for Inspection -by Attributes. Basic Rules of the I EC Quality Assessment System for Electronic Components (IECQ). Rules of Procedure of the I EC Quality Assessment System for Electronic Components (IECQ).

4. 4.1

Terminology Dim-i!,. hrutrd

positive .rtep+mc.tion temperature cot@ient

thermistor (PTC-S) increase in its

A thermally sensitive semi-conductor resistor, which shows a step-like resistance when the increasing temperature reaches a specific value.

The change in temperature is obtained either by the flow of current through the thermosensitive element, or by a change in the ambient temperature, or by a combination of both these means. A PTC-S thermistor may show secondary effects which have to be taken into account (see Sub-ciauses 4.20 and 4.21).

4.2

Zero-pou,er resistance (R, ) The d.c. resistance value of a thermistor measured at a specified temperature with a power dissipation low enough that any further decrease in power will result only in a negligible change in resistance. Zero-power resistance may also ee measured using a.c. if required by the detail specification.

4.3

Temperature/resistance

characteristic resistance of a PTC-S

The relation at a specified direct voltage between the zero-power thermistor and the temperature of the thermosensitive element. It is represented by a curve drawn on a semi-logarithmic abscissa and R in logarithmic ordinates).

co-ordinate graph (T (or 0) in linear

4

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982

Rrn

0, = 25

hll"

FIG. 1. -

Typical resistance-temperature (at zero-power).

characteristic

and

definitions

for

FTC-S

thermistors

4.4

Rated zero-power resistance (R,) The.zero-power resistance at 25 "C (298.15 K), unless another temperature detail specification. is prescribed in the

4.5

Minimum

resistance (R,,,)

The zero-power resistance of the thermistor at temperature T,,,,,;, (or OH,,,,,,) which is the lower limit of the PTC-S part of the resistance/temperature characteristic (see examples of curves in Sub-clause 4.3).

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : .1982 4.6

Switching temperature

T,, (or 8,) at which the step-like increase of the resistance occurs (see

The specified temperature Sub-clause 4. I j. 4.7 Switching resdance ( Rh)

The value of zero-power NO/~. -

resistance corresponding

to the switching temperature.
by a specified independent of

The sw.irching resistance is expressed with reference to the minimum resistance (R,,,) multiplying factor. It may also be expressed as an absolute value of resistance and R,,,,,.

4.8

Temperature

T, (or 0,) characteristic

The chc.3 .-I temperature in the PTC-S part of the resistance/temperature for which a minimum value R, of the zero-power resistance is guaranteed. 4.9 Resistance R,

The zero-power resistance at temperature T,, (or 0,) measured (see Sub-clause 4.13) and given as a minimum value.
4: IO

at maximum

voltage

Temperature co@cient Temperature

at zero-power qf the resistance (cz,) T by the relation:

coefficient is defined at a temperature I Ql=R,`w dR,

The temperature coefficient of the positive coefficient part of the resistance/temperature characteristic (log R - lin T) of thermistors is defined as being the angular coefficient of the secant passing through points T, and T, of the characteristic. For the secant, temperature T. the logarithm of the resistance R is directly proportional to the

IogR = A.T+B dR dT AR =- log e =A log e I . log 2 log e
.
h Tp -

=R,, and R, must be measured cation. No/t,.-

I
Tb

at the same voltage, specified in the relevant detail specificoefficient of resistance specification shall also in a then

The detail specification may specify the measurement of the temperature narrow temperature range where its value is a maximum. The detail provide a method.

4. I I

Ma.Gmum ambient temperature The maximum ambient temperature at which the thermistor may be put into steadystate operation. `At this temperature, the resistor should no longer dissipate power.

6

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 3. Iz!
Mu.\-imum rnltage U,,,,,

The maximum direct voltage which may be continuously applied to after switching at 25 "C in still air (that is to say for stable operation range .Yfjrt,. of the temperature
IMore witching,

the thermistor in the FTC-S

resistance

char;icteristic).
must he limited, if necessary, by a series resistor Rs.

the current through the t';ermistor

4. I3

Di.wiplion

jbctor

ii

in a thermistor and the resultant The quotient of the change in power dissipation is expressed in milliwatts per degree temperature change of the element. This quotient <`elsius (see conditions of measurement in Sub-clause 9.3). 4.14
77wrntul tinic sonstunl

for a thermistor The time necehsary difference between its initial temperature to a temperature step under zero-power in Sub-clause 9.4).
Iliertnislor C',,,

to vary its tempc'rature by 63.2% of the total and its final temperature when it is subjected conditions (see the conditions of measurement

The quantity It is expressed

of heat to be supplied to the thermistor in joules per degree (`elsius.

to raise

its temperature

by

I "C.

The relationship in still air at 25 "C (unless otherwise stated) between the applied voltage (d.c. or a.c.) at the thermistor terminations and the current under steady-state conditions, thermal equilibrium having been reached (see Figure 2 below).

.VO/P. -

I'1.c'-S

thrrmi\tor\

ma!

hate

more

than

one

voltage/current

characterktic

(at

different

ambient

tcmpcr;lttirt'~).

7

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IECQC 440000 : 1982

4.17 Zero-power resistance ratio The zero-power resistance ratio characterjstic identifies the ratio of the zero-power resistance of a thermistor measured at 25 "C to that resistance measured at the temperature 0, as specified in the detail specification. 4.18 A verage zero-power resistance slope (Under consideration.)

4.19 Voltage @zct (VDR effect) and at zero-power, the resistance of a PTC-S thermistor At constant temperature depends on the voltage applied. This effect may be represented by means of the following equivalent circuit or by drawing' the current/voltage characteristic at zero-power (pulse voltage). The equivalent circuit of the thermistor has two parallel resistors, one R', having an ideal characteristic as a function of temperature, the other R,, an ideal characteristic as a function of voltage and complying with the law U = CF.

I/ =

c (/,)P =

R, I,

A

0

/=I,+12 U = 12R2

+ T"C

FIGURE3

The dependency between voltage and current is expressed by the value of p. It may be stated in the detail specification for a given temperature. Equilibrium voltage (U,) designates the voltage for which currents I, and Z2are equal, when considering the equivalent circuit above.
4.20

Frequenc_v dependent effect lfor iqformation on(v) Reduction of the positive temperature the frequency of the applied voltage.

:;. thermistor with the increase of

coefficient of a I&-S

4.21 Insulated thermistors Nor injbrmation or(v) Thermistors capable of meeting the requirements proof tests as specified in the test schedule. of the insulation resistance and voltage

IS QC IEC QC

440000 440000

: 1994 : 1982

4.22

Non-insulated

thermistor.~

Thermistors

to which the isolation voltage and insulation

resistance tests do not apply.

4.23

Rated

temperature

range

The ambient temperature range for which the thermistor has been designed for continuous operation; this range is limited on the one hand by the lower category temperature and on the other hand by the upper category temperature.
4.24 Temperature range at maximum voltage

The ambient temperature range over which the maximum the thermistor in continuous operation.

voltage may be applied

to

5.

Identification

A, thermistor
-

complying

with this standard

is identified

as follows:

-

by the by the by the by the by the cation.

type (see Sub-clause 5.1); rated zero-power resistance and its tolerance (see Sub-clause 5.2); classification (see Sub-clause 5.3); maximum voltage: zero-power resistance ratio (Sub-clause 4.17) if required by the detail specifi-

The type is characterized -

by:

design aspects (shape, coating, finish, outputs); dimensions; climatic category. which will

Characteristics particular to one type are stated in the detail specification also contain the other characteristics necessary for identification purposes.

A type is designated by the group of letters "FTC-S", which represent all those thermistors covered by this standard, followed by a characteristic number, given in the detail specification.
Associated type.y

These are types likely to be grouped together with a view to the same approval or same acceptance. These types shall have the same kind of terminations, the same form (insulated or not) and the same climatic category. Types which may be associated will be indicated in the detail specification.
Climatic cafegorp

The climatic category is coded in accordance with Appendix A of I EC Publication 6% I.

9

IS QC IEC QC 5.2

440000 : 1994 440000 : 1982

Rated zero-pow>erresistance and tolerance The rated resistances and tolerances on these values are given in the detail specification. The rated resistances are preferably chosen from the values given in 1 EC Publication 63 and indicated in the detail specification.

PTC-S thermistors The preferred The switching specification.

are classified according

to the switching temperature.

classes are coded as shown in Table I. temperatures and corresponding classification are given in the detail

TABLE

1

Class

T
i

-Wh ("C)

11 I! F G

H J K L M N P R S T U

- 80 - 60 -40 -20 0

t 20
i-40 + 60 +80 +100 +1x f140 +I60 +I80 +200

6.

Marking

6.1. I

The information given in the marking is normally selected from the following relative importance of each item is indicated by its position in the list:

list; the

1) type designation 2) classification.
3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9) 10) rated zero-power resistance tolerance zero-power resistance ratio (if required by the detail specification) manufacturer's name or trade mark maximum voltage switching temperature year and month (or week) of manufacture number of the detail specification.

10

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 6.1.2 The thermistor shall be clearly marked with I), 2) and 6) above and with as many of the remaining items as is practicable. Any duplication of information in the marking on the thermistor should be avoided. The package containing mation listed above. Any additional the thermistor(s) shall be clearly marked with all the infor-

6.1.3

6.1.4

marking shall be so applied

that no confusion

can arise.

6.2

Coding When coding is used for resistance value, tolerance or date of manufacture, be selected from those given in I EC Publication 62. the method shall

SECTION

TWO -

QUALITY

ASSESSMENT

PROCEDURES

7. 7.1

Quality assessment procedures Qualification Approval/euality Assessment Systems of Sub-clauses 7.4 and 7.6 shall be

7.1.1

For a full Quality Assessment System the procedures followed.

7.1.2

For Qualification A,pproval without Quality Conformance requirements of Sub-clauses 7.4.1 and 7.4.2b) shall apply. Primary Stage of Manufacture

Inspection

the procedures

and

7.2

For the purpose of this specification, the primary stage of manufacture the mixing of the .ingredients. 1 7.3 Structurally Similar Components

is the initial process of

Thermistors may be grouped as structurally similar for the purpose of forming inspection lots provided that the following requirements are met:
' They shall be produced processes and methods.

by one manufacturer
--

using essentially the same design, materials,
I'

The sample taken shah be determined from the total sample,size of the grouped components. For periodic tests the average value of suclr sample size shall be used. Structurally similar components should preferably be included in one detail specification but the details of all claims to structural similarity shall be declared in the qualification approval test reports. 7.3. I For electrical tests, devices having the same electrical characteristics may be grouped provided that the element determining the characteristics is similar for all the components concerned.

11,'

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 7.3.2 For

having the environmental test, components structure and finishing processes may be grouped.

same

encapsulation,

basic

internal

7.3.3 For visual inspection

(except marking), components may be grouped made on the same production line and have the same dimensions, external finish.

if they have been encapsulation and tests

This grouping may also be used for robustness of terminations and soldering where it .is convenient to group components with different internal structures.
7.3.4 For endurance

test, thermistors may be grouped if they have been made on the same production line using the same design and differing only in electrical characteristics. If it can be shown that one style of the, group is tested more severely than the others then tests on this style may be accepted for the remaining styles of the group.

7.4

Qual$cation

Approval Procedure.r shall comply with:

7.4.1 The manufacturer

-

the general requirements of the rules of procedure governing qualification approval (IEC Publication QC 001002, Clause I I). the requirements for the primary stage of manufacture contained in Sub-clause 7.2 of this document. In addition to the requirements of Sub-clause 7.4. I, procedures a) or b) below shall apply:

7.4.2

a) The

manufacturer shall produce test evidence of conformance to the specification requirements on three inspection lots for lot-by-lot inspection taken in as short a time as possible and one lot for periodic inspection. No major changes in the manufacturing process shall be made in the period during which the inspection lots are taken. Samples shall be taken from the lots in accordance with I EC Publication 410 (see Appendix A). Normal inspection shall be used, but when the sample size would give specimens shall be taken to meet the acceptance on zero defectives, additional sample' size required to give acceptance on one defective.

b) The manufacturer

shall produce test evidence to show conformance. to the specification requirements on the fixed sample size test .schedule given in Sub-clause, 7.5. The specimens taken to form the sample shall be selected at random production or as agreed with the National Supervising Inspectorate. from current

7.4.3

Qualification Approval obtained as part of a Quality Assessment System, shall be maintained by regular demonstration of compliance with the requirements for Quality Conformance (see Sub-clause 7.6). Qualification Approval on the basis of theJiwed sample size procedure Sampling The sample shall be representative of the range of values for which approval is sought. This may or may not be the complete range covered by the detail specification.

7.5 7.5. I

12

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IECQC The sample shall consist of specimens a) the highest and the lowest resistance when there are several rated resistance the range being submitted. having: values for which approval is being sought, values and only one switching temperature in 440000 : 1982

h) the highest and the lowest switching temperature values for which approval is being sought, when there are several switching temperature values and only one rated resistance value in the range being submitted. c) the highest resistance value together with the highest switching temperature value and the lowest resistance value together with the lowest switching temperature value for which approval is being sought, when there are several rated resistance values and several switching temperature values in the range being submitted. d) the resistance value and the switching temperature value, if approval is being sought for only one rated resistance value and only on e switching temperature value. The proportion of specimens having the different characteristics shall be proposed by the manufacturer's Chief Inspector and shall be to the satisfaction of the National Supervising Inspectorate. Spare specimens are permitted as follows: a) one per resistance value and one per switching temperature replace the permitted defective in Group "0". value which may be used to

h) one per resistance value and one per switching temperature value which may be used to replace specimens which are defective because of incidents not attributable to the manufacturer. When additional groups are introduced into the Qualification Approval test schedule, the number of specimens required for Sub-group "Oa" shall be increased by the same number as that required for the additional groups. 7.5.2 Tests The complete series of the tests specified in Table II are required for the approval of thermistors covered by one detail specification. The tests of each group shall be carried out in the order given. The whole sample shall be subjected to the tests of Sub-group "Oa" and then divided for the other groups. Specimens groups. found defective during the tests of Group "0" shall not be used for the other

"One defective" is counted when a thermistor has not satisfied the whole or a part of the tests of a group. Approval is granted when the number permissible defectives specified. of defectives does not exceed the number or

13

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000.: 1982

TABLE

!I

Test schedule for Qualification Approval
Notes 1. In this table: n = sample size c = group acceptance criterion (permitted number of defectives per group or sub-group) `t = total acceptance criterion (permitted number of defectives for one or several groups combined) D = destructive; ND = non-destructive, Insulated thermistors only. If required in the detail specitication. Specimens from Sub-group Ob. These specimens are drawn from: - for one half, specimens that have passed the tests of Sub-group la: - for the other half, specimens that have passed the tests of Sub-group I b.

2. 3. 4. 5.

-

Clause and sub-clause number and Test

Conditions of test

r

Sample size and criterion of acceptability (see Note 1) n -

Performance requirements

Group 0 Sub-group 8.3.2' Ou

r

46 46 No visible damage As specified in the detail specification Legible marking Within specified tolerance

8.3.1

Visual examination Dimensions

6. Marking 9. I Zero-power resistance R,

/

Measuring voltage: d.c. (a.c. if required by the detail specitication) Total measuring error, if larger than 10%: . ..`/a See 1.5. I 16 Mounting method: Voltage, if other than 700 V peak: . .. V Mounting method: Voltage, if other than 100 + I5 V:

Spare specimens
Sub-group 9.6 Oh

Voltage proofz)

No breakdown. llashover or discharge
R; > ._. MR

9.7

Insulation resistance"

Sub-group 9.3

Oc

6 Clamping method: Distance clamping point to body: . . . mm Clamping method: Distance clamping point to body: . . . mm

Dissipation factor

ii.

m W/"C

9.4

Thermal time constant

Group 1 Sub-gmup la IO.

I Robusrness of terminations

Tensile, bending and torsion tests as appropriate to the type of termination Visual examination Zero-power resistance

No visible damage ARr <..."<I RI

14

ISQC

440000:

1994

IEC QC 440000 : 1982 .
Sample size ind criterion of acceptability (see Note I) n [The detail specification shall indicate whether Method I A or I B of Test Tb of I EC Publication 68-22tTA applies) Visual examination Zero-power resistance
C -

Sub-clause number and Test

Conditions of test

Performance requirements

/ t

0.2.2 Resistance to soldering heat

t -

_I

No visible damage
ART <

"h,

---------------Sub-group 10.2.1 lb Solderability

RT
__ ----__---------------_ 61' Method, if other than Method I): .. Good tinning as evidenced by free flowing of the solder with wetting of the terminations

(The detail specification shall indicate the procedure for thermistors intended to be used only on printed boards) IO.4 Vibration Mounting method: see 10.4 Frequency range, if other than lOHzto55Hz:...Hz Amplitude 0.75 mm or acceleration 98 m/s2 (whichever is the less severe) Duration: 6 h Visual examination Zero-power resistance 10.5 Bump31 Mounting method: see 10.4 Acceleration Number of bumps: Visual examination Zero-power resistance

No visible damage
ART R-l Q ...%J

: ._. m/s* ...
No visible damage ARr RT

<...%I

___-----_------Sub-group ic Temperatures: see 10.3 Number of cycles: Duration: 10.3 Rapid change of temperature

...
No visible damage Legible marking

...

Visual examination

Zero-power resistance 10.6 Climatic sequence Dry heat Damp heat, cyclic test, Test .Db, first cycle Cold Low air pressurej) ,. Mounting method: . . . Air pressure: 2 kPa (20 mbar)
`,. .

ART RT

d...%

-

No breakdown, fhishover or discharge

Voltage:

... V

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IECQC 440000 : 1982
Sample size md criterion of acceptability (see Note I) n C -

Sub-clause number and Test

3

I; -

Conditions of test

Performance requirements

t -

-

-

Damp heat, cyclic test, Test Dh, remaining cycles Final measurements

Visual examination Zero-power resistance Voltage proof2j

No visible damage Legible marking IRr < .% RT No breakdown, flashover or
R,

roup 2 1.7 Damp heat, steady state

Insulation resistance2) 04)
-

discharge . . . MR

D Visual examination

I

No visible damage Legible marking

Zero-power resistance Voltage proof2) Insulation resistance21 ;rwp 3 2 Temperature coefftcient at zero-power dissipation D Measuring voltage: . . . V Temperature range, if other than Tr, to T& . . . Method: . . Temperature range: . "C to . . . "C Clamping method: . . Duration: 1000h `Test A: all specimens (half the number of specimens if Test B is a!so made): Series resistance: . . . R Test B: (if required in the detail specification) the other half of the specimens: Temperature: . . "C II: .., min r2: . . . min Number of cycles: . . . Series resistance: . . . Cl Examination at 48 h and 500 h: Zero-power resistance Examination at 1000h Visual examination Zero-power resistar)ce -

ART Q . .% discharge

RT No breakdown, flashover or

. .MR R, .
1

10

ff,-: . . . +

D.8.1 Endurance at maximum voltage

ART RT

Q . ..%

No visible damage Legible marking
ART RT d . ..%

-

-

16

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982
T-

-

T Sample size
Conditions of test and criterion of acceptability (see Note I) n IO Duration:
C

Sub-clause number and Test

D
I

G D

Performance requirements

I

t.

Group4
I 1.8.2
Endurance at maximum ambient temperature at zero-power dissipation

I 000h

Examination at 48 h and 500 h:

Zero-power resistance Examination at

ART -

4

?4,

RT I 000h:
No visible damage Legible marking Visual examination

-

1

Zero-power resistance -

-

-I
ART RT

4...%,

7,6

Quality Conformance Inspection The blank detail specification(s) associated with the generic specification test schedule for Quality Conformance Inspection. shall prescribe the

This schedule shall also specify the grouping, sampling and periodicity for the lot-by-lot and periodic inspection. Inspection Levels and AQL's shall be selected from those given in I EC Publication 410.

If required, more than one schedule may be specified. 7.6. I Formation of inspecrion lots An inspection lot shall consist of thermistors of the same style or associated styles. It should be representative of those extremes of the resistance range and switching temperature range produced during the inspection period. Styles having the same nominal dimensions but different temperature characteristics of resistance produced during the period may be aggregated, except for the purpose of sub-groups which contain a test for temperature coefficients of resistance. The low and high values of the ranges of resistance and switching temperature for which Qualification Approval has been granted shall be inspected during a period which is approved by the National Supervising Inspectorate. The samples for Group "C" shall be collected over the last 13 weeks of the inspection period.

1.6.2

Terl schedule The schedule for the lot-by-lot and periodic tests for Quality Conformance Inspection is given in Section Two, Table III of the Blank Detail Specification, I EC Publication 73% I- 1.

17

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 1.63 Assessment levels

The assessment level(s) given in the blank detail specification from the following Tables IV A and IV B:
TABLE IV D* inspection sub-groups** IL IL E

shall preferably

be selected

A
F* c*

AQL

y/o
II 11 II s-3

AQL O/o
4.0 1.0 I.0 4.0

IL

AQL %

IL

AQL %

Al A2 A3 I B

IL = inspection level AQL = acceptable quality level TABLE IV B

r
Inspection sub-groups ** P CIA
(`IB CIC

D* n

E

c2 c-3 c-4

c i
7-

n IO 6 6 IO IO IO

p = periodicity in months

n = sample size c = permitted number of defectives
No/cc- cnncwnin~ Tahlec I VA and IV B:

_ 1
-r
F* n

I
I c*

1
I
C

_

C

P

C

P

n

I

I I I

3

* The assessment levels D. F and G are under consideration. ** The content of the Inspection sub-groups is described in Section Two of the relevant Blank Detail Specification.

7.6.4

Cert$ed

Record.s qf' Released Lots

When certified records of released lots are prescribed in the relevant specification requested by a purchaser, the following information shall be given as a minimum : -

and are

-

attributes information (i.e. number of components tested and numbers of defective components) for tests in the sub-groups covered by periodic inspection without reference to the parameter(s) for which rejection was made; variables information for the change in zero-power resistance after the I 000 h endurance test.
Delayed delivery

7.6.5

Thermistors held for a period exceeding two years following the release of the lot shall, before delivery, be re-examined for solderability and zero-power resistance as specilied in Group A or B Inspection of the detail specification.

18

IS QC 440000

: 1994

IEC QC 440000 : 1982 The re-examination procedure adopted by the manufacturer's approved by the National Supervising Inspectorate. Once a "lot" has been satisfactorily period. 7.6.6 re-inspected, Chief Inspector shall be

its quality is re-assured for the specified

Release for delivery before the completion of Group B tests When the conditions of I EC Publication 410 for changing to reduced inspection have been satisfied for the Group B tests, the manufacturer is permitted to release components before the completion of such tests.

1.6.7

Alternative test methods The test and measurement methods given in the relevant specification are not necessarily the only methods which can be used. However, the manufacturer shall satisfy the National Supervising Inspectorate that any alternative methods which he may use will give results equivalent to those obtained by the methods specified. In case of dispute, for referee and reference purposes, the specified methods only shall be used.

SECTION

THREE

-

TEST AND MEASUREMENT

PROCEDURES

8.
8.1

Test and measurement

procedures

General The blank detail specification shall contain tables showing the tests to be made, which measurements are to be made before and after each test or sub-group of tests, and the sequence in which they shall be made. The stages of each test shall be carried out in the order written. The measuring conditions shall be the same for initial and final measurements. If national specifications within any Quality Assessment System include methods other than those specified in the above documents, they shall be fully described.

8.2

Standard atmospheric conditions for testing Unless otherwise specified, all the tests are carried out under the standard conditions for testing specified in I EC Publication 68- 1. In case of dispute, the referee conditions
1 060 mbar pressure. Before the initial measurements

atmospheric

shall be 25 +- 1 "C, 48% to 52% r.h. and 860 to of each group or sub-group, the sp,ecimens shall be stored under the standard conditions for testing for 24 hours. Before the intermediate or final measurements, the thermistors shall be placed in the recovery conditions*, stated in IEC Publication 68-1, for 4_t 1 h. The mounting devices shall not affect the results of measurements.

* Standard recovery conditions of I EC Publication 68-l : Temperature: actual laboratory temperature k 1"C, subject to the overriding requirements within + 15 "C to +35 "C. Relative humidity: 45%-75%. Air pressure: 860 mbar to 1 060 mbar.

of Sub-clause 5.3 i.e.

19

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 8.3 8.3. I Visual examination Outline drawing and dimensions There shall be an illustration of the thermistor comparison of the thermistor with others. as an aid to easy recognition and for

Dimensions and their associated tolerances, which affect interchangeability and mounting, shall be given in the detail specification. All dimensions shall preferably be stated in millimetres, however when the original dimensions are given in inches, the converted metric dimensions in millimetres shall be added. Normally the numerical values shall be given for the length of the body, the width and height of the body and the wire spacing or, for cylindrical types, the body diameter, and the length and diameter of the terminations. When necessary, for example when in a detail specification more than one case size is covered, the dimensions and their associated tolerances shall be placed in a table below the drawing. When the configuration is other than cylindrical with axial terminations, the detail specification shall state such dimensional information as will adequately describe the thermistor. When the thermistor is not designed for use on printed boards, this shall be clearly indicated in the detail specification. The dimensions shall comply with those given in the detail specification and shall be measured in accordance with I EC Publication 294 if cylindrical types with axial terminations are concerned. 8.3.2 Visible damage Visible damage is defined as any visible damage which would reduce the usability of the product for its intended purpose.

9. 9. I

Electrical tests Zero-power resistance Procedure The thermistors shall be fixed in corrosion resistant clamps by their usual means*. The thermistors are then immersed in an insulating medium not likely to cause deterioration, the temperature of which is maintained at the specified value. The zero-power resistance is measured when it has stabilized.

The measuring method used shall be such that the total measuring error is less than lOO/o of the zero-power resistance tolerance, unless otherwise stated in the detail specification.

* A preferred means of mounting is given in Appendix C for measurements in air and when self-heating may occur. This method shall be used in the event of dispute.

20

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC: QC 440000 : 1982 The total measuring error is the sum of the errors due to: -

/

-

temperature variation of the measuring medium : temperature rise of the thermistor due to the measuring current (Joule effect); resistance measuring instrument.

Requirement The zero-power resistance shall be within the specified tolerance.

9.2

Temperature coefficient at zero-power dissipation cxI Procedure The values R, and Rh are measured at the same voltage specified in the relevant detail specification. The temperature Sub-clause 4. IO. Requirement The temperature fication. coefficient thus calculated shall be within the limits stated in the detail specicoefficient at zero-power TY,is calculated by means of the formula given in

9.3

Dissipation ,factor 6 Procedure Mounting The thermistors are held in accordance Appendix C, unless otherwise specified. with one of the clamping methods shown in

The distance (in millimetres) of the clamping point in relation to the body is stated in the detail specification. It is the highest value in the series I -2.5 - 5 and decimal multiples compatible with the length of terminations. When the terminations are insulated, irrespective of their lengths. Initial measurement Zero-power Test The thermistors are introduced in still air at 25 kO.5 "C in a test chamber, the volume of which is at least I 600 times that of the thermistors under test, in such a way that no thermistor is less than 75 mm from other thermistors or from the wall of the enclosure. resistance at 25 "C in accordance with Sub-clause 9. I. measurements are carried out at their end-points,

1) The voltage U,;,, is applied and the corresponding
ratio IV,,;,, dnd ,' the corresponding

current 1 is measured. By calculation, the

power are deduced. AB = i (6 being the value stated in the

2) The resultant temperature
detail specification).

increase is calculated:

21

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982
3) Two

measuring temperatures

are calculated:

H, = 25 + AH - 5 H,=?S+A8+5

4) At temperatures 0, and H,, the values R, and R, of the zero-power resistance are measured for an applied voltage pulse having a peak value equal to U,,.,,. U,,.,, 5) By interpolation, the temperature $, at which the zero-power resistance is equal to 7, is evaluated.

Requirement The dissipation factor 5 thus calculated shall correspond specification, taking into account the tolerance.
9.4

to the value stated in the detail

Thermal time constant r Procedure Mounting The thermistors are held in position in accordance in Appendix C, unless otherwise specified. with one of the clamping methods shown

The distance (in millimetres) of the clamping point in relation to the body is stated in the detail specification. It is the highest value in the series I -2.5- 5 and decimal multiples compatible with the length of terminations. When the terminations are insulated, irrespective of their lengths. Tesr The thermistors are introduced in still air at temperature chamber described in Sub-clause 9.3. Before introduction the figure below: 13, (0, = 25 &OS "C) in the test measurements are carried out at their end-points,

in the test chamber, the thermistors are inserted in the circuit shown in

B

0

Stabilized variable voltage source

Resistance measuring equipment under test

FIGURE 4

22

ISQC IECQC

440000 : 1994 440000 : 1982

The high impedance voltmeter and the ammeter shall measure to an accuracy of 1%. The resistance measuring equipment shall measure to an accuracy of O.l'% or less. Depending
Method a

on the cases determined

below, `method a or h shall be used:

Applicable when: HJ - Hh> 63.2%~(0, - 4,) Initial measurements: R,, and RH, with 8, = fIJ - 0.632 (H, - #,,)

With the contacts AA made, the voltage is so adjusted that the power dissipated in the thermistor raises its temperature to a value slightly above H, (calculated as in Sub-clause 9.3) and the indications of the instruments are stable. The applied power may then, for example, be calculated as follows: P = I/. I = I.1 (0, - Cl,,). 0 where 6 is the value calculated according to Sub-clause 9.3. Contacts BB are then made by means of the reverser and measurement of the time is started as soon as the resistance value has returned to R,,? and the resistance measuring equipment is in balance. Time measurement &,I. The elapsed time t is noted. In this case, it represents the thermal time constant. Method b Applicable when: & - 0, < 63.2(K)(Bi - H,,) Initial measurements: R,,3 and R, is stopped when the resistance measuring equipment indicates a value of

With the contacts AA made, the voltage is so adjusted that the power dissipated in the thermistor raises its temperature to a value slightly above HI and the indications of the instruments are stable. The applied power may then, for example, be calculated as follows: P = u.1 = I.1 (0, - 0,)). ii

where 6 is the value calculated according to Sub-clause 9.3. Contacts BB are then made by means of the reverser and measurement of the time is started as soon as the resistance value has retur-ned to R,,3 and the resistance measuring equipment is in balance. Time measurement is stopped when the resistance measuring equipment indicates a value of Rh. The elapsed time t is noted, and the thermal time constant is then calculated as follows:
t
5=

03- 4, h3c ___ 4 - 4,
automatic switching should be provided between both resistance the time interval between both equilibria. measuring equipment shall be sufficiently low to

Note.7 I. -

For thermistors measurements, The power

with low time constants, as well as for measuring to the thermistor

2. -

applied

via the resistance

enable the zero-power

resistance of the thermistor

to be measured.

23

ISQC 440000 : 1994 1EC QC 440000 :.1982
Requirement

The thermal time constant shall correspond taking into account the tolerance.
9.5 Calor$c
Note. -

to the value given in the detail specification,

capacity
This sub-clause does nor describe a particular test, but enables information to be obtained which might be of interest to some users.

9.5.1

Calor$c

capacity C,, of a thermistor

The calorific capacity means of the formula:

C,, of a thermistor

is deduced

from the previous measurements

by

c,, = rx 6 r being the time constant 0` being the dissipation factor. 9.5.2
Calor@- capacity of the ceramic alone Cfor information)

The calorific capacitance of the ceramic alone is calculated in the same way. The dissipation factor and thermal time constant are measured as previously, but the power shall be applied to the ceramic by means of connections of negligible thermal capacitance and high thermal resistance (e.g. platinum wires of 60 urn diameter).

9.6

Voltageproof(for

insulated thermistors only) one of the following

According to the instructions given in the relevant detail specification, test methods is used :
Method 1

The non-insulated insulation value.

parts of the thermistor shall be wrapped in insulating material of very high

The whole is inserted into a box containing lead balls of 1.6 + 0.2 mm diameter, in such a manner that only the connections of the thermistor emerge. An electrode is inserted into the lead balls.
Method 2

A metal foil shall be wrapped closely around the body of the thermistor. For those types not having axial leads, a space of I mm to I.5 mm shall be left between the edge of the foil and each termination. For those types having axial leads, the foil shall be wrapped around the whole body of the thermistor protruding by at least 5 mm from each end, provided that the minimum space of I mm between the foil and each termination can be maintained. The ends of the foil shall not be folded over the ends of the thermistor.
Method 3

The thermistor shall be clamped in the trough of a 90" metallic V-block of such size that the thermistor body does not extend beyond the extremities of the block. The clamping force shall be such as to maintain adequate contact between the thermistor and the block.

24

IS QC

440000 440000

: 1994 : 1982

IEC QC The terminations point of the V-block u
I

shall be so positioned is not Ie<s than: thermistors:

that the distance between

the terminations

and any

l-or cylindrical

the thermistor

shalt be positioned

in the block so that the termi-

nation furthest from the axis of the thermistor

is nearest to one of the faces of the block. in the block so that the termi-

h:

For rectangular

thermistors:

the thermistor

shall be positioned

nation nearest to the edge of the thermistor

is nearest to one of the faces of the block.

For cylindrical

and rectangular

thermistors

with axial leads, any out-of-centre

positioning

of

the point of emergence

of the terminations

from the thermistor

body shall be ignored.

An alternating otherGse mounting other po!e. of the thermistor

voltage of a frequency connected

of 40 Hz to 60 Hz, with a peak value of 700 V, unless is applied for I min + 5 s between the terminations on the method sheet, forming of the

stated in the detail specification, used, with the electrode inserted

to each other to form one pole, and, depending in the lead balls, or the metal

The v,c)ltape shall be applied

progressively

with a maximum

step of 100 V per second.

No puncture,

flashover or discharge shall occur.

Depending

on the instructions 9.6 is used. resistance

in the detail

specification,

one of the methods

of mounting

giv-en in Sub-clause The insulation

is measured between

under

a d.c. voltage of mounting

of 100 + 15 V, unless otherwise interconnected to inserted in the

stated in the detail specification, form one pole, and, depending

the terminations

of the thermistors

on the method

used, the electrode

metal ball bearings or the metal sheet forming The voltage shall be applied stable reading. The insulation for one minute,

the other pole. or for a shorter period but sufficient to obtain a

resistance is noted at the end of each period.

Minimum

insulation

resistance: see detail specilication.

IO. IO. I

Environmental Rdwme.v.r Procedure

tests of terminations

The test is carried out in accordance following IO. I . I initial particular mtururemenl requirements:

with Test U of I EC Publicat .ic >n 68-2-2 I ( 1975), with the

Zero-power

resistance at 25 "C (in accordance

with Sub-clause

9.

25

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 10.1.2 Tesr

Test Ua: Tensile. The loading weight to be applied for IO s shall be: For'all types of terminations, For wire terminations, except wire terminations; 20 N.

see the table below:

Nominal
cross-sectional (mm') -i area

Corresponding diameter for circular-section wires (mm)

Force (N)

s < 0.05
0.05 0.07 0.2 0.5 1.2 < .s < s < s < s <S < < < Q 0.07 0.2 0.5 1.2 0.25 0.3 0.5 0.8 I.25 < < < < <

d d d d d d

< < < < <

0.25 0.3 0.5 0.X 1.25

2.5 5 10 20 40

Test Ub: Bending (half the number of terminations). `Two consecutive bends shall be applied (Method I).

Test UC: Torsion (other half of the terminations). Two rotations of 180" shall be applied (Severity 2). IO.I .3 Visual examination After each of these tests, the thermistors shall be visually examined. There shall be no visible damage. IO.I .4 Final measurements and requiremenfs After the test, the zero-power resistance shall be measured according to Sub-clause 9. I. The change' of resistance compared `with the value measured in Sub-clause IO.I. I shall not exceed the limit specified in the detail specification. 10.2 10.2. I Soldering Solderahilil~~ Procedure The test is carried out in accordance following particular requirements: 10.2. I I
-

with Test T of I EC Publication 68-2-20 (1468) with the

Test Bath method (unless otherwise stated in the detail specification). Procedure: the terminations are immersed in turn up to 6 mm from the body of the component.
For thermistors fication. intended to be used only on printed hoards the test procedure is laid down in the detail speci-

-

No/c~. -

2i;

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 10.2.1.2 Requirement for good tinning as evidenced by free flowing of the

The terminations shall be examined solder with wetting of the terminations. 10.2.2 Resistance to soldering heat Procedure The test is carried out in accordance the following particular requirements: 10.2.2.1 Initial measurement Zero-power 10.2.2.2 Test

with Test Tb of I EC Publication 68-2-20A (1970) with

resistance at 25 "C (in accordance

with Sub-clause 9.1).

Bath method IA (unless otherwise stated in the detail specification). Procedure: the terminations are immersed in turn up to 6 mm from the body of the thermistor.
For thermistors intended to be used only on printed boards the test procedure is laid down in the detail specification.

Note. -

Final inspection and measurements Appearance. Zero-power resistance at 25 "C (in accordance with Sub-clause 9.1). Requirements No mechanical deterioration. Maximum change of resistance: see detail specification.

10.3

Rapid change of temperature Procedure The test is carried out in accordance following particular requirements: with Test Na of I EC Publication 68-2-14 with the

10.3. I

Initial measurement Zero-power resistance at 25 "C (in accordance with Sub-clause 9.1). Required temperatures Minimum temperature of the climatic category limited to - 55 "C and the maximum temperature of the climatic category. The number of cycles and duration of exposure to be prescribed in the relevant detail specification.

10.3.2 -

Final inspection and measurements Appearance. Marking. Zero-power resistance at 25 "C.

27

IS QC 440400 : 19.94 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 10.3.3 Requirements

10.4

No mechanical deterioration. Marking shall remain legible. Maximum change of resistance: see detail specification.
Vibrurion

Procedure

The test is carried out in accordance with Test Fc (Procedure with the following particular requirements: 10.4. I
Initial measurement

B4) of I EC Publication 68-2-6

Zero-power
Mounting

resistance at 25 "C (in accordance

with Sub-clause 9. I).

For thermistors usually held by their connection
a) thermistors

wires:

with axial terminations: the connection wires held in the position stated in the detail specification are fixed to a rigid support.6f I mm from the body of the thermistor; at the clamping point given in the detail specification.

h/ thermistors with radial terminations:

For other thermistors: fixed in accordance with the usual method of attachment or, if this does not exist, in accordance with the requirements given in the detail specification on a rigid support integral with the vibration apparatus.
Test

10.4.2 -

Frequency range: IO Hz to 55 Hz (unless otherwise prescribed in the detail specification), Amplitude: 0.75 mm or acceleration 98 m/s', Duration: 6 h; Direction of vibration application: one direction parallel to the terminations, two directions perpendicular to the first, one of which is parallel to the likely plane of the terminations.
Final inspection and measuremen& ,

-

10.4.3
-

-

Appearance. Zero-power resistance at 25 "C (in accordance with Sub-clause 9. I) before dismantling from the support where components have been soldered in order to undergo the tests.
Requirements

10.4.4
-

-

No mechanical deterioration. Maximum change of resistance: see detail specification.
Bump

10.5

(Under consideration.)

28

IS QC h40000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982 10.6
Climatic sequence Procedure

The test is carried out in accordance requirements:
10.6.1 Initial measurement

with I EC Publication 68 with the following particular

Zero-power 10.6.2
Test Dry heat

resistance at 25 "C.

The thermistors are subjected to test method Ba of I EC Publication 68-2-2 with the degree of severity appropriate to the climatic category for 16 h. They are then placed under standard recovery conditions until the end of the 24 h period.

10.6.3

Damp heat, cyclic, Test Db, jirst cycle

The thermistors are subjected to Test Db of I EC Publication 68-2-30, severity b (55 "C).

10.6.4

Cold

The thermistors are subjected to Test Aa of I EC Publication 68-2-i with the degree of severity appropriate to the climatic category for 16 h. They are then placed under standard recovery conditions until the end of the 24 h period. 10.6.5 Low air pressure The detail specification shall state whether this test is applicable. 10.6.5. I
Procedure

The test is carried out in accordance particular requirements:
Initial measurement

with Test M of I EC Publication 68 with the following

None.
Mounting

r

The method of mounting used (a or b) (see Sub-clause 9.6) is stated in the detail specification.
Test

Required pressure: 20 mbar. Operation: application of a voltage proof test, in accordance with Sub-clause 9.6, but at the voltage given in the detail specification. Duration of low pressure: the time needed to carry out the voltage proof test.
Final measurement

None.

29

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 : 1982

10.6.5.4

Requirement No breakdown, flashover or discharge shall occur.

10.6.6

Damp heat. cycle. Test Dh, remaining cycles * The thermistors number of cycles: are subjected to Test Db of I EC Publication 68-2-30 for the following

Categories

Number

of cycles

-/-I% -/-/I1

5

I
None None

-/-/IO
- / - 104

10.6.6.1

Final inspection and measurements

- Appearance. - Marking. Y Zero-power resistance (in accordance with SubLclause 9. I). - Voltage proof (in accordance with Sub-clause 9.6) I - Insulation resistance (in accordance with Sub-clause 9.7) 10.6.6.2 -

for insulated thermistors only.

Requirements

"

-

No mechanical deterioration. Marking shall remain legible. Maximum change of resistance: in accordance with the limit stated in the detail specification. No breakdown, flashover or discharge shall occur. Minimum insulation resistance: see detail specification.

10.7

Damp heal. sreadj' slate Procedure The test is carried out, in .accotdance' with Test Ca of I EC Publication following particular recfuirements: Initial measurements Zero-power resistance at 25 "C (in accordance with Sub-clause 9. I). 68-2-3 with the

10.72 -

Te.si Severity: dependent on the climatic category. Operation (for insulated thermistors only): a direct voltage is applied to the thermistors throughout the test. The voltage value is taken from the R5 series range of values. It is limited to the value immediately less than 550thof the maximum voltage.

* Altsrnati\ely

the accelerated

damp heat Test D may still be used for the next five years. however

Test Db is preferred

ISQC 440000 : 1994 IECQC 10.1.3 Final inspection and measurements - Appearance. - Marking. - Zero-power resistance at 25 "C (in accordance with Sub-clause 9. I). L .Voltage proof (in accordance with Sub-clause 9.6) for insulated - Insulation resistance (in accordance with Sub-clause 9.7) I thermistors only. 440000 : 1982

10.7.4
-

Requirements No mechanical deterioration. Marking shall remain legible. Maximum change of resistance: see detail specification. No puncture, flashover or discharge shall occur. Minimum insulation resistance: see detail specification.

10.8 10.8.1

Endurance Endurance at maximum voltage Procedure Mounting The thermistors are held in position in accordance given in Appendix C, unless otherwise specified. with one of the methods of clamping

10.8.1.1

tnitial measurement There shall be two options: Option 1:. All specimens are subjected to Test A. Option 2: If required by the detail specification, one half of the specimens shall be subjected to Test A and the other half to Test B.

Test A The thermistors are placed in the test chamber described in Sub-clause 9.3, maintained temperature of 25 "C. at a

Throughout the test, the thermistors are subjected to successive cycles consisting of a 90 min application of the permissible maximum voltage at 25 "C, followed by a 30 min rest period. The value of the resistor to be placed in series with the thermistor ($,).is given in the detail specifi(i cation. The test duration is I OOOk24 h. .

The thermistors are placed in the test chamber described in Sub-clause 9.3, maintained at the -, .. ` temperature given in the detail specificatiqr$ I_ Throughout the test, the thermistors are inbjected to cycles com&ising .I* application of the maximum voltage and a rest period t2. The values of I, and t,, the number of cycles; and the values of%e series with the thermistor (R,) are given in the detail specification. The test duration is I 000 1- 24 h. of a period t, with

resistor to be placed in

31

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000': 1982 Measurement during test: Zero-power

resistance at 25 "C.

This measurement is carried out at the following stages of the test, after a recovery time of I to2h: 168h,500hand I OOOh.
Final inspection and measurements

Appearance. Marking. Zero-power resistance at 25 "C.
Requirements No mechanical deterioration. Marking shall remain legible. Change of resistance between the initial measurement test: in accordance with the detail specification. 10.8.2 Endurance Procedure at maximum ambient temperature

and each of the measurements

during

at zero-power

dissipation

10.8.2.1

Initial measurement

Zero-power
Test

resistance at 25 "C.

The thermistors are placed in a moving-air test chamber, raised to the maximum temperature (+ 2 "C) and maintained at that temperature for 1 000 h at zero-power.
Measurement during test: Zero-power

ambient

resistance.

1 to2h:

This measurement is carried out at the following stages of the test, after a recovery time of 168h,500hand lOOOh.
Final inspection and measurements

Appearance. Marking. Zero-power resistance at 25 "C.
Requirements No mechanical deterioration.

Marking shall remain legible. Change of resistance between the initial measurement accordance with the detail specification.

and the final measurement:

in

32

ISQC IECQC

440000 : 1994 440000 : 1982

APPENDIX

A

INTERPRETATION OF SAMPLING PLANS AND PROCEDURES AS DESCRIBED IN IEC PUBLICATION 410 FOR USE WITHIN THE l,EC QUALITY ASSESSMENT SYSTEM FOR ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS When using I EC Publication 410 (1973) for inspection by attributes the following interpretations of the clauses indicated below apply for the purpose of this standard: I. The responsible authority is the National Authorized and Rules of Procedure. The unit of product is the electronic component Institution implementing the Basic Rules

I .5

defined in a detail specificatiqn.

2.

Only the following definitions from this clause are required: a defect is any non-conformance of the unit of product to specified requirements: a defective is a unit of product which contains one or more defects. of product shall be expressed in terms of per cent defective.

3. I 3.3 4.5

The extent of non-conformance Not applicable.

The responsible authority is the I EC Technical Committee drafting the blank detail specification which forms part of the generic or sectional specification. The responsible authority is the Chief Inspector, acting in accordance with the procedures prescribed in the document describing the inspection department of the approved manufacturer and approved by the National Supervising Inspectorate. The responsible authority is the Chief Inspector. Not applicable. The responsible authority is the Chief Inspector. Normal inspection shall always be used at the start of inspection. The responsible authority is the Chief Inspector.

5.4

6.2 6.3 6.4 8.1

8.3.3(d) 8.4 9.2

The responsible authority is the National Supervising Inspectorate. The responsible authority is the I EC Technical Committee drafting the blank detail specification which forms part of the generic or sectional specification. (Fourth sentence only.) Not applicable. (Fifth sentence only.) The responsible authority is the Chief Inspector.

9.4

10.2 Not applicable.

33

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IECQC 440008 : 1982

APPENDIX

B

RULES FOR THE PREPARATION OF DETAIL SPECIFICATIONS FOR CAPACITORS AND RESISTORS FOR ELECTRONI% EQUIPMENT

BI.

The drafting of a complete detail specification by I EC Technical Committee No. 40: Capacitors and Resistors for Electronic Equipment, if required, shall begin only when all the following conditions have been met:
a)

the generic specification has been approved; has been circulated for approval under the Six for approval under the Six

b) the sectional specification, when appropriate, Months' Rule; c) the associated blank detail specification Months' Rule;

has been circulated

(1, there is evidence that at least three National Committees have formally approved, as their own national standard, specifications covering a component of closely similar performance. Where a National Committee formally asserts that substantial or significant use is made within its country of a part described by some other national standard, this assertion may count towards the foregoing requirement. B2. Detail specifications prepared under the responsibility of Technical Committee No. 40 shall use the standard or preferred values, ratings and characteristics and severities for environmental tests, etc., which are given in the appropriate generic or sectional specifications. An exception to this rule may only be granted for a specific detail specification, by Technical Committee No. 40. B3. when agreed

The detail specification should not be circulated under the Six Months' Rule until the sectional and blank detail specifications have been approved for publication.

34

IS QC 440000 IEC QC 440000

: 1994 : 1982

APPENDIX C
MOLNTING FOR MEASUREMENTS OF DIRECTLY HEATED THERMISTORS
for thermistors without leads

C I.

Mounting

Thermistors without wire terminations shall be pressed between phosphor-bronze wires of I .3 mm t IO'!`G diameter, mounted on a base of insulating material, as shown in Figures 5 and 6.

Dimentionc

in millimerrer

`imeire.5

951

FIG. 5. -

Mnunting for values & IO C2(measurements

with two contact poin_tsl

35

IS QC 440000 : 1994 IEC QC 440000 :*1982

FIG. 6. r

Mounting for values < 10 R (measurements with four contact points) The measuring voltage shall be applied via an ammeter to contacts A and D (or'B and C) and the voltage drop shall be measured between contacts B and C (or A and D).

36

IS QC

440000 440000

: 1994 : 1982

IEC QC C2. Mounting for thermistors with to leads shall mounted with leads be connected V+ires on a base of (but of

Thermistors not soldered)'

phosphor-bronze

I .3 mm + 10% diameter.

insu-

lating material, as shown in Figure 7.
Dlmensrons in millimerrer

.------a
8 -+ 0,5 t

FIG. 7. -

This mounting For thermistors together. For thermistors

is suitable for measurements of values of values 2 IO R, contacts

of high and iow value thermistors AC and BD or AB and CD may be used points shall be A and D (or B

< IO 0, the measuring

method

with four contact to contacts

used. The measuring

voltage shall be applied

via an ammeter

and C) and the .,n!r `:e drop shall he measured between contacts B and C (or A and I>).

.

37

