lS:2672-1W

Indian LIBRARY

Standard FOR LIGHTING

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

CODE OF PRACTICE

( Third Reprint MAY 19E9 )

UIX!

6213.977.2~022.7

@ copyright

1966 STANDARDS
ZAFAR MAHG

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:2672-

1966

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LIBRARY LIGHTING
Illuminating
Chairman SHRI I(. C. GROVER Members

Engineering

and

Lifts Sectional

Committee,

ETBDC

9

Representing

Central Public Works Department,

New Delhi

The Ahmedabad Millowners Association, Ahmedahad Eastern Regional Electrica Contractors' Association ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI H. N. MULLICK ( Alternate I CHIEF EL~:CTI~IIZAL ENGINEER, .iailway Board ( Ministry of Railways) NOWWEHNRAILWAY CHII:F ELE<:TxIcAL INYPECTOR TO Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Government of Punjab, Patiala THEGOVEI~NMENTOFPUNJAB The General Electric Co of India Private Ltd. &RI B. CUNNINOHAM Calculta SHRI D. K. DAS ( Aflernale) Chief ElectrIcal Inspectorate, Government of West L SARI NIHMALBNT)U 1)~s GUPTA Bengal, Calcutta Hindco Lighting Industries Ltd, Bombay SRRI D. M. D~s.41 \ SHR~JAYAST R. PAXI ( Allcrnnrc) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHKI B. S. D~~AMI Philips India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. P. GUF~A Indian Institute of Architect ( Northern Chapter), SHRI N. K.KOTHARI New Delhi SHRI H. R. LAROYA ( Ammte) Directorate Genera1 of Supplies & Disposals, New SHRI A. MITRA Dellli SHHI.J. N. V,rz ! `4llernale 1 National `Trst H~x15e, C:alrutta Sun1 S. N. MUK":KJI Str,rl B. K. MI;I(`,I.;KJI,:I2 ( nllrrnnlc, Prcnlirr Lighti, I: Irliluxirie(; Private Ltd, ll-mbay SHRI J. R. NAHAH ,I. .J. Enginrc: t:s!; Co i~ornhay ~lllCI,j. G. PATFI, H;ijaj I<lrctrll:alS l.,rl!, Bombay S-~ICI G. A. RAO S~irtr S. U. BHOJWANI ( Al:ernal~ , Electric Lamrx atlfi Accessorie,: Scclional Committee, Srrm SACKIN Sbx
SHKI R. R. ANAI>A
SHRI

P. BOSE

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC+

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 1lOOOZ

IS : 2672- 1966 ( Continuedfrom page 1 )
Members SHRI P. L. VAHI SHRIV. VENVGOPALAN Rcprc.`enting Otis Elevator Co ( India ) Ltd, Bombay Central Electricity Board (Ministry of Irrigation 6~ Power ), New Delhi

,

CAIEB ELECTRICAL, INSPECTOR TO THE GOVERNMENT OR MADRAS ( Alfernotc ) Director General, SJ~RI Y. S. VENUATESWARAN, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary

ISI ( Ex-@cio Member 1

SERI T. RAJARAMAN

Deputy Director

( Elec tech ), IS1

Panel

for Code of Practice

for Library

Lighting,

ETBDC

9/P4

Conurnn Stmr K. S. S~RMA
Members SHXI B. CUNNINQHAM SHRI D. K. DAS ( Alfnnotc ) SEHI K. C. GROVER
SURVEYOR SENIOR OB WORKS

National

Physical Laboratory

( CSIR ), New Delhi

The

General Calcutta

Electric

Co

of

India

Private

Ltd,

Central

Public Works Department,

New Delhi New Delhi

( ELEC ), I ( Alternate ) ARCHITECT ( B ) I SHlll P. N. SRlNIVAsAN

Central Public Works Department, Philips India Ltd, Calcutta

lS:2672.1!%6

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE LIBRARY

FOR

LIGHTING

0.

F 0 R E W 0 R. D

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 5 August 1966, after the draft finalized by the Illuminating Engineering and Lifts Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 The technique of interior lighting in building has developed beyond the stage involving mere provision of light. As a result of a good deal of scientific investigation it has been recognized that improvements in environmental conditions are needed to alleviate the strain on eyesight so widely prevalent. This is particularly so in a library building where Modern all sorts of reading materials have to be read for long periods. standards of interior lighting call for the provision of both quantity and quality adequate for a particular visual task so as to ensure a satisfactIn the designory degree of ease and comfort to the individual at work. ing of a lighting installation, provision of adequate illumination is not a guarantee of comfort. It has been found that such factors as `glare' and `brightness .pattern' shall receive great consideration if it is to achieve its object. From this point OF view, this code of practice has been drawn up. 0.3 Modern libraries have rooms for lectures, demonstrations and seminars; facilities for projecting still or motion pictures; and acoustically treated rooms where musical records can be played; study rooms, carrels, or individual study rooms as well as special rooms and display cases for showing rare books, manuscripts and archival materials. It is, therefore, necessary that while recommending a lighting practice in a library, the following factors should be taken into account: a) The possible wide range in the ages and library visitors, b) The and varying conditions of reading of eyesight materials 3 educational within levels of the these groups, used.

found

c) The variety

that are currently

IS : 2672 - 1966

0.4 The

following undesirable features should be avoided or eliminated as far as possible while recommending lighting installations for libraries: a) The major dependence upon table lamps for reading purposes, uncomfortable glare, b) Dark furniture and interior finishes which produce brightness differences with the reading task, c) Reading d) Lighting tables with glossy tops which create units which produce glare, and

reflected

e) Stack lighting with bare or inadequately shielded lamps or lamps producing a very high glare but inadequate amount of illumination on the bottom shelves. 0.5 Provision of a good lighting system calis for co-ordination from the initial stages among the various parties concerned, namely, the ihe consultant and the illumination engineer. Therefore, architect, it is essential that information regarding lighting should be exchanged between the parties from the stage of planning to installation. 0.6 This code has been drawn up in order to specifically deal with the General aspects of interior lighting, special aspects of library lighting. including assessment of glare, are dealt with in IS : 3646 ( Part I )-1966*. 0.7 In preparing this code assistance `Recommended practice of library Engineering Society of U.S.A. has been derived from IES/RP4-1950 lighting' prepared by Illuminating

0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressbe rounded off in accordance with ing the result of a test, shall The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-196C)t. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standilrd.

1. SCOPE covers the principles and practices governing good Iighting of both public and institutional libraries. It recommends the levels of illumination to be achieved by general principles of lighting. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For apply. the purpose of this s:andard, the following definitions shall

1.1 This standard

*Codr of practice for interior illumination : Parr I Principles of good lighting and aspects of design. +Rules for rounciing off numerical values ( reoised ). 4

IS : 2672 - 1966 2.1 Luminous Flux-The light given hy a source, or received by a surface or transmitted by a medium irrespective of the way in which it is The unit of luminous flux is the distributed spatially as r,.:gards direction. lumen ( Im). 2.2 Lumen ( lm)-(one stcradian) by candela. The luminous a point source flux emitted within having a uniform unit solid afigle intensity of one

2.3 Candela (cd)-The unit of luminous intensity. Its magnitude is r)rle-sixtieth oi the luminous intensity of one square centimetre of a black-body radiator operated at the temperature of solidification of platinum. 2.4 Illumination - Illumination is the density The unit of illumination dent upon a surSace. ( lm/m*) which is known as lux ( lx). of the luminous fluu inciis lumen per square metre

2.5 Luminance (at a Point of a Surface in (Brightness )The quotient of the luminous direction of an infinitesimal element of the surface under consideration by the orthogonally projected a plane perpendicular to the given direction. The 2.6 Reflectance ( Reflection Factor) -The reflected by a body ( with or without diffusion

a Given Direction? intensity in the given containing the point area of the element on unit is cd/ems. of luminous flux

ratio

) to the flux it receives.

2.7 Contrast - The subjective assessment of the difference in appearance of two parts of a field of view seen simultaneously or successively ( hence brightness contrast, colour contrast, simultaneous contrast). Objectively the relative difference of luminance between two parts of a field of view. 2.8 Glare -A condition of vision in which there is discomfort or a reduction in the ability to see significant objects, or both due to an unsuitable distribution or range of luminance or to extreme contrasts in space and time. 2.9 Glare Index glare in a lighting of room sizes and distributions ( BZ -A number representing the amount of discomfort installation to which upper limits are given for a variety surface reflection factors resulting from ten selected light classification ). method of classifying the in accordance with the intensity in the lower

2.10 BZ ( British Zonal ) Classification -A of fittings light distribution characteristics shape of the mean polar curve of himinous hemisphere. 5

IS : 2673 - 1966 3. ANALYSIS OF VISUAL TASKS which take place in

3.1 Functional AitivitiesThe various activities libraries fall into two main categories, namely : User activities Operative activities

Catalogue reference, book selection, reference and research reading Cataloguing, issuing aud control, book stacking, rebinding, etc general repair,

3.2

Reading

3.2.1 General - Reading is the most important visual task performed in a library. In ,the recommendation of environmental conditions and illumination levels for optimum reading efliciency and comfort, the following three factors, capable of very wide variation, shall be taken into P' account: a) The condition b) The character c) The intensity An additional line of vision. of the reader's of the reading eyesight, material, between and the page and the reader's

and purpose of reading.

factor is the angle

33.2 Condition of Eyesight I- Defective vision may occur in reader; of all age groups though, in percentage, it increases with added years. This could be corrected to some extent with glasses but good lighting and proper seeing-conditions will be particularly helpful for people with subnormal vision. 3.2.3 Variep of Reading Tasks - In any library there will be found a great variety of reading tasks. The readability of printed matter depends upon the type size and its contrast with the background; plus factors such as type face, length of lines, and margin widths. It has been found that two to three times the illumination is needed for pencil work as for average printed matter because of the difference in contrast. Lighting levels and environmental conditions should `be broad enough to compensate for the range and difficulty of these visual tasks. 3.2.4 Intensity and Purfiose of Reading - The third variable is the intensity with which reading is done, or the purpose for which the visitor goes* to the library. Intensive reading may occur in general reading rooms as well as in carrels or other rooms designed for study purposes. With the exception of children's rooms and other areas set aside for browsing the lighting level and environmental conditions for all reading areas should be selected with the expectation that some intensive study will be carried on there. 6

IS : 2672 - 1966 3.3 Book Stacks - Several factors continue to make the lighting of stacks difficult, especially those to which the people have access. Although people are seldom in the stacks for long periods and their visual tasks are intermittent, they should be able to see all of the titlestop -shelf to bottom shelf-easily and quickly. Part of the diEic,tlty ill lighting book stacks is caused by the dark book bindings, by the small printing of the titles and the usually worn out condition of the back of the bincimg partialjy obiiterating the title. Another difficulty is caused narrow stack aisles, and the limitations as to the by the long, location of the light sources in `relation to the vertica! surfaces to be lighted. 3.4 Carrels -Research and study carrels are reading areas often In these, some additional with or located close to the stacks. lighting should be arranged besides the genera1 lighting. integrated functional

3.5 Administrative Office-As a part of every library operation, there shall be areas for regular office work and for other visual tasks, such as indexL,lg, cataloguing, recording, issuing and general control, typing and For these, the same kind and amount of illumination employed in filing. commercial offices will be suitable. 4. ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

4.1 Plandag the Brightness Pattern -The brightness pattern may be considered as composed of three main parts- the task itself, the immediate background to the task and the general surroundings of ceiling floor, equipment and furnishings. For details see walls, IS : 3646 ( Part I ) -1966*. A general guide of view could be: a) b) for the brightness relationship sources areas within like the normal

field

between the visual table tops between room the visual

task and task and

adjacent remote

3 to 1 lOto 1

of the

Since brightness of an object is determined by the reflection charactr&tics of its surface and the quantity of light failing on it: control of brightness contrasts shall be directed primarily for uniform distribution of light and secondly by the choice of sui:able surface colouring whenever possible. 4.2 Room ness ratios Finishes -The ability described above will to keep depend within the to a large maximum hrightextent upon the

*Cede of Practice for interior illumination : Part I Prinriplcs of good lighting arld aspects
of' design.

IS : 2672 - 1966 reflectance values of the room finishes also; in conjunction with the lignring, they set up the brightness pattern of any room and the brightness .raLos between the tastr and other major surfaces within the normal field of views. In order to avoid annoying reflections, smooth non-glossy surfaces are recommended for ceilings, walls and table tops. Besides, these are easy to In additton clean and collect dirt less rapidly than rough matt finishes. to creating comfortable brightness ratios light grey or white coloured surfaces aid materiall!: in the utilization of light. Generally adopted values of reflecta.nce for differen: surfaces are given in Table 1.
TABLE 9 FEATCW Ceilmg Walls Desk and table tops, furniture Floors 1 RECOMMENDED REFLECTANCE VALUES

( ClOllSL 4.2 ) REFLECTANCE percent 70 50 35 30 VALUE

4.3 Reading Table and Desk Tops - In order to keep the brightness ratio between the reading table top and the printed page below, the reflectance of the table top should be higher than the dark-stained tables ( 10 to 12 percent ) commonly used. It is also recommended that reading table and desk tops should have as little specularity or gloss as possible. 4.4 Glare-The question of glare is not only connected with that of brightness and contrast but arises when excessively bright sources of light come within the field of view. In effect, a glare source increases the observer's adaptation level* with a resultant reduction in his contrastsensitivity and visual efficiency Discomfort, and in extreme cases disability, follow when the brightness relationship are only mildly when a relatively high brightness lies close to the annoying ; disability line of vision. In fact, the degree of discomfort arising from a glare sensation is a function of the brightness of the glare source, its relative size and nearness to the lilte of sight. Avoidance of glare in artificial lighting systems can usually be effected with the layout of suitably chosen lighting equipment and by the arrangement. of the furniture and fittings to suit. Recourse should first be made to prevent a direct view of the source or fittings by ensuring that the contrasts between them and their surroundings are kept within desirable limits.
*When required, the eye has the capacity limits between which it will respond usefully ore evoked by the prevailing level of ambient adaptation level. to adjust automatically the upper and lower to stimulation by light. These adjustments brightness, which is usually described as the

8

15:2672-1966 4.4.1 Assessment of Glare -For
reference 5. RECOMMENDED assessment of glare shall be made to IS: 3646 ( Part I )-1966*. from light sources,

ILLUMINATION

VALUES

illumination values should be graded accordi g to These values should be maintain 9 d in the difficulty of the visual tasks. service through proper cleaning and relamping of lighting equipment, the cleaning of windows, and the maintenance of the reflectance values of room surface. Initial values from the artificial lighting system shall be greater by a percentage sufficient to compensate for the normal depreciation expected in service ( 30 to 35 percent ). As already described, it is apparent that some of the visual tasks encountered in libraries are comparable in character to those in schools and offices a'nd should, therefore, be consistent with them. Consistent with the above explanation but with no reference to the type of illuminant, luminaire, or type of lighting system, the levels of illumination recommended for the various types of visual tasks graded according to the difficulty of the task as a library lighting practice are given in Table 2. 5.2 It is not a simple matter to specify suitable intensity levels if these are Since there is no distinct threshold to be based upon sound reasoning. level of illumination below which the performance of particular visual task is greatly impeded, some compromise has to be sought between an ideal level and one which is obviously inadequate. Generally, a recommended level is arrived at after being carefully weighed in the relation it bears to the eyesight, the visual task, the environment, and the economics involved. Any specification is, therefore, always open to a great deal of controversy. It may, however, be summarised that any of the above recommended levels of illumination could serve chiefly as a guide to good practices. It is not always suficient to provide just enough light and lrave it at that. Adequate illumination will benefit people with normal sight, but the benefit will be far greater to those with faulty vision. For example, elderly people require higher illumination values for the same facility ol seeing as young people. 5.3 In any lighting arrangement the required level of illumination co; `.' be achieved through a combined usage of the natural daylighting and t!(c Proper use of daylighting will also allow furthe! artificial lighting. reduction in the use of artificial lighting consistent with the economics of the lighting arrangement. 6. DAY LIGHTING

5.1 Any recommended

6.1 Most
One

people prefer to work in buildirfgs of the characteristics of daylight which

having good daylighting. gives it this appe2I is the

aspects of design.

*Code of practice for interior illumination : Part I Prlaciplc; of good lighting and

ISr2672-1966
TABLE 2 LEVELS OF IJLUMINATION

( c1uusc 5.1 )
SL TASK ILLUYINATI~N LEVEL GLARE INDEX

No. (1) i) DifGult (2) and Critical Visual Tasks:

(3)
IX

(4)

a) Discrimination of fine detail ( 6-8 point type, footnotes, etc. legal reference books, with small condensed type, illustrations with fine details, ctc ) b) Poor contrasts ( newspapers, pencil notes, carbon copies, c) Study and long periods nary books d) Book repair ii) Ordinary Visual maps, etc ) over ordi300 to 700 22

research, reading of time involving

and binding Tasks:

a) Discrimination of moderately fine detail (leading 8-12 point type, children's books; general and private office work; active file and mail rooms; cataloguing ) b) Better-than ing better iii) Casual Visual average magazines `Tasks: and reception
r0Oms;

150 to 300

19

contrast ( readand books )

a) Conference
stacks

closed to the public: stairways and hallways used by the public: washrooms; checkrooms; and auditoriums; other service areas; book storage rooms where lables arc to be read

70 to 150

16

b) Intcrmitrent periods of time ( browsing; casual reading; book stacks; card files; check-in and chrck-out

desks

)
Tasks:

iv)

Simple

Visual

Corridors not used bv thr public; storage rooms involving no reading of lables

30 to 70

-

IS : 2672- 1966
change both in quality and quantity, creating interest and constant This variation has to be taken into account when avoiding _ monotony. planning a scheme to ensure that at no time will the illuminatioh over the working area be !css than that recommended for the particular visual task. In some buildings it will be possible to achieve this by natural lighting alone, but in other buildings, especially those located in obstructed city areas, it will be necessary to supplement the natural lighting by artificial lighting designed to operate permanently Slyring day time; this should be properly co-ordinated with natural lightmg as described in IS : 3646 For detailed asperts ~1~claylighting, reference shall be ( Part I )-1966*. made to IS : 2440-19637. 6.2 In essence, the design of a lighting system should be such as to provide permanent artificial supplementary lighting in addition to poss$$e adequate daylight, in order to create an intimate and inviting atmosphere in libraries. 7. MAINTENANCE OF LIGHTING INSTALLATIONS

7.1 Unless both the structure ( the: room surfaces and windows or roof glazing) of a building and the lighting equipment are well maintained, the aims of good lighting will soon be nullified; the lighting natural or artificial, will no longer fulfil its purpose adequately, the cost of providing useful light wil! increase and the appearance of the building will The problems associated with good maintenance are deteriorate. complex and vary from situation to .situation, but properly planned maintenance schedules are always desirable for both the structure and the artificial lighting equipment ( the lamps and fittings ) ( SCE IS : 3646 (Part I) - 1966*.

*Codr of practice for interior aspects of drsign. tCode of practicr for daylight&

illumination of buildings.

: Part I Principles
( Since revised ).

of good lighting

and

11

6uftEAu
Headquarters: Telephones:
Regional

OF ~`NDIAN

i+t~htoAR~s

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to ail Offices) Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 1375 36 24 99 21843 i 3 16 41 41 24 42

Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : i/l 4 C. 3. T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road. `Eastern Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC. BOMBAY 400093 600113

Southern tWestern

( t: ;; :: Marol. Andheri ( East ). 6 32 92 95

Branch Offices: IPushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 Peenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Banga!ore Tumkur Road 38 4g 55 BANGALORE 560058 I 38 49 56 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor. Bhadbhade Road, T. f. Nagar, 667 16 BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 5315. Ward No. 29, R.G. Baruz Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 Fl-6-56c L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ). 23 1083 HYDERABAD 500001 6 3471 1?14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAlPffR 302005 ( 6 98 32 21 68 76 11714 18 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 { 21 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 ' 6 23 05 T.C. No. 14/l 421. University P.O.. Patayam /6 2104 TRIVANDRUM 695635 16 21 17 /nspection Offices ( With Sale Point ):

f

Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nsgar, PUNE 411005 .

2 51 71 5 24 35

*Sales Office in Calcutta is et S Chowringhoo Approach, P. 0. priftcttp 27 68 00 Street. Cdcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay ir lt NoveRy Chornw grant Rm ~(528 Bombay 4oooo7 :Safsr Office in Bmgaloro k ot Unify Building, Nar&nhw~ja Squaw, 22 3~ 7j Smg*kro WI002

RepzyJr8phy :

upit,

Bxs,

New hltd,

rndb

