Indian Standard 


Tar Hureri Ait — Tags ear 
ai — ak sent 


Earth Moving Machinery — Rubber 
Tyred Machines — Steering 
Requirements 


ICS 53.100 


© BIS 2018 


Rds AM emu 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM Te, 9 aeee SL Art, ae feeet-110002 
Lm MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2018 Price Group 6 


Material Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Material 
Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard addresses the general requirements, requirement of a steering system, emergency steering system. 
This standard is intended to replace the requirements currently notified under CMV(A)R, 1989. 


While formulating this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following: 


ISO 5010 : 2007 Earthmoving machinery — Rubber-tyred machines — Steering requirements 
EN 12643 : 2010 Earthmoving machinery — Rubber-tyred machines — Steering requirements 


Rule 98A of the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 already lays down certain technical prescriptions and 
requirements which have been suitably considered. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding 
off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the 
same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16480 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


EARTH MOVING MACHINERY — RUBBER TYRED 
MACHINES — STEERING REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies steering system tests and 
performance criteria for evaluating the steering 
capability of rubber-tyred, self-propelled earth-moving 
machines and/or construction equipment vehicles as 
defined under CMVR regulations. 


Itis applicable to machines equipped with either manual 
steering, power-assisted steering or fully powered 
steering systems as defined in IS/ISO 6165. 


It is not applicable to rollers, compactors, pipe layers 
and track equipment's which does not include rubber- 


tyres. 
2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions to 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revisions and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

16479 : 2015 Performance requirements and test 
procedures of braking systems for 
wheeled high speed rubber tracked 
earth moving machines and all types 
of construction equipment vehicles 

ISO 6165 : 2006 Earth-moving machinery — Basic 
types — Identification and terms and 
definitions 


ISO 7457 : Earth-moving machinery — 
1997 Determination of turning dimensions 
of wheeled machines 
ISO 10968 : Earth-moving machinery — 
2004 Operator's controls 
ISO 13849-1: Safety of machinery — Safety-related 
2006 parts of control systems — Part 1: 
General principles for design 
ISO 13849-2: Safety of machinery — Safety-related 
2012 parts of control systems — Part 2: 


Validation 

ISO 15998 : 2008 Earth-moving machinery — 
Machine-control systems (MCS) 
using electronic components — 
Performance criteria and tests for 
functional safety 


IS No. Title 
IEC 62061 Safety of machinery — Functional 
safety of safety-related electrical, 
electronic and programmable 
electronic control systems 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS/ISO 6165 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Steering System — System including all machine 
elements between the operator and the ground- 
contacting wheels participating in steering the machine. 


3.1.1 Manual Steering System — System depending 
exclusively on the muscular power of the operator to 
effect normal steering of the machine. 


3.1.2 Power-Assisted Steering System — System 
employing auxiliary power source(s) to supplement the 
muscular power of the operator to effect steering of 
the machine system in which steering is provided by 
steering power source(s). Without the power source(s), 
the machine cannot reasonably be steered with muscle 
power only (see 6.2.1). 


3.1.3 Full Power-Assisted Steering System Fully 
Powered Steering System — System in which the 
steering is performed by one (or several) source(s) of 
power. 

NOTE — A fully powered steering system can be described as 


one that would require 115 N or more muscle power to steer 
without the power assist. 


3.1.4 Emergency Steering System — System used to 
steer the machine in the event ofa failure ofthe normal 
steering power source(s) or engine stoppage. 


3.2 Steering Power Sources 


3.2.1 Normal steering power source means for 
providing power to effect steering in either power- 
assisted or fully powered steering systems. 


Example: Hydraulic pump, air compressor, electric 
generator. 


3.2.2 Emergency Steering Power Source — Means for 
providing power to the emergency steering system. 


Example: Hydraulic pump, air compressor, 
accumulator, battery. 


IS 16480 : 2018 


3.2.3 Failure of Normal Steering Power Source — 
Complete and instantaneous loss of a normal steering 
power source output. 


NOTE — It is assumed that not more than one failure will occur 
at the same time. 


3.3 Steering Control Element 


Control element used by the operator to transmit the 
desired direction of steering of the machine. 


3.3.1 Steering Wheel — Operating element, circular 
shaped or shaped as a segment of a circle, used to 
generate a steering angle to the steered wheels. 


3.3.2 Lever Control — Operating element consisting 
of two independent levers that generate control of the 
relative speed of the left hand and right-hand sides of 
the drive system. 


3.3.3 Joystick Control — Operating element(s), used 
to apply either a steering angle to the steered wheels, 
or to generate a relative speed of the drive systems on 
the left-hand and right-hand side, by actuating the 
operating element to the left hand or right-hand side. 


3.3.4 Pushbutton Control — Operating element 
consisting of two separate pushbuttons which can 
generate a steering angle to the steered wheels or 
generate control of the relative speed of the left-hand 
and right-hand sides of the drive system. 


3.3.5 Foot Pedal Control — Operating element used 
to apply either a steering angle to the steered wheels, 
or to generate a relative speed of the drive systems on 
the left-hand and right-hand sides, by pressing two 
separate foot pedals. 


3.4 Steering Effort — Necessary force exerted by the 
operator on the steering control element in order to steer 
the machine. 


3.5 Steering Angle — Total displacement angle 
between the front wheels and the rear wheels as they 
move about one or more vertical steering axes from 
their normal straight-ahead condition to a turned 
condition: 


A steering angle accomplished by a combination of 
geometries incorporating Ackermann steering is 
included, and also requires the location of the steering 
angle measurement to be specified. 


NOTES 


1 The steering angle for multiple-axle machines is determined 
between the wheels at the farthest forward and farthest rearward 
axles. 


2 Ackermann steering inherently has a greater steering angle 
on the side of the machine toward the inside of the turn as 
compared to the wheels on the outside of the turn. Therefore, 
where Ackermann steering is involved, the location of the 
steering angle measurement also needs to be specified. 


3.6 Tyre Circle — Outer tyre clearance diameter 
determined in accordance with 9. 


3.7 Working Circuit Pressure — That nominal 
pressure applied to the specific circuit by the pump(s). 


3.8 Transfer Device — Parts of the steering system 
(see 3.1) being used to transfer forces (actuation forces 
and steering forces) and/or steering commands between 
the steering control element (see 3.3), and if applicable, 
the steering power source (see 3.2). 


NOTE — The steering forces and/or steering commands can 
be transferred, 


a) mechanically, 
b) hydraulically, 
c) electrically, and 
d) electronically, 


or as a combination of these. 


3.9 Steered Wheels — Wheels whose direction of 
movement can be directly or indirectly modified in 
order to determine the machine's direction of travel. 


3.10 Safe State — State applied automatically or 
manually, after a malfunction of the steering-control 
system whereby the controlled equipment, process or 
system is stopped or switched to a safe mode in order 
to prevent unexpected movements or potentially 
hazardous release of stored energy. 


NOTE — Safe state is a function of many factors, including 
operating conditions, the technologies involved, fault detection 
capabilities and the safety concept. For electro-hydraulic 
steering control systems, disabling the electronic portions during 
a fault and relying on the hydraulic steering system is just one 
of several ways to reach a safe state. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 All Steering Systems 


The following requirements apply to all steering 
systems within the scope of this Indian Standard. 


4.1.1 The normal steering control element provided for 
the operator shall continue in all circumstances to be 
the steering control means of the operator. 


4.1.1.1 When the steering control element is released, 
the selected turning circle of tyres (see 3.6) shall remain 
identical or become larger during travel in the forward 
direction. 


4.1.1.2 The steering system shall be designed so that 
the movement of the steering control element is 
consistent with its effect. If control operation is not 
obvious, an operational sign shall be provided 
(for example using symbols). 


4.1.1.3 During machine operation, no uncontrolled 
steering movement shall occur due to the normal 
operation of the electronic steering control system. 


4.1.1.4 The steering control element shall permit the 
rate of steering to be gradually adjusted. If the steering 
speed cannot be gradually adjusted, the maximum 
machine speed shall be limited to 10 km/h. 


4.1.2 All steering systems shall be designed and 
installed on the machine to withstand, without 
functional damage, anticipated force inputs from the 
operator under panic conditions (see 10.1.1). 


4.1.3 The normal steering system sensitivity, 
modulation and response shall be adequate to allow 
the skilled operator to maintain the machine consistently 
within the intended operating path of each operation 
for which the machine was designed. This shall be 
verified by meeting the requirements of 10.2. If a 
steering control does not permit modulated steering 
speed, the machine speed shall be reduced to 10 km/h. 


4.1.3.1 Machines with rear axle steering shall also meet 
the steering stability requirements of 10.2.2. 


4.1.3.2 Machines capable of speeds in excess of 
20 km/h in reverse shall have similar steering system 
forces, rates and duration capability in both forward 
and reverse. This shall be verified by system schematics 
or calculations. A test in reverse is not required. 


4.1.4 Steering hydraulic circuits shall, 1f used, 
incorporate the following features: 


a) Pressure control devices as required to avoid 
excessive pressures in the hydraulic circuit; 

b) Hydraulic hoses, fittings and tubing with test 
burst pressures at least four times the working 
circuit pressure control device(s) for normal 
and emergency steering systems; and 

c) Plumbing arrangements which avoid 
excessively tight hose bends, torsion in the 
installed hoses, or scrubbing and chafing of 
hoses. 


4.1.5 Steering system reliability shall be enhanced by 
the selection and design of components arranged so that 
inspection and maintenance can be readily performed. 


4.1.6 Steering system disturbances shall meet the 
conditions given in 4.1.6.1 and 4.1.6.2. 


4.1.6.1 Steering system disturbances due to other 
machine functions shall be minimized by appropriate 
arrangement and geometry. Flexure or travel of 
suspension elements, machine side inclinations or axle 
oscillations and steering variations due to driving and 
braking torques at the wheels are among the influences 
which shall be minimized by suitable system 
arrangement and geometry. 


4.1.6.2 Steering system disturbances due to the 
influences of external forces on the machine within the 


IS 16480 : 2018 


applications for which the machine is designed shall 
not significantly affect steering control. 


4.1.7 Power assisted and fully powered steering 
systems shall meet the conditions given in 4.1.7.1 
and 4.1.7.3. 


4.1.7.1 These systems should preferably be separate 
from other power systems and circuits. Where this is 
not the case, the power assisted and fully powered 
steering systems shall have priority over other systems 
or circuits except for an emergency steering system and 
emergency stopping system which shall be maintained 
at the level of performance specified in IS 16479. 


4.1.7.2 If other systems (consumers) are provided with 
power from the normal steering power source, any 
failure in these systems (consumers) shall be considered 
the same as a failure in the normal steering power 
source. 


4.1.7.3 A change in ratio between the steering control 
element and steered wheels is permissible after failure 
of the normal steering power source, provided the 
requirements of 10.3 are met. 


4.1.8 For machines equipped with an emergency 
steering system, the system should preferably be 
separate from other power systems and circuits. Where 
this is not the case, the emergency steering devices and 
circuits shall have priority over all other systems or 
circuits except for the emergency stopping system, 
which shall be maintained at the level of performance 
specified in IS 16479. 


4.1.9 The operator's manual for machines equipped 
with an emergency steering system shall include the 
following information: 


a) An indication that the machine is equipped 
with an emergency steering system; 

b) Emergency steering capability limitations; and 

c) Field test procedure for verifying that the 
emergency steering system is functional. 


4.1.10 Unintentional Operation 


All steering control elements, except for the steering 
wheel, shall be designed, arranged (that 1s, operator 
station layout), taken out of service (that is, interlocked) 
or secured such as to reduce the possibility of 
unintentional activation when a person is entering or 
leaving the operator area. 


4.2 Steering Systems with Normal and Additional 
Steering Control Elements 


If more than one steering control element is to be used, 
in addition to the requirements of 4.1, the following 
requirements shall also be fulfilled: 


IS 16480 : 2018 


4.2.1 If a conventional steering wheel is one of the 
steering control elements, it shall always be activated 
and have a higher priority than any other steering 
control element and shall be considered as the normal 
steering control element. 


4.2.2 Steering control elements that can be activated/ 
deactivated or which have a restricted speed range shall 
have visible or audible indication to the operator when 
activated. 


4.2.3 If use of a steering control element is limited to 
a certain travel speed in accordance with the steering 
test specified in 10.4, the travel speed of the machine 
shall be restricted by design to that speed when the 
steering control element is activated. 


4.2.4 The function of the additional steering control 
element shall be capable of being switched off or 
disabled, if it is required to be disabled for travel on 
public roads. 


4.3 Steering Systems with Electrical/Electronic 
Transfer Device 


In addition to the requirements of 4.1, these steering 
systems shall also meet the requirements of ISO 15998, 
or ISO 13849 or IEC 62061, as applicable, and the 
following. 


4.3.1 In the case of a single failure of the electrical/ 
electronic steering control system that results in a 
hazardous condition and where the driving speed of 
the machine is greater than 10 km/h, the steering system 
shall pass into the safe state. 


4.3.2 For machines having a speed greater than 20 km/h 
when operated with electrical/electronic steering control 
system, the following performance criteria shall be met: 


a) Steering performance shall be maintained also 
in case of a single failure 2; 

b) Probability of unintended steering shall be 
minimized; 

c) Operator shall be warned in case of a failure 2. 


4.3.3 In the case of failure in the power source for 
the additional steering control element and if the 
normal steering control element is not affected, 
requirement 4.3.2 a) and 4.3.2 b) shall not apply. 


4.3.4 The requirements specified in 4.3.2 shall be 
verified by relevant risk analysis methods, such as FMEA, 
FTA, ETA or similar, as specified by the manufacturer. 


5 ERGONOMIC REQUIREMENTS 


The following requirements apply to all steering 
systems within the scope of this Indian Standard. 


5.1 The machine shall steer in the direction that 
corresponds to the direction of movement of the 


steering control element: that is, steering-wheel rotation 
shall be such that the clockwise rotation will turn the 
machine to the right; counterclockwise rotation will turn 
the machine to the left. 


Operation of the steering control element shall be in 
accordance with IS/ISO 10968 and, as applicable, with 
the normal functioning of the machine. 


5.2 The steering effort, as defined in 3.4, shall be as 
low as practical and shall not exceed the values given 
in 5.2.1 and 5.2.2. 


5.2.1 The steering effort for normal steering systems 
using a steering wheel shall not exceed 115 N when 
specified for the steering tests according to 10. 


The steering actuation forces for operating elements 
apart from the steering wheel shall be in accordance 
with Table 1. 


5.2.2 The steering effort for emergency steering systems 
shall not exceed 350 N for the steering tests according 
to 10. 


5.3 Steering control element movement to produce a 
given result shall not vary by more than 25 percent 
between right and left turns up to a 30? steering angle. 
This may be shown by calculations. For Ackermann 
steering, this angle applies to the wheels toward the 
inside of the turn. 


5.4 When continued moving of the steering control 
element is required to continue changing the steering 
angle, it is desirable to make steering control movement 
for a given steering angle change greater in the vicinity 
of the straight-ahead position, such as is commonly 
achieved with variable rate worm steering gears. 


Table 1 Control Actuating Forces 
(Clause 5.2.1) 


SI Control-Actuating Force, in 
No. Newton 
oF 
Max Normal Minimum ” 
(Frequent 
Operation) 

i) Hand lever, forward/ 200 80 20 
backward lever, sideways 100 60 15 
brake lever, upwards 400 60 15 

ii) Foot pedal 450 120 30 
tread, centre-pivoted 230 50 30 
iii) Toe pedal 90 50 12 


iv) Fingertip lever or switch 25 10 


? For information only. Since the actuating force can be variable 
along the travel of the control lever, the indicated values are 
intended to be achieved during the movement and, in particular, 
before any engagement into a detent position. 


i With back support: 150 N. 


6 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Normal Steering 


Steering effort (see 3.4) for normally operating systems, 
whether manual, power-assisted, or fully powered, shall 
not exceed 115 N when negotiating the test course 
described in 10.2.3. 


6.2 Emergency Steering with Power-Assisted 
Steering 


6.2.1 Steering effort (see 3.4) shall not exceed 350 N 
during the emergency steering tests according to 10.3.5 
and 10.3.6. If this requirement is not met, the steering 
system shall be classified and tested as a fully powered 
steering system. 


6.2.2 ^ warning device indicating a normal steering 
power source failure is required. This warning device 
shall be audible or visual, and shall be activated by 
failure ofthe normal steering power source. However, 
no emergency steering power source or warning 
device is required, provided that the emergency 
steering capability remains within the limits specified 
in 6.2.1, regardless of time or number of steering 
applications, and that either a significant increase in 
steering effort or a significant increase in steering 
wheel movement for a given amount of steering gives 
a definite indication to the operator of normal steering 
power source failure. 


6.2.3 This emergency steering system shall also function 
with reverse machine movement, if the maximum rated 
speed in reverse exceeds 20 km/h. 


6.3 Emergency Steering with Fully Powered 
Steering 


6.3.1 For machines equipped with an emergency 
steering system, the emergency steering power source 
shall be as defined in 3.2.2. 


6.3.2 Steering effort shall not exceed 350 N when tested 
in accordance with 10.3.5, 10.3.6 and 10.5.4. 


6.3.3 A warning device indicating a normal steering 
power source failure is required. This warning device 
shall be audible or visual, and shall be activated by 
failure of the normal steering power source. 


6.3.4 This emergency steering system shall also function 
with reverse machine movement if the maximum rated 
speed in reverse exceeds 20 km/h. 


6.4 All Steering Systems 


All steering systems (normal and emergency) shall 
remain functionally undamaged after testing in 
accordance with 10.1.1. 


IS 16480 : 2018 


7 STEERING TEST COURSE 


7.1 All steering tests shall be performed on courses 
made on a compacted earth or paved surface which is 
flat and which has no more than 3 percent grade in any 
direction (see 9, 10.2.1, 10.3.3, and Figs. 1, 2 and 3. 


Course dimensions 


A= 1.1 times the tyre circle or 14 m, whichever is the 
larger 

B= 1.75times the tyre circle or 22 m, whichever is the 
larger 

C = twice the maximum wheelbase or 15 m, whichever 
is the smaller 

Course length 

Machines with a tyre circle of less than 12 m, all wheeled 

dozers and all graders shall start the test at "Start 1" 

and terminate the test at "Finish 1". All other machines 

shall start the test at "Start 2" and terminate the test at 

"Finish 2". 

2.5 times maximum width over tyres. 

Finish 1. 

Finish 2. 

Corridor 3. 

Corridor 4. 

Corridor 2. 

Corridor 1. 

Start 1. 

Start 2. 

1.25 times maximum width over tyres. 


fo DQ eo Qaa C0 m 


All dimensions in metres. 


Fic. 1 STEERING TEST COURSE 


IS 16480 : 2018 


Key 

A = 1.1 times the tyre circle or 14 m, whichever is the larger 
a Perpendicular to original direction of travel. b Original direction of travel. 
c Point A: forward axle location at initiation of steering control movement (see 10.3.8). 
d Outside line of tyres. 


Fic. 2 EMERGENCY STEERING RESPONSE 


Fic. 3 ALTERNATIVE STEERING TEST COURSE 


6 


7.2 The test course dimensions shown in Fig. 1 shall 
be determined according to tyre circle, wheelbase, 
width over tyres and machine type. 


7.3 The stated minimum values in Fig. 1 are set forth 
to maintain a reasonable course for the smallest 
machines. 


7.4 The wheelbase for a multiple-axle machine for 
establishing the Fig. 1 test course dimensions is the 
distance between the most forward axle and the most 
rearward axle. 


7.5 The mirror image ofthe test course shown in Fig. 1 
may be used. 


7.6 Machines with optional tyre sizes shall be tested 
with tyres approved by the manufacturer having the 
narrowest tyre tread width. 


Except for the alternative test course for Fig. 3 machines 
with optional tyre sizes shall be tested with the tyres 
approved by the manufacturer that have the narrowest 
tyre tread width. 


7.7 Additional steering tests shall be performed 
according to 10.4, with the additional steering control 
elements lever control, joystick control and pushbutton 
control. 


8 MACHINE SPECIFICATIONS FOR TEST 


8.1 Scrapers and dumpers shall be at the manufacturer's 
rated maximum gross mass and axle distribution, 
including the mass of the heaviest combination of 
equipment and attachments approved by the 
manufacturer, an operator of 75 kg and a full fuel tank. 


8.2 Wheeled loaders, wheeled dozers, excavators and 
graders shall be at the manufacturer's empty machine 
mass, including the mass of the heaviest combination 
of equipment and attachments approved by the 
manufacturer which produce the greatest load on the 
steered axle(s), an operator of 75 kg and a full fuel 
tank. 


8.3 All component parameters related to steering 
capability shall be within the manufacturer's 
specifications, that is, tyre size and pressure, hydraulic 
fluid pressure and flow, warning device actuation point, 
etc. 


9 TYRE CIRCLE TEST PROCEDURE 


The tyre circle (used in calculating the test course 
dimensions for Fig. 1 and Fig. 2) is the outer tyre 
clearance diameter as determined in ISO 7457 and the 
following. 


9.1 Use only the normal steering control element (for 
example steering wheel) and the normal steering 
system. Controls of other functions that can affect the 


IS 16480 : 2018 


steering path obtained shall not be used (for example 
steering brakes, grader wheel lean, grader rear bogie 
steer). 


9.2 For machines with different right- and left-hand 
steering circles, use the smaller tyre circle in calculating 
the test course dimensions. 


9.3 Machines with three or more axles which include 
towed trailing units shall have the tyre circle determined 
without any semi-trailed or trailing units being towed 
in order to preclude steering stop interference between 
the trailing portions and the leading unit. 


10 STEERING TESTS 


10.1 Tests with All Steering Systems 


10.1.1 Steering systems with a steering wheel as the 
steering control element shall resist a force of 900 N 
applied to the steering control element in the direction 
of the control element movement (see 4.1.2) without 
any restriction of their function. 


Other steering control elements shall resist the double 
load of the maximum operating force as defined in 
Table 1. 


10.1.2 Machine tyres shall remain within the boundaries 
of the test courses as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, 
excepting machines with three or more axles which 
include a towed semi-trailed or trailing section or 
unit(s), where the tyre path of those semi-trailed or 
trailing unit(s) is excluded. 


10.2 Tests with Normal Steering System 


10.2.1 The steering system performance shall be 
sufficient to maintain the machine tyres within a straight 
course 100 m long and having a width of 1.25 times 
the maximum width over tyres while travelling at 
maximum forward speed. Normal operator steering 
corrections are permissible. 


10.2.2 Machines with rear axle steering shall be driven 
at 8 km/h + 2 km/h in a circular path with a diameter 
corresponding to approximately half of the largest 
steering angle. When releasing the steering control 
element, the steering angle shall not increase. 


10.2.3 The steering system shall provide sufficient 
capability to maintain the machine tyres (see 10.1.2) 
within the test course shown in Fig. 1, constructed in 
accordance with 7, in forward travel at a sustained speed 
of 16 + 2 km/h, from the time the axes of the front 
wheels enter the course until the axes ofthe front wheels 
reach the end of the course. The steering effort shall be 
recorded and shall not exceed 115 N. Several practice 
runs are permitted to allow the operator to develop an 
even, modulated application of muscular force on the 
steering control element. 


IS 16480 : 2018 


10.3 Tests with Emergency Steering System 


10.3.1 Check the emergency steering warning device 
system for proper functioning in accordance with 6.2.2 
and 6.3.3. 


10.3.2 The power for the normal steering system shall 
be disconnected if engine-driven because engine power 
is employed to drive the machine through the test 
courses specified in 10.3.3, 10.3.5, 10.3.6 and 10.3.8. 


10.3.3 The emergency steering system performance 
shall be sufficient to maintain the machine tyres 
(see 10.1.2) within a straight course 100 m long and 
having a width of 1.25 times the maximum width over 
tyres while travelling at 16 + 2 km/h. Normal operator 
steering corrections are permissible. 


10.3.4 Emergency steering power available at the 
beginning of any emergency steering test run shall be 
no more than is normally available at the instant a 
normal steering power source failure is indicated. 


10.3.5 Emergency steering shall provide an adequate 
steering force and steering duration to maintain the 
machine tyres (see 10.1.2) within the test course 
(as determined from Fig. 1) at 8 + 2 km/h, with the 
machine moving continuously at that speed from the 
time the axes of the front wheels enter the course. 


10.3.6 Emergency steering shall provide an adequate 
steering force and steering rate to maintain the machine 
tyres (see 10.1.2) within the test course (as determined 
from Fig. 1) at 16 + 2 km/h, with the machine moving 
continuously at that speed from the time the axes of 
the front wheels enter the course until the axes of the 
front wheels reach the end of the course. 


10.3.7 During the tests according to 10.3.5 and 10.3.6, 
the steering effort shall be recorded and shall not 
exceed 350 N. Several practice runs are permitted to 
allow the operator to develop an even, modulated 
application of the muscular force on the steering 


ZONE 1 ZONE 2 


control element. 


10.3.8 The emergency steering response test specified 
in this clause shall be conducted by driving the machine 
through the test course as shown in Fig. 2, at 16 
+ 2 km/h. This test shall be conducted with the mirror 
image of the course shown in Fig. 2 if the Fig. 1 test 
course was conducted with its own mirror image. Enter 
the test course with the emergency steering system 
capability as normally available. Initiate a turn at point 
A, as shown in Fig. 2. The start of steering control 
actuation should trigger a ground marker located under 
the front axle, and simultaneously simulate a failure of 
the normal steering power source(s). The machine shall 
complete a 90? turn with the tyre track paths remaining 
within the boundary specified. 


10.4 Steering Test with Additional Steering Control 
Elements 


Additional steering control element(s) shall be tested 
according to Fig. 1. In the case of failure, the highest 
permitted speed shall be defined according to Fig. 4. 


Machine tyres shall remain within the boundaries of 
the test course as shown in Fig. 4, excepting machines 
with three or more axles which include a towed semi- 
trailed or trailing section or unit(s), where the tyre path 
of those semi-trailed or trailing unit(s) is excluded 
(other than avoiding the obstacle). 


None of the cones shall be run over. 


The machine shall be controllable as a comparable 
machine with a steering-wheel as operating element and 
shall provide the same level of safety and efficiency. 


Zone 1: The maximum speed should be realized in 
zone |. The machine shall enter zone 2 centered 
between the cones and parallel to the course. Speed 
may only be reduced after the front edge ofthe machine 
has reached the first group of cones. 


ZONE 3 


1.25xw 


Fic. 4 STEERING TEST WITH ADDITIONAL STEERING CONTROL ELEMENTS (OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE TEST) 


8 


Zone 2: In this zone, the operator is permitted to do 
anything that is required for keeping or reducing speed, 
except for using the brakes. The machine shall swerve 
around the single cone; additional manoeuvres are not 
permitted (for example a loop turn). 


Zone 3: In this zone, the operator may use the brakes 
after the wheel centre of the front tyre has passed the 
cones. The machine shall be able to stay within the 
course until coming to a complete stop. 


10.5 Alternative Steering Tests 


For rubber-tyred earth-moving machines the steering 
tests in this clause may be used as an alternative to 
those tests in 9, 10.2.3 and 10.3.5 to 10.3.8. 


10.5.1 Alternative Test Course 


The alternative test course is a test course having a 
machine clearance diameter of 24 m on a surface as 
specified in 7.1 (see Fig. 3). 


10.5.2 Test Steering Angle 


The steering angle for subsequent use in this test shall 
be determined to the left and right as follows. 


10.5.2.1 Use only the normal steering control element 
(for example steering wheel) and the normal steering 
system. Controls of other functions that may affect the 
steering path obtained shall not be used (for example 
steering brakes, grader wheel lean, grader rear bogie 
steer). 


10.5.2.2 The machine shall be steered into the test 
course and driven in a continuous circular path at 
3+1km/h. To determine the steering angle 
corresponding to the test course according to 10.5.1, 
the outermost part of the machine and its equipment 
shall follow the test course (see Fig. 3). 


IS 16480 : 2018 


10.5.3 Test with Normal Steering Systems 


The steering system shall provide sufficient capability 
to steer the machine from straight-ahead position 
to the steering angle as determined from 10.5.2 within 
a time of 4 s. The forward travel speed shall be 
10 + 2 km/h and the steering effort shall not exceed 
115 N. Tests shall be made turning to both the left hand 
and right-hand side. 


10.5.4 Tests with Emergency Steering Systems 


10.5.4.1 Emergency steering shall provide adequate 
steering force and steering duration to steer the machine 
continuously without interruption from straight-ahead 
position to the left steering angle determined 
from 10.5.2, afterwards to the right steering angle and 
finish in the straight-ahead position. The forward travel 
speed shall be 10 + 2 km/h and the steering effort shall 
not exceed 350 N. 


10.5.4.2 Emergency steering shall provide adequate 
steering force and steering rate to steer the machine 
from straight-ahead position to the steering angle 
determined from 10.5.2 within a time of 6 s. The 
forward travel speed shall be 10 + 2 km/h and the 
steering effort shall not exceed 350 N. Tests shall be 
made turning to both the left-hand and right-hand side. 


10.5.4.3 An emergency steering response test shall be 
conducted by driving the machine from straight-ahead 
position to the steering angle as determined from 10.5.2. 
At the start of steering control actuation, a failure of 
the normal steering power source(s) shall be simulated. 
The time from the start of steering control actuation to 
the steering angle specified in 10.5.2 shall not exceed 
6 s. The forward travel speed shall be 10 + 2 km/h and 
the steering effort shall not exceed 350 N. The test shall 
be made turning to the side of the greatest time as 
determined in 10.5.4.2. 


IS 16480 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Bulk Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 07 


Organization Representative(s) 


Bharat Earth Movers Limited, Mysore Suri K. V. KrisHNAMURTHY (Chairman) 
Suri B. MAHADEVAN (Alternate) 


Airport Authority of India, New Delhi Suri K. S. Kunwar 
Suri JasraL SINGH (Alternate) 
Bharat Coking Coal Limited (A Subsidiary of Coal India Ltd), SHRI ARUNA NAND SAHAY 
Dhanbad SHRI CHANDRA SHEKHAR (Alternate) 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi Suri G. S. MAHAL 


Sarı P. K. Basu Ray (Alternate) 


Caterpillar India Private Limited, Tiruvallur SHRI B. VENKATESH 
Suri N. SEKAR (Alternate) 


Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi Sarı N. P. Dixir 
Sarı R. K. Srivastava (Alternate) 


Department of Heavy Industry, New Delhi SHRI SUSHIL LAKRA 
Suri SANJAY CHavRe (Alternate) 


Desein Private Limited (Consulting Engineers), New Delhi Suri HARISH K. GUPTA 
Suri DrBasis MITRA (Alternate) 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR 
Institutes, Mumbai Suri S. C. SHARMA (Alternate) 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad Suri G. N. VENKATESH 


Sarı H. K. Srivastava (Alternate) 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI S. M. AMANULLAH 
Suri P. B. BHATTACHARJEEY (Alternate) 


Escorts Construction Equipment Limited, Faridabad SHRI AsuisH MATHUR 
Suri Faiz AuMep (Alternate) 


Fact Engineering and Design Organization, Udyogmandala Suri R. K. PILLAI 
Suri Jugy Cranny (Alternate) 


Heavy Machine Building Plant, Ranchi Suri R. PRASAD 
Suri S. Mustari (Alternate) 


Indian Airlines Limited, New Delhi SHRI MANO) KUMAR KAKAR 
Suri ATUL GARG (Alternate) 


Ircon International Limited, New Delhi Nomination Awaited 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, Navi Mumbai Suri N. B. Rao 

Suri A. K. Sen (Alternate) 
JCB India, Ballabgarh SHRI SANJEEV ARORA 
John Deera India Private Limited, Pune SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
Jost's Engineering Company Limited, Mumbai SHRI KANNAN VISHVANATH 


Suri Muresu JAMNADas (Alternate) 


L & T Komatsu Limited, Bangalore Suri G. S. NARAYANA 

Suri K. Kesuava (Alternate) 
Ministry of Defence Directorate of Quality Assurance, New Delhi Suri J. P. TIWARI 

Lr Cor K. Maurya (Alternate) 
Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi Suri A. R. Rao 


Sarı D. J. Basu (Alternate) 


Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai Suri DILIPVISHWANATHAN 
SHRI PANDIAN SEKAR (Alternate) 


National Council for Cement and Building Material, Suri S. N. MEHROTRA 
Suri S. N. M. Kuan (Alternate) 


10 


Organization 


National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, Hyderabad 


National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited, Neyveli 


NMDC Limited, Hyderabad 
Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), New Delhi 


Projects and Development India Limited, Noida 


Terex India Private Limited, Bangalore 


The Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Pune 


Voltas Limited, Thane 


Volvo India Private Limited, Bangalore 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16480 : 2018 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. M. R. K. RAMNATH 
Suri G. G. Krisuna (Alternate) 


SHRI MADHUKAR ANAND 
SHRI P. S. CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SHANMUGAM 
SHRI S. R. SRIDHARAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. M. SATHEES KUMAR 


Suri K. L. Rao 
Sarı K. K. Funpa (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. SINHA 
Sarı R. N. Prasan (Alternate) 


Dr KRISHNA PRASAD 
Suri Tony WEIR (Alternate) 


Suri A. A. BADUSHA 
Suri P. D. BETGERI (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. PRASHAR 
Suri HEMANT PrrArE (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK 
Suri Sam Tuama (Alternate) 


Suri T. V. Scn, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Earth Moving Machinery Subcommittee, ME 7:2 


Organization 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 
Belaz-Enrika Mining Equipment Services Private Limited, 


Mumbai 
Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd (A Subsidiary of Coal India Limited), 


Dhanbad (Jharkhand) 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited, Mysore 
Caterpillar India Private Limited, Tiruvallur 
Escorts Construction Equipment Limited, Ballabhgarh 


Fact Engineering and Design Organization, Udyogmandal 


JCB India, Ballabgarh 


John Deera India Private Limited, Pune 


L & T Komatsu Limited, Bangalore 


National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, Hyderabad 


Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited, Neyveli 
Terex India Private Limited, Bangalore 


The Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Pune 


Volvo Construction Equipment, 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri G. NAGRAJ VENKATESH (Convener) 
Suri H. K. Srivastava (Alternate) 


SHRI PRABHAKAR KOHALE 
SHRI SHANTANU BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUNA NAND SAHAY 
SHRI CHANDRA SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


Suri K. V. KRISHNAMURTI 
Suri C. V. SHIVARAMAIAH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMKRISHNA 
SHRI PRAJEESH SANKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHISH MATHUR 
Sarı Faiz Amman (Alternate) 


Suri V. G. S. NARAYANAN 
Suri E. Jacos Kurian (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHENDRA NARKHEDA 


SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
Suri Krisunat Parir (Alternate) 


Suri G. S. NARAYANA 
Suri K. Kresuava (Alternate) 


Suri G. G. KRISHNA 


SHRI K. SHANMUGAM 
Dr KRISHNA PRASAD 


Suri A. A. BADUSHA 
Suri P. D. BETGERI (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 07 (1237). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


