( Reaffirmed 2003 )

;

Indian Standard

PREVENTIVE MEASURES AGAINST HAZARDS AT WORKPLACES L RECOMMENDATIONS
PART 4 TIMBER STRUCTURES

UDC

69!3.81:658.382.3

0

BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

July 1994 I

Price Group 2

Safety in Construction

Sectional Committee, CED 45

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (Part 4) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Safety in Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Components of timber structures commonly used in building construction are columns, beams, trusses, rafters, purlins, etc of different sizes and forms. Construction and erection of timber structures, though appear to be simple, involve considerable hazards. Depending on their weight and mode of fixing particularly in space or height, some precautionary measures should be adopted during works for necessary safety of the works and the workers. There are various methods in vogue in industries in India and abroad to prevent accident while working on timber structures. This standard has been formulated for providing general guidance in respect of safety requirements to all those involved in timber works, such as the designers, engineers, architects, contractors, supervisors, carpenters and all other workers. This standard also covers the merits and demerits of the institutional practice and suggests suitable remedial measures. However, the list is not exhaustive and any other methods considered to be good depending on the facilities of works may also be adopted, if approved by the competent authority. In addition, from fire safety point of view, a reference may be made to IS 13416 (Part 5) : 1994 `Recommendations for preventive measures against hazards at workplaces : Part 5 Fire safety'. The composition Annex B. of the technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in

IS 13416 (Part 4 ) : 1994

Indian Standard

PREVENTIVEMEASURESAGAINST HAZARD%ATWORKPLACESRECOMMENDATIONS
PART 4 TIMBER STRUCTURE

1 SCOPE
I.1 This standard (Part 4) lays down the safety requirements for the works and workers, while working on timber structures starting from processing the limber, jointing them to make beams, columns, trusses, purlins, etc and erecting them to make the structures including structures with roof covering. 1.2 This standard does not cover the safety requirements during masonry or concrete works for flooring, walling, etc of the structures.

3.2.1 No fragile material should be'used as ladder or supporting aid of the workers during works in space. 4 SAFETY IN TOOL HANI1LING 4.1 In timber works, right from the stage of processing of timber pieces, different types of tools such as saws and drills of various sizes, hammers, planers, chisels, etc are used. The tools should be carefully checked for sharpness before starting the work. Particular attention should be paid to tools with wooden handles or butts. In no case tooL?like hammer, chisel, handsaw, screwdrivers, etc should be used with loose handles as it may cause injury by falling suddenly on the people working nearby. Blunt tools and toob with broken or loose handles are certain to retard the progress of work in addition to causing constant inconvenience to the concerned carpenters. 4.2 During work in height, tools like drills, chisels, hammers or even the box containing them or any other containers or nails and bolts should not be kept haphazardly. This may inadvertently harm the people working there or below by being dislodged due to movement of carpenters. In general, no tool or the box carrying tools, etc should be Left within 500 mm of the edge of a high working platform. 5 SAFETY IN WORKING IN HEIGHT 5.1 Wearing of Safety Dress Material Proper dress including shoes, gown or apron, head gear, etc should be used by the carpenters, which are essential safety measures in carpentry works, and safety belts should be used while working in space or height. 5.1.1 Wearing o/Head-Gear All the workers should wear suitable head gear/helmet (IS 2925 : 1984) for precaution against any untoward happening.

2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard, 3 SAFETY IN TIMBER HANDLING 3.1 On Ground Timber pieces, big or small, may cause injury if carelessly handled during processing, fabrication, erection and transportation. A siender piece with sufficient length should not be attempted to process, push or pull so that it may not get broken at weaker points like at knots with a sudden thrust on the persons working on it. Smaller pieces should be carried in bundles. Carts, trolleys, trucks, ctc should be used as per convenience, for heavier and big&r pieces. For proper handling of the timber by the workers, stronger ropes, wires, aiding poles or rods, etc should be used. While using trucks for transportation, sufficient cart should be taken in loading and unloading the bundles and bigger pieces particularly over the sloped surfaces so that these do not cause any injury to the peopleworkingbclowwho should be given clear sound or signal 10 leave the place well in advance. 3.2 In Space In casts ofworks in space or height where the pieces are required to be taken for fixing with adjacent memhcrs, thcsc should be lifted by using wires or ropes, cranes, c1c while nobody should bc allowed /IO stand or work under the structure.
1

Workers should wear such type of shots th:r2 wil! ensure ficcdom of movcmcnt as well as mimmizc chances of fall from height or roof.

IS:13416(Part4):1994 5.2 Spreading Wire Mesh of Nylon Rope Nets or Galvanized

In roofing work, nylon rope net or galvanized iron

mesh should be spread, duly fixed to the framework below the roof, covering the area from ridge purlin to eave purlin. 5.3 For executing works on the overhanging portion of pitched roof, it is better and easier to work on pitched roof, by spreading 3 strong bambooculm or 70 mm to 100 mm diameter eucalyprus pole
along the lower side parallel to eave duly bound by strong ropes from the ridge. The workers wil! be able to work by making the bamboo or eucalyptus pole as supporting base. The system of such loose support over pitched roofwill not cause hinderance in placing the roof covering. 6 SAFETY IN FABRICATION
of Beams, Trusses,

nearby. Protruded ends of mild steel nails should either be clenched or cut off at the concerned face of the timber. Unnecessarily extended length of bolts beyond the nuts should also be cut and filed. All these, if inadvertently left out, may cause serious injuries to workers at any stage of fabrication, erection or application of paints, creosote, etc. 6.2 Fabrication and Fixing of Columns

OF STRWCetc

TURAL COMPONENTS
6.1 Fabrication The joints in beams, trusses, etc are fixed earlier in fully-fabricated structures but in case of semi-prefab structures, the positions for jointing with necessary prebores and finished ends are duly marked for easy identification and fastening with adjacent parts by using nails or bolts. Simple type of joints like butt fish joints should be employed in joining truss members placed over the layout (full scale) made on workshop fIoor.
6,l.l I"hough it is desirable to use defect-free timber, the same is not always available. Defects, like knots, cross grains, checks, shakes, etc should be accommodated on the timber as per the coda1 provisions given in IS 3364 (Part 1) : 1976 and IS 3364 (Part 2) : 3976. Timber pieces with the accommodable knots particularly at central zone of beams, purlins, etc should be so placed as to bring the knotty face in the compression zone for adequate safety.

Proper fuing of the timber columns, particularly box types or spaced columns fabricated by use of assorted p!anks and spacer blocks generaily rcquirc at the base ready made dwarf RCC footing having extended iron straps duly prcbored. This is an essential arrangement for safe erection of thestructure. The columns should have suitable bearing at the top to accommodate the trusses. At least two bolts at base and one bolt at top should be provided to ensure safety against collapse. The required number of purlins should bc duly fixed on the trus.. ses, generally aided by wooden &a& or iron straps. 6.3 Spreading of Roof Covering Precautionary measures should be adopted while fixing the Corrugated GI or AC sheets over the sloped roof. Due overlapping at the ends and cdgcs of the sheets, screwing the sheets with purlins and fastening byJ-hooks, etcare the requisites for safety against storms, cyclones, etc. While laying ;::d fixing the sheets, from cave to ridge, the carpenters should not move over the sloped roof to avoid slipping down inadvertently. Wooden or bamboo poles may be stretched horizontally over the lower end of the sloped roof to facilitate easy working and safe movement of the cArpenters as described in 5.3. Their tools may also be kept lcancd against this type of temporary supports which will have to bc raised or pulled towards the ridge depending on the progress of work. Sufficient number of labourcrs should be engaged to lift or carry up the necessary materials including Corrugated G-I or AC sheets, timber purlins, etc and there should bc c!car signals and shoutings at the start and end of the lifting work to avoid any untoward happenings. Workers engaged in the work should use safety dress materials (XT 5.1) including cat ladders and safetv harness.
7 WARNING SIGNAIS

6.L.2 Use of Fasteners Fasteners, like mild slcel nails and bolts should be used in prebored ho/es to avoid splitting of the members during driving. The bore diameters for nails should be a bit less, say about 0.8 times the diameter of the respective nails and a bit more for the bolts with edge, end, intermediate and row distances as per the proviston given in IS 2366 : 198.3 and IS 11096 : 1984 respectively for nail and bolt joints. Operation of electric drills for long period of time on harder and thicker picccs, and forcible or casual drivingofnallson harder timberswithout preboringshould bc avoided. Othcnvisc such nails, during hammering, may suddenly and swiftly get thrown out causing serious injurj, to the: carpzntcr himsclforanyother person hclpinkt h:~:.,.`Ii' 2 :,.ing

7.1. Adequate warning signals, notice boardx, CI~: should be depicted at or near the working pl~c:, highlightingthcdangcr involved in non-ohscrvancc ofsafety ru!cs. In addition to written signals, thcri
may also hc: occasional verbal warning% sounded by the SUpxVhrS, ScniOI' Or eXpcricnccd WOrkC:IS SIJ that the busy workers may nol he 111clifl'icully c\cn when they inadvcrtcnrly ll,rget the bahiu h;tl`clj r:.IlCS.

IS 13416 (Part 4 ) : 1994 7.2 In the workplace, there should be adequate quantity of safety equipment, garments, shoes, helmets, etc as per the number of workers to be engaged. The supervisor should ensure that no person in workplace violates the safety rules even in short or temporary absence of the supervisor. 8 PRECAUTIONS In addition to the specific provisions, following precautions should also be adopted: The sling points should be suitably positioned from safety considerations particularly in case of laminated timber constructions involving use of small dimensioned timber as slings may have embeding effect in timber pieces due to pulls and self weight of structural component. Similarly adequate precaution should be taken while unslinging under unfavourable conditions of height after the structure has been hoisted in place.

a) Trusses should be carefully handled while
tilting up as very large stresses hnd bending moments arise in the upper chord due to its possible bending out of the plane and reversal of stresses may also take place.

d) While using scaffolds

and ladders the provisions for safety given in' IS 3696 (ParL 1) : 1987 and IS 3696 (Part 2) : 1991 respectively should be followed.

b)

Framing presents problem after erection had commenced and joists, purlins, sheathing, etc are still not provided. This skeleton may need adequate bracings to protect compression members in particular and the frame as a whole until structure is complete.

9 TRAINING The carpenters should be imparted basic training in respect of dangers associated with the works and the methodology of avoiding the dangers for smooth and speedy completion of the work.

ANNEX A (Clause 2 )
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS Title Code of practice for nail-jointed limber construction @sf revision) Specification for industrial helmets (second revision) Title Part 2 Converted revision) timber yirst

IS No.

IS No.

2366 : 1983 2925 : 19u

36% (Part 1): Safety code of scaffolds and lad1987 ders : Part 1 Scaffolds 36% (Part 2) : Safety code of scaffolds and ladders : Part 2 Ladders 1991 11096 : 1984 Code of practice for design and construction of bolt-joinled timber construction

and 3364 (Part I) : Methods of measurement evaluation of defects in timber: 1976 Part 1 Logs (F-d revision) and 3364(Part 2) : Methods of measurement evaluation of defects in timber: 1976

IS : 13416 ( Part 4 ) : 1994

ANNEX
COMMITTEE Safety in Construction chab7nun
h4~1 GEN s.N. Bourn
Me??rberS
SHRIK. S. S. zklJAN

B ( Foreword )
COMPOSITION Committee, CED 45

Sectional

Rep.wenting
Engineer-in-Chief's National Central Central Builders' Thermal Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi New Delhi

Power Corporation, New Delhi

SHRI k B. LN. (Akm~re) SHRIG.S. CHANDPLJRI SHfu D. S. KHANGURA (&?rmle)
CHIEFENGINEER (TRAINING) SUPFOWIKNDING ENGINEER (TRAINING)(Altemure) MAI DALBIR SINGH SHR~VIKKAMKuMAR (Akmte) DEPUTY DIRWIOR (B&s) A.W.TANT DEXGN ENGINEER (B&S) @kernore) SHRIP. G. DEVADA~ SHRIP. K DUTTA SHRIA P. BAHADUR (.4ltemafe) FIREADVISER DZP~TY FIRE A~vtsm (A~lermru)

Water Commission,

Public Works Department, Association

New Delhi

of India, Bombay (RDSO), I~ucknow

Ministry of Railways

Acrow India Ltd, Bombay Ministry of Surface Transport Ministry of 1 Iome Affairs

(Roads

Wing), New Delhi New Delhi

(Fire Services),

SHKIV. K JAN DR A K. PANDA (Akniale) DR J. L. JETHWA SHRIM. K. VERMAN (Alternate) SHIU v. L. k%IHANA SHRI U. B. PARELKAR (Alternate)

Steel Authority Central

of lndia Ltd, New Delhi Station, Dhanbad Bombay Ltd, New Delhi

Mining Research

Ministry of Labour

(DGFASLI),

SHRI B. B. Ku~ SHRI .I. L. MAHXJAN SHRI V. K k&SLlWAL (.`bk7KZl~)
SHRl N. L. MANCIIANDA SHIUR. P. CHAlURv'EPI (AkTtale) SHR~ J. P. METAL SHRIA C. NIRWANI SHRJ A K I&ANNA

National Buildings Construction Corporation Geological Survey of India, Calcutta Rashtriya I'ariyojna Ninuar

Ntgam Ltd, New Delhi

The Institution 0fEngineen: (India), Calculta Hindustan Construction Co I,td, Bombay The Indian Institute Hindustan Central Gammon National Hindustan Steelworks of Architects, Construction Insiitute Hombay Ltd, Calcutta (CSIR), NLW Delhi

(~kt710fe) SHRIUMAKANT B. PARE~XAR
SHRI A. 1,. CHHATRE
SHRIk J. PATANW SHR~D. M. SRIVAS~AVA(Akmale)

(Alremote)
Road Research

Stm Aor~ RAM
SHRI G. K `l'k~ (Akmme) SHIUS. A. REDUI SHRtV. M. DI-L%RAP (Alzcmate)

India Ltd, Bombay Safety Council, Bombay

SHRIAJ. REGO
SH~U R. P. BHANUSHALI (Almwte) `SHRIS. ROY

Prefab Ltd, New Delhi

SHRI htKUNDU(Akrnot~) SHRI D. S. MISHRA (~kmure)
DR GOV~NDSACHDEV Sttrn S. N. SANYAL S~tu II. N. MISRA [Ahemate)

In personal capactty (J-1374, P&m Khur, I11srGurguwu"", Iloym~~ I `2017) Forest Research Institute, Dchra Dun Fabricare, Punt

SHKI JAY PRAKFSHSATHE StiRI ADHAY KHIJ~~~AR (~lkmte) SHRI SADANANDSATFVE (Alremote)
Stttu S. K G~JHATXWJRTA SI 1RIS.K.GUk!!1`1IAKIJRTA

COL,~`. P:rYAGI SHill N. K BHATTACWRYA (Akmari)
SttRt 3. VENUTARAMAN, Director (Civ Engg)

4

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has a copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced iu any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed t6 the Director ( Publications), BlS.

Review of Indian Standards
Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such a review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession ofthe latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Addition'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. CED 45 ( 5045 ) Publication

Amcadmentr Issued Since Amend No. Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Man& Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 3310131,331 13 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Afar Marg
NEW DELHI 110002 Maniktola 160036 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern 37 84 99, { 37 86 26, 53 38 43, t 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 15 19, t 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Officer) Telephones 33101 31 t 331 13 75
37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

600113

- Western :' Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 430093

Andheri ( East )

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORB. Branches : AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. ,JAIPUR. KANPUR. I LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

