1S/1S0

10055:1996

Indian Standard

MECHANICAL VIBRATION -- VIBRATION TESTING REQUIREMENTS FOR SHIPBOARD EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY COMPONENTS

ICS 47.020.01

@ BIS 2007 BUREAU OF INDIAN MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW October 2007 DELHI STANDARDS SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Group 3

MARG

Mechanical

Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee,

MED 28

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 10055 : 1996 `Mechanical vibration -- Vibration testing requirements for shipboard equipment and machinery components' issued by the International Organization fo( Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. deviations. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standards, Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

while in

In this adopted standard, reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard, which is to be substituted in its respective place, is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: International ISO 2041 :1990 Vocabulary Standard and shock -- Corresponding Indian Standard on Degree of Equivalence Identical

Vibration

IS 11717 : 2000 Vocabulary vibration and shock (first revision)

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the in this standard.

this standard is complied with, the or analysis, shall be rounded off in values (revised)'. The number of same as that of the specified value

1S/1S0 10055:1996

Indian Standard MECHANICAL VIBRATION -- VIBRATION TESTING REQUIREMENTS FOR SHIPBOARD EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY COMPONENTS

1

Scope

This International Standard defines vibration test requirements for shipboard equipment and machinery requirements for such equipment and machinery components to ensure consistency in vibration resistance components. The tests are intended to locate resonances of the equipment and impose endurance tests at these frequencies, if any. The vibration test is a type test, unless otherwise agreed between the parties concerned. Ths International Standard is applicable to the following shipboard equipment:

--

control and instrumentation. navigation and communication,

--

mast-mounted machinery

equipment,

components

For special machinery, equipment and installations such as antennae, large machinery items and certain unusual designs, [t may be necessary to deviate from this International Standard, subject to approval by the parties cor, cerned. The maximum size and mass of equipment and machinery that can be tested in accordance with this International Standard cannot be def[ned because the capacities of available vibration-testing machines vary. Furthermore, a given piece of equipment or machinery, although too large to be accommodated on a vibration-testing machine, may be separated into components that are small enough for testing. Control and instrumentation equipment, a!though often attached to [arger pieces of machinery, are tested in this manner.

2

Normative

reference

The following standard contains provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the posslbll(ty of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below, Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards.

1

1S/1S0 10055:1996

3

Definitions
of this International Standard, the definitions given in ISO 2041 and the following definitions

F:Jr the purposes apply,

3.1 3.2

machinery: A system of mechanical and electrical elements

that operates in a definable way

machinery component: A physical portion of a machine which can operate as a separate system. and electronic devices which are normal constituents of the operating

3.3 shipboard equipment: Machinery mechanism of ships. 3.4 resilient mounts: Supports (machmery attachment points).

of equipment

in which input dynamic forces are attenuated

at the output

ends

4 Requirements
4.1 Basis of acceptability

Acce;)tabllliy IS contingent upon the ability of the equipment to perform its function during and after the tests speclfled In this International Standard. Minor damage or distortion will be permitted during the testing provided ?p,at such damage or distortion does not in any way Impair the ability of the equipment to function. Because the :YP~?sof equipment covered by this International Standard are numerous, a definite demarcation between major and rnlnor failures cannot be specified, and decisions must necessarily be left to the judgement of the test eng, neer or authorized representative of the party concerned. In general, a major failure is one which would cause malfunction of the equipment. Non-repetitwe failures of such parts as soldered joints and components on circuit boards, which can easily be replaced or repaired, are generally considered minor failures. As such, the repair could be made and the test continued with no negative effect on the remainder of the equipment. However, repetitive tmlure of such components should be considered as a basis for non-acceptability.

4.2

Testing machines

\~lblatlor)

tests shall & performed using a testing machine capable of meeting the conditions spe~ified in table 1. !\Jeans shall be provided for controlling the direction of vibration of the testing machine and for adjusting and [ne{]sur:ng its frequencies and amplitudes of vibration in order to keep them within specified limits. If the lower frequency limit of 2 HZ cannot be reached, another available machine may be used, with the permission of the pa:iy concerned, provided that the natural frequencies of the equipment in translational and rocking modes of vlbratlon are not less than the lowest frequency of the testing machine. This may sometimes be determined by properly controlled transient excitation, such as bumping the equipment to see whether low-frequency resonances exist In no case shall a vibration-testing machine with a minimum frequency of greater than 5 Hz be used.

4.3 4.3.1

Method

of attachment

Shipboard

equipment

FOI ail tests, the equipment shall be secured to the mounting brackets of the testing machine in the same manner as it WIII be aboard ship, If alternative methods of mounting are specified, tests shall be made using each method of mounting specified by the party concerned, For equ~pment designed to be secured to a deck and a headbrace support, a vertical bracket shall be used to simulate a bulkhead, The bracket shall be sufficiently rigid to ensure that its motion will be essentially the same as the motion of the platform of the testing machine,

2

1S/1S0 10055:1996

4.3.2

Portable shipboard

equipment

and test equipment

Test equipment and portable equipment which are designed for permanent and semi-permanent attachment to ship structures shall be attached as specified in 4.3.1. Equipment which is not designed for permanent or semipermanent attachment shall be secured to the testing machine by means of suitable straps. 4.3.3 Orientation for vibration test

Equipment shall be installed on vibration-testing machines in such a manner that the direction of vibration will be, in turn, along each of the three mutually perpendicular axes of the equipment installed aboard ship: vertical, athwartshi~, and fore-aft. 4.3.4 Resiliently mounted equipment

Equipment which is to be installed on resilient mounts or on distributed isolation material shall be tested with its mounts. The resonance frequencies of the equipment on its resilient mounts, determined during the vibration response investigation, shall not be used as the fixed frequencies for endurance testing. Equipment which incorporates other resilient mounts integrally in the enclosure, such as electronic cabinets, shall be tested as supplied. This requirement does not contradict those given In 4.3.1. NOTE -- The presence of resilient mountings WIII generally produce lower frequency resonances during testing, and prolonged excitation at these frequencies may tend to wreck the mounts. Care should be taken to ensure that these resonance frequencies will be sufficiently below the frequencies of main shipboard excitations. For certain applications, distributed Isolators or other types of mounts ought not to be used durirw the test. in these cases, the test may be performed with the external mounts removed.

5 Test procedures
The tests specified In this International Standard are sinusoidal vibration tests. Each of the tests for resonance ]dermflcation and endurance shall be conducted separately [n each of the three principal directions of vibration. T"ests in one dlrectlon shall be completed before proceeding to test in another direction. The equipment shall be energ{zed to perform Its normal functions during the testing if appropriate, and the test item shall be monitored for any rnalfunctlon or damage during the test. Functional testing before and after the vibration testing shall be performed If the equipment is not energized and operating during the vibration testing. If major damage (see 4.1) occurs, the test shall be discontinued and the entire test shall be repeated following repairs and correction of def!clencies, lunless otherwise directed by the party concerned. The manufacturer may, at his option, substitute ectlrely new equipment for retest. If this option is taken, it should be noted in the test report furnished in accordance with clause 7.

5.1

Exploratory

vibration test (resonance search) with amplification factor exceeding 2, in the

To determine the presence of significant resonances, i.e. responses equipment under test, vibrate the equipment as follows: a)

either at discrete frequency intervals of 1 Hz over the frequency range with the vibration amplitudes as specified for category 1 of table 1, maintained at each frequency for about 15 s; take finer increments of frequency resolution near observed, resonances to identify more accurately the frequencies at which endurance testing (see 5.2) will be performed;
or by sweeping test over the frequency range With the

b)

vibration

amplitudes adequate.

as specified

for category

1 of

table 1; a sweep rate of one octave per two minutes is considered

3

1S/1S0 10055:1996

5.2

Fixed-frequency

endurance

test

Vibrate the equipment for a period of 1,5 h at each of the four most significant resonance frequencies as determined by the test engineers (or at all resonances if there are less than four) and at the corresponding vibration amplitudes shown in table 1. If no resonances are observed, for each category perform this test at 30 Hz for a duration of 2 h.

Table 1 -- Vibration test requirements for shipboard equipment and machinery components Displacement or acceleration amplitude (zero-peak)l)

Category

Frequency range

Duration

I
1: Communication and navigation equipment, control and instrumentation equlprnent, and other equipment and machinery components 2: Control and instrumentation when
mounted on diesel engines, air compressors and other severe environments

Hz

2 to 13,2 13,2 to 100
2 to 25 25 to 100 2to15

t---

=-k =---w
1,0 11,6 1-

1,5 h at each resonance frequency or

40 2,5
]

--
22,5

2hat30Hz resonances

if no

3:

Mast-mounted

equipment 15t050

1} Allowable deviat)onfrom these valuesis & 10 Y.

6

Certification

of testing
by an plate

Any shipboard equipment that has met the requirements of this International Standard shall be so identified accompanying certificate or other documentation, for reference. Although not required, an identification furnishing the number of this International Standard, securely fastened to the equipment, is recommended.

7

Test report

The test report to be furnished by the testing laboratory shall include a listing of the items tested, giving manufacturer's model and serial numbers, the type of testing machine used, its capabilities and limitations, and a description of the tests conducted, including type of test, and the corresponding frequency and amplitude data. In addition, detailed descriptions of any damage or malfunctioning incurred and what stage in the tests shall be included, Recommendations should be given regarding what corrective measures, if any, should be taken. At the discretion of the test engineer, it should also include other pertinent information, such as overall dimensions of the equipment, its mass, approximate location of the centre of gravity, and a sketch or photograph of its mounting on the test machine.

lS/lSO 10055:1996

Annex A (informative) Bibliography

[1] [2] [3]

IEC 68-2-6:1995, IEC 92-504:1994, iEC 945:1994,

Environmental testing -- Part 2: Tests -- Test Fe: Vibration (sinusoidal).
Hectrica/ installations in ships -- Part 504: Specia[ features -- Control and instrumentation.

Marine

navigational equipment -- General requirements -- Methods of testing and rewired

test results.
[4] IACS E1O:1993, Unified environmental test specification for testing procedure for electric/, instrumentation equipment, marine computers and peripherals covered by classification. ~) control and

1) International Association of Classification Societies, Genoa, Italy

5

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffsrrned when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from
Amendments
DOC: No.

MED 28 (0850).

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002
Telephones; 23230131,23233375,2323 Regional Offices: 9402 website : www.bis.org.in

Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches

: Manrtk Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE, BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Press, Delhl Printedat SimcoPrinting

