**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14362 (1996) : Pile boring equipment - General 
requirements [MED 18: Construction Plant and Machinery] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1814362:1996 

(Reaffirmed 2001) 

Indian Standard 

PILE BORING EQUIPMENT - 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

ICS 93.020 



€BIS 1996 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR|yIARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1996 Price Group 2 



Construclion Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, HMD 18 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, HMD 18 had been approved by the Heavy 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

The construction of bored piles require careful selection of the boring equipment. The choice of the 
appropriate piling equipment will depend upon the subsoil conditions, diameter of the piles to be constructed, 
their depths and other specific requirements of a particular project. 

In view of the increasing usage of bored-piles for various applications and also with the proliferation 
of the associated equipment, it has been considered necessary to lay down standard general requirements 
for pile boring equipment. However, it shall be noted th^t the equipments described in this standard refer 
to construction of bored piles on land only and without the use of bentonite. The standard nominal 
diameter of piles shall be 450 mm, 500 mm and 600 mm. 

Forthepurposeof deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2: 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (rev/^ec/)'. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14362 : 1996 



Indian Standard 

PILE BORING EQUIPMENT - 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down the requirements for sizes and 
dimensions of pile-boring equipment. 

2 REFERANCES 

The hidian Standard hsted below is necessary adjuncts 
to this standard: 



IS No. 
800 . 1984 

3 MATERIALS 



Title 

Code of practice for general 
construction in steel ( second 
revision ) 



All materials used in the construction of pile-boring 
equipment shall conform to the requirements of 
relevant Indian standards. 

4 PILE BORING EQUIPMENT 

4,1 General 

The various items comprising pile-boring equipment 



are: 

a) Winch, 

b) Derrick, 

c) Boring/chiselling tools, 

d) Temporary casings, 

e) Tremie arrangements, and 

f) Accessories. 

4.1.1 A typical piling winch shall consist of the 
following components ( see Fig. 1 ): 

a) Winch drum, 

b) Prime mover, 

c) Transmission system, 

d) Clutch system, 

e) Brake system, and 

f) Winch frame. 




4.4m (H) 
TYPICAL 



1 , Winch drum 

2, Prime mover 

3, Transmission 

4 , Cluth operating lever 

5, Brake pedal 

6, Main shear leg 

7 , Side shear leg 

8, Pulley 

9, sludge pump 

10. Wire rope 

1 1 . Winch frame 
Safety link 



12 



Fig. I Winch and Derrick 
1 



IS 14362 : 1996 



4.1.1.1 Winch drum 

This standard capacities (drum rope pull) of the winh 
drum shall be 1 . 5 1, 2 . 5 1 and 5 1; and the drum diameter 
shall be not less than 20 times the diameter of the 
wire rope used. 

4.1.1.2 Prime mover 

The prime mover shall usually be a diesel engine of 
the air cooled type or an electric motor. A suitable 
reduction gear shall also be provided. 

4.1.1.3 Transm issi on 

The transmission system shall be one of the following: 

a) Geared drive, 

b) Cham drive, and 

c) Belt drive (flat belt or V-belt) 

The transmission system shall be provided with 
suitable guard cover. 

4.1.1.4 Clutch system 

The clutch system shall consist ofa clutch wheel and 
friction plate(s) or a friction cone oerated by a lever. 

4.1.1.5 Brake system 

This shall consist of a brake band connected with thr 
foot brake padal or brake handle for hand operation. 

4.1.1.6 Winch frame 

A typical winch frame shall be made from structural 
steel section and shall be either truck-mounted, 
crawler-mounted, or skid-mounted. A proper 
stabilizer shall be provided to transmit the load to the 
ground smoothly 

4,2 Derrick 

4.2,1 General 

The standard derrick shall consist of the following 
components: 

a) Main shear leg, 

b) Side shear leg, 

c) Shear leg base, 

d) Pulley, and 

e) Safety link. 

The hoisting capacity of the derrick shall be at least 
equal to the maximum drum rope pull and preferably 
more by 25 percent. 

4.2.1,1 Main shear leg 

The main shear leg shall be a box section fabricated 
according to IS 800:1984 either from two mild steel 
angle sections or two channel sections. The box 
section shall have minimum dimensions of 125 mm^ 
and the minimum length of the leg shall be 5.6 m. 



4.2.1.2 Side shear legs 

The two side shear legs shall have a minimum box- 
section of 100 mm^ One of the two side legs shall 
be provided with suitable mild steel rxmgs spaced 
0.3 m apart up to the top. These legs shall be placed 
apart at a distance of minimum of 3 m. 

4.2.1.3 Shear leg base 

This shall consist of a steel plate welded to the base 
of the leg. Additional plates shall be welded on all 
four sides of the leg for up to 1 5 mm above the bottom 
of the leg. 

4.2.1.4 Pulley 

The pulley shall be usually provided at the top of 
the main shear-leg and it shall have a diameter at 
least 20 times the diameter of the wire-rope used. 
The pulley shall have a suitable guard and shall be 
properly lubricated. 

4.2.1.5 Safety link 

An interconnected steel-chain shall be providednear 
the topT)f the derrick so as to preclude any accidental 
increase in the distances between the legs. 

4.3 Boring/Chiselling Tools 

4.3.1 The various tools shall be as follows: 

a) Sludge pump, 

b) Bailers, 

c) Chisels, 

d) Casings, 

e) Casing extractor plate, 

f) Casing extractor bar, 

g) Casing drive bar, and 
h) Tiller. 

4,3.1.1 Sludge pump 

Boring shall be usually advanced by using a sludge 
pump (also called shell) as shown in Fig. 2. Weight 
of the sludge pump shall vary with the diameter but 
normally minimum weight shall be 7.5 kN. Sludge 
pump is a hollow cylindrical steel body with a cutting 
shoe at the bottom and a lifting hook at its top. It has 
hinged trap door immediately above the bottom cutting 
edge and it has an opening (window) near the top for 
muck removal. Above this window, lead or steel or 
concrete may be added to increase the weight of the 
sludge pump for effective boring. 

4.3.1.2 Bailer 

The bailer (see Fig. 3) is used for removal of water 
or slush from the borehole. It is madeup ofa hollow 
steel cylinder with a lifting hook at the top and a 
truncated base plate with perforation at the bottom. 
There is a plunger passing through a central hole of 



IS 14362 : 1996 



the base plate which acts as a plug valve. This plunger 
is about 20 cm long and has about 15 cm diameter 
steel plates welded at its top and bottom. This closes 
the central hole in the base plate of the plunger and 
thus retain the slush material for removal. 

4.3.1.3 Chisels 



Hard strata during boring shall be broken by chisels. 
The chisels shall be made of solid round bar with a 
hard faced edge at the bottom (see Fig. 4). The chisel 
shall weigh at least 7.5 kN for 450 mm, 12.5 kN for 
500 and 600 mm piles. 




CLEAN OUT WINDOW 



TRAP DOOR 



HARD FACrD EDGE 



TRAP DOOR 




HARD FA'CED 



Fig. 2 Slude Pimp ( Shell ) 



PLUNGER 




Fig. 4 Chisel 

4.3.1.4 Casing 

These shall be made from 16 mm thick plates and 
the standard length shall be 1.5 m- The casings shall 
be threaded on both sides and suitable collar shall be 
used to protect the threads. 

4.3.1.5 Casing extractor plate 

A steel plate of suitable size [see Fig. 5(a)] shall be 
used for the extraction x)f casing, after the boring 
operation is complete. 



PERFORATIONS 
ON SIDE AND 
BOTTOM 




Fig. 3 Bailer 



Fig. 5A Casing Extractor Plate 



IS 14362 : 1996 

4.3.1.6 Casing extractor bar 

This shall be a round bar [see Fig 5(b)] of about 75 
mm diameter. It shall be passed through the holes on 
sides of the casing and tiitough the extractor plate, to 
enable extraction of casing. 



at the bottom to facilitate driving. 

4.5 Tremie Arrangements 

The tremje arrangements shall include the following: 
a) Concrete hopper; 



olS 



COLLAR 




Fig. 5B Extractor Bar 

4.3.1.7 Casing drive bar 

This bar shall have a cross-section of at least 75 ninr 
and shall be used to drive the casing. 

4.3.1.8 Tiller 

This gadget {see Fig. 6) shall be used to rotate the 
casing manually, whenever necessary. 



025 




SO 25 



Fig. 6 Tiller 
4.4 Temporary Casing 

This shall consist of the following parts (see Fig. 7). 

4.4.1 The casing collar shall be attached at the casing 
top to take the blows during casing driving. 

4.4.2 The main casing shall be made from 16 mm 
thick steel and shall be threaded at one end. 

4.4.3 The casing shall be provided with a cutting edge 



~\::^ 



P^^ 



CUTTING C DGC. 

Fig. 7 Temporary Casing 

b) Hopper plug; 

c) Tremie pipe; 

d) Holding clamp; and 

e) Hoisting plug. 

4.6 Accessories 

Accessories shall include the following: 

a) Concrete placer; 

b) Wheel barrow; 

c) Measuring chain; 

d) Bailers; 

e) Crowbars; 

f) Dog-<:lamps with pins; 

g) Steel measuring tape; and 
h) Mucking shovel- 



