**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12556 (1988) : Binary direct voltage signals for process 
measurement and control systems [ETD 18: Industrial Process 
Measurement and Control] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 12556- 1988 

Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

SPECIFICATION FOR BINARY DIRECT 

VOLTAGE SIGNALS FOR PROCESS 

MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL SYSTEMS 



UDC 621-3-501 



© Copyright 1 989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 1 June 1989 



IS : 12556 - 1988 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR BINARY DIRECT 

VOLTAGE SIGNALS FOR PROCESS 

MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL SYSTEMS 



0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on 27 October 1988, 
after the draft finalized by the Industrial Process 
Measurement and Control Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Electrotechnical Divi- 
sion Council. 

0.2 Binary direct voltage signal varies in a dis- 
crete manner corresponding to two states, used 
in industrial-process measurement and control 
systems to transmit information corresponding to 
two logical states. The binary direct voltage 
signal which appears at the input/output termi- 
nals of an element has two logical states which 
are represented by the signal voltages Un for 
the high level and C/l for the low level. Each 
of these signal voltages has a range defined by 
an upper and a lower limit. 



0.3 While preparing th:; standird, assistance w.is 
derived from lEC, draft publication 65 A ( Cen- 
tral Offiee ) 16 'Biniry direct voltage sigmls for 
process measurement and control systems', 
issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission ( lEC ) in July 1985. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a parti- 
cular requirement of this stanJ:ird is complied 
with, the final value, observed or calculated, ex- 
pressing the result of a test, shall b^ rounded olf 
in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



^Rules for rouoding off numerical values { revised ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard is applicable to non-multip- 
lexed two wire binary direct voltage signals of 
nominal 24 volt level that are used to transmit 
information between elements in industrial 
process measurement and control systems. 

1.2 This standard does not apply to signals that 
are entirely within such elements, 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the follo- 
wing definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Binary Direct Voltage Signal — A dc voltage 
quantized signal with two values, used to trans- 
mit information as stated in l.l. 

2.2 Current Sourcing Circuit — Within the 
range of Uh. the output of an elcnienl supplies 
current to the inputs or other loads driven by it. 

2.3 Elements of Industrial Process Measurement 
and Control Systems — Functional units or 
integrated combinations thereof which transduce, 
process or transmit measured values, controlling, 
controlled and reference variables. 

2.4 Leakage Current — \n case of a current 
sourcing circuit, leakage current is defined as the 
value of current Ilowing from an output, within 
the range of t/i.. 

2.5 Minimum Signal Duration — The shortest 
time of a binary input signal, which in any case. 



is sufiieient to initiate transition from one voltage 
range to the other. 

2.6 Nominal Load Factor — The nominal load 
factor indicates the load capacity of an output 
or the load imposed by the respective input. 

It is used for engineering purposes and is 
expressed as a multiple of the nominal load unit. 
The abbreviation for input is F\ and that for the 
output is Fo- 

2.7 Power Supply — The supply that provides 
the necessary dc power to enable a system cle- 
ment to generate the binary direct voltage signal. 

2.8 Signal Common — A number of signal cir- 
cuits may have a common direct electrical 
connection. This is the signal common which 
may or may not be connected to earth. 

2.9 State Transition Time — The time required 
for transition from one voltage range to other in 
case of a change between logic states. 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Type of Circuits — System elements shall 
have current sourcing circuits. 

3.2 Ranjrc of Binary Direct Voltage Signals of 
Nominals 24 Volts Level — the ranges of binary 
direct voltai^e sii^nals shall he as mvcn in 
Tabic 1. ^ " 



IS : 12556 - 1988 



TABLE 1 RANGES OF BINARY DIRECT 
VOLTAGE SIGNALS 

( Clause 3.2 ) 
Low Level U^^ (V) High Level U^ (V) 

...*■ , . '*' 


Lower Upper 
Limit Limit 
Output 2 
Input -3 5 


Lower Upper 

Limit Limit 

16 30 

13 33 



The limits include all ac voltage components 
and are valid for a load resistance of 20 k^. 

3.3 Nominal Load Factors 

3.3,1 For the calculation of nominal load 
factor of input Fi, the current voltage characte- 
ristic of the input will be replaced by a linear 
characteristic in such a way that the actual 
input current, even under worst operation condi- 
tions, within the entire range of Vh will be lower 
than the current required according to the sub- 
stitute linear characteristic ( see Fig. 1 ). 

3«3.2 The nominal load factor of an input Fi 
will then equal the quotient of current, resulting 
at 24 volts from the substitute linear character- 
istic, to the nominal load unit represented by a 
current of 2 mA. 



The nominal load factor of an output Fo indi- 
cates how many inputs with a nominal load 
factor Fi = 1 may be connected to this output. 

3.4 Leakage Current — The leakage current 
shall not exceed O'l mA under worst case opera- 
ting conditions. 

3.5 State Transition Time — The state transi- 
tion times for output signal changes in both 
directions shall be specified for worst case 
conditions. 

For inputs, the maximum permitted state 
transition time for signal changes in both direc- 
tions shall be specified for worst case conditions. 

3.6 Minimum Signal Duration — The minimum 
duration of an input signal needed to initiate a 
reaction of an element in both directions shall 
be specified for worst case conditions. 

3.7 Signal Common — The signal negative shall 
be the signal common. If the signal common is 
connected to dc power supply, it shall be con- 
nected to the negative terminal or zero volt termi- 
nal in case of a bipolar power supply. 

3.8 Earthing — If a signal circuit is to be earth- 
ed, the signal negative or the power supply 
negative shall be earthed ( or the zero volt ter- 
minal in case of a bipolar power supply ). 



1-5- 



1-0 




SUBSTITUTE LINEAR 
CHARACTERISTIC 

INPUT CHARACTERISTIC 



U-, (V) 



Note — A at Ui — 24 Volts equals 3 MA; this divided by the nominal load unit of 2 mA results in a nominal 
load factor ofFi=l'5» 

Fig* 1 Calculation of the Nominal Load Factor Fi for Elements with 
NoN Linear Input Characteristic 



Fniitea ai tiwaLanira iiiiurat ITess, JJeltil InUia 



