IS 11182 ( Part 5 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 941 ( 1988 )

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

VTT 5

Sifas; Ft~WT V+WJl TTrifafkTf

Indian

Standard

GUIDE FOR EVALUATION OF INSULATION SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
PART 5 MECHANICAL ENDURANCE FUNCTIONAL TESTS

UDC

621'31'048

: 620'169'1

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN. 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 4 ZAFAR `MARG

February

1993

Electrical Insulation Systems Sectional Committee,

ET 04

FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC Pub 941 ( 1988 ) `Mechanical endurance functional tests for electrical insulation systems', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Electrical Insulation Systems Sectional Committee ( ET 04 ) and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. The text of IEC publication has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Srandard without deviations. Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard, the following respective place the following:
International Standard

International
Indian

Standards are referred to.

Read in their

Standard

Degree of Correspondence

IEC 68-l ( 1988 ) Environmental testing - Part 1 : General and guidance IEC 68-2 ( 1975 ) Environmental testing - Part 2 : Tests IEC 505 ( 1975 ) Guide for the evaluation and identification of insulation systems of electrical equipment IEC 610 ( 1978) Principal aspects of functional evaluation of electrical insulation systems: Ageing mechandiagnostic isms and procedures IEC 792-l ( 1988) The multi-factor functional testing of electrical insulation systems - Part 1 : Test procedures

IS 9000 ( Part 1 ) : 1988 Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 1 General ( first revision ) IS 9000 Series

Not equivalent

Not equivalent

1 1 1 IS 11182 (Part 1 ) : 1984 Guide I for evaluation of insulation > systems of electrical equipment : Part 1 ldentif ication evaluation ; and ageing mechanisms I I 1 IS 11182 ( Part 7ISec 1 j : 1986 Guide for the evaluation of insuof electrical lation systems equipment : Part 7 Multifactor functional testing, Section 1 Test procedures Technically equivalent Technically equivalent

Only the English language text in the International it in this Indian Standard.

Standard has been retained

while

adopting

IS 11182 ( Part 5 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 941 ( 1988 )

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR EVALUATION OF INSULATION SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
PART 5 INTRODUCTION Mechanical stresses as ageing factors of electrical insulation systems MECHANICAL ENDURANCE FUNCTIONAL TESTS

Electrotechnical equipment may experience mechanical stresses from many causes during manufacture, transport, erection and operation. In certain types of equipment the presence, during operation,, of mechanelectromagnetic and thermal forces, ical stresses from electrodynamic, has been shown to be one of the main causes of changes in their insulation systems.

The transformation of mechanical stress into a major insulation the mechanical causes various system ageing factor depends on type of equipment, service conditions, type of insulating stress level, in IEC Publication 505, it is often As I emphasized material, etc. by functional testing the ageing processes to reproduce necessary in order to estimate the serviceability of the which occur in service, insulation system for a particular application.

This report deals with methods for evaluating insulation' systems when mechanical stress ageing is a contributing or dominant factor in determining service life. It presents basic princ'iples and approaches even in the absence of theoretical that have been found to work, explanations, based on service experience data and research practice.

Further development of test methods for evaluating the mechanical stress endurance of insulation systems is expected through cooperation between the Equipment Technical Committees and IEC Technical Committee No. 63.

1.

Scope This report provides a guide for IEC Equipment Technical Committees to assist them in developing mechanical functional test procedures for insulation systems designed for their specific equipment.

This report is applicable to the dominant ageing factor. It for use in multi-factor functional

such cases where mechanical stress may also be an important consideration tests.

is

IS11182 (Part5):1993 IEC Pub 941 ( 1988 1 2. General considerations

.

Only mechanical stress ageing is considered in this report.

occurring

during

equipment

operation

Functional tests for mechanical ageing of insulation systems differ materials. The from mechanical tests on insulating significantly performance of systems is not only affected by the composite structure' but also ,by the associated parts which materials, of insulating Changes in any component may change influence mechanical behaviour. the mechanical characteristics of an insulation system.

2.1

Ageing

effects an insulation either alone system or in may have combination. ageing The

Mechanical stresses applied ,to effects `which can be present principal effects are: fatigue failure of of low-level stress . breaking may be conditions of insulation by caused by great of the equipment; caused insulation cycles;

components

caused

by

a

large

number

high levels of mechanical stress such as external forces or abnormal operating

abrasive wear components; insulation creep

by

relative

motion

between

equipment

or flow

under are

stress. not evenly distributed throughout . the

Generally these phenomena volume of insulation.

3.

Experience

with

mechanical

functional

tests

National standards for mechanical ageing tests of electrical insulation systems are not well developed. Most of the published material relates to the use of mechanical stresses for brief periods at normal service levels to serve as diagnostic aids in evaluating deterioration caused by another ageing stress; or to short-time exposure to relatively severe levels to evaluate ?the resistance of an apparatus to electromagnetic forces which may accompany short-circuits in power equipment, or to an externally applied mechanical stress t.hat may be characteristic of specific applications.

The real-ization that service level mechanical stresses in certain types of power equipment could be more important in determining insulation and equipment life than ageing due to thermal exposure has encouraged the development of mechanical testing methods for insulation systems. However, the published work on mechanical ageing, either on actual equipment or on functional test models, is only a small fraction of the work published on thermal ageing, or even on voltage endurance.

2

IS 11182 ( Part 5 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 941 ( 1988 ) A contributing factor to the lack of standardized mechanical stress ageing functional tests of insulation systems is the slow development of accepted theories which relate accelerated mechanical stress ageing to level stress ageing. General relationships (such as the, service Arrhenius relationsh.ip applicable to thermal ageing) for accelerating and extrapolating mechanical stress ageing have not been demonstrated. Accelerated mechanical ageing of insulation systems has been largely limited to conditions only slightly above service amplitude and frequency.

Mechanical considerable of apparatus

functional investment must often

testing models tend `to. be complex and to create and operate, since full-size be built to produce realistic results.

require sections

4. 4.1

Assesment Test

of mechanical' and `other

stress

as an ageing

factor

variables

aspects

Ageing tests under mechanical stress may be performed whenever this stress is considered to act as an agelng factor. In the present state of knowledge, it is not possible to give complete and ,definite rules for every case. Equipment Technical Committees should determine which aspects of mechanical ageing are important in specificcases.

The damaging effect of mechanical ageing stress is dependent on the nature of the insulation systems and equipment being tested, as well as on the amount of ageing at any time. Conditions which are normally important include the, equipment duty cycle and the occurrence of unusual loads due to extreme service conditions or other electrical transients. 4.2 Reasons for mechanical testing

While mechanical of many equipment it is the dominant procedures were failure of insulation

stress ageing may not be a factor in the service life types, experience has shown that in certain cases factor. Past experience has shown that useful test developed when there was a record of mechanical systems in service.

Equipment Technical Committees test procedures to be *used when:

should

consider

`the

developing

of

there is, or there may be, an expected increase in the thermally or electrodynamically generated mechanical stresses caused by modifications in size, rating, duty cycle, environment, distribution of temperature, or cycles more severe than previously experienced. This is particularly relevant to polymeric insulation in which cumulative damage can occur;

3

IS 1118? ( Part 5 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 941 ( 1988 ) the equipment is liable to be subjected to constant or externally or environmentally imposed mechanical stress cause cumulative damage to the insulation system. repetitive that may

.

4.3

Presence

of other

factors

It is possible that mechanical stress will become an ageing factor only in the presence of another factor, e.g. mechanical stress and a fluid can cause environmental stress cracking. The mechanical properties of many insulation systems change significantly from ambient start-up service temperature conditions at equipment to peak dther .environmentaI factors, such as humidity and temperatures. contaminants, may also change mechanical properties.

The ageing the presence

rate produced by other factors may either directly of mechanical stresses,

also be inf!uenced or indirectly.

by

Note.-

IEC Publication combined tests

792-l for two

should or more

be ccnsulted ageing factors.

before

preparing

4.4

Types There

of mechanical are, broadly

testing speaking, establish designed three types of tests: (or a new test a specific duty

acceptance object) is cycle;

test to properly

that new equipment and manufactured for

test of suitability for service to evaluate diagnostic procedure for endurance tests

equipment of insulation

in use, or systems;

as a

endurance long-term

test, which causes accelerated ageing, capability of the insulation system.

to

estimate

the

Testing of the first type has been carried out for many years and is described in IEC Publications 68-1 and 68-2. In general, these publications apply to externally generated environmental damage and Equipment Technical Committees should refer to them for guidance whenever or an overall equipment test, an insulation system functional test, includes mechanical stresses which are generated either externally to the equipment or by the environment. However, the information in some of these publications will also be valuable in establishing the detailed procedures of mechanical `endurance tests.

Endurance tests of the third type utilize intensified mechanical stress as the ageing factor of influence to evaluate insulation systems compaare characterized by accelerated ageing as These tests ratively . compared to the ageing rate under normal service conditions.

IS 11182 ( Part 5 ) : 1883 IEC Pub 841 ( 1888 ) 5. Ageing acceleration

The development of accelerated .functional testing for mechanical stresses has been complicated by the very large number of stress cycles that may accumulate on equipment under normal duty cycles. Test `acceleration by significantly increasing the frequency of stress application is restricted by the requirement that only failure modes found in service be produced. Attempts to accelerate have also been limited failure mechanisms that ageing by to moderate do not occur increasing the intensification in service. level of test stresses to avoid introducing

Tests to evaluate mechanical ageing of been developed for most equipment types that service levels of mechanical stress ageing which may lead to equipment failure.

insulation systems have not until experience has shown produce insulation system

these tests require the development of accepted To be practicable, intensified stress testing, so that insulation ageing may be obtained in tests which are quickly run, as compared to normal service life. Hoivever , a recognized theory is not available to relate accelerated mechanical ageing to ageing obtained in service, In a few simple cases the equivalence of accelerated and service mechanical ageing rates has been demonstrated, and test procedures based on these findings are in use.

Stress intensification is controlled by the model design and by the severity of the test conditions. Any level of stress intensification conditions, should only be permitted after careful beyond service study and trials have shown that failure mechanisms caused by the selected mechanical stress test level are comparable to those found in Further gu.idance in selecting accelerated ageing service experience. conditions that do not change ageing mechanisms during mechanical functional tests may be found in IEC Publication 610.

5.1

Acceleration

by

frequency

increase

insulation system component may often be The fatigue life of an This conveniently determined by accelerating the stress frequency. technique may be used when the additional heating caused by the increased thermal energy dissipated in the specimen is negligible, or is controlled by additional cooling.

Unwanted acceleration. significantly therefore, times.

resonance If they exceed the stress

conditions shall not be introduced by frequency the amplitude of stress application may occur, results; invalidate the limits and desired amplitude must be known and controlled at all

IS 11182 ( Part 5 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 941 ( 1988 ) insulation systems may .be sensitive to the rate of mechanical stress application and thus experience non-linear changes in ageing rates as Possible the frequency of cyclic mechanical stress is increased. evidence of change in response may be found by comparing mechanical at service stress and frequency hysteresis curves, or wave shapes, . similar at higher frequencies desired for ageing with curves acceleration. Some control over these phenomena may be obtained by imposing limits on the allowable changes in the shape of these curves during accelerated mechanical functional testing.

5.2

Repetitjon

rate

acceleration

Some types of mechanical stress experienced by insulation. systems in nature and not continuously service are of a random or periodic applied. Mechanical stresses caused by electrical transients due to starting, stopping, switching, load changing, short-circuits or other aspects of the duty cycle may be accelerated by decreasing the interval between applications of the stresses relative to that expected in service. This can be done without increasing either the amplitude or the frequency of mechanical stress and permits, in many cases, significant acceleration of testing without change of ageing mechanisms. Care should be exercised to ensure that the.,increased rate of stress application does not cause excessive heating of the insulation under test.

5.3

Acceleration

by

stress

level

increase

The mechanical ageing of insulation systems by greatly increasing the stress levels is less generally practised except in creep studies. moderately higher than service stresses are stresses However, commonly used to provide a safety factor and are often used in a frequency or repetition rate acceleration.

5.4

Scatter

in resul'ts

The inherent variability of insulation system specimens and the normal inaccuracyoof stress application will `result in a dispersion of measurement results, even when a number of specimens are manufactured in the same way and tested under the same nominal conditions. The Equipment Technical Committee should take' these considerations into account when specifying the number of specimens and the choice test levels to establish an `endurance curve.

of

IS 11182 ( Part 5 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 941 ( 1988 )

6.

Conclusions Functional .tests for the evaluation of insulation systems subjected to mechanical ageing in equipment are in limited use. Most of the has been made. with equipment types p rog res s in test development which have a history of service failures due to mechanical stress ageing of their insulation systems.

In common with functional tests for the other factors of influence described in IEC Publication 505, these tests are comparative evaluainsulation system with a service-proven tions of a new, or changed, insulation system for similar equipment. Absolute or non-comparative mechanical endurance tests for insulation systems are not possible at present.

The absence of generally accepted theories for mechanical ageing has led to the development of empirical methods of relating the accelerated mechanical ageing rate to the service ageing rate, or estimated perUseful mechanical functional tests formance, for some equipment types. for other types of equipment can be developed with the information in including Appendix A, and in textbooks on mechanical this report, endurance testing.

IS 11182 ( Part 5 ) : 1993 IEC Ptib 941 ( 1988 ) APPENDIX MECHANICAL A TESTS

ENDURANCE

Al. Al.1

Mechanical Origin external

ageing

stresses : Electrodynamic mechanical forces, forces, temperature variations, or combinations of these.

stress of and internal

Al .2

Type abrasion,

compression, stress : Tension, of of these. or combinations of stress: Static, impact,

bending,

torsion,

shear,

Al .3

Application these. Methods

vibration,

or

combinations

of

A2. A2.1

of acceleration

of the

ageing

process generally `inc.reases *the ageing be unpredictable. Applicable to

Increasing magnitude. of the stress steeply, but in a way that is likely to most stress types in Sub-clause A1.2.

A2.2

Increasing frequency: Applicable to most vibrating and impact Increasing stresses and to static stresses of a temporary character. frequency generally increases the ageing rate, but in an unpredictable to internal or frictional losses should be Overheating due way. avoided.

A2.3

Increased repetition rate: causes by transient phenomena. Diagnostic procedures

used

to

accelerate

mechanical

ag.eing

A3.

(Cyclic measures or applications preset limits are exceeded.) A3.1 Application down voltage, tangent, loss

of

specific

stresses.

End-point

when

of electric stress. Overvoltage test: resistance during etc. ; insulation energy; partial discharge measurement.

Proof test, humidification;

breakloss

A3.2

Periodic application of an approApplication of meizhanical stress: in force to reach a endurance test, change priate stress in an specified displacement, etc. Mechanical strength measurement on selected test objects. Vibration, bending, impact, abrasion resistance, shear; possibly connected with Sub-clauses A3.1 and A3.3.

A3.3

Humidification: clauses A3.1 and Visual of wezir, Physical

absorption, A3.2.

condensation:

In

connection

with

Sub-

A3.4

inspection: Cracks, delamination, porosi_ty, loosening of parts, dust from fretting. properties: Thermal conductivity, hardness,

colour,

indication

A3.5

density.

8

-__
Reprography Unit, BE, New Delhi, India

Standard Mark

Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Acf, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

The use of the Standard

Bureau of Indian Standards

is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Srandards Act, 19&j to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
BIS Copyright

BlS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also revie ,ved periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook. and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No ET 04 ( 3285 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

to all

Offices )

Regional
Central

Offices :
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

Telephone Shah Zafar Marg 37 84 99, I 37 86 26, 53 3843, 53 23 84 l 235 02 16, I 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 110002 331 01 31 l 331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 1640 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

NEW DELHI

Eastern : l/l4 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western
: SC0 44.5-446, Sector

35-C, CHANDIGARH

160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARLDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers. Aligarh. lndla

