( Reaffirmed 2001 )

" .?-&

\i. `_ `I t , `_

1, Indian Standard t' CODE OF PRACTICE FOR !,$ :1c+'63 EXTERNAL RENDERED FINIS~.~`U~.,:_: -.%. Concrete, Plaster and Tiled Finishes Sectional Committee, BDC 8
Chairman
SHRI M. S. BHATIA

-jy iceyw7

Representing
Central Public Works Department \

Members

K.R. Irani & Co., Bombay SHRI J. G. BODHE Government Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. BOSE SHRI E. K. RAMCHANDRAN ( Alternote ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( ARCRITEC- Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) TURE ), RDSO Buildings $ Communications Department, PWD, SRRI M. K. JADHAV Government of Maharashtra Modern Tiles & Marble, New Delhi SHRI S. C. KAPOOR SHRI A. C. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI L. 5. KUMAWAT Central Builders' Association, New Delhi SHRI HAZARI LAL MARWAH The Institution of Engineers ( India ) SHRI T. R. MEHANDRU Narwekar & Narwekar, Bombay SHRI S. J. NARWEKAR Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI M. H. PANDYA Roorkee SERI R. D. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organisation (Ministry of &RI J. L. SEH~AL Works Housing & Rehabilitation ) Indian Insiitute of Architects, Bombay SHRI G. C. SHARMA Cole Paints & Contracts Private Ltd., Bombay SHRI B. SHIRAZI Bharat Tiles and Marbles Private Ltd., Bombay SHRIMATI T. P. SIDRWA SKRI R. D. SIDHWA ( Alternate ) ENGINEER Public Works Department, Madras SUPERINTENDING ( PLANNING & DESIGNS ) EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (BumDINS CENTRE ) ( Alternate ) ENGINEER Central Public Works Department SUPERINTENDINU ( II CIRCLE ) The Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI K. V. THADANEY &RI R. R. GORE ( Alternate ) Director, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) DR. H. C. VISVESVARAYA, Deputy Director (Bldg) Sam S. P. RAMAN Assistant Director ( Bldg ), IS1 SHRI Y. R. TANEJA Extra Assistant Director ( Bldg ), IS1 ( Continued on pale 2 i

Secretaries

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION MANAK BHAVAN, 9 MATHURA ROAD NEW DELHI 1

IS:2402- 1963 (Continuedfrom
Plaster

page 1 )
and

Allied

Finishes

Subcommittee,
Representing

BDC

8 :3

Convener
SHRI K. V. THADANEY

The Concrete Association

of India, Bombay

Members
SHRI C. V. NAZARETH (Alternate to Shri K. V. Thadaney ) K.R. Irani & Co., Bombay SHRI J. G. RODHE Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI D. D. BORKER Buildings & Communications Department, PWD, SERI M. K. JADEAV Government of Maharashtra The Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd., Bombay SHRI B. P. KAPADIA The Institution of Engineers ( India ) SHRI T. R. ME~ANDRU Narwekar BE Narweknr, Bombay SHRI S. J. NARWE~AR Cole Paints and Contracts Private Ltd., Bombay SHIU B. SHIRAZI SIJPERINTENDINQ ENGINEER Central Pnblio Works Department S2: FF%!ADANI . . Defence Production Defence ) Organization (Ministry of

2

IS: 2402-1963 CONTENTS

PAGE 0. FOREWORD SCOPE ............... ............ ......... ......... ...... ... ...

5 6 6 12 13 14 16
...... ... of

1.

2. TERMINOLOGY

3. NECESSARY INFORMATION

4. MATERIALS, TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES 6. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
6.1
6.2 Functions of External ......... Renderings

5. CARE OF MATERIALS, TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES......

6.3 6.4
6.5 6.6 6.7 6.8

Suitability of Various Types of Rendered Finishes Nature of Background in Relation to Choice ...... ... ... Rendering ...... Resistance to Water Penetration Durability Resistance Resistance Thermal ............ to Cracking to Crazing Properties ......... .......... ......... ) ...... ...... ...... Recommended

16 16 18 18 20 22 23 23 23 23 23 26 26 26 27

6.9 Sound Insulation ( Air-Borne Sound 6.10 Fire Resistance and Combustibility 6.11 Recommended

Mix Proportions 6.12 Number of Coats ............ 6.13 Functions of Different Coats and their ......... Thicknesses ............... 6.14 Colour ............ ............ and Protection of Mortar Mix of Adjacent .........

...

7. PRELIMINARY WORK
7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 Scaffolding Cleanliness Preparation

Work

...

......... Preparation of Background Fixing Metal Lathing or Expanded ............ ground

27 27 28 29

Metal

as a Back-

32

3

PAGE
8. APPLICATIONOF RENDERING COATS . . .

,.. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

. .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

32 32 33 33 34 34 34 34 31 34 35 35 36 38 17 19

8.1 8.2 8.3 8.4 8.5 8.6 8.7 8.8 8.9
9. 10. 11.

General First Undercoat

... ...

... ... ... ... .,. ... ... ...

Subsequent Undercoat Plain Finishing Coats Roughcast Finish . . . Dry-dash Finish Machine-Applied Architectural ......... ...... ... Finishes

Scraped or Textured Finishing Coats

Features

CURING

MAINTENANCE

... ... ...

REPAIR OF DAMAGED AREAS

APPENDIX A TABLE I TABLE II TABLE III

MEASURESTO OVERCOMETHE EFFECTS OF SOLUBLE SULPHATES FROM BACKGROUNDS ON RENDERINGS ... SUITABILITYOF THE VARIOUS METHODS OF FINISHING ... RENDERINGS FOR VARIOUS CONDITIONS. . . BACKGROUNDS FORRENDERINGS .. . ...

RECOMMENDED MIXES FOR EXTERNAL RENDERINGS IN RELATION TO BACKGROUND MATERIAL, EXPOSURE ... ... CONDITIONS AND FINISH DESIRED

24

4

1S : 2402- 1963

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EXTERNAL RENDERED FINISHES
0. FOREWORD
Standard was adopted by the Indian tion on 29 June 1963, after the draft finalized Plaster and Tiled Finishes Sectional Committee had the Building Division Council.

0.1 This Indian

Standards Instituby the Concrete, been approved by

0.2 ` Rendering ' denotes generally external plaster and allied finishes, plain or textured, applied for the purpose of protection and decoration. Rendered finish can be designed for performance suited to the different situations of use, whether it is severe or moderate exposure to rain; whether it is dusty, clear or corrosive atmosphere; or whether it is subject to large variations in temperature or other climatic cycles. The binder in the rendering mix can be varied by adjusting proportions of cement, lime or other ingredients; the types of aggregates can be chosen for special durability and finishing characteristics and adjustments made in their sizes and grading; different textures and finishes can be adopted, such as scraped, roughcast, pebble-dash, etc; and the techniques of application can be varied to obtain special effects, increased durability and better performance. 0.3 This standard is intended to give guidance with regard to the selection of rendered finishes to suit different backgrounds and conditions of exposure, and with regard to the design of their composition and methods of application so as to obtain a finish that gives satisfactory performance without undue maintenance and repairs. 0.4 The Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has taken into consideration the views of producers, consumers and technologists and has related the standard to the manufacturing and trade practices followed in the country in this field. Due weightage has also been given to the need for international co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. These considerations led the Sectional Committee to derive assistance from B.S. CP 221 : 1960 External Rendered Finishes issued by the British Standards Institution and National Building Studies Bulletin No. 10, External Rendered Finishes for Walls, issued by the Building Research Station, United Kingdom. 5

IS:2402-1963 0.5 This standard
finishes. Other is one of a series of Indian standards in the series are: Standards covering plaster

IS : 1661-l 960 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CEMENT AND CEMENT-LIME PLASTER FINISHES ON WALLS AND CEILINGS *Is

: 2394-

CODE `OF PLASTER FINISH

PRACTICE

FOR

APPLICATION

OF in

LIME this and

0.6 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears standard, it shall be taken as a reference to its latest version. 0.7 Metric dimensions

system has been adopted in India and all quantities in the standard have been given in this system.

0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values ( Revised ). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 0.9 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions relating to external rendered finishes, and it does not cover all the necessary provisions of a contract.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the application of external rendered finishes It also specifies the materials to for all normal types of backgrounds. be used for renderings and the minimum preparation of background for application of finish.
1.2 It does not cover plain plaster finishes required for internal walls and ceilings, which are dealt with in a separate standard, namely, IS : 1661-1960 Code of Practice for Cement and Cement-Lime Plaster Finishes on Walls and Ceilings. 2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For
apply.

the

purpose

of

this

standard,

the

following

definitions

shall

2.1 General

Background - The material or combination the first coat of the rendering is. applied.
*Under preparation.

of materials

to which

6

15:2402-1963
Eflorescence on drying. Firring for subsequent Salts deposited on the surface of building materials

Light wood or metal battens fixed to solid backgrounds attachment of expanded metal or sheet materials.

openings, grooves or other irregularities on Key - Indentations, the surface of the background or undercoat into or through which the rendering material can be pressed in such a way that it will bond to the surface. Thickness of a Coat - The average thickness of a particular coat excluding the thickness of material required for filling and levelling up the background or for filling the raked joints. Workability - The quality of a rendering mix in respect of all the properties affecting its behaviour during application. The operative's is influenced by the flow properties, the opinion of workability cohesiveness of the mix and its retentivity of moisture against the suction of the background. 2.2 Site Operations Back RenderingThe inner face of the lathing. coat of rendering material applied on the

Filling - The process of filling in hollow places in a solid background before the rendering is applied. It may also be employed where projections or extra thicknesses are required. Final or Finishing Coat - The final continuous coat of rendering In dry-dash finishes, it is the coat on to which the dash 1s material. thrown while the coat is still soft. In roughcast or machine applied finishes it is the last coat thrown on to complete the finish. Floating Coat - The undercoat finishing coat. immediately preceding the final or material

Rendering or Base Coat - The first undercoat applied directly to the prepared background. 2.3 Finishing Treatment

of rendering

Dry-dash ( Pebble-dash ) -A rough finish in which small pebbles or crushed stones of suitable size (generally from 10 to 20 mm) are thrown on to a freshly applied final coat of mortar, and left exposed. Machine-Applied Finishes - A variety offinishes of which the final coat is applied by means of hand or power-operated machines which spatter or throw the material on to the wall. The roughness of

7

ts : 2402- 1963 the finished machine. surface varies `with the material `used and the type of

J+iuglicasi -A finish in tihich the final coat, containing a proportion of. fairly coarse aggregate; is thrown on as a wet mix and is left in the rough condition. The texture desired is regulated by the size of the coarse aggregate which is generally of size between 6 1 to 12 mm. Scraped FinishA finish in which the final coat, after being levelled and allowed to stiffen for a few hours, is scraped with a steel straight edge, old saw blade or other tools to remove the surface skin. Textured Finishes - Finishes having ornamental, patterned or textured' surfaces produced by treatment of the freshly applied final coat with-various tools. The horizontal or vertical ribbed texture, the fan texture, torn texture and the English cottage texture are some of the variations attained by such treatment. Typical Fig. 1 to 5. illustrations of different finishing treatments are given in

16, : 2402 - 1%3

FIQ. 2

ROUGHCAST

FIG. 3

SCBAPED FINISH

9

ISi: $402 - 1963

FIG. 4A

RIBBED

TEXTURE

FIG. 4B

FAN

TEXTURE

10

IS : 2402- X%3

FIG. 4C

ENQLISH COTTAGE TEXTURE

FIG. 5A

MACHINE-THROWN FINISH : COARSE TEXTURE

11

I$ : 2402 - 1963

Fro. SB

MACHINE-THROWN FINISH : MEDIUEI FINE TEXTURE

2.4 Characteristic Defects
Crazing - The development forming an irregular pattern. 3. NECESSARY INFORMATION of hair cracks on a surface, usually

3.1 For the satisfactory selection of materials for rendering, their preparation and application, the following information will be necessary and shall be furnished to those responsible for the work:
Types of surface, such as brick, a> the rendering is proposed to stone or concrete over which Constructional be applied. details will have to be suitably adopted to the background, particularly the type and the extent of preparation of the background;

b) Area
cl

and type of external rendered finish; Nature of the background, namely (1) whether it contains soluble sulphates and (2) the time elapsed since its construction to know the extent to which the background should be further dried before application of the rendering;

12

IS:2402-1963

4 4 f)

Atmospheric conditions in the locality; namely, whether carrying dust, acidic fumes, etc, and also the extent of exposure `to rain and wind; Drawings giving details of the finish at junctions to doors, windows and other openings, type of cornice,' arris and return treatments; and Details of decorative rendering. finishes that are to be applied for preparatory over the

3.2 Necessary be given.

drawings and instructions

work shall also

3.3 Arrangements shall be made for proper exchange of information and co-ordination between thoseengaged in the rendering work and all those whose work will be affected. 4. MATERIALS, TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES

4.1 Cement - This shall be ordinary cement conforming

to IS : 269-1958 Specification for Ordinary, Rapid Hardening and Low Heat Portland Cement ( Revised ), or blastfurnace slag cement conforming to IS : 455-1962 Specification for Portland Blastfurnace Slag Cement ( Revised ), or white cement of approved quality. 4.1.1 Coloured cement may be either ready mixed material or may be obtained by mixing pigments and cement at site. The pigments to be mixed with cement shall conform to Appendix A of IS : 2114-1962 Code of Practice for Laying In-Situ Terrazzo Floor Finish. for Sand 4.2 Sand - This shall conform to IS : 1542-1960 Specification for Plaster. For white or coloured renderings, only quartz or silica sand shall be used. 4.2.1 For some textured finishes, such as those produced by treatment of the freshly applied final or finishing coat with a tool, it may be desirable to remove the coarser particles (for example, by screening through 3*35-mm IS Sieve or 2*36-mm IS Sieve ) while for others, such as the torn texture, a slightly larger proportion of material coarser than 4,75-mm IS Sieve may be needed. 4.3 Aggregates- All aggregates other than sand (see 4.2 ) shall conform to IS : 383-1963 Specification for Coarse and Fine Aggregates from Natural Sources for Concrete ( Revised). 4.3.1 For roughcast, crushed stone or fine gravel up to 12 mm maxiThe grading and maximum mum may be used in the finishing coat. size will vary according to the texture required and the type of stone; an aggregate of the desired grading may be obtained either by using

13

IS :`2402'; 1963

a mixture of stone or gravel with sand or by using crushed stone graded

from the maximum down to dust. The proportion of coarse material ( over 4.75mm IS Sieve ) to fines shall be between 1 : 1 and 1: 2 by volume. This shall conform to IS : 712-1956 Specification for Building

4.4 Lime Limes.

used for mixing shall 4.5 Water -Water rious matter and unusual proportions of estuarine water or brakish water shall drinking is normally suitable; in case of made.

be clean, free from deleteSea water, dissolved salts. not be used. Water fit for doubt, an analysis shall be

4.6 Fibrous Materials - Certain natural fibres, such as flax, sisal, manila, jute, hemp, and coconut fibres may be used for incorporation in the They shall be clean, dry and free from oil. Mineral fibres mortar. like asbestos may also be used. 4.7 Metal Lathing - Different varieties of metal lathings are available as proprietary products, and only approved variety shall be used. Typical illustrations for different types are shown in Fig. 6. When used as a reinforcement or to provide a key on solid backgrounds, only the plain expanded type without ribs shall be used. used as background for rendering, 4.8 Expanded Metal - Where expanded metal shall comply with the requirements of IS : 412-1962 Specification for Expanded Metal Steel Sheets for General Purposes (Revised). 4.9 Tools and Accessories - Tools and accessories used for rendering the relevant provisions of may advantageously conform to IS : 1630-1960 Specification for Mason's Tools for Plaster Work and Pointing Work. 5. CARE OF MATERIALS, TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES

5.1 Materials - These
the relevant in 4. ,

provisions

shall be stored and handled in accordance with of the specifications for materials mentioned Specification for

5.1.1 Lime shall be stored as specified in IS : 712-1956 Building Limes. 5.1.2 Sand shall be stored under clean conditions nation by soil or other deleterious substances.

to prevent

contami-

tools shall be cleaned by scraping and 5.2 Tools and Accessories -All washing at the end of each day's work, or after use with different 1.4

18:2402-1963

6h

Plain Expanded Type

6B

Ribbed Expanded ( ribs integral )

Type

6C

Ribbed Expanded Type (ribs attached subsequent to expansion of the metal )

6D FIG. 6

Pwforated

Type

TYPICAL ILLTJ~TRATIONS OF METAL LATHINO

15

IS:2402-1963
materials. Metal tools shall be cleaned and greased after each operation. All tools shall be examined and thoroughly cleaned before plastering is Cleanliness is particularly important with cement plasters, begun. where' contamination with set material can seriously affect the performance as well as reduce effective life of the tools.

6. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Functions of External Renderings - The functions of external renderings are: a) to increase the durability of a wall, pier, column or similar structures and to reduce maintenance costs; b) to prevent penetration of moisture into the structure; and c) to cover an unsightly surface or to obtain a particular decorative effect. 6.1.1 The various factors that will affect the choice of the type of treatment are as mentioned in items (a) to (f) under 3.1. These factors will assume varied degrees of importance in different circumstances and will affect the mix used, the method of application and finishing, the preparatory treatment to be given to the background and the design of architectural features and other details in relation to the rendering. 6.1.2 Other performance a) Durability; b) Adhesion between the rendering and the background, between the various coats of the rendering; and c) Resistance to cracking and crazing. and factors which are important are as follows:

6.2 Suitability of Various Types of Rendered Finishes - The suitability of various methods of finishing renderings for various conditions is explained in Table I, and also generally in 6.2.1 to 6.2.4. * 6.2.1 Troweled or Floated Plain Finishes - Steel trowelled finishes are not recommended for external renderings. Plain floated finishes require a high standard of workmanship to minimize the risk of cracking, crazing and irregular discoloration. 6.2.2 Scraped or Textured Finishes, Hand-Applied - Scraped or textured finishes are generally less liable to crack and craze than plain finishes and are easier to bring to a uniform appearance; this is especially important when coloured renderings are used. Although offering more lodgement for dirt, a rough texture tends to an evenness of discbloration, which is less apparent than with a smoother finish. Also the distribution of the flow of rain water over the surface reduces the risk of $penetration through the rendering. 16

TABLE I SUITABILITY OF THE VARIOUS METHODS OF FINISHING RENDERINGS FOR VARIOUS CONDITIONS ( Clause 6.2 )
TREATMENT SUITABILITY ON VARIOUS BACKING MATERIALS (2) or 1 Not suitable on weak types of brick or lightweight concrete SUITABILITY FOR VARIOUS ENVIRONMENTS (3) All areas, but particularly suitable for situations subjected to rainfall and heavy strong winds All areas, but coarser finishes less suitable in the dirtier urban atmosphere All areas ( see `remarks' SUITABILITY FOR VARIOUS EXPOSURE CONDITIONS (4) Particularly for severe tions suitable condiREMARKS

(1) Pebble-dash dry-dash Roughcast

(5)
Requires little maintenance except for fungus growth

Scraped finishes 4 Textured finishes

1 J
.I

All conditions

>

All backing materials

Greater freedom from crazing and petchiness of appearance than smooth finishes This type is most likely to develop defects, including crazing, cracking and patchiness of appearance Do not craze but become patchy or streaky under certain conditions

Smooth (Floated finishes

All backing materials

) All conditions

Machine finishes

applied

All backing

materials

Often less suitable for industrial areas and localities exposed to dust storms as they show dirt rather badly Less suitable for industrial areas

All conditions

White or light colours in any of above finishes

All backing materials

All conditions

Will probably require some maintenence to keep good appearance in urban areaa

l!s i.2402 - 1963
6.2.3 Hand-Thrown Finishes, Roughcast and Dry-dash, e'tc - Handthrown finishes, roughcast and dry-dash have all the advantages Under severe conditions of exposure of scraped or textured finishes. these are more satisfactory from the points of view of weather proofness, durability and resistance to cracking and crazing than the types mentioned in 6.41 and 6.2.2. 6.2.4 Machine-Applied Finishes - These are of various types, mainly proprietary materials and processes operated by specialists. The types are as follows: a) Finishes in which the material is thrown at random - These have an open porous structure, behave similarly to hand-applied scraped finishes and are equal to the latter and to hand-thrown finishes in water-proofness, durability and resistance to cracking and crazing. b) Finishes which are applied by gun or spray-These give low density porous finishes. However, there are some finishes which are also applied by means of a cement gun, under pressure, but produce a finish somewhat similar They are generally in appearance to roughcast but less attractive. For this more dense and, therefore, give very effective protection. reason, they are generally used in circumstances where protection is the sole requirement. 6.3 Nature of Background in Relation to Choice of Rendering

6.3.1 Broadly the background may be classified so far as application of rendering is concerned:
a) Dense, strong and smooth materials; b) Moderately strong and porous materials; c) Moderately weak and porous materials; d) No-fines concrete; and e) Lathing or other similar backing materials. 6.3.2 The characteristics Table II.

under following

types

of these types of background

are explained

in

6.4 Resistance to Water Penetration

6.41 Water may penetrate either through the pores of a rendering or through cracks or both. The extent of penetration through the pores will depend upon the permeability of the various coats, upon the relative suction of the rendering and the backing and also upon the quantity of water at any one point upon the surface.
18

TABLE II

BACKGROUNDS

FOR

RENDERINGS

( Clause 6.3.2 ) SL No.
1

BACKING MATERIALS

STRENCJTII

POROSITYAND SUCTION

MECHANICAL KEY
AND ADHESION

RESISTANCE TO

PENETRATION,

PRO-

TECTION REQUIRED

Poured cement con-] Crete I C;;fe;;concrete

2 3

' 1

strong

Low

Roughening, moistening and sometime treating the surface with cement and sand grout (1: 1) is necessary

Sufficient resistance; no further treatapart from ment rendering

z

Bricks, very dense 1 type; stones J B r i c k s, Ordinary Porous Type Moderately strong High Satisfactory; if suction is irregular use cement and sand mix 1: 1 over the surface Very satisfactory Sufficient resistsnce; no further treatment apart from rendering

4

5

No-fines concrete

Sometimes weak

Large voids, few small pores, capillarity absent; suction low -

-

6

Lathing

Sth&Aedbe strengagamst subsequent movements

Purpose is to provide key

Two coats of rendering are necessary. First coat shall be of relatively impervious mix

IS : 2402 - 1963 6.4.2 Rain falling upon a relatively smooth surface with little or no absorption does not distribute itself evenly, but tends to run down the surface in streaks. A rough surface, on the other hand, will break up the flow and so avoid the concentration of water at any one point.
6.4.3 Where cracks occur, particularly in a dense and impermeable rendering, water may enter and find its way between the rendering and the background, or directly into the background. When this happens, the water is liable to cause trouble in one or more of several ways. It may cause loss of adhesion, further cracking or complete disintegration of the rendering through either frost action or the action upon the cement of soluble sulphates that may be present in the walling material; it may soak through the wall and cause dampness, loss of adhesion or disintegration of plaster work inside; or it may have other deleterious effects. durability of the external rendering is dependent 6.5 Durability -The upon the factors mentioned in 6.5.1 to 6.5.5. 6.5.1 Nature of Background and its Durability - The durability of the various types of background to which renderings may be applied is dealt with in the relevant codes of practice dealing with those materials or types of structures. The influence of the nature of the background upon the type of rendering recommended is dealt with in 6.3. 6.5.2 Presence of Soluble Salts ( S&hates ) in Backgrounds

6.5.2.1 Soluble salts, particularly sulphates, may sometimes occur in new backgrounds consisting of some types of clay brick or block, or in old work in a wider range of backgrounds, the salts then having been derived from extraneous sources, condensation in chimneys being one of the most common sources. Whatever the source, such salts have harmful effects which may lead to cracking and loss of adhesion of any rendering. The risk of defects arising from this cause is much greater if the background at any time becomes damp, since the chemical reactions between the sulphates and constituents of the cement, which give rise to the defects, progress only under moist conditions and the salts diffuse to the surface only in solution.
6.5.2.2 Where such salts are likely to be present, the rendering shall be avoided on any background liable to get damp, for example, retaining walls, work below damp-proof course at ground level, and'chimney stacks. Rendering on all such backgrounds shall have an undercoat of cement mortar with an admixture of waterproofing compound. 6.5.2.3 Where rendering is essential on backgrounds containing such salts and liable to become damp, the measures explained in Appendix A shall be taken. It is, however, to be emphasized that these measures will be useless unless care has also been taken to avoid risk of expansion of mortar joints in the background due to similar action.

20

IS : 2402 - 1963 6.5.3 Types of Rendering - The types of rendering and proportions of mix used are of the utmost importance from the point of view of durability as explained in 6.5.3.1 and 6.5.3.2. 6.5.3.1 Cement and cement-lime renderings - Renderings consisting of Portland cement or Portland cement and lime, with a carefully selected and properly graded aggregate, have sufficient durability and If a mix suited to the conditions do not require any protective coating. and requirements is used and carefully applied as recommended in this standard, there will be no difficulty in obtaining a rendering of adequate durability for any situation. 6.5.3.2 Lime-sand mix -These mixes give renderings with fair strengths if properly used, but are subject to rapid deterioration if exposed to rain and frost. It is essential, therefore, for the durability of such external renderings liable to be exposed t.o rain, that a coating of paint or other protective material shall be applied. This coating shall be maintained in satisfactory condition; where the protective coating is allowed to fall int,o disrepair, the rendering may rapidly Simple lime-sand mixes ate rarely used for external work deteriorate. except in dry areas with light rainfall, and their use is mainly confined to repair and alteration of old buildings and for such purposes hydraulic limes are generally used. Relevant details for application of Iime Code of Practice for Application of plaster are given in *IS : 2394Lime Plaster Finish. 6.5.4 Method of Application, Particularly in Relation to the Nature of the Background - Of the two general methods of application, namely, layingon with a trowel or float and throwing-on either by hand or machine, throwing-on is likely to produce the more durable rendering due to better adhesion. This is especially so with a dense background having little suction, where satisfactory adhesion is difficult to obtain with the laying-on method. 6.5.5 Atmospheric Conditions 6.5.5.1 Accumulation of dirt or other the following effect upon renderings: deposited material will have

'

a) It may lead to failure of the rendering by introducing destructive substances, such as sulphur oxides, which attack the cementitous materials. b) It will cause discoloration of the surface. This may not be harmful to the durability of the rendering, but may adversely affect the appearance, particularly when the discoloration is irregular. 6.5.5.2 Dirt wiI1 find a Iodgement on the surface of even a dense and smooth finished rendering and, although rain may wash a certain
*Under preparation.

21

KY: 2402 - 1963 amount off, it will distribute the greater part, together with its own additional deposit, throughout the path of its flow. On surfaces of smooth finished renderings, this path is often restricted (see 6.4 ) and tends to give an irregular, streaky or patchy discoloration. A rough textured surface, on. the other hand, by breaking up the flow and spreading the rain water, and with it the dirt; will give a more uniform discoloration. 6.6 Resistance to Cracking - Cracking causes explained in 6.6.1 and 6.6.2. in renderings may result from the

6.6.1 Movements of the Structural BackgroundMovements of the structural background upon which a rendering is applied may be of diverse forms and due to diverse causes, according to the nature of the background. Reference shall be made to the relevant Indian Standard dealing with the type of construction involved in any particular case. 6.6.2 Movement of the Rendering - Renderings, in common with other materials, undergo a slight change in volume as the moisture content changes and this results in shrinkage of the rendering upon drying out. As the background will usually be rigid, this shrinkage will set up stresses in the rendering, partly tensile and partly shearing along the plane of adhesion. The tensile stresses tend to cause cracking, and the shear stresses cause failure of adhesion between the rendering and the background; both may occur together. If the adhesion is sufficiently strong and uniform, the restraint so afforded may take up the whole of the shrinkage stresses; good adhesion, therefore, is an important factor in the avoidance of cracking. 6.6.3 Another factor affecting adhesion is the relative strength of the background and of the successive coats. In general, the first coat should be weaker than the background and each successive coat not stronger than that to which it is applied. 6.6.4 Creep, the internal relief of stresses, can help to avoid cracking by relieving shrinkage stresses. Its magnitude is small, it occurs naturally in all renderings, but no methods of encouraging it are known. An adequate time shall be allowed for each coat to dry out before the application of the next coat. a rendering is to be continuous `6.6.5 Mixed Backgrounds -Where across backgrounds of different classes, metal lathing or wire netting fixed across the junction will minimize cracking due to differential Alternatively, it may be practicable to form a straight movements. joint in the rendering along the line of the junction of the two backgrounds by cutting through each coat with a trowel or suitable sharp edged tool. The resulting gap should be sealed with a building mastic of suitable colour. 22

6.7 Resistance to Crazing
6.7.1 Crazing results from differential shrinkage of the surface of the The cracks formed are narrow rendering in relation to its interior. and generally do not extend far below the surface; they may, however, Dense, steel trowelled finishes are develop into shrinkage cracks. particularly liable to craze; on the other hand, a porous mix, with a scraped, textured, or other rough finish is highly resistant to this defect. 6.7.2 The risk of crazing may be minimized a) the use of relatively b) the avoidance of an excessive in the finish coat, and by: of very fine material weak mix for the finishing coat, proportion

c) the avoidance of excessive trowelling the surface of an excess of laitance.

to prevent the drawing to

6.8 Thermal Properties - A rendered finish has little effect upon the overall thermal transmittance of a normal external wall, since the conductivity of the material is relatively high and only a thin layer of rendering is applied. 6.9 Sound Insulation ( Air-Borne Sound ) - The addition of a rendering to a wall ( except one of very light-weight construction ) will not significantly increase its resistance to the passage of sound.

6.10 Fire Resistance and Combustibility
6.10.1 An ordinary external rendering is non-combustible according to the definition in IS : 1641-1960 Code of Practice for Fire Safety of Buildings ( General ): General Principles and Fire Grading. 6.10.2 A rendering contributes to the fire resistance of a wall but no separate value for fire resistance of the rendering can be given; the ,data for fire resistance of walls with and without rendered finishes are given in IS : 1641-1960 Code of Practice for Fire Safety of Buildings ( General): General Principles and Fire Grading.

6.11 Recommended Mix Proportions - Mixes suitable

for different types Where alternative mixes are given, of rendering are given in Table III. selection shall be made on the following considerations: The mix for each such successive coat shall never be of a type richer in cement: than the mix used for the coat to which it is applied. The type richer in Portland cement shall be preferred applied under winter conditions. 23 when it is

TABLE

III

RECOMMENdED MIXES FOR EXTERNAL RENDERINGS IN RELATION MATERIAL, EXPOSURE CONDITIONS AND FINISH DESIRED (Clause 6.11 )

TO

BACKGROUND

MIX:

Type 1 to 5 shall consist of Portland Cement : Lime : Sand ( by volume ); Tvue 6 shall consist of Portland Cement : Coarse Aggregate of size 6 to 12 mm pKportions are: Type l-1:0:4 Type2-1:0:5to6 Type3-1:1:6to7 Type4-1:2:9toiO Type5-1:0:3 Type6-1:3

( by volume ). The

BACKGROUND MATERIAL

TYPE OF FINISH

TYPE OF MIX RECOMMENDED FOR TEE GIVEN EXPOSUIZE CONDITIONS -~_--*----__ --First and subsequent Final Coat Undercoats r--_...-*r-___A__-___~ Severe Moderate Lightl Severe Moderate Light (3) 1 2 5 5 2 1 1 5 5 (4) 2 3 5 5 3 2 2 : (5) 2 or 3 2 or 3 6 5 4 2 or 3 2 or 3 5 5 (6) B 6 (7) 2 3 6 (3) 2.2 3or or34 6,

(1)
Dense and strong]

(2)
Wood-float

I k Moderately strong and ) porous J
Moderately porous weak and

Scraped or textured Roughcast Dry-dash
Wood-float

-

Scraped or textured > f Wood-float Scraped or textured

Same as for undercoats

No-fines concrete

: 6

2" 6 -

3 or or 4 6 ( Continued )

TABLE III

RECOMMENDED MIXES FOR EXTERNAL RENDERINGS IN RELATION TO BACKGROUND MATERIAL, EXPOSURE CONDITIONS AND FINISH DESIRED - Conki
TYPE OP FINISH TYPE OP MIX RECOMMENDED FOR THE GIVEN EXPOSURE CONDITIONS __-__-_---_--_-~ -First and Subsequent Final Coat Undercoats ----7 ti-r----Severe Moderate Severe Moderate Light Light (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (6)

BACKQROUND MATERIAL

(1)

(3)

Met81 lething or expended met81

i

r Wood-float

1Scraped or textured
Roughcast Dry-dash

1

1

1

5 5

5 5

5

2 6 -

2 6 -

-

2 6

E

NOT&~ 1 -

For special mixes for high sulphate backgrounds, see Appendix A. repair work, see 11. preparation of background, see IS Plaster Finishes on Walls and Ceilings.

2 -For

3 -For

: 1661-1960 Code of Practice for Cement 8nd Cement-Lime

4-Where alternative sand contents 8re shown for the cement : lime : sand mixes ( for example 6 to 7 parts in mix Type 3 ) the higher of the send contents ( that is 7 parts ) should be used if the sand is co8rse or well graded, but the lower sand contents ( that is 6 parts ) should be used if the sand is fine. 5The types of finish that sre shown in italics in the table 8re those to be preferred in most circumstances. z L ;f; a

6 -Mixes for machine-spplied decorative finishes are generally supplied 8s ready-mixed proprietsry materials and should be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. For some types, the whole process is proprietary. For dense cement-gun finishes, mixes of cement end sand only 8re used. 7In the case of coloured cement renderings, the underco8ts must be admixed with 8 suitable waterproofing compound. The preparation of admixture should be according to the instructions of the manufacturers.

'
g c

IS : 2402 -"1963
one coat is sufficient for ordinary buildings in dry or moderately wet climates. For important buildings or for buildings in areas of heavy rainfall and for uneven backgrounds, two coats will be required. For pebble-dash and roughcast at least one undercoat will be necessary.

6.12 Number of Coats -Normally

6.13 Functions of Different Coats and Their Recommended Thicknesses
serve various purposes. They pro6.13.1 Undercoats -Undercoats vide a means of straightening or levelling an uneven surface; they seal the surface of the wall, and are often the most important part of the treatment in preventing rain penetration; they provide a surface of even suction and satisfactory adhesion for the finishing coat, and they prevent ` grinning' of joints or of areas of differing suction through the finishing coat. An undercoat in any part shall have a thickness of not less than 8 mm, nor more than 12 mm. If greater thickness is required to build up an even surface, additional undercoats shall be used as required. For coloured cement renderings, the undercoat must be admixed with waterproofing compound to provide a waterproofing base. 6.13.2 Final or Finishing coat will be governed to normally be 3 to 8 mm as applied finishes may be as thickness of the final or finishing Coat -The some extent by the texture required, but will Some of the fine-textured machinefinished. thin as 3 mm.

6.13.3 Single Coat Rendering - In the case of dense background, such as of cement concrete, or where surface of the background is very even (as for example, walls built with hollow concrete blocks ) or buildings subjected to moderate, or light exposure conditions, wood-float . rendering can be applied in one coat. It shall not exceed 18 mm or be less than 6 mm in thickness in any part. But extreme care shall be taken in preparing the surface of the background as explained in 8.1.1 to ensure adequate bond between the rendering and the background. 6.14 Colour 6.14.1 Only the finishing by the following methods: coat need be coloured and this can be done

Using a suitable sand or other aggregate - If delicate coloured effects are desired, the aggregate shall be most carefully selected to give the required effect in the finished rendering; a consistent supply shall be assured. Using white or coloured cement or by the addition of `suitable pigments to the mix -To ensure a uniformity of colour, it is
generally advantageous to use a coloured cement, rather than to mix in the pigments as required on the site.,

26

IS : 2402 : 1963 6.14.2 When light colours are required, it is preferable to use a white cement; other cements have a deadening effect upon most colours. Lime added to a coloured cement mix will lighten the colour.
6.14.3 Proprietary finishing materials, which require only mixing Such with water, are obtainable in white and a variety colours. proprietary mixes have advantages in the control and uniformity of colour and texture obtainable. .

of

6.14.4 Coloured finishes, particularly of the deeper colours, are liable to suffer lightening of the colour through formation of a white film of calcium carbonate on the surface, known as ` lime bloom' or emorescence. The incidence of this depends to some extent upon the grading of the sand, but mainly on the conditions of finishing the surface and No definite recommendation can be the subsequent drying conditions. made for avoiding it. 6.14.5 The effect of atmospheric pollution sooty deposits should be taken into account ( see also 6.5.5 ). and discoloration by in choice of colour

7. PRELIMINARY WORK 7.1 Scaffolding - Where possible, independent scaffolding shall be used, to obviate the subsequent restoration of masonry in putlog holes and other breaks in the work. Scaffolding shall be checked to make sure that it is suitable and safe. ,
7.2 Cleanliness and Protection of Adjacent Work

7.2.1 All existing work and fittings that are likely to be damaged in the application of renderings shall be protected.
7.2.2 Cleanliness is essential in all stages of the work. Gauge-boxes, ' tools and anything else used in the preparation or application of the mixes shall be kept clean. The platform of mix container shall be cleaned immediately after each batch of mixed material has been used up. 7.2.3 Care shall be taken to avoid, as far as possible, the splashing of mortar on to finished surfaces, such as brickwork, joinery, paintwork and glass; any such splashes shall be cleaned immediately.

off

7.2.4 On completion, any mortar splashings, formerly missed, shall be carefully removed so as to avoid, where possible, damaging the surfaces from which they are. removed, and the whole of the work including the rendering itself and other surfaces shall be left clean. 27

tS:2402-1963 ( 7.3Preparation of Mortar Mix
7.3.1 Proportioning
7.3.1.1 The material used in the preparation of plastering mixes may be measured either by volume using gauge-boxes or by weight. Measurement by weight of the dry materials is the more accurate method of proportioning and shall preferably be used. 7.3.1.2 Variations in mix proportions may occur if proportioning is done by volume. Adjustment for such variations may be made as explained in the relevant Indian Standard on preparation of masonry mortars. 7.3.1.3 Cement shall be measured by weight, 1440 kg of the material being taken as equivalent to one cubic metre for the purpose of proportioning. 7.3.1.4 Proportioning of lime may be done by measurement of volume as lime putty, or by measurement of weight of quicklime or dry hydrated lime before the preparation of putty. The mix proportion of lime, unless otherwise stated, generally refers to the volume of putty, and when measurement is done on quicklime or dry hydrated lime, their quantities shall be such as to yield the required volume of lime putty. 7.3.1.5 Quantity of water - For general cement plaster work with 1 : 3 proportion, the quantity of, water required is about 70 percent by weight of cement. This may, however, vary depending on the following factors, and adjustment shall be done as explained in the relevant Indian Standard on preparation of masonry mortars: a) The nature and condition of the fine aggregate; b) The temperature and humidity at the time ofworking; c) Richness of the mix, namely, whether richer or leaner than 1 : 3; of lime in composite mortar; a&l added for improving the workabiIity. d) The varying quantities e) The use of admixtures 7.3.2 Mixing plaster 7.3.2.1 Cement-lime plaster - The cement-lime prepared by any one of the methods given in (a) and (b): shall be

a) Lime putty and sand shall be mixed in the required proportions and kept protected from drying out till the time of use. The required quantity of cement shall then be added and the whole mass thoroughly mixed. Water shall be added if necessary, but only to the minimum extent required to give a working consistency for the plaster. 28

IS : 2402 - 1963
If the sand used is fine sand, cement and sand in the required proportions shall be mixed dry in a mixer. Lime putty thinned with water shall then be added to the mixer and the contents mixed for some time until a satisfactory mortar is obtained. The quantity of water added to lime putty shall be slightly less than the finally required quantity to ensure that no lime water Final adjustment of water to will be left over in the mixer. obtain a mortar of required consistency may be made by adding clean water afterwards. If the sand used is coarse sand, lime putty and sand in the required proportions shall first be mixed on a clean water-tight platform. Necessary quantity of water shall then be added and the mixture mixed again. The mixture shall be ground in a masonry lined mortarmill. Grinding shall be done for at least 120 revolutions, and the mortar shall be raked up continuously during the process, particularly at corners. Water may be added as required during the grinding. The mix shall then be transferred to a mechanical mixer to which the required quantity of cement is added, and the contents mixed for some time until a satisfactory mortar is obtained. 7.3.2.2 Cement plaster - Cement and sand shall be mixed dry in the required proportions to obtain a uniform colour. Water shall then be added to get the required consistency for the plaster. 7.3.2.3 Cement-lime plaster or cement plaster shall be used within half an hour after the addition of water to cement. Any mortar for plaster which is partially set, shall be rejected and removed forthwith from the site. 7.3.2.4 Mixing may be done either manually or mechanically. ` Hand Mixing ' shall be carried out on a clean, water-tight platform; during mixing, the mortar shall be hoed back and forth with addition of necessary quantity of water until a mixture of uniform appearance and consistency is obtained. In ` Machine Mixing ' the mixer shall run at least five minutes after placing all the ingredients in the drum. Machine mixing is preferable to hand mixing for cement mortars, and since all mixed materials have to be used up within half an hour, it is important that the batch is not too large. 7.4 Preparation of Background

7.4.1 To obtain satisfactory bond between background and the base coat and to ensure that this bond is maintained subsequently, the background shall be prepared to fulfil the requirements explained in 7.4.1.1 to 7.4.1.7.
29

IS;: 2402- 1963 7.4.1.1 Cleanliness -The loose layer of dust on masonry shall be brushed with a stiff bristle or wire brush; brushing may advantageously be combined with blowing of compressed air. The laitance, if any, found on the freshly cut concrete surface shall also be removed. The concrete surface if found contaminated with soap which is formed by reaction of resins with calcium hydrate or is derived from mould oils, shall also be removed with a brush. If the background contains soluble salts, particularly sulphates, the application of plaster shall be done only after the efflorescence of the salts is complete and is thoroughly removed from the surface. Any trace of algae or moss formation shall also be removed.
7.4.1.2 Roughness - The roughness of the background may generally improve the bond between the surface and the rendering. A smooth surface shall be roughened by wire brushing or by hacking or bushhammering. After roughening the surface, care shall be taken to moisten the surface sufficiently before the base coat is applied as otherwise the freshly exposed surface may tend to absorb considerable amount of water from the plaster. The joints in the masonry shall also be raked to a depth of about 1 cm for providing key to the plaster. Special backgrounds, such as expanded metal lathing, wire netting, etc, may be fixed if required to improve further the key to the plaster. 7.4.1.3 Suitable suction - Adequate time shall be allowed between the erection and application of rendering finish to make the surface suitable for suction adjustment. Careful adjustment of suction is necessary for proper adhesion of base coat to the surface and may be done by wetting the backing suitably if it is dry, or by sprinkling with a cement mix as in the case of concrete surface with low suction. Without the aid of suction, plaster would creep and slide down due to its own weight. On the other hand, very strong suction withdraws all moisture from plaster and makes it weak, porous and friable. Too much water makes it impossible to keep the mortar in position till it sets. The background shall not be soaked but only damped evenly If the surface becomes dry in spots, before applying the rendering. such areas shall be moistened again to restore uniform suction. A fog spray is recommended for this work. 7.4.1.4 Evenness - Any unevenness shall be levelled before the rendering is applied. For finishes applied in three-coats local projections shall not exceed I.2 cm proud of the general surface as determined by the periphery of the surface concerned and local depressions shall not exceed 2-O cm. For two-coat work the local projections shall not exceed O-6 cm and local depression shall not exceed 1.2 cm. strength and elasticity of plaster 7.4.1.5 Strength and elasticity -The shall be compatible with that of the background. 30

IS : 2402- 1%3 7.4.1.6 lmmobiliry - The differential movements between the background and the plaster due to moisture changes, temperature changes, structural settlement, deflection, etc, cause cracks in the rendered fin,ish. The major part of such movements shall be allowed to set in before the rendering is applied. In the case of moisture movements, sufbcient drying interval for the background shall be allowed. The background must be immobile at the time of application of the plaster, or subsequently the movements of the background are such as to be in step with and in the same direction as that of the rendered finish. 7.4.1.7 Precautions against discontinuity in backgrounds similar to those described in 6.6.5 shall be taken. Precautions

7.4.2 The preparation for different types of backgrounds shall be done as specified in 1.4.2.1 and 1.4.2.2. 7.4.2.1 Brickwork or hollow block masonry - The joints of new work, particularly if the bricks or blocks are smooth, shall be raked out as the work proceeds. Projecting bricks shall be trimmed off where necessary. The masonry shall also be allowed to dry sufficiently so that the initial drying shrinkage is fairly complete and suction adjustment is possible during application of rendering. In the case of old brickwork, surface shall be thoroughly brushed down to remove dust, loose particles and efflorescence, if any. Low spots, where necessary, shall be filled in by means of a mix similar to that intended for the base coat but richer and coarser, and ample time shall be allowed for the filling material to dry out before the base coat is applied. concrete surface shall be sufficiently 7.4.2.2 In-situ concrete -The rough to provide adhesion and shall be evenly wetted ( not saturated ) to provide correct suction. The surface shall be cleaned of all dust, loose particles, laitance, efflorescence and all other such matter. Laitance and efflorescence shall preferably be removed by dry methods. Grease and oil shall be removed as completely as possible. The surface shall be made sufficiently rough by hacking and bush hammering. If this is not possible, key shall be provided by an initial coating of mortar composed of one part of cement to 14 to 3 parts of coarse sand, mixed to a wet consistency. The mix shall be forcibly dashed on to the concrete surface by suitable means and allowed to harden before application of the last coat. If a chemical retarder has been applied to the formwork, care shall be taken that none of the retarders is left on the concrete or other surfaces. A roughened surface may then be formed by wire brushing and all the resulting dust and loose particles cleaned off. Where mechanical key forming devices have been used in the concrete, these shall be stripped off if still adhering and the resulting surface cleaned down. Ridges or fins left by shuttering imperfections shall be removed before cleaning down, to be compatible with the finish to be applied. 31

IS : 2402 - 1963

7.5 Fixing Metal Lathing or Expanded Metal as a Background
75.1 The metal lathing or expanded metal shall be of 6 mm to 10 m&h and shall be applied with the long way of the mesh across supports. If the supports are more than 35 cm apart, the gauge of metal shall be increased above that normally used, according As most of metal lathings experience, to give sufficient stiffness. proprietary tvpes, detailed recommendations cannot be given and manufacturer's advice should be obtained regarding their erection. mm the the to are the

7.5.2 The strands in the various sheets shall all slope in one direction; in vertical work they should slope inwards and downwards from the face of the rendering. 7.5.3 In order to space the lathing from the face of the bearers and thereby ensure continuity of the key at these points, small round rods, V-shaped ribs or strips of hardwood may be fixed on the face of the supports. 7.5.4 For fire protection of steel columns the metal lathing is normally spaced from the columns by a spiral of 3 mm steel wire of 30-cm pitch, wrapped round the columns before the metal lathing is fixed, or by cradles or stirrups of 6 to 10 mm diameter mild steel rod. This is done primarily to give increased rigidity to the lathing, but it also assists in key formation on the flanges. 7.5.5 All sheets shall be lapped not less than 2.5 cm at the sides and ends; overlaps shall not occur at angles or curves and end laps shall occur only at supports. 7.5.6 Sides of sheets shall be wired together with galvanized diameter not less than 1.25 mm, every 10 cm between supports. 7.5.7 Cut ends of wire used for fastening not towards the finishing coat. wire of and

shall be bent inwards

7.5.8 Expanded metal, when applied to timber supports, shall be secured by means of galvanized nails or staples driven skew-wise across the grain of the timber at intervals of not more than 10 cm. If nails are used, they shall be of .the flat-headed type. Expanded metal, when applied to steelwork, shall be secured by wire or clips. 7.5.9 After erection, all cut edges and damaged staples or nail heads shall be given a protective coat of bitumen-oil paint. 8. APPLICATION OF RENDERING COATS

8.1 General 8.1.1 Just before applying the first coat the surface of the background
.. , ' ,. . . ..I 32

shall be roughened, if necessary, thoroughly cleaned of loose particles and *

IS i 2402- 1963 dust and sufficiently moistened to prevent absorption of moisture from the rendering mortar in order to ensure adequate bond with the background. A newly cement rendered surface shall be prevented &om drying out too rapidly by spraying the surface with water and keeping it continuously moist for at least four days. In sunny weather, the work shall be carried out in the shade, whenever possible, following the sun round as the day passes. When using mixes containing high alumina cement, the work shall not be done in very hot weather and it shall be kept thoroughly damp for 48 hours after application by protecting from the sun and wind or by spraying. 81.2 Between two coats, it is desirable to have an interval of at least 24 hours in hot and dry weather and more in cold and wet weather. 81.3 When rendering on metal lathing or expanded metal, back rendering, whenever it can be applied, shall be done when the first undercoat on the face is hard enough to permit this. The work shall then be allowed to dry as completely as possible before applying further coats. Neglect of this precaution may be a frequent cause of cracking. 81.4 With certain textured finishes and the dry-dash finish, it is essential for the final coat to remain plastic for a longer time than normal. This may be assisted by reducing the suction of the undercoat by more thorough wetting down. If the undercoat is a cement-sand mix, it may also be helpful to use a water-repellent admixture in the undercoat mix. 81.5 The finishing coats shall be applied from top to bottom ( except for English cottage finish, where the procedure should be reversed) and, in doing so, care shall be taken to avoid joints in continuous surfaces. 8.2 First Undercoat 82.1 This may be applied either by laying on with or throwing the trowel. from

8.2.2 The undercoat shall be applied as uniformly as possible but It shall not less than 8 mm nor more than 12 mm thick in any part. be left rough and open from the edge of the laying trowel and, after it has been left long enough to set firm, the surface shall be combed or scratched, care being taken to leave the .scratch marks sufficiently deep to provide a key for the following coat, but not so deep as to penetrate the rendering. undercoat becomes 8.3 Subsequent Undercoat - Where an additional necessary, the first undercoat shall be brushed down to remove

IS : 2402 - 1963
any dust and loose particles and shall be slightly shall not exceed 12 mm in thickness; the surface, combed or scratched. wetted. This coat when firm, shall be

8.4 Plain Finishiag Coats - The finishing coat shall be not less than 3 mm or more than 8 mm thick and shall be applied with a laying trowel `and finished with a wood, felt, cork, or other suitably faced float. A steel trowel shall not be used and overworking shall be avoided. Water shall not be applied to the surface of the finishing coat whilst working up, but patches showing signs of premature drying may be patted with a damp float. 8.5 Scraped or Textured Finishing Coats - Various scraped or textured finishes can be obtained by hand or machine application and by different Successful effects depend upon the artistry as well tools and methods. as the skill of the craftsman. The thickness of the final coat is governed to some extent by the texture required. For scraped finishes, the final coat is usually applied to a thickness of about 6 to 12 mm of which about 3 mm is removed in the scraping process. Scraping shall be done after setting has taken place, but before the mortar has become too hard. The precise time will depend upon the mix and the atmospheric conditions. The surface skin of the mortar shall be removed to expose the aggregate. The texture obtained depends mainly on the grading of the aggregate. the mix for which shall 8.6 Roughcast Finish - The final coat, quite wet and plastic, is thrown on by means of a trowel or scoop. 8.7 Dry-dash Finish be

8.7.1 For dry-dash finish, the undercoat shall be laid on to a thickness of about 8 mm and shall be lightly pressed over to straighten it. The aggregate used for dashing shall be well washed and drained and thrown wet on to this coat while it is still plastic.
8.7.2 To ensure satisfactory bond between the dashing and the mortar, the aggregate may be lightly tapped into the mortar with a wood float or the flat of a trowel. surfaces which might 8.8 Machine-Applied Finishes - All adjacent stained or damaged shall first be masked. The precise method application will depend on the particular machine used. Generally, is necessary to allow the undercoat to harden and dry out sufficiently provide adequate suction, the finish is then applied at such a rate as ensure the desired texture. be of it to to

architectural features, such as quoins, 8.9 Architectural Features -Any mouldings and sills, shall be marked out and built up to the required shape and thickness, or cast and planted, before the finishing coat 34

IS : 2402- 1963 is applied. When forming heavy cornices, great care shall be taken in coring; it is preferable to build up with small quantities of material well keyed before each subsequent addition, rather than to apply too much material at one time. 9. CURING 9.1 Curing of rendered finishes is necessary to develop their maximum strength and density. Each coat shall be kept damp continuously for at least two days. Moistening shall commence as soon as the plaster has The water shall hardened sufficiently and is not susceptible to injury. Soaking of wall shall be avoided be applied by using a fine fog-spray. and only as much water as can be readily absorbed shall be used. Excessive evaporation on the sunny or windward sides of buildings in hot dry weather shall be prevented by hanging mattings or gunny bags on the outside of the plastered surface and keeping them wet. 9.2 After the completion of the final finishing treatment, the surface shall be kept wet for at least seven days during which period it shall be protected from exposure to extremes of temperature and weather.

10. MAINTENANCE 10.1 Cleaning 10.1.1 Rendered finishes may be cleaned applied through a fine jet at pressure.
by washing down with water

10.1.2 Organic growths of fungi, algae, etc, shall be killed by treatment with a suitable fungicide and the dead dry material brushed Reference may be made to *IS : 2395 off after a suitable interval. Code of Practice for Painting Calcareous Surfaces, for application of suitable fungicide. 10.1.3 All cracks and 11.1 ). and damaged areas shall be repaired (see 10.2

1

10.2 Repairs to Cracks
cracks in walls that remain dry and 10.2.1 General -Inconspicuous Cutting and repairing, however sound are usually best left alone. carefully done, invariably results in some differences in appearance over the area of the repair. 10.2.2 Cracks Occurring in Rendered Finishes Only - Cracks which form in rendered finishes and do not penetrate into the background can
*Under preparation.

35

IS : 2402 - 1963
usually be attributed to failure of adhesion adjacent to the crack. In order to carry out satisfactory repairs, the area surrounding the crack shall be tested for hollowness by tapping~ the surface and the hollow areas shall be cut out. If hollowness is not detected, the material on both sides of the crack shall be cut out to a total width of not less than 7.5 cm. Any material that develops hollowness or loses its adhesion during cutting-out shall also be removed. The edges of the cut material shall be either left square or, preferably undercut and the background well brushed and washed to remove any dust or loose material. 10.2.2.1 Where only very fine cracks are present and the work appears to be otherwise sound, coating the whole of the rendered finish with a cement paint or other decorative treatment may be adequate to close and conceal the cracks. 10.2.3 Cracks Occurring in Rendering and Base -Where cracks penetrate not only the rendering but also the background, the cause before of the cracking shalI be ascertained and dealt with proceeding with the repair. The background shall first be restored. Where it is not possible to effect complete repair of the background, the rendering shall be cut back on both sides of the cracks for at least 15 cm and light expanded-metal shall be fixed to the background and This method may not embedded in the undercoat of the rendering. Cracks entirely prevent further cracking but it will reduce its severity. occurring at the junction of dissimilar materials, that is, on mixed backgrounds, may alternatively be dealt with as described in 6.6.5. area cut out in repairing cracks 10.2.4 Restoring Rendering -The should be made good according to the nature of the background and the type of finish, as described for new work in this code. Since it is unlikely that the areas made good will exactly match existing work, consideration shall be given to the possibility of coating the whole of the repaired work with a cement paint or other decorative finish. 11. REPAIR OF DAMAGED

AREAS

11.1 General - The need for repairs to external ,rendered finishes may arise from negIect, damage, use of unsuitable materials or treatments, or unsatisfactory design of the building. The procedures for repairs arising out of various causes are dealt with in 11.2 to 11.3. 11.2 Loss of Adhesion 11.2.1 Loss
design of adhesion may arise from various causes. Defective or detailing may allow water to penetrate and this can lead to 36

IS : 2402 - 1963
expansion of the background or of the rendering as a result of either frost or sulphate action. Loss of adhesion may also arise from incorrect composition of the rendering in relation to the background or due to excessive absorption of moisture from the undercoat mortar if the background has not been properly moistened prior to applying undercoat. 11.2.2 Where water penetration is an obvious or suspected cause of Prevention of the ingress of water failure, this shall first be remedied. shall be effective against frost action and is generally the only practicable step that can be taken against further sulphate action. 11.2.3 When the causes of failure have been dealt with, the patches of damaged rendering shall be cut out cleanly, preferably to rectangular The exposed edges of the existing areas, down to the background. The exposed rendering shall be cut square or preferably undercut. surface of the background shall be well brushed to remove dirt or loose material and washed, and the prepared surface treated with a coat of cement grout comprising one part of cement and one part of fine sand. The area cut out shall be made good according to the nature of the background and the type of finish as described for new work in 8. The colour and texture of the new rendering shall be matched as closely as possible to the existing work; for this purpose the sand for the mix should be carefully selected and pigments or coloured Portland cement It is desirable to prepare small test may be incorporated as required. panels before finally deciding upon the mix to be used.

11.3 Mechanical Damage - In repairing mechanical ples of repair as described in 10.2 shall be followed. 11.4 Overcoming Unsatisfactory Appearance

damage, the princi-

11.4.1 It may be desired to change the appearance of a rendering or deposition of dirt because of unsatisfactory quality, discoloration or for aesthetic reasons. Necessary improvement or change may be effected by cleaning as described in 10.1, by renewing the existing rendering or by giving suitable paint treatment.
rendering may be painted satisIl.42 ?aint Treatment -External factorily with various types of paints, such as cement paints, emulsion paints, bituminous emulsion paints and oil paints of appropriate types. Reference shall be made to *IS : 2395 Code of Practice for Painting Calcareous Surfaces, for the selection and application of suitable paints.
*Under preparation.

IS-: 2402 - 1963

11.5 Overcoming Damp Penetration 11.5.1 General - The causes of damp penetration through renderings are discussed in 6.4. Where such penetration is due to the presence of cracks, they shall be dealt with as indicated in 10.2. Where damp penetration results from rain-runs due to defective design features, these Where penetration cannot be assigned should, if possible, be remedied. to either of the above causes, one of the treatments specified in 11.5.2 and 11.5.3 shall be applied.
surface of the rendering can be 11.5.2 Colourless Treatments -The made water-repellent by treatment with appropriate colourless solutions sold for this purpose. These consist either of solutions of silicones or of waxes and the like. Those based on silicones may produce a more lasting effect. These materials are proprietary types and shall be applied All types need in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions. renewal after a period of some years.

11.5.3 Paint Treatments - Paint treatments, regularIy applied, will effectively prevent rain nenetration through renderings. Thev shall be applied as described i;r *IS : 239% Code of PractYce for `Painting Caicareous Surfaces.

APPENDIX

A

( Clause 6.5.2.3 and Table III )
MEASURES TO OVERCOME THE EFFECTS OF SOLUBLE SULPHATES FROM BACKGROUNDS ON RENDERINGS A-l. One of the measures specified in A-2 and A-3 may be taken to overcome the effects of soluble sulphates from backgrounds on renderings. A-i. A separate support may be provided for the rendering.
be done by battening background. This may out and applying metal lathing or other subsidiary

A-3, A cement resistant to sulphate action may be used, namely, sulphateresisting Portland cement or, in very severe conditions, high alumina cement or blastfurnace slag cement.
*Under preparation.

38

1S:"2402-1963 A-3.1 The sulphate-resisting
Portland cement may be used exactly as ordinary Portland cement in the various mixes indicated in 6.11 and Table III. Where alternatives are given, the mix richer in cement shall be used. A-3.2 High alumina cement shall not be mixed with lime. used in the following mixes: In place of Type 1 mixes ( see Table III ) In place of Type 2 mixes ( see Table III ) In place of Type Type 4 mixes Table III ) 3 or (see It shall be

1 part high alumina cement : 3 parts sand by volume 1 part high alumina cement : i& to 2 part zinc sulphate powder : 4 parts sand, all by volume 1 part high alumina cement : 1 part zinc sulphate powder : 5 to 6 parts sand, all by volume

39

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

The Indian Standards Institution (ISI), which started functioning in 1947, is the national standards organization for India. Its principal object is to prepare standards on national and international basis, and promote their general adoption. The overall control of ISI, which is run and financed jointly as a non-profit making body by the Central Government and private enterprise, is exercised by a General Council, composed of representatives of Central and State Governments; leading trade, organizations; and and technological subscribing scientific members. The Minister of State in charge of the Ministry of Industry is the ex-officio President of ISI. The present technical activity of ISI is carried out through Products; its Division Councils for Agricultural and Food Structural Chemical; Electrotechnical; Engineering; Building; and Metals; and Textile. All technical work relating to the formulation and revision of standards is- done by committees appointed by and under the direction of their respective Division Councils. These committees consist of experts drawn from manufacturing units, technical institutions, purchase organizations and other concerned bodies. To make available benefits of lndlan Standards to the common man, ISI has introduced its Certification Marks Scheme under the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, 19.52, as amended by the Amendment Act, 1961. According to this Act, quality goods conforming to Indian Standards can carry the ISI This Mark is a third party guarantee of Certification Mark. Licences to use the ISI Certification quality of marked goods. Mark are granted to manufacturers using reliable methods of quality control and providing facilities for inspection by ISI staff. In the international field, ISI represents India on the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the InterElectrotechnical Commission (IEC). IS0 and IEC national respectively link 46 and 36 countries, and function through 104 and 53 technical committees; ISI participates in 75 technical committees of IS0 and all the technical committees of IEC. The committees and subcommittees of IEC and IS0 for which ISI holds the secretariat deal with: Electric Fans, Lat. Mica, Pictorial Markings for Handling of Goods, Liquid Flow Measurements in Open Channels, Spices and Condiments, and Stimulants. -

