■wtf (WTP^r) ^arr: l^ra^Rfr ^ 

3ft? MllRilH - ftf^ ?fflm 


Indian Standard 

FIRE SAFETY OF BUILDINGS (GENERAL): EXIT 
REQUIREMENTS AND PERSONAL HAZARD — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 

( Second Revision) 


ICS 13.220.01 



© BIS 2013 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 


Price Group 8 



Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Indian Standards relating to fire safety of buildings have been formulated covering general principles and fire 
grading, details of construction, exposure hazard and exit requirements. This standard covering the last aspect 
was formulated in 1960 and revised in 1988. In the past years, useful data has been made available. The provision 
in this revision has, therefore, been made based on the data adopted by some developed countries. Requirements 
for stair case and horizontal exit have been modified. Additional precautions, exceptions and deviations in 
requirements for various occupancies incorporated. Fire protection provisions for cinema halls and metro stations 
included. Criteria for compartmation is now given. Further the provisions have been aligned with SP 7 : 2005 
‘National Building Code of India 2005’. 

The exit requirements and personal hazard dealt with in this standard is considered as at least of equal importance 
to all other aspects; in fact in most cases, it is paramount because of the density of population associated with 
particular occupancy; an example is that of a cinema or similar densely occupied building when constructed with 
a godown of similar occupancy. 

Density of population varies from one building to another and also in the same building from time-to-time; one 
example is that of a large general or mixed bazar, emporium or stores where a great variety of goods are displayed 
for sale; and at certain periods may be offered at special attractive bargain prices, with the result that normal 
population will be rapidly exceeded, more so during peak shopping hours when an outbreak of fire would cause 
considerable confusion, possibly panic; therefore, the closet attention to design and maintenance of escape routes 
including any staircases, cannot be overemphasized. Likewise special consideration is essential to arrangement 
of display of any highly flammable articles or materials for sale in such risks because of the danger; normal 
escape routes being made unsafe or altogether useless. 

It would be neither possible nor advisable to rely on electrical or mechanical devices, such as lifts for moving the 
population of various floors to a place of safety because of the probability of fire rendering these devices inoperative. 
Therefore, staircases with associated escape routes become all important and staircases considered in this Code 
are the means of communication in an up and down direction of a building and serve not only as escape routes for 
occupants but also afford a direct means of access to the source of fire by the fire fighting staff. In fact, staircase 
landings of buildings which present a serious hazard are required to have fire fighting equipment mounted thereon 
comprising hydrant stand, pipes and accessories. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values {revisedY .Tho. number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 1644 : 2013 


Indian Standard 

FIRE SAFETY OF BIJILDINGS (GENERAL): EXIT 
REQUIREMENTS AND PERSONAL HAZARD — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 

(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


3 EXIT REQUIREMENTS 


This Standard covers requirements regarding fire safety 
of buildings with respect to exit requirements and 
personal hazard. 

2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
listed were valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and the parties to agreements based on this standard 
are encouraged to investigate the possibility of apply 
the most recent editions of the standards indicated 
below: 


IS No. 

IS 1641 : 1988 


IS 1642 : 1989 

IS 1646: 1997 

3614 (Part 1): 
1966 

4786 : 1968 

4878 : 1986 
4963 : 1987 

5572 : 1994 


SP 7 : 2005 


Title 

Fire safety of building 

(general): General principles of fire 
grading and classification — Code of 
practice 

Fire safety of buildings 

(general): Details of construction — 
Code of practice 

Fire safety of buildings 

(general): Electrical installations — 
Code of practice 

Specification for fire check doors: 
Part 1 Plate, metal covered and rolling 
type 

Specification for variable high 
pressure regulators for use with 
liquefied petroleum gases 
Byelaws for construction of cinema 
buildings 

Recommendations for buildings and 
facilities for the physically 
handicapped 

Classification of hazardous areas 
(other than mines) having flammable 
gases and vapours for electrical 
installations 

National Building Code of India 
2005 


3.1 Ample provision for escape of population of a 
building when on fire is vital and all routes should be 
constructed to ensure that the population reaches a 
place of safety in the shortest period of time without 
undue hindrance by smoke, fumes, debris and the like. 
Every exit, exit access or exit discharge shall be 
continuously maintained free of all obstructions or 
impediments to full use in the case of fire or other 
emergency. 

Every building meant for human occupancy should be 
provided with exits sufficient to permit safe escape of 
occupants, in case of fire or other emergency. 

3.2 Types of Exits 

3.2.1 An exit may be a doorway, a corridor or 
passageway(s) to an internal staircase, or external 
staircase, or to a verandah or terrace(s) which have 
access to the street, or roof of a building, or a refuge 
area. An exit may also include a horizontal exit leading 
to an adjoining building at the same level. 

3.2.2 Lifts and escalators should not be considered as 
exits. 

3.3 General 

3.3.1 In every building, exits should comply with the 
minimum requirements except those not accessible for 
general public use. 

3.3.2 All exits should be free of obstructions. 

3.3.3 No building should so altered as to reduce the 
number, width or protection of exits to less than that 
required. 

3.3.4 Exits should be clearly visible and the routes to 
reach the exit should be clearly marked and sign posted 
to guide the population of the floor concerned. Signs 
shall be illuminated and wired to an independent 
electrical circuit on an alternative source of supply. The 
colour of the exit signs shall be green. 

NOTE —This provision should not apply to A-2 and A-4 
occupancies up to 15 m in height {see 3.7.3 and 3.7.5). 



IS 1644 :2013 


3.3.5 The floors of areas covered for the means of exit 
shall be illuminated to values not less than 1 ft candle 
(10 lux) at floor level. In auditoriums, theatres^ concert 
halls and such other places of assembly, the illumination 
of floor exit/access may be reduced during period of 
performances to values not less than 1/5 ft candle (2 lux). 

3.3.6 Fire check doors [see IS 3614 (Part 1)] should at 
appropriate places along the escape routes to prevent 
spread of fire and smoke and particularly at the entrance 
to lifts and stairs where a ‘funnel or flue effect’ may 
be created, including an upward spread of fire. 

3.3.7 All exits should provide continuous means of 
access to the exterior of a building or to an exterior 
open space leading to a street. 

3.3.8 Exits should be so arranged that they may be 
reached without passing through another occupied unit. 

3.4 Occupant Load 

For determining the exits requirement, the number of 
persons within any floor area or the occupant load 
should be based on the actual number of occupants, 
but in no case less than that specified in Table 1. 

3.4.1 Mezzanine and Balcony 

The occupant load of a mezzanine floor and balcony 
discharging to a floor below should be added to that 
floor occupancy and the capacity of the exits shall be 
designed for the local occupancy load thus established. 


Table 1 Occupant Load 

{Clause 3.4) 


SI Group of Occupancy 

Occupant Load, Floor 

No. {see IS 1641) 

Area in /Person 

(1) (2) 

(3) 

i) Residential (A) 

ii) Educational (B) 

iii) Institutional (C) 

iv) Assembly (D) 

12.5 

4 

15'' 

0.6 

a) with fixed or loose seats and 

dance floors 


b) without seating facilities 

1.5^' 

including dining rooms 


v) Mercantile (F) 


a) street floor and sales basement 

3 

b) upper sale floors 

6 

vi) Business and Industrial (E and G) 

10 

vii) Storage (H) 

30 

viii) Hazardous (J) 

10 

Occupant load in dormitory portions of homes for the aged, 
orphanages, insane asylums etc, where sleeping accommodation 
is provided, should be calculated at not less than 7.5 m- gross 

floor area/person. 


The gross floor area should include, in additional to the main 
assembly room or space, any occupied connecting room or space 
in the same storey or in the storeys above or below where entrance 
in common to such rooms and spaces and they are available for 
use by the occupants of the assembly place. No deductions should 
be made in the gross area for corridors, closets or other sub¬ 
division; the area should include all space serving the particular 

assembly occupancy. 



3.5 Capacity of Exits 

3.5.1 The unit of exit width, used to measure the capacity 
of any exit, should be 50 cm. A clear width of 25 cm 
should be counted as an additional half unit. Clear widths 
less than 25 cm should not be counted for exit width. 

3.5.2 Occupants per unit exit width should be in 
accordance with Table 2. 

3.5.3 Horizontal Exit Allowance 

When horizontal exit is provided in buildings of 
mercantile, storage, industrial, business and assembly 
occupancies, the capacity per storey per unit width of 
exit of stairways in Table 2 may be increased by 50 
percent; and in buildings of institutional occupancy, it 
may be increased by 100 percent. 


Table 2 Occupant per Unit Exit Width 

{Clauses 3.5,2 and 3.5.3) 


SI 

No. 

(1) 

Group of 
Occupancy 
{see IS 1641) 

(2) 

Number of Occupants 

Stairway 

(3) 

Ramps 

(4) 

- ^ 

Doors 

(5) 

i) 

Residential 

(A) 

25 

50 

75 

ii) 

Educational 

(B) 

25 

50 

75 

iii) 

Institutional 

(C) 

25 

50 

75 

iv) 

Assembly 

(D) 

40 

50 

60 

V) 

Business 

(E) 

50 

60 

75 

vi) 

Mercantile 

(F) 

50 

60 

75 

vii) 

Industrial 

(G) 

50 

60 

75 

viii) 

Storage 

(H) 

50 

60 

75 

ix) 

Hazardous 

(J) 

25 

30 

40 


3.6 Arrangement of Exits 

3.6.1 Exits should be so located that the travel distance 
on floor should not exceed the distance given in Table 3. 

3.6.2 The dead end travel distance to an exit in a 
corridor should not exceed half the distance specified 
in Table 3 except in educational, assembly and 
institutional occupancies in which case it should not 


Table 3 Travel Distance for Occupancy and T^pe 
of Construction 

{Clauses 3.6.1 and 3.6.2) 


SI 

Group of 

Maximum Travel Distance as 

No. 

Occupancy 

per Construction {see IS 1642) 


(see IS 1641) 

r' 





Types 1 & 2 

Types 3 & 4 

(1) 

(2) 


(3) 

(4) 




m 

m 

i) 

Residential 

(A) 

22.5 

22.5 

ii) 

Educational 

(B) 

22.5 

22.5 

iii) 

Institutional 

(C) 

22.5 

22.5 

iv) 

Assembly 

(D) 

30.0 

30.0 

V) 

Business 

(E) 

30.0 

30.0 

vi) 

Mercantile 

(F) 

30.0 

30.0 

vii) 

Industrial 

(G) 

45.0 

30.0 

viii) 

Storage 

(H) 

30.0 

30.0 

ix) 

Hazardous 

(J) 

22.5 

22.5 



IS 1644 : 2013 


exceed 6 m. The capacity of any open mezzanine or 
balcony shall be added to the capacity of the floor for 
the purpose of determining exit capacity. 

3.6.3 Whenever more than one exit is required for any 
room, space or floor of a building, exits should be 
placed as remote from each other as possible and 
should be arranged to provide direct access in separate 
directions from any point in the area served. 

3.7 Number of Exits 

3.7.1 General Requirement 

All buildings which are more than 15 m in height and 
all buildings used as educational (B), assembly (D), 
institutional (F), industrial (G), storage (H), and 
hazardous (J) occupancies and mixed occupancies with 
any of the aforesaid occupancies, having area more 
than 500 on each floor should have a minimum 
two staircases. They should be of enclosed type; at least 
one of them should be on external walls of buildings 
and should open directly to the exterior, interior open 
space or to an open place of safety. Further, the 
provision or otherwise of alternative staircase should 
be subject to the requirements of travel distance being 
complied with. 

3.7.2 Rooming Houses of Residential Buildings (A-1) 

Every sleeping room above the street floor should have 
access to two separate means of exit, at least one of 
which should consist of an enclosed interior stairway 
or an exterior stairway, or a fire escape or horizontal 
exit, all so arranged as to provide a safe path of travel 
to the outside of the building without traversing any 
corridor or space exposed to an unprotected vertical 
opening. 

3.7.3 One or Two Family Private Dwellings or 
Residential Building (A-2) 

3.7.3.1 For more than two rooms, every occupied room 
excluding areas used solely for storage, should have at 
least two means of exit, at least one of which should 
be a door or a stairway providing a means of 
unobstructed travel to the outside of the building or 
street or grade level and not more than one of which 
may be a window. No room or space should be 
occupied which is accessible only be a ladder, folding 
stairs or through a trap door. 

3.7.3.2 All locking devices which would impede or 
prohibit exit, such as chain type bolts, limited opening 
sliding type locks and burglar locks which are not 
disengaged easily by quick releasing catches, should 
be prohibited. All closet door latches should be such 
that even children may open the doors from inside. All 
bathroom door locks or fasteners should be designed 
to permit the opening of the locked or closed door from 


the outside in an emergency. 

3.7.4 Dormitories (A-3) 

All dormitories, except those mentioned in 3.7.6 should 
have exits so arranged that from any sleeping room or 
open dormitory sleeping area, there should be access 
to two separate and distinct exits in different directions 
with no common path of travel unless the room or space 
is subject to occupancy by not more than 10 persons 
and has a door opening directly to the outside of the 
building at street or grade level, or to an outside 
stairway in which case one means of exit may be 
accepted. 

3.7.5 Apartment House (A-4) 

3.7.5.1 Every individual living unit should comply with 
the requirements for occupancy sub-division A-2 in 
respect of exit {see 3.7.3 ). 

3.7.5.2 Every living unit should have access to at least 
two separate exits which are remote from each other 
and are reached by travel in different directions except 
that a common path of travel may be permitted for the 
first 6 m (that is, a dead-end corridor up to 6 m long 
may be permitted) provided that single exit may be 
permitted under any of the conditions given in 3.7.5.3. 

3.7.5.3 Any building not more than two storeys in height 
with no basement, or in case there is a basement and 
with street floor level not more than 2.5 m above ground 
at any point next to the building, excluding driveways, 
not more than 10 percent of the perimeter should be 
subject to the condition that the access to the basement 
is only from the exterior of the building if the basement 
contains a heating plant, group storage, incinerator room 
or paint shop or other hazardous occupancy. 

3.7.5.4 At least half of required exits should discharge 
direct to the outside of the buildings, any other exit 
should be the same as required for the hotels {see 3.7.6). 

3.7.6 Hotels (A-5) 

3.7.6.1 Not less than two exits, as remote from each 
other as practicable, should be accessible from every 
floor, including basements occupied for hotel purposes, 
except as a single exit as permitted in 3.7.6.2. Exits 
and ways of access thereto should be so arranged that 
they are accessible in at least two different directions 
from every point in any open area, or from any room 
door. 

3.7.6.2 Any room or section with an outside door at 
street or grade level may have such outside door as a 
single exit provided no part of the room or area is more 
than 15 m from the door measured along the natural 
path of travel. 

3.7.6.3 Where stairways or other exits serve two or 


3 



IS 1644 :2013 


more upper floors, the same stairway or other exit 
required to serve any one upper floor may also serve 
other upper floors except that no inside open stairway 
or ramp may serve as a required egress facility from 
more than one floor. 

NOTE — Under this provision, if the second and third floors 
were each required to have three stairways, the second floor 
may use the stairways serving the third floor so that the total 
number of stairways required is three, and not six. 

3.7.7 Basement Exits for Residential Buildings (A) 

3.7.7.1 Basements occupied for hotel purposes should 
have exits arranged in accordance with 3.7.6. 

3JJ.2 Basement exits should be sufficient to provide 
for the capacity of the basement as determined in 
accordance with 3.3 and in no case should there be 
less than two independent basement exits. 

3.7.7.3 Basements or. sub-basements not open to the 
public and used only for heating equipment, storage 
and service operations (other than kitchens which are 
considered part of the hotel occupancy) should have 
exits appropriate to the actual occupancy, in accordance 
with applicable provisions or in case of mixed 
occupancy where there may be doubt as to which other 
section is applicable, such basements should have exits 
determined on the basis of lesser exit capacity. 

3.7.8 Educational {B) 

3.7.8.1 Buildings intended for educational occupancy 
shall not be used for any hazardous occupancy except 
incidental to educational buildings like laboratories etc. 

3.7.8.2 At least two separate exits are available in every 
floor area. Exits should be as remote from each other 
as practicable and so arranged that there are no pockets 
or dead ends of appreciable size in which occupants 
may be trapped. 

3.7.8.3 Every room with a capacity of over 45 persons 
in area should have at least two doorways as remote 
from each other as practicable. Such doorways should 
provide access to separate exits but may open upon a 
common corridor leading to separate exits in opposite 
directions. 

3.7.8.4 Exterior doors should be operated by bars or 
some other panic hardware device except that doors 
leading from classroom directly to the outside may be 
equipped with the same type of lock as is used on 
classroom doors leading to corridor with no provision 
whatsoever for locking against egress from the 
classroom. 

3.7.8.5 Additional precautions 

a) Storage of volatile flammable liquids shall be 
prohibited and the handling of such liquids 
shall be restricted to science laboratories only. 


b) Each building shall be provided with an 
approved outside gas shut-off valve 
conspicuously marked. The detailed 
requirements regarding safe use of gas shall 
be as specified in IS 4786. 

c) All exterior openings in a boiler room or 
rooms containing central heating equipment, 
if located below opening in another storey or 
if less than 3 m from other doors or windows 
of the same building, shall be protected by a 
fire door assembly. Such assemblies shall be 
fixed, automatic or self-closing. Provisions of 
residential buildings shall also apply to this 
group of occupancy. 

3.7.8.6 Exception and deviation 

a) Gymnasiums, indoor stadiums and similar 
occupancies may have floors/ running tracks 
of wood, cinder, synthetic or unprotected steel 
or iron. 

b) In gymnasiums and in multi-purpose school 
rooms having an area not greater than 300 m^, 
25 mm nominal tight tongue-and-grooved or 
20 mm plywood wall covering may be used 
in the inner side in lieu of fire-resistance 
plaster. 

c) A building, which will have only the first floor 
and is accessible to not more than 20 students 
at any time, may be used for school purposes 
with the following exceptions: 

1) Exterior walls or parts of walls which are 
less than 1 000 mm from adjacent 
property lines shall have no openings 
therein. 

2) Classrooms may have only one exit not 
less than 1 000 mm wide. 

3.7.9 Institutional (Q 

3.7.9.1 In buildings or sections occupied by bedridden 
patients where the floor area is over 280 m^, facilities 
should be provided to move patients in hospital beds 
to the other side of a smoke barrier from any part of 
such building or section not directly served by approved 
horizontal exits or exits from the first floor (Floor 2) 
of a building to the outside. 

3.7.9.2 Not less than two exits of one or more of the 
following types should be provided for every floor, 
including basement, of every building or section: 

a) Doors leading directly outside the building, 

b) Stairways, 

c) Ramps, 

d) Horizontal exits, and 

e) Fire tower. 


4 



IS 1644 : 2013 


3.7.9.3 All required exits which serve egress from 
hospital or infirmary sections should be not less than 
2 m in clear width, including patient bedroom doors, 
to permit transport of patients on beds, litters or 
mattresses. The minimum widths of corridors serving 
patients bedrooms in building should be 240 cm. For 
detailed information on recommendations for buildings 
and facilities for the physically handicapped, reference 
may be made to IS 4963. 

3.7.9.4 Revolving doors should not be counted as 
required exits and should not be installed, except in 
situations, such as revolving doors at a main entrance 
where they are not subject to emergency exit used by 
patients. 

3.7.9.5 Elevators constitute a desirable supplementary 
facility but are not counted as required exits. Patient 
lifts shall also be provided with enough room for 
transporting a stretcher trolley. 

3.7.9.6 Each storey in which 35 or more patients are 
housed should be divided into at least two 
compartments by smoke barriers and the Authority may 
require storeys housing a lesser number of patients to 
be divided into compartments when, in its judgment, 
such division is essential for the protection of the 
patients. Any area providing sleeping accommodation 
to the patients exceeding 500 m^ (unsprinkled) or 
750 m^ (sprinkled) shall be divided into compartments 
by fire resisting walls. 

3.7.9.7 Doors in smoke barriers should be so installed 
that these may normally be kept in open position but 
will close automatically or may be released manually 
to self-closing action. Corridor door openings in smoke 
barriers should not be less than 150 cm in width. 
Provision should also be made for double swing single/ 
double leaf type door. 

3.7.9.8 Exits and other features for penal and mental 
institutions, and custodial institutions should be the 
same as specified for hospitals, in so far as applicable. 
Reliable means should be provided to permit the 
prompt release of inmates from any locked section in 
case of fire or other emergency. 

3.7.9.9 Wherever any inmates are confined in any 
locked rooms or spaces, adequate guards or other 
personnel should be continuously on duty or 
immediately available to provide for release of inmates 
or for such other action as may be indicated in case of 
fire or other emergency. 

3.7.9.10 No building constructed in whole or in part 
of combustible materials should be used to combine 
inmates in cells or sleeping quarters unless automatic 
sprinkler protection is provided. 

3.7.9.11 All buildings or sections of buildings penal 


and mental institutions used for manufacturing, storage 
or office purposes should have exits in accordance with 
the provisions of occupancies. 

3.7.9.12 Additional precautions 

a) No combustible material of any kind shall be 
stored or used in any building or section 
thereof used for institutional occupancy, 
except as necessary to normal occupancy and 
use of the building. 

b) Bare minimum quantities of flammable 
material such as chloroform, ethyl alcohol, 
spirit, etc shall be allowed to be stored and 
handled. The handling of such liquids shall 
not be permitted by un-authorized persons. 
Bulk storage of these items, will be governed 
by relevant rules and safe practices. 

3.7.9.13 Exception and deviation 

It is recognized that in institutions or part of buildings 
housing various types of psychiatric patients, or used 
as penal and mental institutions, it is necessary to 
maintain locked doors and barred windows; and to such 
extent the necessary provision in other sections of the 
Code requiring the keeping of exits unlocked may be 
waived. It is also recognized that certain type of 
psychiatric patients are not capable of seeking safety 
without adequate guidance. In buildings where this 
situation prevails, reliable means for the rapid release 
of occupants shall be provided, such as remote control 
of locks, or by keying all locks to keys commonly used 
by attendants. 

3.7.10 Assembly Building (D) 

3.7.10.1 Every place of assembly, every tier or balcony, 
and every individual room used as a place of assembly 
should have exits sufficient to provide for the total 
capacity thereof as determined in accordance 
with 3.7.7. Door width for assembly buildings shall 
not be less than 2 000 mm. 

3.7.10.2 Every place of assembly of sub-division D-1 
should have at least four separate exits as remote from 
each other as practicable. 

3.7.10.3 Every place of assembly of sub-division D-2 
should have at least two separate exits remote from 
each other as practicable and if of capacity is over 600, 
at least three exits should be provided with each exit 
not less than of 2 000 mm widths. 

3.7.10.4 Every place of assembly of sub-divisions D-3, 
D-4 and D-5 should have atleast two means of exit, 
consisting of separate exits or doors leading to corridor 
or other spaces giving access to two separate and 
independent exits in different directions, except that 
for places of assembly having a capacity of less than 


5 



IS 1644 : 2013 


100 persons, one 2 000 mm doorway may be permitted 
in rooms where no part of the room is more than 15 m 
from the doorway, measured along the line of travel, 
and the doorway leads directly outside the building at 
grade level or leads to a corridor or other space giving 
access to two separate and independent exits. 

3.7.10.5 Clear aisles not less than 1.2 m in width should 
be formed at right angles to the line of seating in such 
number and manner that no seat should be more than 
seven seats away from an aisle. Rows of seats opening 
on to an aisle at one end only should have not more 
than seven seats. Under the conditions where all these 
aisles do not directly meet the exit doors, cross-aisles 
should be provided parallel to the line of seating so as 
to provide direct access to the exit, provided that not 
more than one cross-aisle for every 10 rows should be 
required. The width of cross-aisles should be a 
minimum of 1 m. Steps should not be placed in aisles 
to overcome differences in levels unless the gradient 
exceeds 1 in 10. 

3.7.10.6 The fascia of boxes, balconies and galleries 
shall have substantial railings not less than 1 000 mm 
high above the floor. The railings at the end of aisles 
extending to the fascia shall be not less than 1 100 mm 
high for the width of the aisle or 1 200 mm high at the 
foot of steps. 

3.7.10.7 Cross-aisles except where the backs of seats 
on the front of the aisle project 60 cm or more above 
the floor of the aisle, should be provided with railings 
not less than 90 cm high. 

3.7.10.8 No turnstiles or other devices to exits which 
restrict the movement of persons should be installed 
in any place of assembly in such a manner as to 
interfere in any way with the required exit facilities. 

3.7.10.9 In theatres and similar places of public 
assembly where persons are admitted to the building 
at a time when seats are not available for them and are 
allowed to wait in a lobby or similar space until seats 
are available, such use of lobby or similar space should 
not encroach upon the required clear width of exits. 

Such waiting should be restricted to areas separated 
from the required exit ways by substantial permanent 
partitions or fixed rigid railing not less than 105 cm 
high. Exits should be provided for such waiting spaces 
on the basis of one person for each 0.3 m^ of waiting 
space area. Such exits should be in addition to the exits 
specified for the main auditorium area and should 
conform in construction and arrangement to the general 
rules of exits given above. 

3.7.10.10 No display or exhibit should be so installed 
or operated as to interfere in any way with access to 
any required exit, or with any required exit sign. All 
displays or exhibits of combustible material or 


construction and all booths and temporary construction 
in connection with it should be so limited in 
combustibility or protected as to avoid any undue 
hazard of fire which might endanger occupants before 
they have opportunity to use the available exits. 

3.7.10.11 No mirrors should be placed in or adjacent 
to any exit way in such a manner as to confuse the 
direction of the exit. 

3.7.10.12 Places of assembly in buildings of other 
occupancy may use exits common to the place of 
assembly and other occupancy. Provided the assembly 
area and other occupancy are considered separately, 
each has exits sufficient to meet the requirements. 

3.7.10.13 Exits should be sufficient for simultaneous 
occupancy of both the places of assembly and other 
parts of the building, unless the conditions are such 
that simultaneous occupancy will not occur. 

3.7.10.14 For any place of assembly under sub-division 
D-1, at least half the required means of exits should 
lead directly outdoors or through exit ways completely 
separated from exits serving other parts of the building. 

3.7.10.15 For detailed information regarding cinema 
buildings, reference may be made to the latest 
provisions of Cinematography Act, However, following 
guidelines may be adopted: 

3.7.10.15.1 Lighting 

No open flame lighting devices shall be used in any 
place of assembly, except in the following cases: 

a) Where necessary for ceremonial purposes, the 
enforcing Authority may permit open flame 
lighting under such restrictions as are 
necessary to avoid danger of ignition of 
combustible materials or injury to occupants. 

b) Candles may be used on restaurant tables if 
securely supported on non- combustible bases 
and so located as to avoid danger of ignition 
of combustible materials. 

c) Open flame devices may be used on stages 
where they are a necessary part of theatrical 
performance, provided adequate precautions, 
satisfactory to the Authority are taken to 
prevent ignition of combustible materials. 

3.7.10.16 Additional precautions 

The decorations of places of assembly shall be of non¬ 
flammable materials. Fabrics and papers used for such 
purpose shall be treated with an effective flame- 
retardant material. Stage settings made of combustible 
materials shall likewise be treated with fire retardant 
materials of Class 1 flame spread. 

3.7.10.17 Seats in places of public assembly. 


6 



IS 1644 : 2013 


accommodating more than 300 persons, shall be 
securely fastened to the floor, except as permitted in 
next subclause. All seats in balconies and galleries ^all 
be securely fastened to the floor, except that in nailed- 
in enclosures, boxes with level floors and having not 
more than 14 seats, the seats need not be fastened, 

3.7.10.18 Chairs not secured to the floor may be 
permitted in restaurants, night clubs and other 
occupancies where the fastening of seats to the floor 
may not be practicable, provided that in the area used 
for seating, excluding dance floor, stage, etc, there shall 
be not more than one seat for each 1.4 m^ of floor area 
and adequate aisles to reach exits shall be maintained 
at all times. 

Rows of seats between aisles shall have not more than 
14 seats. 

Rows of seats opening on to an aisle at one end only 
shall have not more than 7 seats. 

Seats without dividing arms shall have their capacity 
determined by allowing 450 mm per person. 

The spacing of rows of seats from back to back shall 
be neither less than 850 mm nor less than 700 mm 
plus the sum of the thickness of the back and inclination 
of the back. There shall be a space of not less than 
350 mm between the back of one seat and the front of 
the seat immediately behind it as measured between 
plumb lines. 

3.7.10.19 Rooms containing high pressure boilers, 
refrigerating machinery other than domestic 
refrigerator type, large transformers or other service 
equipments subject to possible explosion shall not be 
located directly under or adjacent to the required exits. 
All such rooms shall be effectively cut off from other 
parts of the building and provided with adequate vents 
to the outer air. 

3.7.10.20 All rooms or areas used for storage of any 
combustible materials or equipment, or for painting, 
refinishing, repair or similar purposes shall be 
effectively cut off from assembly areas or protected 
with a standard system of automatic sprinklers. They 
shall be located away from staircases. 

3.7.10.21 Every stage equipped with fly galleries, grid 
irons and rigging for movable theatre type scenery, shall 
have a system of automatic sprinklers over and under 
such stage areas or spaces and auxiliary spaces, such 
as dressing rooms, store rooms and workshops, and 
the proscenium opening shall be provided with a fire- 
resisting curtain, capable of withstanding a lateral 
pressure of 4 kN/m- over the entire area. The curtain 
shall have an emergency closing device capable of 
causing the curtain to close without the use of power 
and when so closed, it shall be reasonably tight against 


the passage of smoke. 

3.7.10.22 The stage roof of every theatre using movable 
scenery or having a motion picture screen of highly 
combustible construction shall have a ventilator or 
ventilators in or above it, open able from the stage floor 
by hand and also opening by fusible links or some other 
approved automatic heat/smoke actuated device, to give 
a free opening equal to at least one-eighth the area of 
the floor of the stage. 

3.7.10.23 The proscenium wall of every theatre using 
movable scenery of decorations shall have, exclusive 
of the proscenium opening, not more than two openings 
entering the stage, each not to exceed 2 m^ and fitted 
with self-closing fire resistant doors. 

3.7.10.24 Every place of assembly in which projection 
of motion pictures by light is made shall have the 
projection apparatus enclosed in a fire-resisting fixed 
booth in accordance with IS 4878, except that such 
booth shall not be required where no nitrocellulose 
motion picture film is used. 

3.7.10.25 Automatic smoke vents actuated by smoke 
detectors shall be installed above the auditorium or 
theatres, including motion picture houses, with vent 
area equal to not less than 3 '>6 percent of the floor area 
of the auditorium, including the sum of the floor areas 
of all balconies, galleries, boxes and tiers. It may be 
desirable to provide a large number of small vents 
rather than a small number of large vents. 

3.7.10.26 Exception and deviation 

Where boilers or central heating plants using liquid or 
solid fuel are located at grade level, these shall be 
separated from the remainder of the building by a 
separating wall with openings protected as given under 
mixed occupancies and openings in separating walls 
and floors in the general requirements. 

Gymnasiums, indoor stadiums and similar occupancies 
may have floors/running tracks of wood, cinder, 
synthetic or un-protected steel or iron. 

The underside of continuous steel deck grand stands 
when erected outdoors need not be fire-protected when 
occupied for public toilets. 

3.7.10.27 Fire protection and fire fighting system for 
metro stations 

3.7.10.27.1 Wet riser system 

Main and diesel fire pump of 1 800 LPM capacity to 
be provided to support 3 to 4 hydrants at a time. Jockey 
pump capacity shall be 180 LPM. Where it is possible 
to extend reliable DG supply to the fire pump room 
without routing through the station building, the 
provision of diesel pump can be dispensed with and 


7 



IS 1644 : 2013 


instead, two electric pumps may be provided out of 
which at least one should have DG backup. The jockey 
pump should also have DG back up. 

3.7.10.27.2 Internal hydrant 

The internal hydrant is proposed to be provided with 2 
numbers RRL hose pipes of 38 mm diameter with 
63 mm standard instantaneous coupling along with 
associated branch pipes and cabinet and a first aid hose 
reel of 25 mm diameter, length 45 m and fitted with 
6.5 mm nozzle. 

Two internal hydrants are proposed to be provided on 
each platform in such a way so that most of the platform 
is covered by hose. However, in case of necessity, the 
hose pipes from other hose cabinets can be utilized for 
extending the length of fire hose pipe for fire fighting, 
if need be. At the concourse level minimum two 
hydrants will be provided. In station where the 
concourse is split into two halves at least one hydrant 
is to be provided in each half of the concourse. Further, 
in case the area is more than 2 000 sq m, an additional 
first aid hose-reel point shall be provided for every 
additional 1 000 sq m. 

In addition, hydrants shall be provided in commercial 
areas also. One hydrant shall be provided at entry of 
each station at ground floor for providing the coverage 
to the parking area. 

3.7.10.27.3 Sprinklers 

Sprinklers are required to be provided only in the 
commercial areas, if any, in the station. The commercial 
areas will be segregated from the station area through 
2 h fire rated walls and doors. Additional sprinklers 
pumps are not required, as two pumps already provided 
for hydrant system will take care of the sprinkler flow 
requirements. 

However, if such commercial areas in the premises of 
stations are in isolated building separate from the 
station building then the provision of sprinkler pump 
and water tank capacities shall be as per SP 7. The 
water storage and pumps may however be common. 

3.7.10.27.4 Detectors 

Detectors are required to be provided only in areas 
where there are false ceiling and false floor and areas 
of equipment rooms. Wherever there are false ceiling, 
the detectors should be provided both above and below 
false ceiling giving due consideration to depth of false 
ceiling/flooring. However, in concourse, the detectors 
below false ceiling may not be effective due to heights/ 
cross ventilation and therefore may not be provided. 
In other areas, because of high heights and cross¬ 
ventilations, detectors will not be effective and hence 
therefore can be dispensed. A conventional detection 
system will suffice at a normal station. 


3.7.10.27.5 Manual call box 

Manual call box should be provided at a central place 
on each platform (near emergency plunger) and at least 
two on the concourse, on each sidewall. When the 
concourse in two halves there should be one manual 
call box on each side. 

3.7.10.27.6 Manual panel gas flooding 

Electric panels should have provision of manual gas 
flooding. Alternatively panels can be provided with 
linear heat sensing tubes with CO 2 cylinder. This 
required to be provided only in main power panels that 
is HT panel, main LT panel, main LT distribution board 
and Essential power panels and other such major 
panels. 

3.7.10.27.7 External area of the station 

A ‘two way/four way’ fire brigade inlet to be provided 
at ground level on each rising main for hydrants/ 
sprinkles. 

The 'Draw Off Connection’ shall be provided on the 
underground tank for fire brigade. 

3.7.10.27.8 Water tank capacity 

Capacity of fire tanks at stations without any 
commercial development (Beverage stall/ATM/Florist/ 
Book stalls up to total 250 m^ excluded) shall be 
50 000 litres. 

However, at stations having commercial development, 
the fire tank capacity shall be 100 000 litres. 

3.7.10.27.9 Portable fire extinguishers 

The following portable extinguishers are 
recommended: 

a) Water CO 2 type 9 litres, and 

b) CO 2 fire extinguishers 4.5 kg. 

3.7.11 Business {E) 

3.7.11.1 In the case of mezzanines or balconies open 
to the floor below, or other unprotected vertical 
openings between floors, the population of the 
mezzanine or other subsidiary floor level should be 
added to that of the main floor for the purpose of 
determining the required exits, provided, however, that 
in no case should the total number of exits, units be 
less than that required if all the vertical openings were 
enclosed. 

3.7.11.2 Not less than two exits should be provided 
for every floor, including basements occupied for office 
purposes or uses incidental thereto. 

3.7.11.3 Additional requirements 

The handling and use of gasoline, fuel oil and other 


8 



IS 1644 : 2013 


flammable liquids shall not be permitted, unless such 
use and handling complies with the appropriate 
regulations. 

Every boiler room or room containing a central heating 
plant using solid or liquid fuel shall be separated from 
the rest of the building by a separating wall of 4 h rating. 
Every boiler room or room containing a central heating 
plant, which burns gas as a fuel shall be adequately 
separated from the rest of the building. 

3.7.11.4 Exception and deviation 

Basements used only for storage, heating, any other 
service equipment shall conform to exit requirements 
for Group H occupancies in all respects. 

3.7.12 Mercantile {F) 

3.7.12.1 In the case of mezzanines or balconies open 
to the floor below, or other unprotected vertical 
openings between floors, the population or area of the 
mezzanine or other subsidiary floor level should be 
added to that of the main floor for the purpose of 
determining the required exits, provided, however, that 
in no case should the total number of exits units be 
less than that required if all vertical openings were 
enclosed. 

3.7.12.2 At least two separate exits should be accessible 
from every part of every floor, including basements; 
such exits should be as remote from each other as 
practicable and so arranged as to be reached by 
different paths of travel in different directions except 
that a common path of travel may be permitted for the 
first 15 m from any point. 

3.7.12.3 Additional precautions 

Requirements specified for Business buildings shall 
be applicable to all Group F occupancies also. 

Hazardous areas of mercantile occupancies shall be 
segregated or protected suitably as per the requirements 
laid down in J (Hazardous Occupancy). 

In self-service stores, no check-out stand or associated 
railings or barriers shall obstruct exits or required aisles 
or approaches thereto. 

Open-air mercantile operations, such as open-air markets, 
gasoline filling stations, roadside stands for the sale of a 
farm produce and other outdoor mercantile operations 
shall be so arranged and conducted as to maintain free 
and unobstructed ways of travel at all times to permit 
prompt escape from any point of danger in case of fire or 
other emergency, but no dead-ends in which persons might 
be trapped due to display stands, adjoining buildings, 
fences, vehicles or other obstructions. 

If mercantile operations are conducted in roofed-over 
areas, these shall be treated as mercantile buildings, 


provided canopies over individual small stands to 
protect merchandise from the weather shall not be 
canstrueted to constitute buildings for the purpose of 
the Code. 

NOTE — Classification of Low/Moderate/High hazard 
occupancies are given in IS 1641. 

3.7.12.4 Exception and deviation 

Any mercantile occupancy, where goods of a highly 
hazardous nature are pre-dominant, shall be considered 
under Group J occupancy for the purpose of the Code. 

3.7.13 Industrial (G) 

3.7.13.1 Not less than two exits should be provided 
for every floor or section, including basements used 
for industrial purposes or uses incidental thereto. 

3.7.13.2 In buildings used for aircraft assembly or other 
occupancy requiring undivided floor areas so large that 
the distance from points within the area to the nearest 
outside walls where exit doors could be provided are 
in excess of 45 m, requirements for distance to exits 
may be satisfied by providing stairs leading to exit 
tunnels or to overhead passageways. In cases where 
such arrangements are not practicable, permit other exit 
arrangements for one storey buildings with distance in 
excess of the maximum distances specified in 3.6. If 
completely automatic sprinkler protection is provided 
and if the heights of ceiling curtain boards and roof 
ventilation are such as to minimize the possibility that 
employees will be overtaken by the spread of fire or 
smoke within 180 cm of the floor level before they 
have time to reach exits, provided, however, that in no 
case may the distance of travel to reach the nearest 
exit exceed 120 m where smoke venting is required as 
a condition for permitting distances of travel to exits 
in excess of the maximum otherwise allowed. The 
distance of travel to reach the nearest exit shall be 45 m 
for unsprinkled and 60 m for sprinkled. 

3.7.13.3 Basements used only for storage, heating and 
other service equipment, and not subject to industrial 
occupancy should have exits in accordance with the 
requirements of Group H occupancies. 

3.7.13.4 The following exceptions should apply to 
special purpose industrial occupancies: 

a) Exits need be provided only for the persons 
actually employed; spaces not subject to 
human occupancy because of the presence of 
machinery or equipment may be excluded 
from consideration. 

b) Where unprotected vertical openings are 
necessary to manufacturing operations, these 
may be permitted beyond the limits specified 
for industrial occupancy provided every floor 
level has direct access to one or more enclosed 


9 



IS 1644 : 2013 


stairways or other exits protected against 
obstruction by any fire in the open areas 
connected by the unprotected vertical 
openings or smoke therefrom. 

3.7.13.5 The following exceptions should apply to high 
hazard industrial occupancies: 

a) Exits should be so located that it will not be 
necessary to travel more than 22.5 m from 
any point to reach the nearest exit. 

b) From every point in every floor area, there 
should at least be two exits accessible in 
different directions; where floor areas are 
divided into rooms, there should be at least 
two ways of escape from every room, however 
small, except toilet rooms, so located that the 
points of access thereto are out of or suitably 
shielded from areas of high hazard. 

c) In addition to types of exits for upper floors 
specified for Group G occupancies, slide 
escapes may be used as required exits for both 
new and existing buildings. 

3.7.13.6 Additional precautions 

In any room in which flammable substances are used 
or stored, no device generating a glow or flame capable 
of igniting flammable vapour shall be installed or used. 
Such a room shall be provided with a suitably designed 
exhaust ventilation system. To ensure safety from fire 
due to short circuit, faulty electrical connection or some 
similar cause, proper care shall be taken in designing 
electrical installations in such room {see IS 1646). All 
electrical fittings of class O rating shall be as per 
IS 5572. 

The storage, use and handling of gasoline, fuel oil and 
other flammable liquids shall not be permitted in any 
Group G occupancy unless it complies with regulations 
pertaining to Petroleum Act, 1934 and Rules thereunder. 

Every boiler room or room below the first floor 
containing a heating plant shall be adequately separated 
by 4 h rating wall from the rest of the buildings. 

For requirements regarding electrical generating and 
distribution stations, reference may be made to IS 1646. 

Industrial buildings of low hazard are permitted only 
up to 18 m height. 

The following exceptions shall apply to high hazard 
industrial occupancies: 

All high hazards industrial occupancies shall have 
automatic sprinkler protection or such other protection 
as may be appropriate to the particular hazard, 
including explosion venting for any area subject to 
explosion hazard, designed to minimize danger to 
occupants in case of fire or other emergency before 


they have time to utilize exits to escape. 

Industrial buildings of moderate and high hazard are 
permitted only up to 15 m height. 

For detailed information on fire safety of certain 
individual (specific) industrial occupancies reference 
may be made to relevant standards. 

Fire protection considerations for venting industrial 
occupancies shall be as given in Annex D of SP 7. 

3.7,14 Storage (H) 

3.7.14.1 Every building or structure used for storage, 
and every section thereof considered separately, should 
have access to at least one exit so arranged and located 
as to provide a suitable means of escape for any person 
employed therein and in any room or space exceeding 
I 400 m^ gross area, or where more than 10 persons 
may be normally present, at least two separate means 
of exit shall be available, as remote from each other as 
practicable. 

3.7.14.2 Every storage area should have access to at 
least one means of exit which can be readily opened. 
This should not be subject to locking so long as any 
persons are inside and should not depend on power 
operation. 

3.7.14.3 The following special provisions should apply 
to parking garages of closed or open type, above or 
below ground but not to mechanical parking facilities 
where automobiles move into and out of storage 
mechanically which are not normally occupied by 
persons and thus require no exit facilities. Where repair 
operations are conducted, the exits should comply with 
the requirements of Group G occupancies in addition 
to compliance with the following: 

a) Where both parking and repair operations are 
conducted in the same building, the entire 
building should comply with the requirements 
for Group G occupancies unless the parking 
and repair sections are effectively separated 
by separation walls. 

b) Every floor of every closed parking garage 
should have access to at least two separate 
means of exit so arranged that from any point 
in the garage, the paths of travel to the two 
means of exit should be in different directions, 
except that a common path of travel may be 
permitted for the first 15 m from any point. 

c) On the street floor, at least two separate exit 
doors should be provided except that any 
opening for the passage of automobiles may 
serve as a means of exit provided no door or 
shutter is installed thereon. Street floor exits 
in closed garages should be so arranged that 
no point in the area is more than 30 m from 


10 



IS 1644 : 2013 


the nearest exit, or 45 m in the case of garages 
protected by automatic sprinklers, distance 
being measured along the natural path of 
travel. 

d) On floors above the street, at least two means 
of exit should be provided, one of which 
should be an enclosed stairway. The other 
means of egress may be a second exit of any 
of the types, or in a ramp type garage with 
open ramps not subject to closure, the ramp 
may serve as the second means of exit. 

e) Upper floor exits in closed garages should be 
so arranged that no point in the area should 
be more than 30 m from the nearest exit other 
than a ramp on the same floor level, or 45 m 
in the case of garages protected by automatic 
sprinklers. 

f) On floors below the street (either basement 
or outside underground garages), at least two 
exits should be provided, not counting any 
automobile ramps except that for garages 
extending only one floor level below the 
street, a ramp leading direct to the outside may 
constitute one required means of exit. In 
garages below street level, exits should be so 
arranged that no part of the area should be 
more than 30 m from the nearest stair exit. 

g) If any gasoline pumps are located within any 
closed parking garage, exits should be so 
located that travel away from the gasoline 
pump in any direction should lead to an exit, 
with no dead-end in which the occupants 
might be trapped by fire or explosion at any 
gasoline pump. Such exit should lead to the 
outside of the building on the same level, or 
downstairs; no upward travel should be 
permitted unless direct outside exits are 
available from the floor and any floor below 
(as in the case of a basement garage where 
the grade is one storey or more lower at the 
rear than at the street). 

3.7.14.4 Exits from aircraft hangars (storage or 
servicing areas) should be provided at intervals of not 
more than 45 m on all exterior walls of aircrafts 
hangars. There should be a minimum of two exits 
serving each aircraft storage or servicing area. 
Horizontal exits through interior fire walls should be 
provided at intervals of not more than 30 m. ‘Dwarf’ 
or ‘smash’ doors in doors accommodating aircraft may 
be used to comply with these requirements. All doors 
designated as exits should be kept unlocked in the 
direction of exit travel while the area is occupied. 

3.7.14.5 Exits from mezzanine floors in aircraft storage 
or servicing area should be so arranged that the 


maximum travel to reach the nearest exit from any point 
on the mezzanine should not exceed 22.5 m. Such exits 
should lead directly to a properly enclosed stairwell 
discharging directly to the exterior or to a suitably cut¬ 
off area or to outside fire escape stairs. 

3.7.14.6 The following provisions should apply to grain 
elevators: 

a) There should at least be one stair tower from 
basement to first floor and from first floor to 
top floor of the workhouse enclosed in a dust- 
tight non-combustible shaft; 

b) Non-combustible doors of self-closing type 
should be provided at each floor landing; 

c) An exterior fire escape of the stair or basket 
ladder type should be provided from the roof 
of the workhouse to the ground level or to the 
roof of an adjoining annex with access from 
all floors above the first; and 

d) An exterior fire escape of either the stair or 
basket ladder type should be provided from 
the roof of each storage annex to the ground 
level. 

3.7.14.7 Every area used for storage of hazardous 
commodities should have an exit within 22.5 m of any 
point in the area where persons may be present or 30 m 
where automatic sprinkler protection is provided. 

3.7.14.8 Additional precautions 

In addition to the general requirements specified for 
type of construction and occupancy group and the exit 
requirements, the following requirements shall be 
complied with: 

3.7.14.8.1 Fire Detection/ Extinguishing System 

The requirements for group H occupancy, as specified 
in Table 23 and Annex C (for high rise building) of 
SP 7 shall apply. 

NOTE — Automatic sprinklers are prohibited where water 
reactive materials are kept. Instead automatic fire alarm system 
coupled with suitable fire extinguishing systems shall be 
installed. 

3.7.14.9 Exceptions and deviations 

Every area used for the storage of hazardous 
commodities shall have an exit within 22.5 m of any 
point in the area where persons may be present or 35 m 
where automatic sprinkler protection is provided. 

3.7.15 Hazardous (J) 

Same as in 3.7.13.5. 

3.7.15.1 Additional precautions 

In addition to the general requirements specified for 
type of construction and occupancy group and the exit 


11 



IS 1644 : 2013 


requirements, the following requirements shall be 
complied with: 

Fire Detection/ Extinguishing System 

The requirements for Group J occupancy, as specified 
in Table 23 and Annex C (for high rise building) of 
SP 7 shall apply. 

NOTE — Hazardous buildings shall have vapour detectors/ 
explosion suppression systems/automatic sprinklers, besides 
hydrant system, wet risers and automatic fire alarm system 
depending on the type of fire hazard involved. 

Exit Facilities 

General requirements and those specified for industrial 
buildings shall apply to Group J occupancies also. 

3.7.15.2 The following requirements shall also apply 
to all Group J occupancies, as applicable: 

a) Each building where gas is employed for any 
purpose shall be provided with an approved 
outside gas shut-off valve conspicuously 
marked. The detailed requirements regarding 
safe use of gas shall be as specified in relevant 
standards. 

b) Each boiler room or room containing a 
heating plant shall be separated from the rest 
of the building by a separating wall. 

c) In any room in which volatile flammable 
substances are used or stored, no device 
generating a spark, or glow flame capable of 
igniting flammable vapour shall be installed 
or permitted unless it is enclosed in a 
flameproof enclosure. 

d) The use, handling, storage and sale of gasoline, 
fuel oil and other flammable liquids snail not 
be permitted in Group J occupancies unless such 
use, handling, storage and sale is in accordance 
with appropriate legislation in force. 

e) All openings in exterior walls except wall vents 
shall be protected by a fire stop assembly and 
they shall be fixed, automatic or self-closing. 
Wall vents having an area of not less than 
100 cm- each shall be placed in the exterior 
walls near the floor line, not more than 1 800 
mm apart horizontally. Each building shall be 
provided with a power driven fan exhaust 
system of ventilation which shall be arranged 
and operated so as to produce a complete 
change of air in each room every 3 min. 

f) Each machine in dry-cleaning establishments 
which uses flammable liquid shall have an 
adequate steam line or any other suitable 
extinguishing agent directly connected to it, 
so arranged as to have the agent automatically 
released to the inside of each machine should 
an explosion occur in the machine. 


g) Equipment or machinery which generates or 
emits combustible or explosive dust or fibres 
shall be provided with an adequate dust 
collecting and exhaust system. 

3.8 Doorways 

3.8.1 Every exit doorway should open into an enclosed 
stairway, or horizontal exit of a corridor, or passageway 
providing continuous and protected means of egress. 

3.8.2 No exit doorway shall be less than 1 000 mm in 
width except assembly buildings where door width 
shall be not less than 2 000 mm. Doorways shall be 
not less than 2 000 mm in height. 

Mirrors shall not be placed in exit ways or exit doors 
to avoid confusion regarding the direction of exit. 

3.8.3 Exit doorways should open outwards, that is, 
away from the room but should not obstruct the travel 
along any exit. No door, when opened, should reduce 
the required width of stairway or landing to less than 
90 cm; overhead or sliding door should not be installed. 

NOTE — In the case of buildings where there is a central 
corridor, the doors of rooms should open inwards to permit 
smooth flow of traffic in the corridor. 

3.8.4 Exit door should not open immediately upon a 
flight of stairs, a landing equal to at least the width of 
the door should be provided in the stairway at each 
doorway; the level of landing should be the same as 
that of the floor which it serves. 

3.8.5 Exit doorways should be openable from the side 
which they serve without the use of a key. 

3.8.6 Revolving Doors 

3.8.6.1 Revolving doors should not be considered as 
required exits. Additional doors should be provided 
for exits from fire safety point of view. In mercantile 
buildings where there is possibility of congregation of 
a large number of people (more than 200), revolving 
doors should not be permitted. 

3.8.6.2 Where the revolving door provided are 
completely made of toughened glass (plate glass), a 
red circle or emblem or logo at 1.5 m level above sill 
should be painted on the glass. The thickness of the 
toughened glass should not be not less than 12 mm. 

3.9 Corridors and Passageways 

3.9.1 Exit corridors and passageways should be of 
width not less than the aggregate required width of 
exit doorways leading from them in the direction of 
travel to the exterior. All means of exit including 
staircases lifts lobbies and corridors shall be adequately 
ventilated. 

3.9.2 Where stairways discharge through corridors and 


12 



IS 1644 : 2013 


passageways, the height of corridors and passageways 
should be not less than 2.4 m. 

3.10 Internal Staircases 

3.10.1 Interior stairs should be constructed of non¬ 
combustible materials throughout. 

3.10.2 Interior staircase should be constructed as a self- 
contained unit with an external wall constituting at least 
one of its sides and should be completely enclosed. 

3.10.3 A staircase should not be arranged round a lift 
shaft unless the latter is totally enclosed by a material 
of fire-resistance rating as that for the type of 
construction itself. 

3.10.4 Hollow combustible construction should not be 
permitted. 

3.10.5 No gas piping or electrical panels shall be allowed 
in the stairway. Ducting in stairway may be permitted if 
it is of the fire resistance rating of the enclosure. 

3.10.6 Notwithstanding the detailed provision for exits 
given above the following minimum width should be 


provided for staircases: 

a) Residential buildings (dwellings) — 1.0 m 
NOTE — For row housing with 2 storeys, the width 
should be 0.75 m. 

b) Residential hotel buildings — 1.5 m 

c) Assembly buildings like auditorium, 

theatres and cinemas — 1.5 m 

d) Educational buildings: 

1) Up to 24 m in height —1.5 m 

2) More than 24 m in height — 2.0 m 

e) Institutional buildings like hospitals: 

1) Up to 10 beds —1.5 m 

2) More than 10 beds — 2.0 m 

f) All other buildings — 1.5 m 


3.10.7 The minimum width of tread without nosing 
should be 25 cm for internal staircase of residential 
buildings. This should be 30 cm for hotels, assembly, 
educational, institutional, business and other buildings. 
The treads should be constructed and maintained in a 
manner to prevent slipping. 

3.10.8 The maximum height of riser should be 19 cm 
for residential buildings and 15 cm for other buildings 
and the number should be limited to 15 per flight. 

3.10.9 Hand rails should be provided at a minimum 
height of 100 cm and not exceeding 120 cm to be 
measured from the base of the middle of the treads to 
the top of the hand rails. Further, the gap between the 
two verticals should not exceed 30 cm. This gap should 
be reduced to 15 cm where children are likely to use 
the staircase. Balusters/railing shall be provided such 


that the width of staircase does not reduce. 

3.10,10 The design of staircase shall also take into 
account the following: 

a) The minimum headroom in a passage under 
the landing of a staircase and under the 
staircase shall be 2.2 m. 

b) For building 15 m in height or more, access 
to main staircase shall be through a fi re/smoke 
check door of a minimum 2 h fire resistance 
rating. Fire resistance rating may be reduced 
to 1 h for residential buildings or half of the 
rating if sprinkled with open and control valve 
(except hotels and starred hotels). 

c) No living space, store or other fire risk shall 
open directly into the staircase or staircases. 

d) External exit door of staircase enclosure at 
ground level shall open directly to the open 
spaces or through a large lobby, if necessary. 

e) The main and external staircases shall be 
continuous from ground floor to the terrace 
level. 

f) No electrical shafts/AC ducts or gas pipes, etc, 
shall pass through or open in the staircases. 
Lifts shall not open in staircase. 

g) No combustible material shall be used for 
decoration/wall paneling in the staircase. 

h) Beams/Columns and other building features 
shall not reduce the head room/width of the 
staircase. 

j) The exit sign with arrow indicating the way 
to the escape route shall be provided at a 
300 mm height from the floor level on the wall 
and shall be illuminated by electric light 
connected to corridor circuits. All exit way 
marking signs should be Hush with the wall 
and so designed that no mechanical damage 
shall occur to them due to moving of furniture 
or other heavy equipments. Further, all 
landings of floor shall have floor indicating 
boards prominently indicating the number of 
floor as per bye-laws. 

The floor indication board shall be placed on 
the wall immediately facing the flight of stairs 
and nearest to the landing. It shall be of size 
not less than 0.5 m x 0.5 m. 

k) Individual floors shall be prominently 
indicated on the wall facing the staircases. 

m) In case of single staircase it shall terminate at 
the ground floor level and the access to the 
basement shall be by a separate staircase. 

The second staircase may lead to basement levels 
provided the same is separate at ground level by 


13 



IS 1644 ; 2013 


ventilated lobby with discharge points to two different 
ends through enclosures. 

3.11 Fire Escapes or External Stairs 

An external staircase is desirable to be provided for 
high rise buildings. External stairs, when provided shall 
always be kept in sound operable conditions. 

3.11.1 Fire escapes should not be taken into account 
in calculating the evacuation time of a building. 

3.11.2 All fire escapes should be directly connected to 
the ground. 

3.11.3 Entrance to the fire escape should be separate 
and remote from the internal staircase. 

3.11.4 Care should be taken to ensure that the wall 
opening or window opens on to or close to a fire escape. 

3.11.5 The route to the fire escape should be free of 
obstructions at all times. 

3.11.6 The fire escape should be constructed of non¬ 
combustible materials, and any doorway leading to the 
fire escape should have the required fire resistance. 

3.11.7 No staircase, used as a fire escape, should be 
inclined at an angle greater than 45° to the horizontal. 

3.11.8 External stairs shall have straight flight not less 
than 1 250 mm wide with 250 mm treads and risers 
not more than 190 mm. The number of risers shall be 
limited to 15 per flight 

3.11.9 Handrails shall be of a height not less than 
1 000 mm and not extending 1 200 mm. There shall be 
provisions of balusters with maximum gap of 150 mm. 

3.11.10 Spiral Fire Escape 

The use of spiral staircase should be limited to low 
occupant load and to a building not exceeding 9 m in 
height unless they are connected to platforms, such as 
balconies and terraces to allow escapees to pause. 

3.11.11 Spiral fire escape should be not less than 
150 cm in diameter and should be designed to give 
adequate headroom. Unprotected steel frame staircase 
shall not be accepted as means of escape. However, 
steel staircase in an enclosed fire rated compartment 
of 2 h will be accepted as means of escape. 

3.12 Roof Exit 

In all buildings over three storeys in height where the 
slope of the roof is less than 20°, direct access to the 
roofs should be provided from the street by means of a 
stairway. Where roofs are used as roof gardens or for 
other habitable purposes, sufficient stairways should 
be extended to them to provide necessary exit facilities 
required for such occupancy. 


NOTE — This does not apply to A-2 and A-4 occupancies up 
to 15 m height. 

3.13 Horizontal Exits 

3.13.1 The width of horizontal exit should be the same 
as for the exit doorways {see 3.8). 

3.13.2 A horizontal exit shall be equipped with at least 
one fire/smoke door of minimum 1 h fire resistance, 
of self-closing type. Further, it is required to have direct 
connectivity to the fire escape staircase for evacuation. 

3.13.3 Floor area on the opposite or refuge side of a 
horizontal exit should be sufficient to accommodate 
occupants of the floor areas served, allowing not less 
than 0.3 mVperson. For buildings more than 24 m in 
height, refuge area of 15 m^ or an area equivalent to 
0.3 m^ per person to accommodate the occupants of 
two consecutive floors, whichever is higher, shall be 
provided as under: 

The refuge area shall be provided on the periphery of 
the floor or preferably on a cantilever projection and 
open to air at least on one side protected with suitable 
railings. 

a) For floors above 24 m and Up to 39 m — One 
refuge area on the floor immediately above 
24 m. 

b) For floors above 39 m — One refuge area on 
the floor immediately above 39 m and so on 
after every 15 m. Refuge area provided in 
excess of the requirements shall be counted 
towards FAR. 

NOTE — Residential flats in multi-storied building 
with balcony, need not be provided with refuge area, 
however flats without balcony shall provide refuge area 
as given above. 

3.13.4 Where there is a difference in level between 
connected areas for horizontal exits, ramps, not more 
than 1 in 10 in slope should be provided; steps should 
not be used. 

3.13.5 Doors in horizontal exits should be openable at 
all times from both sides. 

3.14 Fire Tower 

Fire towers are the preferred type of escape route for 
storeyed buildings and their application should be 
considered as the safest route for escape. Their number, 
location and size should depend on the building 
concerned, and its associated escape routes. 

3.14.1 In every mercantile, industrial, business, assembly 
buildings other than theatres, institutional and residential 
buildings, over 8 storeys or 24 m in height, at least one 
required means of egress should be a fire tower. 

3.14.2 The enclosure of fire towers should be 


14 



IS 1644 : 2013 


constructed of walls with a 2 h fire-resistance rating 
without openings other than the exit doorways with 
platforms, landings and balconies having the same fire- 
resistance rating. 

3.15 Ramps 

3.15.1 Ramps should comply with all the applicable 
requirements for stairways regarding enclosure, 


capacity and limiting dimensions except where 
specified for special uses and occupancies. 

3.15.2 The slope of a ramp should not exceed 1 in 10. 
In certain cases, steeper slopes may be permitted but 
in no case greater than 1 in 8. 

3.15.3 For all slopes exceeding 1 in 10 and wherever 
the use is such as to involve danger of slipping, the ramp 
should be surfaced with approved non-slipping material. 


15 



IS 1644 : 2013 


ANNEXA 

{Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


Organization 

Delhi Fire ServiceSj New Delhi 

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 
Centra] Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata 
Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety, New Delhi 

Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 
Controderate of Quality Assurance, Pune 

Council of Architecture, New Delhi 

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & Labour Institute, 
Mumbai 

Electricity Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum, New Delhi 
Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 

Engineering Industrial Technical Section, Ministry of Industry, 
New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 
GAIL, New Delhi 

Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 
Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 

Lloyd Insulations (India) Limited, New Delhi 

Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 

Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 

National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 

Reliance Refineries Limited, Jamnagar 


R epresen tati ve(s} 

Shri R. C. Sharma {Chairman) 

Shri a. K. Sharma {Alternate) 

Shri A. K. Tandle 
Representative 

Dr M. P. Singh 

Dr Suvir Singh {Alternate) 

Shri C. S. Kasana 

Shri P. C. Kureel {Alternate) 

Representative 

Deputy Inspector General (Fire) 

Shri S. L. Nagarkar {Alternate) 

Shri Satya Prakash Barnwal 

Shri Ashok Kumar Goel {Alternate) 

Director 

Dr K. C. Wadhwa {Alternate) 

Shri J. P. K. Hepat 

Lt-Col B. T. Manjunath 

Shri M. B. Paradkar {Alternate) 

Shri A. R. Ramanathan 

Shri Girish Mishra {Alternate) 

Shrimati Tripta Khurana 

Shri A. K. Ganguly 

Shri S. P. Bandopadhyaya {Alternate) 

Shri Hemant Kumar 

Shri A. K. Ray 

Shri S. K. Gupta {Alternate) 

Shri R K. Sunkaria 

Shri K. C. Mathur {Alternate) 

Shri Arvind Kumar 

Ms Alpana Srivastava {Alternate) 

Shri Jayant Chakraborty 
Shri T. K. Kumar 
President 

General Secretary {Alternate) 

Shri K. K. Mitra 

Shri Sanjeev Angra {Alternate) 

Shri Om Prakash 

Shri D. K. Shami {Alternate) 

Chief Fire Officer 

Deputy Chief Fire Officer {Alternate) 
Shri D. K. Suryanarayan 

Shri S. C. Gupta 

Shri B. R. Gadekar {Alternate) 

Shri Vara den dra Koti 

Shri Umesh Khandalkar {Alternate) 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, Delhi 
State Bank of India, Mumbai 


16 


Representative 
Shri J. S. Gahlaut 



IS 1644 :2013 


Organization 


Representative(s) 


in personal capacity, P/4 Belgacuta, Kolkata 
in personal capacity, K~33-A Green Park, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, C~I27 Kendriya Vihar, Noida 


Shri S. N. Kundu 
Shri S. K. Dheri 
Shri H. S. Kaparwan 


In personal capacity, 305 SJR Verity, Amrita College Road, Shri T. R. A. Krishnan 

Kasa van a ha 11 i. Bang a lo re 

BIS Directorate General Shri A. K. Saini, Scientist ‘F’ & Head (Civil Engg) 

[Representing Director General {Ex-ojflcio)\ 

Member Secretary 
Shri S. Chaturvedi 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


17 



Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 36 (7665). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. 


Date of Issue 


Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 

Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 


Regional Offices: 


Telephones 


Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 


r 2323 7617 
\2323 3841 


Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VIIM, V. L P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700054 


("2337 8499, 2337 8561 
\2337 8626, 2337 9120 


Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 


J 260 3843 
\260 9285 

r 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
\2254 2519, 2254 2315 

r 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
^2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD, BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 





