атт Ah IS 2210 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


safa Фе chi ает divert afit Ч 
gu сете h TSSITg4 % fero тч 


(FAT тда) 


Criteria for Design of Reinforced 
Concrete Shell Structures and 
Folded Plates 


( Second Hevision ) 


ICS 91.080.40 


© BIS 2023 


STRE 9198 эч 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR ЧӘЧ, 9 SEEL ЭТТЕ HHL Tri, +ç Й - 110002 
M МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2023 Price Group 12 


Special Structures Sectional Committee, СЕР 38 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Special Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Shells and folded plates belong to the class of stressed-skin structures which, because of their geometry and small 
flexural rigidity of the skin, tend to carry loads primarily by direct stresses acting in their plane. Wherever shell 
Is referred to in this standard, it refers to thin shell. On account of multiplicity of the types of reinforced concrete 
shell and folded plate structures used in present day building practice for a variety of applications demanding 
roofing of large column-free area, it is not practicable to lay down a rigid code of practice to cover all situations. 
Therefore, this standard lays down certain general recommendations for the guidance of designers. 


Cylindrical shells have been in use in building construction for the past many decades. Well developed theories 
exist for their analysis. Labour-saving short-cuts, such as, charts and tables for their design, are also available. 


Although shells of double curvature, with the exception of domes, have been introduced on a large scale 
comparatively recently into building construction, these are likely to be used more and more in future. Being non- 
developable surfaces, they are more resistant to buckling than cylindrical shells and in general, require less 
thickness. This saving in materials is, however, often offset by the relatively expensive shuttering required for 
casting them. 


Among the doubly-curved shells, the hyperbolic paraboloid and the conoid have, however, the advantage of less 
expensive shuttering because their ruled surfaces can be formed by straight plank shuttering. 


Folded plates are often competitive with shells for covering large column-free areas. They usually consume 
relatively more materials compared to shell but this disadvantage is often offset by the simpler framework required 


for their construction. 


This standard was first published in 1962 and subsequently revised in 1988. The present revision is based on the 
developments in the design of shell and folded plate structures subsequently, and to include more rigorous methods 
of analysis, and numerical methods, such as, finite element methods, which have become available to enforce 
more rational criteria of design. Some of the significant changes incorporated in this revision are as follows: 


a) New terms and their definitions have been incorporated; 
b) Some of the existing definitions have been modified; 


c) New informative and non-mandatory Annex E, for incorporating analysis using numerical methods has 
been included; 


d) Guide to finite element modeling of reinforced concrete structures has been included in Annex F; 


e) New informative but non-mandatory Annex G, for response transformation from numerical methods has 
been included; 


f) Acceptability of approximate methods of analysis has been added; 
g) Shells with prestressed concrete have been addressed; and 


h) Various provisions on materials have been modified in line with IS 456 : 2000 “Plain and reinforced 
concrete — Code of practice (fourth revision)’. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 2210: 2023 


Indian Standard 


CRITERIA FOR DESIGN OF REINFORCED CONCRETE SHELL 
STRUCTURES AND FOLDED PLATES 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard lays down recommendations for 
the classification, dimensional proportioning, 
analysis and design of cast in-situ, reinforced 
concrete thin shells and folded plates. 


1.22 All provisions of IS 456 not specifically 
excluded, and not in conflict with provisions of this 
standard, shall apply to thin shell concrete 
structures. Provisions of this standard shall govern 
for thin shell structures, including ribs and edge 
members. 


1.3 Wherever prestressed concrete is used, in 
addition to the stipulations of present standard, 
provisions of IS 1343 shall apply, for pre-tensioned 
and post-tensioned type of shells, as the case may 
be. 


1.4 This standard does not deal with construction 
practices relating to these structures which have 
been separately dealt in IS 2204. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions, which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication the editions indicated are valid. AII 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Anticlastic Shells — A shell is said to be 
anticlastic shells if its Gauss curvature is negative. 


3.2 Asymmetrical Cylindrical Shells  — 
Cylindrical shells which are asymmetrical about the 
crown. 


3.3 Barrel Shells — Cylindrical shells which 
symmetrical about the crown (see Fig. 1). 


3.4 Butterfly Shells — Butterfly shells are those 
which consist of two parts of a cylindrical shell 
joined together at their lower edges (see Fig. 2). 


3.5 Chord Width — The chord width is the 
horizontal projection of the arc of the cylindrical 
shell. 


3.6 Continuous Cylindrical Shells — Cylindrical 
shells which are longitudinally continuous over the 
traverses (see Fig. 3). 


NOTE — Doubly-curved shells continuous in one or both 
directions may be termed as continuous shells. 


3.7 Cylindrical Shells — Shells in which either the 
directrix or generatrix is a straight line. 


3.8 Double Curved — A shell is said to be doubly 
curved if its Gauss curvature is definite. Such shells 
are non-developable. 


3.9 Edge Member — A member provided at the 
edge of a shell. 


NOTE — Edge members increase the rigidity of the shell 
edge and help in accommodating the reinforcement. 


3.10 Elastic Analysis — Ап analysis of 
deformations and internal forces based on 
equilibrium, compatibility of strains, and assumed 
elastic behavior, and representing, to a suitable 
approximation, the three-dimensional action of the 
shell together with its auxiliary members. For an 
elastic analysis, concrete may be assumed as 
uncracked, homogeneous, and isotropic. Elastic 
behavior is the commonly accepted basis for 
determining stresses, displacements, and stability of 
thin shells 


3.11 End Frames or Traverses — End frames or 
traverses are structures provided to support and 
preserve the geometry of the shell. 
NOTE — They may be solid diaphragms, arch ribs, portal 
frames or bowstring girders. Where a clear soffit is required, 


especially for the use of movable formwork, the end frames 
may consist of upstand ribs. 


3.12 Folded Plates — Folded plates consist of a 
series of thin plates, usually rectangular, joined 


IS 2210 : 2023 


monolithically along their common edges and 
supported on diaphragms. They are also known as 
hipped plates. 


Folded plates may be prismatic, non-prismatic or 
faceted. The first two types consist generally of 
planar thin slabs joined along their longitudinal 
edges to form a beam-like structure spanning 
between supports. Faceted folded plates are made up 
of triangular or polygonal planar thin slabs joined 
along their edges to form three-dimensional spatial 
structures. 


NOTE — Shapes of folded plates and their applications 


A few of the commonly used shapes of folded plates are 
shown in Fig. 4. The simplest is V-shaped unit (Fig. 4A) 
but this may not provide enough area of concrete at the top 
and bottom to resist the compressive forces due to bending 
and to accommodate the reinforcement. The trough- 
shaped or the trapezoidal unit (Fig. 4B and Fig. 4E) 
eliminates these disadvantages. Asymmetrical sections of 
the 'Z shape (Fig. 4C) provided with window glazing 
between two adjacent units serve as north-light roofs for 
factory buildings. The shape shown in Fig. 4D is obtained 
by replacing the curved cross-section of a cylindrical shell 
by a series of straight plates. This has the advantage of 
greater structural depth compared to other shapes. 
Butterfly type of folded plates shown in Fig. 4F are also 
employed to cover factory roofs as there are provisions for 
window glazing. Tapering plates are also used as roofs 
mainly for aesthetic reasons. Hipped plate structures of the 
pyramidal types are used for tent-shaped roofs, cooling 
towers, etc. 


3.13 Gauss Curvature — The product of the two 
principal curvatures, 1/R; and 1/R» at any point оп 
the surface of the shell. 


3.14 Generatrix, Directrix — A curve which 
moves parallel to itself over astationary curve 
generates a surface. The moving curve is called the 
generatrix and the stationary curve the directrix. One 
of them may be a straight line. 


NOTE — The common curves used for cylindrical shells 
are, arc of a circle, semi-ellipse, parabola, catenary and 
cycloid. 


3.15 Inelastic Analysis — An analysis of 
deformations апа internal forces based оп 
equilibrium, nonlinear stress-strain relations for 
concrete and reinforcement, consideration of 
cracking апа time-dependent effects, апа 
compatibility of strains. The analysis shall represent 
to a suitable approximation three-dimensional action 
of the shell together with its auxiliary members. 


3.16 Junction Member — The common edge 
member at the junction of two adjacent shells. 


3.17 Multiple Cylindrical Shells — A series of 
parallel cylindrical shells which are transversely 
continuous. 


3.18 North-Light Shells — Cylindrical shells with 
two springing at different levels and having 
provisions for north-light glazing (see Fig. 5). 


3.19 Radius — Radius at any point of the shell in 
one of the two principal directions. 


NOTE — If cylindrical shell of a circular arc is used, the 
radius of the arc is the radius of the shell. In other cases, the 
radius R at any point is related to the radius Rọ at the 
crown by R = R, cos (0), where Ө is the angle of 
inclination of the tangent to the curve at that point. The 
parabola, value of n is 1, - 2 and - 3 for cycloid, catenary 
and parabola, respectively. For an ellipse: 


a? b? 


R= 3 
(a2Sin20 + b2Cos?0) /2 


where, a and b are the semi-major and semi-minor axes, 
respectively, and is the slope of the tangent at the point. 


3.20 Ribbed Shells — Spatial structures with 
material placed primarily along certain preferred rib 
lines, with the area between the ribs filled with thin 
slabs or left open. Ribbed shells generally have been 
used for larger spans where the increased thickness 
of the curved slab alone becomes excessive or 
uneconomical. Ribbed shells are also used because 
of the construction techniques employed and to 
enhance the aesthetic impact of the completed 
structure. 


3.21 Rise — The vertical distance between the apex 
of the curve representing the centre line of the shell 
and the lower most springing. 


3.22 Ruled Surfaces — Surfaces which can be 
generated entirely by straight lines. The surface is 
said to be ‘singly ruled' if at every point, a single 
straight line only can be ruled and ‘doubly ruled' if 
at every point, two straight lines can be ruled. 
Cylindrical shells, conical shells and conoids are 
examples of singly ruled surfaces; hyperbolic 
paraboloids and hyperboloids of revolution of one 
sheet are examples of doubly ruled surface 
(see Fig. 6). 


3.23 Semi Central Angle — Half the angle 
subtended by the arc of a symmetrical circular shell 
at the centre. 


3.24 Shells — Three-dimensional spatial structures 
made up of one or more curved slabs or folded plates 
whose thicknesses are small compared to their other 
dimensions. Thin shells are characterized by their 
three-dimensional load-carrying behavior, which is 
determined by the geometry of their forms, by the 
manner in which they are supported, and by the 
nature of the applied load. Thin shells are those in 
which the radius to thickness ratio should not be 
more than 20. 


3.25 Shells of Revolution — Shells which аге 
obtained when a plane curve is rotated about the axis 
of symmetry. Examples are segmental domes, 
cones, paraboloids of revolution, hyperboloids of 
revolution, etc (see Fig. 7). 


3.26 Shells of Translation — Shells which are 
obtained when the plane of the generatrix and the 
directrix are at right angles. Examples are 
cylindrical shells, elliptic paraboloids, hyperbolic 
paraboloids, etc (see Fig. 8). 


IS 2210 : 2023 


3.27 Singly Curved — А shell is said to be singly 
curved if its one principal curvature is zero (hence, 
Gauss curvature is zero) It is also known as 
developable shell, since, such surfaces can be 
developed by bending a plane surface. 


3.28 Span — The span of a cylindrical shell is the 
distance between the centre lines of two adjacent 
end frames of traverses (see Fig. 1). 


3.29 Synclastic Shell — А shell is said to be 
synclastic shell if its Gauss curvature is positive. 


END FRAME 
OR TRAVERSE 


EDGE MEMBER 


FIG. 1 SINGLE BARREL SHELL 


FIG. 2 BUTTERFLY SHELL 


IS 2210 : 2023 


FIG. 3 MULTIPLE BARREL SHELL 


4E 4F 


NOTE — Diaphragms are not shown. 


FIG. 4 FOLDED PLATES 


— =---5 
—— 9 Serene, 
` 


-————-—------ 


FIG. 5 NORTH — LIGHT CYLINDRICAL SHELLS 


4 NOTATIONS 


4.1 For the purpose of this standard, unless 
otherwise defined in the text, the following notations 
shall have the meaning indicated against each: 


a = Semi-major axis of an 
elliptical shell; 

B = Chord width; 

b = Semi-minor axis of an 
elliptical shell; 

D = Flexural rigidity; 

d = Thickness of shell; 

Е, = Modulus of elasticity of 
concrete (long term); 

Es = Modulus of elasticity of steel; 

F — Stress function which gives the 


in-plane stress in doubly- 
curved shells when bending is 
also considered; 


Tek = Characteristic strength of 
concrete; 

fa = Critical buckling stress; 

h = Rise of shell; 

H — Total depth of shell, measured 


from the crown of the shell to 
the bottom of the edge 


member; 

L = Span; 

mx = Bending moment in the shell in 
the x-direction; 

ту = Bending moment in the shell in 


the y-direction; 


тху 
п, пу and 
Nxy 

Nxp, Nyp and 


Nxyp 


P 


Ty 


Wx, Wy and 
W, 
W 


IS 2210 : 2022 


LIGHT 
FRAMING 


Twisting moment in the shell; 
Real membrane stresses in the 
shell; 

Projected membrane forces; 


Permissible buckling load per 
unit area of the surface of 
doubly-curved shells; 

Oz . 

Ox” 

Oz. 

ду? 

02z 

ax?’ 

əz 

дх.ду' 

0?z 

0y2; 

Radius; 


Principal radii of curvature at 
any point on the surface of 
shell; 

Shear stress; 

Normal stress in the x- 
direction; 

Normal stress in the у- 
direction; 

Real forces on unit area of the 
shellin the x, y and z direction; 
Deflection in the direction of 
Z-axis; 


IS 2210 : 2022 


X,YandZ = Fictitious forces on unit 
projected area of the shell in 
the x, y and z-directions; 

x,y andz = Axes of co-ordinates; 


Ø = Stress function used in the 
membrane analysis of doubly- 
curved shell; 


0 = Angle of inclination of tangent 
to the curve at any point; 

Øe = Semi-central angle of a 
symmetrical circular 
cylindrical shell; 

рапак =  Aas Jakobsen's parameters for 
cylindrical shells; 

v =  Poisson's ratio; and 

\/2 = 


д? д? 
5 CLASSIFICATION OF SHELLS 


5.1 General 


Shells may be broadly classified as 'singly-curved' 
and 'doubly-curved'. This is based on Gauss 


6A CONOID 


2 


curvature. The gauss curvature of singly-curved 
shells is zero because one of their principal 
curvatures is zero. They are, therefore, developable. 
Doubly-curved shells are non-developable and are 
classified as synclastic or anticlastic according as 
their Gauss curvature is positive or negative. 


5.1.1 The governing equations of membrane theory 
of singly curved shell are parabolic. It is elliptic for 
synclastic shells and hyperbolic for anticlastic 
shells. If z = f(x, y) is the equation to the surface 
of a shell, the surface will be synclastic, developable 
or anticlastic according as, s? - r.t s 0, where r, s 
and t are as defined in 4.1. 


5.1.2 There are other special types of doubly curved 
shells, such as, funicular shells, which are synclastic 
and anticlastic in parts and corrugated shells which 
are alternately synclastic and anticlastic. The gauss 
curvature for such shells is positive where they are 
synclastic and negative where they are anticlastic. 


5.2 The detailed classification of shell structures is 
given in Annex B. 


/ 77 7727542 7 4 = 
ПУЗ 
HERE 
HERS. 


6B HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOID 


6C HYPERBOLIC OF REVOLUTION OF ONE SHEET 


FIG. 6 RULED SURFACES 


7A SEGMENTAL DOME 


IS 2210 : 2023 


7B PARABOLOID OF REVOLUTION 


FIG. 7 SHELL OF REVOLUTION 


S2 


8A ELLIPTIC PARABOLOID 


ey 


8B HYPERBOLIC PARABOLOID 


FIG. 8 SHELL OF TRANSLATION 


6 MATERIALS 
6.1 Concrete 


Controlled concrete shall be used for all shell and 
folded plate structures. The concrete is of minimum 
grade M20. The quality of materials used in 
concrete, the methods of proportioning and mixing 
the concrete shall be done in accordance with the 
relevant provisions of IS 456. 


NOTE — High cement content mixes are generally 
undesirable as they shrink excessively giving rise to cracks. 


6.2 Steel 
The steel for the reinforcement shall be: 


a) Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars 
and hard-drawn steel wire conforming to 
IS 432 (Part 1) and IS 432 (Part 2); 


b) Hard-drawn steel, wire fabric for concrete 
reinforcement conforming to IS 1566; and 


c) Highstrength deformed bars conforming to 
IS 1786. 


Specified/design yield strength of non-prestressed 
reinforcement shall not exceed 415 MPa, to 
minimize cracking of thin shells. 


6.2.1 Welding may be used in reinforcement in 
accordance with IS 456. 


7 LOADS 


7.1 Unless otherwise specified, shells and folded 
plates shall be designed to resist the following load 
combinations: 


a) Dead load, 

b) Dead load + appropriate imposed load or 
snow load, 

c) Dead load + appropriate imposed load 
wind effects, and 

d) Dead load + appropriate impoesed load 
+ seismic effect. 


7.2 Dead loads shall be calculated on the basis of the 
unit weights taken їп accordance with 
IS 875 (Part 1). 


7.3 Imposed loads, wind loads and snow loads 
shall be taken as specified in IS 875 (Parts 2 to 4). 


IS 2210 : 2023 


7.4 Seismic effects shall be taken in accordance with 
IS 1893 (Part 1). 


7.5 Where concentrated loads occur, special 
considerations should be given in analysis and 
design. 


7.6 Secondary loads due to diurnal and seasonal 
variation of temperature should be considered in the 
design load combinations, in line with 
IS 875 (Part 5). 


8 SELECTION OF DIMENSIONS 
8.1 Thickness 
8.1.1 Thickness of Shells 


The thickness of a shell and its reinforcement shall 
be proportioned for the strength and serviceability 
requirements of IS 456. Strength design of shell 
slabs for membrane and bending forces shall be 
based on the distribution of stresses and strains as 
determined from either elastic or an inelastic 
analysis. 


Thickness of shells shall not normally be less than 
50 mm if singly curved and 40 mm if doubly-curved. 
This requirement does not, however, apply to small 
precast concrete shell units in which the thickness 
may be less than that specified above, but it shall in 
no case be less than 25 mm (see IS 6332). 


8.1.1.1 The reinforcement shall have a minimum 
clear cover of 15 mm or its nominal size whichever 
Is greater. 


8.1.2 Shells are usually thickened for some distance 
from their junction with edge members and 
traverses. The thickening is usually of the order of 
30 percent of the shell thickness. It is, however, 
important to note that undue thickening is 
undesirable. In the case of singly-curved shells, the 
distance over which the thickening at the junction of 
the shell and traverse is made should be between 
0.38 /R.d and 0.76VR.d, where R and d are the 
radius of the shell directrix and the thickness, 
respectively. The thickening of shell at straight 
edges shall depend on the transverse bending 
moment. For doubly-curved shells, this distance will 
depend upon the geometry of the shell and the 
boundary conditions as the extent of bending 
penetration is governed by these factors. 


8.1.3 Thickness of Folded Plates 


The thickness of folded plates shall not normally be 
less Шап 75 mm. However, considering the 
environment conditions, fire resistance, durability 
requirements, and number of reinforcement layers to 
be provided, requirement of cover as per IS 456, 
minimum thickness may be suitably increased. 


8.2 Other Dimensions 
8.2.1 Cylindrical Shells 


8.2.1.1The span should preferably be less than 
30 m. Shells longer than 30 m will involve 
special design considerations, such as the application 
of prestressing techniques. 


8.2.1.2 The width of the edge member shall 
generally be limited to three times the thickness of 
the shell. 


8.2.1.3 The radius of shell structures shall be 
selected keeping acoustic requirements in view. 
Coincidence of the centre of curvature with the 
working level should be avoided unless suitable 
acoustic correction is made. It is, however, 
important to note that even where coincidence of 
centre of curvature with the working level is 
avoided, acoustic treatment may be necessary in 
certain cases. 


8.2.1.4 A single cylindrical shell whose span is 
larger than three times the chord width shall have a 
total depth, H, between 1/12 and 1/6 of its span (the 
former value being applicable to smaller spans). The 
rise in the case of a shell without edge members shall 
not be less than 1/10 of its span. 


8.2.1.5 For a shell with chord width larger than three 
times the span, the rise of the shell shall not be less 
than 1/8 of its chord width. 


8.2.1.6 The chord width of shells shall preferably be 
restricted to six times the span as otherwise arch 
action is likely to predominate. 


8.2.1.7 The semi-central angle shall preferably be 
between 30? and 40*. 


NOTE — Keeping the semi-central angle between these 
limits is advisable for the following reasons: 


a) If the angle is below 40°, the effect of wind load on 
the shell produces only suction; and 

b) With slopes steeper than 40°, backforms may 
become necessary. 


Within these limits the semi-central angle shall be as 
high as possible consistent with the functional 
requirements. 


8.2.2 Folded Plates 


8.2.2.1 For folded plates of type shown in Fig. 4D, 
the selection of depth may be based on the rules 
applicable to cylindrical shells. With other shapes, 
such as, the 'V' or the trough, the depth may be taken 
as about 1/15 of the span for preliminary designs. 


8.2.2.2 The angle of inclination of the plates to 
horizontal shall be limited to about 40° for in-situ 


construction in order to facilitate placing of concrete 
without the use of the back forms. 


9 ANALYSIS 
9.1 General 


Shells may be analyzed either by linear elastic 
analysis based on theory of elasticity or yield line 
theory. Methods based on yield line theory for shells 
may be used along with model tests to check the load 


carrying capacity. 


9.1.1 The finite element method has become a 
practical method of analysis for all types of 
structures. Many common and important features of 
shell and folded plate structures that cannot be 
considered by classical methods can be analyzed 
satisfactorily by the finite element method, such as: 


a) Complex support or boundary conditions; 

b) Openings large enough to disturb global 
stress distribution; 

c) Irregular surface geometry; 

d) Highly variable or localized loads; 

e) Tapering folded plates or boxes or silo and 
bunker bottoms; 

f) Branching shells; 

g) Large deformations; 

h) Heavy and eccentric stiffeners; 

j  Thermoelastic strains; 

k) Elastoplastic, viscoelastic or any inelastic 
behaviour; 

m) Material non-homogeneity; 

n) Irregular surface geometry; 

p) Sudden changes in curvature; 

q) Shells under dynamic wind action; and 

r) Possible effect of settlement. 


9.1.2 When one or more of these complexities occur 
in shell structures, it is advisable to use finite 
element method, at least for a final acceptance of the 
design. Even normal shell structures of spans larger 
than 30 m should be analyzed by finite element 
method, if it is expected that there would be serious 
and significant structural participation in the shell 
behaviour by the supporting units, such as, edge and 
intermediate beams, stiffeners, and or intermediate 
traverses specially flexible traverses cable supports, 
columns, etc. Provisions of Annex E and Annex F 
may be adopted, wherever necessary. 


9.1.3 For many shells, finite strip method (FSM) (a 
particular form of finite element method) of analysis 
is easier to apply and also more economical to use 
than the finite element method. АП types of 
prismatic folded plates and cylindrical shells can be 
handled by FSM since these shells can be discretized 
into long strip elements. Shells of revolution can 
also be efficiently analyzed by this method, after 
discretization of such shells into finite ring elements. 


IS 2210 : 2023 


Since FSM can be used even when the loads are not 
uniform, it may be advisable to use the method even 
for simple shells that are amenable to analysis by 
common classical methods. 


9.1.4 Approximate methods of analysis shall be 
permitted, where it can be shown that such methods 
provide a safe basis for design. Such solutions 
should include both membrane and bending effects, 
and satisfy conditions of compatibility and 
equilibrium. Approximate solutions that satisfy 
statics, but not the compatibility of strains may be 
used only when extensive experience has proved 
that safe designs have resulted from their use. Such 
methods include beam-type analysis for barrel shells 
and folded plates having large ratios of span to either 
width or radius of curvature, simple membrane 
analysis for shells of revolution, and others, in which 
the equations of equilibrium are satisfied, while the 
strain compatibility equations are not. 


9.1.5 Inelastic analyses shall be permitted to be used 
where it can be shown that such methods provide a 
safe basis for design. 


9.1.6 Equilibrium checks of internal resistances and 
external loads shall be made to ensure consistency 
of results. 


9.1.7 An ultimate strength analysis may be used only 
as a check on the adequacy of the design margins. It 
is not to be used as a sole criterion for design, except 
where it can be proven to be applicable. 


9.1.8 Model Analysis 


Models may be used as the basis for a design and/or 
to check the validity of assumptions involved in a 
mathematical analysis. When models are used, only 
those portions which significantly affect the items 
under study need be simulated. Every attempt must 
be made to ensure that these tests reveal the 
quantitative behavior of the prototype structure. 


The common classical methods of analysis of shells 
are mentioned in the following clauses for use for 
the analysis of common types of shells that are 
without any of the complexities. 


9.2 Cylindrical Shells 


9.2.1 Analytical Methods 


The analytical methods consist of two parts, 
membrane analysis and edge disturbance analysis. 


9.2.1.1 Membrane analysis 


In the membrane analysis, the shell is regarded as a 
perfectly flexible membrane which is infinite in 
extent and is assumed to carry loads by means of 
forces in its plane only. This analysis gives the two 
normal stress resultants nx and ny in the longitudinal 


IS 2210 : 2023 


and the transverse directions and the shear stress 
resultant пху. 


9.2.1.2 Edge disturbance analysis 


Shells, in practice, are always limited by finite 
boundaries where the boundary conditions 
demanded by the membrane theory are not obtained 
with the result that a pure membrane state would 
seldom exist. Edge disturbances emanate from the 
boundaries, altering the membrane state and causing 
bending stresses in the shell. These are accounted for 
by carrying out the edge disturbance analysis. 
Usually edge disturbance analysis is confined to 
disturbance emanating from straight edge as any 
disturbance emanating from curved edges is damped 
quite fast. Even in the case of disturbance from 
straight edges, the bending stresses would get 
damped out more rapidly in shells having chord 
width larger than the span and would seldom travel 
beyond the crown, with the result that the effect of 
the further edge may be ignored without appreciable 
error. 


The superposition of the membrane and the edge 
disturbance stresses gives the final stress pattern in 
the shell. 


9.2.1.3 Tables for the analysis of circular cylindrical 
shells 


Simplifications in the analysis of shells are possible 
by systematizing the calculations making use of 
tables compiled for this purpose (see Annex O). 


9.2.2 Applicability of the Methods of Analysis 


9.2.2.1 Cylindrical shells with (L/R) ratio less than 
7t shall be analyzed using any of the accepted 
analytical methods (see Annex C). 


In such shells, if p (rho) exceeds 10 and к (kappa) 
exceeds 0.15, the effect at any point on the shell of 
the disturbances emanating from the farther edge 
may be ignored, where: 


8 |12z4R? n?R? 
p= qd and к= 1202 


For shells with р (rho) less than 7 and к (Карра) 
less than 0.12, the effect of the disturbances from 
both the edges shall be considered. Shells with 
p (rho) values between 7 and 10 and x (kappa) 
between 0.12 and 0.15 are relatively infrequent. 
However, should such cases arise, the effects of both 
the edges shall be considered. 


9.2.2.2 Cylindrical shells with (L/R) greater than or 


equal to zt may be treated as beams of curved cross 
section spanning between the traverses and the 
analysis carried out using an approximate method 
known as the beam method (see Annex C) which 
consists of the following two parts: 


a) The beam calculation which gives the 
longitudinal stress resultant nx and the 
shear stress resultant ry, and 

b) The arch calculation which gives the 
transverse stress resultant ny and the 
transverse moment my. 


9.2.3 Continuous Cylindrical Shells 
9.2.3.1 Analytical methods 


In the analytical methods, the problem of continuous 
shells is solved in two stages. In the first, the shell is 
assumed to be simply supported over one span and 
all the stress resultants worked out. In the second 
stage, corrections for continuity are worked out and 
are superimposed on the values corresponding to the 
simply supported span. Long cylindrical shells can 
be analyzed by approximating the cylindrical profile 
by a folded plate shape and applying well known 
analysis methods for continuous folded plates 
(see Annex C). 


9.2.3.2 Beam method 


Solution of continuous shell with (L/R) 2 л is 
simpler by the beam method. The bending moment 
factors are obtained by solving the corresponding 
continuous beam. Thereafter, analysis can be 
continued as in 9.2.2.2. 


9.3 Doubly-Curved Shells 
9.3.1 Membrane Analysis 


In the membrane analysis, it is assumed that the 
shells carry loads by in-plane stress resultants and 
usually only deep doubly-curved shells behave like 
membranes. The governing equations for membrane 
analysis of doubly-curved are usually solved by 
using stress functions (see Annex D). 


9.3.2 Shallow Shells 


Shells may be considered shallow if the rise to span 
ratio is less than or equal to 1/5 and p? and q? may 
be ignored in all the expressions. The shorter side 
shall be considered as the span for this purpose for 
shells of rectangular ground plan. A shell with a 
circular ground plan may be considered shallow if 
the rise does not exceed 1/5 of the diameter. 


NOTE — Based on the same consideration of ignoring p?, 
q^ and pq being very small, it is sometimes suggested that 
the shells may be treated as shallow, if the surface is such 
that, the values of p and q do not exceed 1/8 at any point on 
it. However, in normal cases, for practical purposes, higher 
values of p and q up to half may be considered as shallow 
provided the span to rise ratio does not exceed 5. 


9.3.3 Boundary Conditions for Doubly-Curved 
Shells 


In general, in the membrane analysis of synclastic 
shells, only one boundary condition is admissible on 
each boundary. For an anticlastic shell, the boundary 
conditions have to be specified in a special manner 
as the characteristic lines of such surfaces play a 
significant role in the membrane theory. The type of 
boundary conditions that can be specified depend on 
whether or not the boundaries of the shell are 
characteristic lines. 


Further, a membrane state of stress can be 
maintained in a shell only if the boundaries are such 
that the reactions exerted by the boundary members 
on the shells correspond to stresses in the shell at the 
boundaries given by the membrane theory. It is 
seldom possible to provide boundary conditions 
which would lead to a pure membrane state of stress 
in the shell. In most practical cases, a resort to 
bending theory becomes necessary. 


9.3.3.1 Only deep doubly-curved shells behave like 
membranes and it is only for such shells that a 
membrane analysis is generally adequate for design 
(see also 9.1). Bending analysis is necessary for all 
singly-curved shells and shallow doubly-curved 
shells. The governing equation for bending analysis 
of shallow shells are given in Annex D. For 
important and large structures, edge effects cannot 
be neglected altogether. Such effects should be 
taken care by detailed analysis, and adequate 
detailing by providing additional reinforcement as 
necessitated by the analysis and design. 


9.3.4 Bending Theory of Doubly-Curved Shells 


The governing equations for bending analysis of 
shallow doubly-curved shells are given in Annex D. 


9.3.5 Bending Theory of Shells of Revolution, 
Symmetrically Loaded 


In synclastic shells of revolution, such as, domes 
which are symmetrically loaded, a more or less 
membrane state of stress exists. The bending 
stresses are confined to a very narrow strip close to 
edge members and get rapidly damped out. The 
bending stresses in domes can be calculated with 
sufficient accuracy by approximate methods like 
Geckler's approximation. 


9.3.6 Funicular Shells 


The shapes of these shells are so chosen that, under 
uniformly distributed vertical loads, in a membrane 
state of stress, they develop only pure compression 
unaccompanied by shear stresses. Thus theoretically 
no reinforcement will be necessary except in the 
edge members. Small precast funicular shells 


IS 2210 : 2023 


without any reinforcement except in edge beams are 
suitable for roofs and floors of residential, industrial, 
and institutional buildings (see IS 6332). For roofs 
of larger size, in situ construction may be resorted 
to; in such shells, provision of reinforcement is 
necessary to take care of the effects of shrinkage, 
temperature and bending. 


9.4 Folded Plates 


The structural action of folded plates may be thought 
of as consisting of two parts, the 'slab action' and the 
‘plate action’. By the slab action, the loads are 
transmitted to the joints by the transverse bending of 
the slabs. The slabs, because of their large depth and 
relatively small thickness, offer considerable 
resistance to bending in their own planes and are 
flexible out of their planes. The loads are, therefore, 
carried to the end diaphragms by the longitudinal 
bending of the slabs in their own planes. This is 
known as "plate action'. The analysis of folded slabs 
is carried out in two stages. 


9.4.1 Transverse Slab Action Analysis 


The transverse section of the slab, of unit length, is 
analyzed as а continuous beam on rigid supports. 
The joint loads obtained from this analysis are 
replaced by their components in the planes of the 
slabs and these are known as plate loads. 


9.4.2 In-Plane Plate Action Analysis 


Under the action of 'plate loads' obtained above, 
each slab is assumed to bend independently between 
the diaphragms, and the longitudinal stresses at the 
edges are calculated. Continuity demands that the 
longitudinal stresses at the common edges of the 
adjacent slabs be equal. The corrected stresses are 
obtained by introducing edge shear forces. 


9.5 Expansion Joints 


The expansion joint shall conform to provisions laid 
down in IS 456. In the case of folded plates, it is 
recommended that the joint may be located in the 
ridge slab. In the cases of large spans where it is not 
feasible to provide expansion joints, effects of 
shrinkage shall be taken care of in the design. 


9.6 Openings in Shells 


Openings in shells shall preferably be avoided in 
zones of critical stresses. Small openings of size not 
exceeding five times the thickness in shells may be 
treated in the same way as in the case of reinforced 
concrete structures. For larger openings, detailed 
analysis should be carried out to arrive at stresses 
due to the openings. 


9.7 In prestressed concrete shells, analysis shall also 
consider behavior under loads induced during 


IS 2210 : 2023 


prestressing, at cracking load, and at factored load. 
Where tendons are draped within a shell, design 
shall take into account force components on the shell 
resulting from the tendon profile not lying in one 
plane. 


9.8 If construction results in deviations from the 
shape greater than the specified tolerances, an 
analysis of the effect of the deviations shall be made 
and any required remedial actions shall be taken to 
ensure safe behavior. 


9.9 Radial tensile stress along the thickness direction 
should be checked. Radial reinforcement should be 
provided, when radial tensile stresses are greater 
than permissible direct tensile stress of concrete 
(with applicable factor of safety). Radial 
reinforcement can be single legged link type, and 
connecting outer and inner reinforcement mesh. 


10 ELASTIC STABILITY 
10.1 Permissible Stresses 


10.1.1 Stresses in steel reinforcement, and concrete 
for shells and folded plates shall be in accordance 
with the provisions given in IS 456. 


NOTE — If limit state of design is to be used for shells, 
specialist literature may be consulted. 
10.2 Causes of Instability 


Instability in a cylindrical shell may be caused by: 


a) Local buckling in zones submitted to 
compressive stresses; 


b) Hlattening of shells, known as the 'Brazier 
Effect’, which occurs particularly in shells 
without edge members; and 


c) Instability caused by the combined effect 
of bending and torsion in the shell as a 
whole. This occurs particularly in 
asymmetrical shells. 


10.3 Buckling in Cylindrical Shells 
10.3.1 The permissible buckling stress fac in 
cylindrical shells shall be calculated as follows: 


_ 025% 
fac Е 1+(fck/fer) 


where 


fax = Characteristic strength of concrete at 
28 days; and 


fer = Critical buckling stress determined in 
accordance with (a), (b) and (c) below: 


a) Shells with p < 7 and x < 0.12 : In such 
shells, buckling is caused by excessive 
longitudinal compression near the crown of 
the shell and the critical buckling stress fo 
shall be calculated as follows: 


fer = 0.2(E,.d/R) 


b) Shells with > 10 and x > 0.15 : In such 
shells, the transverse stresses tend to be 
critical from the point of view of buckling 
and the critical buckling stress fer shall be 
determined as follows: 


i) For shells with L < 2.3VdR : 
for = EL[3.4(d/L)? + 0.025(L/R)] 


ii) For shells with L > 2.3 VdR: 


where 


E. = 5 0004/ fcx (as per IS 456) duly 
modified for long term modulus 
including the effect of creep; 


d = Thickness of the shell; and 


К = Radius of curvature. 


c) Shells with p values between 7 and 10 and 
K between 0.12 and 0.15 are relatively 
infrequent. For such shells, formulae given 
in (a) or (b) shall apply depending upon 
whether longitudinal or transverse stresses 
are critical from considerations of elastic 
stability. 


The value of modulus of elasticity of concrete to be 
used in the above formulae for calculating the 
buckling stresses should be the value for long term 
modulus including the effect of creep also. 


10.4 Buckling in Doubly-Curved Shells 


For spherical shells, the permissible buckling load 
per unit area of surface, Pperm from considerations of 
elastic stability, is given by: 


P 


егш SOLE d? /R? 


where 


E., d and R are as defined in 4.1. 


For other types of doubly-curved shells, the 
permissible buckling load per unit area of surface, 
Ре Shall be calculated from the formula: 


Pperm = 0.1E, d2 / (R4. R2) 


where 


К and R» are principal radii of curvature at any 
point, and Е, and d are as defined in 4.1. 


10.5 Buckling in Folded Plates 


The folded plate may be replaced by the 
corresponding cylindrical shell where possible and 
the appropriate formula used to check for elastic 
stability. 


11 DESIGN OF TRAVERSES 
11.1 Types of Traverses 


Traverses may be solid diaphragms, arches, portal 
frames, trusses or bowstring girders. For shells with 
large chord widths, it is advantageous to have trusses 
in the form of arches, trusses or bowstring girder. 


11.1.1 Traverses may be placed below or above the 
shells. Where a clear soffit is required, especially to 
facilitate the use of movable formwork, they may be 
in the form of upstand ribs. 


11.1.2 The simplest diaphragms for folded plates are 
rectangular beams with depth equal to the height of 
the plate. The diaphragms are subject to the action 
of the plate loads on one-half of the span of the 
folded plate. 


11.2 Load on Traverses 


Traverses shall be designed to carry, in addition to 
their own weight, reactions transferred from the 
shell in the form of shear forces, and the loads 
directly acting on them. For preliminary trial 
designs, however, the total load on half the span of 
the structure may be considered as a uniformly 
distributed vertical load on the diaphragm. 


11.3 Design 


The shear forces transferred on to the end frames 
from the shell shall be resolved into vertical and 
horizontal components and the analysis made by the 
usual methods. Owing to the monolithic connection 
between the traverse and the shell, the latter 
participates in the bending action of the traverse. 
The effective width of a cylindrical shell that acts 
along with the traverse may be assumed as 
0.38VR. d to 0.76N R.d on either side in the case of 
intermediate traverses and on one side in the case of 
end ones; the higher value being applicable to an 
infinitely rigid rib that can prevent the shell from 
rotating and the lower value to a flexible rib. Where 


IS 2210 : 2023 


solid diaphragm traverses are used, adequate 
reinforcement to distribute shrinkage cracking shall 
be provided throughout the area of the traverses. 


11.3.1 In the design of tied arches, it may be 
necessary to determine the elastic extension of the 
tie member due to tension and the consequent effect 
on the horizontal thrust on the arch. 


11.3.2 The bottom member of a bowstring girder, or 
the tie in the case of a tied arch, is usually subjected 
to heavy tension. Welding or the provision of 
threaded sleeve couplings (see of IS 456) or laps 
may be used for joints in the reinforcement rods. 
Where lapping is done, the length of the overlap 
shall be as specified in the relevant clause of IS 456 
and the composite tension shall be restricted to 
0.1 fa, where fa is the characteristics cube strength 
of concrete at 28 days. Where the composite tension 
exceeds 0.1 fx, the entire length of the lap shall be 
bound by a helical binder of 6 mm diameter at a 
pitch not exceeding 75 mm. The joints in the bars 
shall always be staggered. Prestressing the tension 
member offers a simple and satisfactory solution. 
The detailing of inclined or vertical members of 
trusses or bowstring girders and suspenders of tied 
arches should be done with great care. The 
reinforcements in the tie of tied-arches shall be 
securely anchored at their ends. 


11.4 The traverses may be hinged to the columns, 
except where the traverses and columns are designed 
as one unit, such as in a portal frame. Provision shall 
be made in the design of columns to allow for the 
expansion or contraction of traverses due to 
temperature changes. 


12 DESIGN OF EDGE BEAMS 


12.1 Edge beams stiffen the shell edges and act 
together with the shell in carrying the load of the 
supporting system. They can either be vertical or 
horizontal. Vertical beams are usually employed in 
long cylindrical shells wherein the cylindrical action 
is predominant. Horizontal beams are employed in 
short cylindrical shells where transverse arch action 
is predominant. It is preferable to completely isolate 
the structural system of the shell structure without 
adding any other structure to it. 


In most of the shell forms, edge beams form part of 
the shell structure itself. An analysis of the shell 
structure is carried out along with the edge beam. 
Analysis and design of edge beams should ensure 
compatibility of boundary conditions at the shell 
edge. Analysis should take into account the 
eccentricities, if any, between the central line of the 
shell and the edge beam. Analysis should also take 
into account the type of edge beam, interior or 
exterior, as well as supporting arrangement of the 
edge beam. 


1$ 2210: 2023 


12.1.1 Thickness 


A width of two to three times Ше thickness of the 
shell subject to a minimum of 150 mm is usually 
necessary for the edge beams. 


12.1.2 Reinforcements 


Edge beams carry most of the longitudinal tensile 
forces due to nx in the shell, and hence, main 
reinforcements have to be provided for carrying 
these forces. It may be necessary to provide many 
layers of reinforcement in the edge beam. Design of 
reinforcements should ensure that the stresses in the 
farthermost layer does not exceed the permissible 
stresses. Edge beams should also be designed for 
carrying its self-weight, live load on the part of the 
shell, wind load and horizontal forces due to 
earthquakes. 


13 DESIGN OF REINFORCEMENT 
13.1 Shells 


The ideal arrangement would be to lay the 
reinforcement in the shell to follow the isostatics, 
that is, directions of the principal stresses. However, 
for practical purposes, one of the following methods 
may be used: 


One is the diagonal grid at 45? to the axis of the 
shell, and the other the rectangular grid in which the 
reinforcing bars run parallel to the edges of the shell. 
The rectangular grid needs additional reinforcement 
at 45? near the supports to take up the tension due to 
shear. 


13.1.1 Placing of Reinforcement 


In regions of high tension, membrane reinforcement 
shall, if practical, be placed in the general directions 
of the principal tensile membrane forces. Where this 
is not practical, it shall be permitted to place 
membrane reinforcement in two or more component 
directions. 


Reinforcement required to resist shell bending 
moments shall be proportioned with due regard to 
the simultaneous action of membrane axial forces at 
the same location. Where shell reinforcement is 
required in only one face to resist bending moments, 
equal amounts shall be placed near both surfaces of 
the shell even though a reversal of bending moments 
is not indicated by the analysis. 


13.1.2 In the design of the rectangular grid for 
cylindrical shells, the reinforcement shall usually be 


divided into the following three groups: 


a) Longitudinal reinforcement to take up the 
longitudinal stress n, or mx as the case may 
be; 

b) Shear reinforcement to take up the 
principal tension caused by shear ry; and 

C) Transverse reinforcement to resist ny and 
my. 


13.1.3 Longitudinal reinforcement shall be provided 
at the junction of the shell and the traverse to resist 
the longitudinal moment mx. Where mk, is ignored in 
the analysis, nominal reinforcement shall be 
provided. 


In case of double curvature shell like dome, 
reinforcements are provided in hoop and 
meridional/longitudinal direction. However, near 
crown region (depending on size of the dome), 
reinforcements should be provided in two 
orthogonal cartesian coordinate system (square 
mesh). 


13.1.4 To ensure monolithic connection between the 
shell and the edge members, the shell reinforcement 
shall be adequately anchored into the edge members 
and traverses or vice versa by providing suitable 
bond bars from the edge members and traverses to 
lap with the shell reinforcement. 


Shell reinforcement at the junction of the shell and 
supporting members or edge members shall be 
anchored in or extended through such members at 
least 1.2 /a (development length), but not less than 
450 mm. 


13.2 Folded Plates 


13.2.1 Transverse Reinforcement 


Transverse reinforcement shall follow the cross 
section of the folded plate and shall be designed to 
resist the transverse moment. 


13.2.2 Longitudinal Reinforcement 


Longitudinal reinforcement, in general, may be 
provided to take up the longitudinal tensile stresses, 
in individual slabs. 


13.2.3 Diagonal reinforcement for shear may be 
provided. 


13.2.4 The section of the plate at its junction with 
the traverse shall be checked for shear stress caused 
by edge shear forces. 


13.2.5 Reinforcement bars shall preferably be 
placed, as closely as possible, so that the steel is well 
distributed in the body of the plate. Nominal 
reinforcement consisting of minimum 8 mm 
diameter bars may be provided in the compression 
zones at about 200 mm centre-to-centre. 


13.3 General 


The minimum reinforcement shall conform to the 
requirements of IS 456. Minimum membrane 
reinforcement corresponding to slab shrinkage and 
temperature reinforcement should be provided in at 
least two approximately orthogonal directions even 
if the calculated membrane forces are compressive 
in one or more directions. 


The area of shell tension reinforcement shall be 
limited, so that the reinforcement will yield before 
either crushing of concrete in compression or shell 
buckling can take place. 


15 


IS 2210 : 2023 


13.3.1 Diameters of Reinforcement Bars 


The following diameters of bars may be provided in 
the body of the shell. Larger diameters may be 
provided in the thickened portions, transverse and 
beams: 


a) Minimum diameter — 10 mm; and 


b) Maximum diameter — one fourth of shell 
thickness or 16 mm whichever is smaller. 


13.3.2 Spacing of Reinforcement 


The maximum spacing of reinforcement in any 
direction in the body of the shell shall be limited to 
five times the thickness of the shell and the area of 
unreinforced panel shall in no case exceed 15 times 
the square of thickness. 


NOTE — These limitations do not apply to edge members 
which are governed by IS 456. 


1$ 2210: 2023 


15 Мо. 


IS 432 


(Part 1) : 1982 


(Part 2) : 1982 


IS 456 : 2000 


IS 1343 : 2012 


IS 1566 : 1982 


IS 875 


(Part 1) : 1987 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Mild steel and medium tensile steel 
bars and hard-drawn steel wire for 
concrete reinforcement: 


Mild steel and medium tensile steel 
bars 
Hard-drawn steel wire 


Plain and reinforced concrete — Code 
of practice (fourth revision) 


Prestressed Concrete — Code of 
practice (second revision) 


Hard-drawn steel wire fabric for 
concrete reinforcement 


Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for buildings 
and structures: 


Dead loads (second revision) 


IS No. 


(Part 2) : 1987 
(Part 3) : 2015 
(Part 4) : 2021 
(Part 5) : 1987 


IS 1786 : 2008 


IS 1893 (Part 1) 
: 2016 


IS 2204 : 1962 


IS 6332 : 1984 


Title 


Live loads (second revision) 
Wind loads (third revision) 
Snow loads (third revision) 


Special loads and combinations 


(second revision) 


High strength deformed steel bars and 
wires for concrete reinforcement — 
Specification 


Criteria for earthquake resistant design 
of structures: Part 1 General provisions 
and buildings (sixth revision) 


Code of practice for construction of 
reinforced concrete shell roof 


Code of practice for construction of 
floor and roofs using precast doubly- 
curved shell units 


IS 2210 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 5.2) 


DETAILED CLASSIFICATION OF STRESSED SKIN SURFACES 


STRESSED SKIN SURFACES 


SHELLS 


SINGLY-CURVED 
DEVELOPABLE 


GAUSS CURVATURE 
ZERO MEMBRANE 
EQUATION 
PARABOLIC 


DOUBLY-CURVED 
NON-DEVELOPABLE 


OTHER SPECIAL 
TYPES 


SYNCLASTIC ANTICLASTIC 


GAUSS CURVATURE GAUSS CURVATURE 
POSITIVE MEMBRANE NEGATIVE MEMBRANE 
EQUATION EQUATION 


HYPERBOLIC 


ELLIPTIC 


PARTLY 
SYNCLASTIC & 
PARTLY 
ANTICLASTIC 


ALTERNATIVELY 
SYNCLASTIC & 
ANTICLASTIC 


MISCELLANEOUS 
TYPES 


CONICAL | CYLENDRICAL CONICAL 
SHELLS AND 


INCLUDING CYLINDRICAL 
NORTH- SHELLS 
LIGHT & 

BUTTERFLY 
SHELLS 


SHELLS RULED SHELLS RULED 
ОЕ SURFACES ОЕ SURFACES 
REVO- TRANS- 
LUTION LATION 
CORRUGATED FUNICULAR 
SHELLS SHELLS 


HYPER- 
CIRCULAR BOLOIDS 


petenda OF ONE 
SHEET, 


REVOLUTION, = HYPERBOLIC 
PARABOLOIDS, 


ETC. 
CONCOIDS 


17 


IS 2210 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 9.2.1.3, 9.2.2.1, 9.2.2.2 and 9.2.3.1) 


TABLES AND THE METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF CIRCULAR CYLINDRICAL SHELLS AND 
FOLDED PLATES 


C-1 TABLES FOR THE ANALYSIS 
CIRCULAR CYLINDRICAL SHELLS 


C-1.1 Tables given in the ASCE Manual of 
Engineering Practice No. 31 entitled "Design of 
Cylindrical Concrete Shell Roofs', are based on a 
rigorous analytical method and are accurate enough 
for design of shells of all proportions. However, as 
values corresponding only to two ratios of R/d are 
given, interpolation involved for ratios does not give 
accurate results. A subsequent publication by the 
Portland Cement Association, Chicago, entitled 
‘Coefficients for Design of Cylindrical Concrete 
Shell Roofs', gives the coefficients for 4 values of 
R/d making interpolation easier. 


C-1.2 Tables given in 'Circular Cylindrical Shells' 
by Rudiger and Urban (Published by E.G. Teubner 
Verlagsgeselbchaft, Leipzig, 1955) are based on the 


Donnel-Karman-Jenkins Method. These are 
particularly accurate for shells with L/R « т. 


C-2 BEAM METHOD 


C-2.1 This method, due to Lundgren, consists of two 
parts. In the first, known as the 'beam calculation', 
the shell is treated as a beam of curved cross section 
spanning between the traverses and the longitudinal 
stress Tx and the shear stress S are determined. In the 
second, known as the ‘arch calculation’, a unit length 
of the shell is treated as an arch subject to the action 
of applied loads and specific shear which is defined 
as the rate of change of shear or 0S/0x. This 
calculation yields the transverse stress T and the 
transverse moment My. For a detailed treatment, 
reference may be made to 'Cylindrical Shells' Vol I, 
by H. Lundgren published by the Danish Technical 
Press, the Institution of Danish Civil Engineers, 
Copenhagen, 1949. 


ANNEX D 
(Clauses 9.3.1, 9.3.3.1 and 9.3.4) 
GOVERNING EQUATIONS FOR ANALYSIS OF DOUBLY-CURVED SHELLS 


D-1 MEMBRANE ANALYSIS 


D-1.1 Real and Projected Forces and Stress 
Resultant 


For membrane analysis of doubly-curved shells, it is 
usual to deal with projected stress resultants rp, пур 
and ny, instead of real stress resultants nx, ny and 
пху. The real and projected stress resultants are 
related as follows: 


1+р? 
Ny = Тур i+ @ 
Е 1+9 
ny = Nyp T+p2 and 
Пху = Пхур 


Similarly, the real forces W,, W, апа W, on shell per 
unit area on its surface with x, y and z-directions are 
replaced by the fictitious forces X, Y and Z and the 
relationships between them are as follows: 


X =W,/1+ p? +q? 


Y=W,/1+p?+q? and 
Z = W,/ 1 + p2 + д? 


D-1.2 Equilibrium Equations 


The three equations of equilibrium can now be 
written using the projected stress resultants and 
fictitious forces as follows: 


Onxp Onxyp = 
= T +Х=0 ...(1) 
PUB. SR Ly — and ...(2) 
ду дх 

Тїр + 25пхур + Втр = px +q -Z as) 


D-1.3 Analysis Using Stress Function 


Analysis of the equations of equilibrium is 
simplified by using a stress function @ which 
reduces the three equations to one. The stress 
function @ is related to the projected stress 


resultants as follows: 


8?0 
xp — ду? ES [X d, 
— 020 
пур = 3: J Y dy 
and 
— l4 
уур = Gray .. (4) 


On introducing the stress function, the third 
equilibrium equation reduces to the following: 


920 920 920 
d 5 PR ЕЗ p Ies] 


pX +qY — Z +r | Xdx +t [Үау 


NC 


The homogeneous part of the partial differential 
equation given above will be of the elliptic, parabola 


or hyperbolic type depending upon whether 
s? -r.t $ 0 , which is also the test for classifying 
shells as synclastic, developable or anticlastic. 


D-2 BENDING ANALYSIS 


D-2.1 Bending analysis is necessary for shallow 
doubly-curved shells. For shallow shells under 
vertical loading, this would involve the solution, of 
two partial simultaneous equations given below: 


a) for shells of variable curvature: 
д ð д? 


V*F + t + п =0 
дх ax ^ дхду дуду id 
and in (6) 


д д д? д д 
DV*w — 2 F—Z=0 


1 
Eca 


Әх дх SOMOS ay ду 


b) For shells of constant curvature, that is, for 
shells for which r, s and f are constant, 
above equations simplify to: 


IS 2210 : 2023 


: VF + пац 2 АА a =0 
Ea Ox? 5 дхду Т ду? 
апа (7) 
DV“ "i 0007 ae Z=0 
w Ox? $ 9хду Т ду? 
where 
F = Stress function which gives in-plane 
stresses, when bending is also 
considered; 


w - Deflection along z-axis; 
D = Flexural rigidity = E. d?/( 12(1-v2)); 


Z = Vertical load per unit area of shell surface, 
assumed positive in the positive direction 
of Z-axis; 


v = Poisson ratio; and 
r,s and t are curvature as defined in 4.1. 
The equations given above are based on the 
co-ordinate system in Fig. 9. 


D-2.2 Bending Stress Resultants 


From the values of F and w satisfying equations (6) 
or (7), the stress resultants may be obtained from the 
following relations: 


д?Е 
x= ду? 
д?Е 
yY T gx? 
Е д?Е 
^. дхду 
д?уу д?уу 
mx = D ur У у? 
-— 0?w " 0?w 
My = ду? у дх? 
0?w 
my, = -D(1—-v) ахду 


IS 2210 : 2023 


My 


FIG. 9 SIGN CONVENTION FOR STRESSES AND MOMENTS IN A SHELL ELEMENT 


20 


IS 2210: 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 9.1.2) 


GENERAL SOLUTION FOR TWO-WAY SLABS, WALLS AND SHELL ELEMENTS 


E-1 GENERAL 


This Section deals with plate and shell type elements 
and sub-elements where out of plane loading effects 
as well as in plane loading effects are present. The 
permissible simplifications for separating in plane 
and out of plane effects and designing for the same 
are given. А method of providing reinforcement for 
in plane effects is indicated. For use of three 
dimensional elements as bridge elements (For 
example, shell elements as in case of fish-belly 
superstructure) apart from designing for sectional 
strength, overall and local buckling checks may be 
required. Specialist literature may be referred for the 
same. 


E-2 ONE-WAY AND TWO-WAY SLABS AND 
WALLS 


For predominantly transverse loads acting 
perpendicular to the plane of the slab, where primary 
overall in plane tensile or compressive stress fields 
are absent, the slabs / walls can be designed using 
conventional plate bending analysis and providing 
ultimate strength in bending and shear in one and/or 
two orthogonal directions as required by such 
analysis. Bridge deck slabs, retaining walls resisting 
lateral earth pressures etc., are the typical examples. 


Any rational method of analysis which does not 
permit more than 15 percent redistribution of peak 
bending moments over supports can be used. The 
ultimate strength methods based on local yielding 
(for example, yield line method) are not permitted. 
However, for calculating resistance to accidental 
impact loads (for example, vehicular or barge 
impacts), use of such methods is permitted for which 
specialist literature may be referred. 


E-3 SUB-ELEMENTS OF BOX STRUCTURES 


a) Where box type structure resists the overall 
longitudinal bending, shear and torsional 
effects, significant in-plane longitudinal 
Stresses are present in its sub-elements, 
which coexist with the local out of plane 
loading, for example, effects due to self 
weight, live loads, intermediate 
prestressing anchorages etc. 


b) Such elements can be designed primarily 
for in-plane effects arising from overall 
bending, shear and torsion in longitudinal 
direction. In transverse direction they are 
designed for out of plane loading effects. 


21 


c) If effects of out-of-plane loading are 
present in the same direction as of the 
overall in-plane tensions/compressions, 
these elements should be locally checked 
for combined effect of in-plane forces, and 
out of plane bending moments and shears. 


E-4 GENERAL SOLUTION FOR TWO-WAY 
SLABS, WALLS AND SHELL ELEMENTS 


For plate type elements having complex geometry 
and edge conditions and having in-plane as well as 
out-of-plane (transverse) effects due to loading, the 
resultant stress fields may be obtained by use of 
suitable finite elements in the FEM analysis. The 
analysis yields resultant stresses which represent 
combined effects of in-plane membrane stresses and 
local bending effects. These stress resultants can be 
directly used to design tensile reinforcement and for 
verifying safety in compression. А general method 
of design using sandwich model given in Annex F 
may be referred. Alternatively, the stresses can be 
converted to equivalent axial forces and bending 
effects in orthogonal directions and used for 
designing the sections following conventional 
methods given in E-4.1, E-4.2 and E-4.3. 


E-4.1 Simplified Design for Tensile 
Reinforcement for Orthogonal In-Plane Effects 


The following simplified method may be used for 
proportioning of tensile reinforcement based on the 
in-plane stresses Ogax > Ogay and tgaxy 


a) Compressive stresses should be taken as 
positive, with ока, > Ogay, and the 
direction of reinforcement should coincide 
with the x and y axes. 


b) The tensile strengths fig, and Хау 
provided by reinforcement should be 
determined from: 


Рах = ру. fya and fray = Dy. fya 


Where px and py are the geometric 
reinforcement ratios, along the x and y axes 
respectively. 


c) In locations where ogg, and okay are both 
compressive and  Oggy.Ogay > TËaxy° 
design reinforcement is not required. 
However, the maximum compressive stress 


should not exceed fea. 


IS 2210 : 2023 


d) In locations where ogay is tensile, or 


2 . + 
Ogdx.Cgdy S T&axy reinforcement 15 


required. 


e) The optimum reinforcement, indicated by 
superscript () and placed in directions of 
concerned principal stresses are 
determined by the following equations: 


For OEdx < [ткаху| 


F vax = [таху| — Оках ...(9) 

f'tay = [ткаху| — беду ..(10) 

Oca S 2|Твау| (11) 

For Овах > [тєаху| 

Рах = 0 (12) 
Й TËdxy 

f tax =, Edy ..(13) 

2 
Оса = Оках (1 + (2) ) (14) 


The concrete stress oca, should not exceed v. fca The 
minimum reinforcement is obtained if the direction 
of reinforcement is identical to the direction of 
principal stresses, where value of v is obtained from 
the equation is given below: 


v= 0.6 [1 — fx 
310 


where, fek is in MPa. 


Alternatively, for the general case the necessary 
reinforcement and the concrete stress can be 
determined by: 


Љах = [ткаху|соїӨ — Оках ..(15) 
fy = |Teaxy|/cotð — OFdy ..(16) 
oca = |teaxy| (coto + ——) 017) 


22 


where (Ө) 15 ће angle of ће concrete compressive 
stress to the x-axis. The value of cot (8) shall be 
chosen to avoid compressive value of fu. 


NOTES 


1 In order to avoid unacceptable cracks for the serviceability 
state, and to ensure the required deformation capacity for 
the ultimate limit state, the reinforcement derived from 
equations (15) and (16) for each direction should not be more 
than thrice and not less than half the reinforcement 
determined by equations (9) and (10) or, alternatively, 
from equations (12) and (13). These limitations are 
expressed by: 


p^ fax S fax € 2f'uay and 1/, f'tay < fay < 2f'tay 


2 The reinforcement should be fully anchored at all free 
edges. 


E-4.2 Simplified Design for 
Orthogonal Direction 


Bending in 


The slab (wall) subjected to orthogonal bending 
effects is substituted by two half plates usually 
representing the compression and tensile zones of 
the element. 


The stresses in compressive portions are checked by 
verifying that the resultant principle compressive 
stress is within the allowable limits. 


The half plate carrying tensile stresses in orthogonal 
directions is converted to orthogonal mesh of steel 
following method described in E-4.1. 


The out of plane shear forces are similarly converted 
to principle bending directions and the maximum 
shear. 


E-4.3 Simplified Design of Combined In-Plane 
Forces and Out of Plane Bending and Shears 


The plate is substituted by a sandwiched plate of the 
same thickness consisting of three layers of 1/34 
thickness. The central 1/3"! thickness is designed to 
carry in-plane forces using methods of E-4.1. 


The outer two layers are designed to resist tensile 
and compressive fields with appropriate lever-arm 
to develop resistance to bending and shear in two 
directions as per E-4.2. 


IS 2210: 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 9.1.2 and E-4) 
GUIDE TO FINITE ELEMENT MODELING OF REINFORCED CONCRETE STRUCTURES 


F-1 SANDWICH MODEL FOR THE 
DIMENSIONING OF SHELL ELEMENTS 


The eight stress resultants acting on a shell element, 
Fig. 10A, can be resisted by a sandwich model. In 
this model the bending and twisting moments т, 
ту, Mxy as well as the in-plane forces nx, ny, пху are 
attributed to the sandwich covers, while the 
sandwich core resists the transverse shear forces vx, 
vy (illustrated in Fig. 10B). Thus, the sandwich 
model represents a lower bound solution with its 
basis in plasticity theory. 


The sandwich core transfers the principal transverse 

shear force vy — [v2 +v? in the direction фо = 
-1 

tan (>, / uy). 


If the transverse shear forces are small, that is, 
nominal shear stresses uo / d, are below the nominal 
shear cracking resistance , Tcrea, the core will 
remain uncracked and the forces in the bottom and 
top sandwich covers follow directly as: 


_ mx nx 
Nx infsup = + m quc 
(uncracked core, vo /d, > Boxen) 

— ту пу sas (1 8) 
Ny infsup = + гта к 


mx nx 
= + y y 


Nn. : 
xy infsup dy 2 


If the principal transverse shear force Vo = 
[vz + v? is high enough to produce cracking of the 


sandwich core, the latter can be treated like the web 
of a girder of flanged cross-section running in 
direction qo (see Fig. 10). The corresponding tensile 
forces in the element plane must be resisted by the 
sandwich covers in addition to the forces given by 
equation (18), resulting in the following total forces 
in the sandwich covers. 


Nx u£ 
2 2votan8 


п. 


ау 


x inf,sup 


ny vy 
2 2vgtan8 he (19) 
(cracked core, 0/4, = Tored) 


m 
= y 
ny infsup — t dy + 


п. 


_ | Тху | Пху VxVy 
xyinfsup — t dy Ж 


2 2vgtan8 


10A SHELL ELEMENT 


10B LAYER FORCES 


IS 2210 : 2023 


10C TRANSFER OF TRANSVERSE SHEAR FORCE IN UNCRACKED AND CRACKED CORE 


FIG. 10 SANDWICH MODEL 


According to equations (18) and (19), a state of 
plane stress is obtained in the sandwich covers, and 
they can be dimensioned as membrane elements. 
For the case of failure governed by yielding of the 
reinforcement with the concrete remaining elastic in 
both sandwich covers, the force per unit width in the 


reinforcement in the x and y directions are 
determined with: 
2 
> mx nx vx Myy пху VxVy | 
asxfy а, T 2 2vgtan8 dy p 2 2vgtan8 
m. п. ve т; n. VxV 
> my y y —1 |™Mxy xy x Vy | 
Asy fy = dy + 2 + mutans: U k dy + 2 2votan8 
-..(20) 
a 
D > Hx nx vx П |-= пху UxVy | 
a'sxfy T aly + 2 Ë Sotana T k dy + 2 T 2votanð 
] —my улуу 19 IA -2 пху | _ xy | 
a'syfy = а, m 2 T 2vgtan8 +k dy B 2 E 2vgtan8 
where, as and a's are the bottom and top 


reinforcement areas per unit width of the slab, 
respectively. 


For an uncracked core, that is vo/d, < terea, the 
terms in equation (20) containing v, or vy can be 
omitted and no transverse shear reinforcement is 
required. That is r, = 0. If the core is cracked, 
Uo / d, > t req, transverse reinforcement of 


votan8 


pz — dyfy „Ор 

15 required for the соге to carry transverse ѕһеаг 
force. In equations (18) to (21), dy is the effective 
depth of the membrane forces in the sandwich 
covers, k апа K' are, arbitrary positive factors and 
theta (0) is the inclination of the diagonal 
compression field in the sandwich core. Different 
values of k and k' can be adopted for each element of 
a shell or slab, avoiding abrupt changes or providing 
sufficient 


24 


development length in order to anchor the 
differential forces in the reinforcement while in 
choosing the inclination angle, theta (0). In this 
regard similar considerations apply as in the design 
of membranes. 


For simplicity in design practice using, k = К = 1, 
and theta (Ө) = 45° often provides for a good 
solution. 


Equation (20) is valid only if the concrete in the 
sandwich covers does not crush. In order to satisfy 
this condition, the thickness of the sandwich 
covers, and consequently the effective depth dy, 
should be chosen such that 


feting 2 ај + asyfy T) (Meine + ny inr) 


22) 


fctsup = Q xf, + a' sy fy Ер (n, sup + ny sup) 


Where, fis; and tsup = thickness of bottom and top 
sandwich cover and f. = effective concrete 
compressive strength, respectively. Substituting 
equations (19) and (20) in equation (21), this can be 
written as: 


Абе = (k + k 1) 


Myy , Пху VxUy 
ys ip EM 
dy 2 


2vgtan8 
(23) 
my, mn UU 
t m (ka к) |2 Puy Vy 
fetsup 2 (k + K?) а, t 2vgtan0 


As a first and often sufficient approximation, dv can 
be chosen such that the middle planes of each 
sandwich cover coincides with the centre between 
its two reinforcement layers. 


The threshold value т, reafor considering cracked or 
uncracked behaviour of the sandwich core should be 
carefully selected. Basically it could be taken as the 
nominal shear strength of the slab or shell without 


transverse reinforcement, which, due to size effect, 
varies with the element thickness; for 
example, Ттетеа = feta for membrane shear 
according to [CEB-FIP (1990)]. Since the provision 
of transverse reinforcement is quite time- 
consuming, it is advisable to choose the element 
thickness such that, apart from zones where 
concentrated forces are introduced, no transverse 
reinforcement is required. 


In cases with high axial compression nx, ny or high 
in-plane shear forces nxy, it is possible to attribute 
part of these forces to the sandwich core and then, 
strictly speaking, the concrete compression in the 
sandwich core must be checked taking into account 
the combined action of (nx, ny, пху) and vo. The case 
of high axial compression is likely to occur if 
prestressing is treated as forces acting on the 
structure. However, this is beyond the scope of this 
report. 


F-2 DIMENSIONING OF SLAB AND SHELL 
ELEMENTS IN DESIGN PRACTICE 


The design equations derived from the sandwich 
model [equations (20) and (21)] are simple and 
transparent, allowing for a straightforward 
dimensioning of in-plane as well as transverse 
reinforcement in the general case of a shell element 
subjected to eight independent stress resultants. In 
the special case of slabs and neglecting transverse 
shear forces, equation (20) is equivalent to the 
normal moment yield criterion [equation (13)] if 
exact values are taken for d,. 


25 


IS 2210 : 2023 


The incorporation of equations (20) and (21) into a 
finite element program for shells does not present 
any more difficulties than the implementation of the 
normal moment yield criterion for the dimensioning 
of reinforcement, a post-processing option which is 
already offered by a number of commercial 
programs today (often called ‘Wood-Armer’ 
moments). 


Usually, no explicit check of the assumed failure 
mode is made in slabs, assuming implicitly that the 
reinforcement ratios obtained are small enough to 
avoid concrete crushing. While this condition is 
usually satisfied in slabs, a check of the assumed 
failure mode should always be carried out for shells, 
particularly for elements subjected to significant 
axial compression or cases with high reinforcement 
ratios. Thus, it is advisable to implement the 
corresponding check of concrete resistance 
according to equation (22) together with 
equations (20) and (21). 


Transverse shear forces obtained from a finite 
element calculation will generally be less accurate 
than bending and twisting moments, which can be 
rewritten as, vx = mxx + mxy.y and vy = туу + myx.x, 
transverse shear forces are derivatives of the 
bending and twisting moments. Thus, in order to get 
reasonable results, a finer element mesh is required 
when using equations (20) and (21) in their general 
form than in cases where transverse shear forces can 
be neglected a priori. 


IS 2210 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 


RESPONSE TRANSFORMATION OF RESPONSE FROM NUMERICAL METHODS 


G-1 GENERAL 


This Annex deals with the suggested methodology 
for estimating design reinforcement, based on finite 
element methods, or other numerical techniques. 


With the advent use of numerical methods, such as, 
finite element analysis, finite difference analysis, 
etc, responses obtained from these methods should 
be properly accounted, while evaluating final design 
of plates and shells. In-plane forces obtained along 
the principal directions of finite elements may be 
transformed to obtain principal directions, to have 
severe effect due to applied loading. Principal 
directions of the forces may not coincide with the 
orthogonal or non-orthogonal principal directions of 
finite elements and directions of reinforcement to be 
provided within the shell. 


Wood's criterion is one of the acceptable methods to 
transform elemental responses to principal 
directions. Final reinforcement direction may not 
coincide with the principal directions. Thus, 
reinforcement may be estimated in principal 
directions, and then transformed to orthogonal 
directions (for folded plates) or meridional and 
circumferential directions (for single or double 
curved shell). 


Out of various available methods for estimating 
reinforcement in plates and shells, two methods are 
presented in G-2 and G-3. 


G-2 ANALYTICAL METHOD 


G-2.1 The method of calculating plate and shell 
reinforcement is based on the conception presented 
in the A. Capra and J. F. Maury's article titled 
"Calcul automatique du ferrailage optimal des 
plaques et coques en beton arme", Annales de 
l'Institut Technique du Batiment et des Travaux 
Publics, No. 367, December 1978. 


G-2.2 Calculation Procedure 


If the reinforcement values Ax and А, 
(corresponding to two perpendicular directions 'x' 
and 'y') are given, an equivalent reinforcement in 
any other direction (n) according to the following 
formula: У | 
A, = Ay * cos? (a) + Ay * sin? (a) 

where 'a' is an angle included between the direction 
'х' and the direction 'n'. 


26 


The values of sectional forces (moments and 
membrane forces) M, , Nn may be obtained from the 
following transformational formulas, 


M, = M, * cos? (a) + My * sin? (a) — Myy 
* sin?(2a) 


N, = N, * cos? (a) + Ny * sin? (a) — Nyy 
* sin? (2a) 


Thus, the below-presented inequality formulates the 
condition of correct reinforcement. The 
reinforcement that is able to carry the internal forces 
in an arbitrary section, 


Ау * со52(а) + Ay * sin?(@) = A, > Ø (My, Nn) 


where, Ø (Mn, N) refers to the value of 
reinforcement required to carry the forces calculated 
for the direction 'n' - Mn, Nn. 


Inequality 
Ау * cos^(a) + Ay * sin? (a) > Ø (My, Nn) 


This determines on the plane (Ax, Ay) the area of 
'admissible' values of reinforcement Ax, Ay (half- 
plane). If such area is determined for a sufficiently 
'dense' set of directions n (control is performed every 
10), one obtains the area of admissible values Ax, Ay. 


The adopted reinforcement is the minimal 
reinforcement which yields the minimal sum of 
surfaces Ax + Ay. 


If a structure type or selection of calculation options 
causes reduction of internal forces, the 
reinforcement is calculated based on the following: 


а) M, moments. Plate structure or simple 
bending option in a shell structure; 


b) Na membrane forces. Plane stress structure 
or compression/tension option in a shell 
structure; and 


c) Complete set of М», N. forces. Bending + 


compression/tension option in а shell 
structure. 
Note that in calculations of unidirectional 


reinforcement, the analytical method is limited to 
calculating the reinforcement only for the main 
reinforcement direction, without dividing it into n 
directions. A plate is designed only for ће Мх and 
Nx set of forces. 


G-3 WOOD AND ARMER METHOD 


G-3.1 Wood and Armer method (the European code 
supplement [ENV 1992-1-1 EC2 Design of 
Concrete Structures - Annex 2, point A.2.8 
Reinforcement in Slabs] can be used for 
transformation of responses. The conception of 
determining equivalent moment is authored by 
Wood and Armer. Details concerning the method 
can be found, for instance, in R.H. Wood, "The 
reinforcement of slabs in accordance with a pre- 
determined field of moments", Concrete, February 
1968, August 1968 (correspondence)]. 


G-3.2 Calculation Procedure 


When calculating reinforcement of a plate structure 
or switching on the option of panel design for 
simple bending in a shell structure, design moments 
are calculated according to the method by Wood 
and Armer. 

a) Fora selected directions x and y, two types 
of design moments M* are calculated: the 
lower ones (positive, causing mainly 
tension in the bottom parts) and the upper 
ones (negative, causing tension in the upper 
parts). The general procedure takes the 
following form: 


1) Determination of the 'lower' moments 
Mxa*, Mya* 


Mxa* = Mx + [Muy | 
Mya* = Му+ |Мху | 


However, if Мх < -|Mxy| (that is, the 
calculated Mxa* < 0) 


Мха* = 0 
Mya * =Му+ |Мху *Mxy /Mx |. 


Similarly, when My < -|Msy | (that is, the 
calculated Mya * < 0) — (*) 


Mxa* = Мх+ |Мху *Муу /Му | > (*) 
Mya * = 0 — (*) 


If any of these obtained moments Мха*, 
Mya* is smaller than zero, you should 
assume zero (the design moments for 
tension in the upper layers are determined 
further on in the text). 


2) Determination of the 'upper' moments Mxg*, 
Myg * 


Msxg* = Mx- |Мху | 
Myg* = My- |Mxy | 


If Mx? |Мху | (that is, the calculated Mxg* 
> 0) > (*) 


Ma =0 — (5) 


27 


IS 2210 : 2023 


Мув* = Му- |Mxy*Mxy/Mx| = (*) 


Similarly, when My > |Mxy| (that is, the 
calculated Myg * > 0) 


Msxg* = Mx- |Мху *Myy /Му | 
Myg* = 0 


If any of these obtained moments Mxg*, Myg* is 
greater than zero, assume zero (such moments 
would design the lower reinforcements, which 
is already guaranteed by the formerly calculated 
‘lower' moments Mxa*, Mya*). 


Analogously, design forces are calculated from 
the formulas given below for a plane stress 
structure or for the activated option of panel 
design for compression/ tension in a shell 
structure. 


b) For the selected directions x and y, two 
types of design forces N* are calculated: 
the tensile (positive, causing main tension 
in a section) and the compressive (negative, 
causing section compression). The general 
procedure takes the following form: 


1) Calculation of 'tensile' forces Nxr*, Nyr* 
Мх* = №+ IN, | 
Nyr = Ny+ INxy | 


However, if Nx« -|Nxy| (that is, 
calculated Nxa* « 0) 


Мхг* = 0 
Nyc* = Ny |Мху * Мху/Мх |. 
Similarly, if Ny« -|Nx,| (that is, 
calculated Ny. * < 0) — (*) 
Ny* = Nx+ |Мху *Nxy / Ny | > (*) 
Nyr* = 0 — (*) 


If any of these obtained forces Nxa*, 
Nya* is less than zero, assume these as 
zero value (forces designing a section 
by reinforcement compression are 
determined further on). 


b) Calculation of 'compressive' forces Nxs*, 
Nys * 


№ * = Nx- |Nxy | 

Nys * = Ny- (Ау | 
However, if Nx> |Nxy| (that is, calculated 
Ny * > 0)  (*) 

М%* = 0 > (*) 


IS 2210 : 2023 


Nys a= Ny - [Nxy * Ny /Nx | => (*) 


Similarly, if Ny > |Nsy | (that is, calculated 


Муз * > 0) 
Nxs * = Nx- |Мху *Nsxy/Ny| 
Nys * = 0 


If any of these obtained forces Nxs*, Nys* is greater 
than zero, assume these zero as value (such forces 
design a section by reinforcement tension, which is 
already guaranteed by the tensile forces Nxr*, Nyr* 
calculated earlier). 


28 


For complex stresses (shells with the activated 
option of panel design for bending + compression/ 
tension) with bending moments (Max, Mxy , Myy ) and 
membrane forces (Nx, Му, Nyy) acting 
simultaneously, there is no simplified algorithm 
devised. Since it is often the case that the modeled 
shells work almost as plates (with slight membrane 
forces acting), therefore the possibility to calculate 
moments Mya*, Mya* according to the method 
presented still remains and these design moments 
are superimposed with longitudinal forces Nxx, Nyy . 


IS 2210 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Special Structures Sectional Committee, CED 38 


Organization 


VMS Consulants Private Limited, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Assystem Stup Consultants Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineers Association of India, 
New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 


Gammon Engineers and Contractors Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


GE Power India Private Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural 


New Delhi 


Engineers, 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 


29 


Representative(s) 
MS ALPA SHETH (Chairperson) 
DR DEVDAS MENON (Former Chairperson) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR ANIMESH DAS 


SHRI А. К. RAJDEV 
SHRI SAUROBH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR ACHAL K. MITTAL 
SHRI S. K. SINGH (Alternate) 


DR RAJEEV GOEL 
SHRI G. K. SAHU (Alternate) 


DR S. PARIVALLAL 
DR AMAR PRAKASH (Alternate I) 
DR В. ARUN SUNDARAM (Alternate П) 
DR P. HARIKRISHNA (Alternate III) 


SHRI S. K. SHARMA 
SHRI R. S. RAPERIA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
DR SUDIP PAUL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SANJAY ARORA 


SHRI MANOJ MITTAL 
SHRI AMAN DEEP GARG 


SHRI N. P. RAJAMANE 
DR RAVI SINHA 
DR SIDDHARTHA GHOSH 


DR DIPTI RANJAN SAHOO 
DR A. K. JAIN (Alternate) 


DR SUDHIR MISRA 
DR NIHAR RANJAN PATRA (Alternate) 


IS 2210 : 2023 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society for Structural Engineers, Mumbai 


Invictus Consultancy Services, Mumbai 


Institute for Steel Development & Growth, Kolkata 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


M. N. Dastur Company Private Limited, Kolkata 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


National Institute of Technology Karnataka, 
Surathkal 


National Disaster 
New Delhi 


Management ^ Authority, 


NBCC (India) Limited, New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, 
Mumbai 


Paharpur Cooling Tower Limited, Kolkata 


Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 


Nagpur 


VMS Consulants Private Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity [C-401, Greenfield tower CHS, 
Kadamwadi, Vakola Santacruz (east), Mumbai] 


30 


Representative(s) 
DR A. MEHAR PRASAD 
DR C. V. К. MURTY (Alternate D 


DR ARUL JAYACHANDRAN (Alternate IT) 
DR AMLAN K. SENGUPTA (Alternate III) 


DR PRAMOD KUMAR GUPTA 
DR M. A. IQBAL (Alternate) 


DR MOHUA CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR 


SHRI A. S. OUNDHAKAR 


SHRI ARIJT GUHA 
SHRI P. L. RAO (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI TATHAGATA DASGUPTA 
SHRI KALYAN GOSWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI J. K. JHA 
SHRI ABHINAV BHARAT JHA (Alternate) 


DR B. R. JAYALEKSHMI 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI R. P. MISHRA 
SHRI NAND KISHOR RAM (Alternate) 


SHRI H. K. RAMKUMAR 
DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI G. PRABHAKAR 


SHRI SANTANU CHATTERJEE 
SHRI RAJAT BHAUMIK (Alternate) 


PROF MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI VINAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR O. R. JAISWAL 
DR RATNESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


ER EJAZ KHAN 


SHRI V. N. HEGGADE 


IS 2210 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (36 old Sneh Nagar, Wardha DR L. K. JAIN 
Road, Nagpur) 


In Personal Capacity (Block 2, Flat 2A, Rani DR V. KALYANARAMAN 
Meyyammai Towers, MRC Nagar, RA Puram, 
Chennai) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 


AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) (REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Shell, Plates and Arches Subcommiittee, CED 38:4 


Organization Representative(s) 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai SHRI G. PRABHAKAR (Convener) 
SHRI MANOJ K. NEMA 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai DR RAMANJANYULU 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai DR A. MEHAR PRASAD 
Larsen & Toubro ECC, Chennai SHRI S. SAHA 


SHRIC. Y. SHIVAJI 


National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal DR B. R. JAYALEKSHMI 


SRM University, Kattankulathur DR K. S. SATYANARAYANAN 
DR UMAMAHESHWARI 


3l 


(Continued from second cover) 


Inthe formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in this field in the country. 
For this purpose, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


ACI 318 : 2019 Building code requirements for structural concrete and commentary (American Concrete 
Institute) 


АСТ 334.1 Concrete Shell Structures — Practice and Commentary (American Concrete Institute) 


FIB Bulletin 45 — Practitioner's guide to finite element modelling of reinforced concrete structures (The 
International Federation for Structural Concrete) 


IRC 112: 2011 Code of practice for concrete road bridges (Indian Road Congress) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS2:2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 38 (18507). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


