IS 14330 : 1996 ( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

GROUND WATER INVESTIGATION FOR HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES - GUIDELINES

ICS

93.160

0 BIS 1996

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS h4ANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG
NEW DELHI
July 1996

110002 Price Group 3

Geological Investigation and Sub-surface Exploration Sectional Committee, RVD 5

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geological Investigation and Sub-surface Exploration Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Ground water is of vital importance to the civil engineers not only as a source of water supply but as a controlling factor in all drainage operations, foundation excavations, reservoir storage, etc. Despite this importance, ground water is the most neglected aspect in civil engineering constructions especially hydraulic structures. If the ground water data are not considered properly or if these are not obtained with due care and caution, it may lead to damage or even failure of thehydrological structure. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14330 : 1996

Indian standard

GROUND WATER INVESTIGATION FOR HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES - GUIDELINES
1 SCOPE Thisstandard deals with various aspects which have to be considered while carrying out ground water investigation for hydraulic structures. 2 REFERENCE The Indian standard 693.5 : 1973 `Method for dcterminationofwater level in a bore hole' is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 ENGINEERING CONSIDERATIONS
3.1 Dam Foundations

b)

It will create appreciable pore pressure and thereby reducing the shear strength of the slope forming material, and c) It will tend to weaken weaker kinds of rock and unconsolidated material.

These cfrects lead to the conclusion that slides normally occour in wet weather and the drainage system offers an effective remedy for preventing landslides. 4 GEOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS 4.1 The geological aspects as given in 4.2 to 4.6 should be considered for carrying out systematic investigation for ground water at the site of any hydraulic structure. 4.2 Influence of the Nature of Rock 4.2.1 Rocks seldom show the same water bearing qualities in different regions. The two most important properties which make a rockmass an aquifer of any importance are porosity and permeability. Ground water occurs in consolidated rock materials (hard rock) and in loose unconsolidated materials (soft rock). Any type of rock that is sedimentary, igneous or mctamporphic, whether consolidated or unconsolidated, may form an aquifer if it is sufficiently porous and permeable. Based on these factors of porosity and permeability, the water bearing properties of the more common rock groups arc discussed in 4.2.1.1 to 4.2.1.3. 4.2.1.1 Sedimentary rocks - Since these materials are both porous and pervious they may act as most ideal-water bearing strata. do not contain any ground water. Hard shales may yield water at joints.

Prior to excavation of the foundation of any hydraulic structure, it is essential to have a knowledge of the ground water distribution in the area. When the water table is higher than the recommended depths of cut-off/foundation, especially when thick pervious unconsolidated strata like sand and gravel is present, the problem of dewateringduringexcavationshould bcanticipated in advance. The possibilities of presence of artesian water should also be studied by observing the water table and the geological data and suitable measures for depressing the water table should be thought of prior to taking up foundation excavation. 3.2 Reservoir
3.2.1 Competency of Reservoir

The position of the water table in the proposed reservoir area should be thoroughly established, as well as the fluctuation it undcrgocs during the year. Such studies will indicate the possibility of seepage from the reservoir and provide a sound basis for calculations to be made for arriving at the inventory of the reservoir and its vicinity. 3.2.2 Stability ofReservoir Rim Occurrence of landslides in reservoir arcas is a common phenomenon. In a reservoir arca of high relief with adversely oriented joints/bedding planes, landslides may occur. The process may accelerate if the drawdown is sudden. The prcscnce ofground water has three main effects: a) It wili increase the effective weight of the material that it saturates.

a>Smwis and pvels

b) clrl}Jsnnd Sl1nles - As a general rule, these c) Sandstones These sedimentary rocks show great variation in their water yielding capacity which is chiefly controlled by the texture and nature of ccmcnting materials. Coarse graincd sandstones with impcrfcct cementing material may prove excellent aquifers while fine graincd varieties which are thoroughly cemented may yield a poor quantity of water.

IS 14330 : 1996

d) Limestones - These rocks also show great variation in their water yielding capacity. If the rock is having solution channels, cavities and crevices, etc, it may be a good aquifer. When such openings are absent it may prove to contain very little water. 4.2.1.2 &neous rocks
Acid Volcanic Roth -

4.2.3 4.2.3.1

Permeability

These rocks may or may not prove to be successful wa ter bearing strata because acidic lava is comparatively viscous and generally fragmentary at the time of eruption. Interstices will normally be common in such lava and hence the possibility of their retaining water, however these interstices may subsequently get filled with ash or other materials and hence the uncertainty of these rockmasses being aquifers. Basic Volcanic Rocks - These rocks are characterized by high mobility at the time of eruption and hence they flow to a great distance. They may thus form thick sheets rich in cavities (occurring due to escape of gases from cooling lava) and cracks (due to contraction) and hence may be sulXcicntly permeable to be water bearing strata.
Metanzorpkic rocks

Permeability of rock depends on the following: Size and shape of the constituent grains, b) Sorting of the grains, cl Continuity and nature of interstices, and gradient hydraulic d) Hydraulic conductivity, Stratification, The amount of consolidation and ccmentation undergone, and 8) The presence and nature of discontinuitics.

a>

e> f>

4.2.3.2

The ultimate permeability of a rockmass is the outcome of the combination of the factors given in 4.2.3.1 which most obviously cannot, and do not, fall strictly under any thumb rule generalization. 4.3
Influence of Geolpgical Structures

4.2.1.3

4.3.1 Underground conditions afccting ground water differ from the ideal case not only because of the wide variety of materials in contact with the water but also because of the way in which the various rock strata are arranged in general and in relation to one another. The disposition of the pervious and impervious strata below the surface and its influenceon ground water table is illustrated in Fig. 1. 4.4 Quality of Ground Water

The rocks like schist, slate and even gneiss which are often foliated and highly fractured may prove exceptionally good aquifers. But marble and quar_tzite are normally almost impermeable, except along original beddings. Where folding is pronounced, quartzite is usually jointed in nature, at these locations quartzite may prove to bc water bearing. 4.2.2
Porosity

The quality of ground water is a matter of vital

Some typical values of porosity for well known rocks are given in Table 1.
Table 1 Porosity of Rocks
Type of Rock Maximum Porosily, Percenl Up to 60 up 10 50 2s -30 10-15 10 and marble 5 4 1.5 rocks up to 0.5

a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j)

Soil and loam Chalk Sand and gravel Sandstone Limestone Limestone

Slate and shale Granite Crystalline

importance as the water is used for industrial, domestic and/or construction purposes. Ground water will almost certainly contain dissolved solids and gases. Most ground water contains no suspended matter and practi~cally no bacteria. The main gaseous impurities are methane, hydrogen bisulphide, carbon.dioxide, etc. It should be kept in mind that severe corrosion is observed in steel pipelines due to presence of free carbon dioxide. Pure water will dissolve only 20 ppm (parts per million) of calcium carbonate and 20 ppm of magnesium carbonate, but water containing carbon dioxide will dissolve many hundreds of parts per million of the solid. The dissolved carbonates impart temporary hardness to the water while the dissolved sulphatcs cause permanent hardness which cannot be removed by simple chemical procedures. Chemical analysis is necessary to determine the degree of hardness of the water, and if this exceeds about 200 ppm of calcium carbonate the water rcquircs softening. The presence of high concentrations of calcium and magnesium sulphatcs in ground water can cause serious trouble with concrete work in contact with the ground. This can, howcvcr, be solved by use of sulphate resisting cement.

2

IS 14330 : 1996

PERVIOUS

,- WATER

TABLE

f-lMPEFiVlOUS

STRATUM

1A indicates the position of water table when impervious bed is lying horizontally below the pervious bed. 1B indicates that the inclined impervious stratum will constitute a barrier between two pervious beds, so that the elevation of the respective water table need not, and probably will not, be the same. 1C shows how water will collect in distorted stratum creating a perched water table. 1D demonstrates the effect of a fault on the distribution of ground water in alternating strata. The variations possible in this case are dependent on the relative thickness of strata, the nature of fault and the throw of the fault. 1 E, 1 F, 1G and 1H show altered ground water conditions when the surface of the ground is inclined. At the point marked `X', bodies of ground water will come into contact with the atmosphere. FIG. 1 DWCXITION OF TI IE PERVIOUSAND IMPERVIOUS SIXATA

4.5 4.51

Ground Water Survey

Ground water survey for hydraulic structurcs should always be associated with geological information of the dam vicinity and rcscrvoir arca. This information should include regional and local geological maps and cross sections, lithological characteristics of the rocks, structural fcaturcs, well inventory, etc. The ground water survey should be carried out by sub-surface cxploralion by means of drilling, geophysical survey, well inventory, etc. 4.5.2 In well inventory, the information on existing wells is gathered. The information on location, depth and diamctcr of well, depth to water table, aeount of water pumped, type and nature of rocks the wells have penetrated through, yualityofwater, etc, are collcctcd. 4.5.3 Information obtainable from the drill holes may be two fold, that is for the overburden as well as for the rock underneath. Overburden may consist of soil, clay, sand, gravel, boulders, glaciated materials, etc, whereas rock may be igneous, metamorphic, sedimentary or a combination thercof. Depth to wcathcring, jointed and /or sheared/ faulted zones could also be present. In drill holes water level measurements should be made in accordance with IS 6935 : 1973.
4.5.4

level in the wells located within the rcscrvoir aswcll as outside the pcriphcry of the rcscrvoir, should be measured before and after monsoon. The prcimpoundinggroundwatcrlcvelsshould bcpropcrly monitored. By using measurcmcnts of ground water levels obtained from wells and by observing the levels at which springs occur, it is possible to make contour maps of the water tablcwhich would give an idea about the depth below which ground water is stored and the direction in which it is moving. 4.5.5 Reduced water level map prepared on the basis of well inventory, in the rcscrvoir and vicinity area, will be helpful in establishment of the influent or effluent nature of the stream across which the structure is proposed. If the ground water level contours are decreasing beyond the periphery of the reservoir, there are chances of losing wa tcr from the reservoir after impounding. 4.5*6 As shown in Fig. 2, if water is impounded above the critical water lcvcl (WZ in the figure) and the broken line extending through pervious material is the required underground hydraulic gradient for flow through that material, it is clear that leakage will occur from valley_4 to valley B. In addition to causing loss of water from the rcscrvoir, this under ground flow of water may cause trouble in valley B if there is any instability due to
3

In case of reservoir basin area, water table may be measured during well inventory. The water

IS 14330 : 1996

unconsolidated deposits (such as aeolian sand volcanic tuff, red bole, fault zone, etc which might be
MINIMUM HYDRAULIC

intensified by the derground water.
GRADIENT

presence

of excessive un-

FIG. 2 SIMPLIFIEDGEOLOGICALSECTION After impounding of the reservoir the groundwater table in the area around the reservoir rises due to artifical recharge. A similar condition also occurs in the command area of the dam due to water flow in the canals. This phenomenon creates the problem of water logging whereby all vegetation including crops are badly affected due to decay of the roots.
4.5.7
ZONE OF LEAKAGE r FLOW LINE OF RESERVOIR

4.6
4.6.1

Ground water Table and Reservoir

I

Construction of a dam and subsequent impounding of water behind it causes interference with natural conditions. Adifference is set up in the level of the water table corresponding to the height of the dam between the two sides of the dam. As a consequence, there will be a tendency for the impounded water to find some means of escape through any weakness that may exist in the structure of the ground. In order to assess this behaviour, a study of~the ground water, its position and movement in the area adjoining the reservoir site is of primary importance. This will detcrminc how the filling of the reservoir will affect these factors.
4.6.2 4.6.2.1 Reservoir Areas of High Water Table

GROUND WATER STORAGE

Fig. 3 DIAGRAMZ&OWINGRELATIONOF RESERVOIR LEVEL TO HIGI-I WATER TABLE 4.6.2.2 Springs in the reservoir site arc favourable indication of a water table sloping towards the valley. If they are large, attention should be given to their discharge pressure: for, if~it is insufficient to raise thewatcr to the reservoir Icvel, the flow may be revcrscd when the reservoir is filled. But since this head is not directly measurable, it should be determined indirectly from the level of the water table in the surrounding area. 4.6.3
Reservoirs Arem with Deep ~WaterTable

After impounding of the reservoir, the water soaks into the ground until it meets the water table, and consequently changes the grade of the water table. If the surface of the reservoir is below the ground water divide, there will be no loss by seepage and the ground water will flow into the reservoir (see Fig. 3). In addition, there will be under ground water storage between the old and the new position of the water table. The volume of this newly saturated ground water will depend on the level of the reservoir and the slope of the original water table. If the ground water divide is lower than the reservoir flow line, the ground water forms an under ground spillway with possible leakage on the opposite side of the ridge.

A deep water table is likely to occur in areas where the rocks are exceedingly porous or contain large
PERCHED e I-FLOW LINE OF WATER ,B

TABLE,

IMPERVIOUS

BED'

FIG. 4 SECTION SI-IOWING RELATIONOF RESEI~VOI~LEVEL TO DEEP WATER T,ULE
4

IS 14330 : 1996 openings (see Fig. 4). Conditions favourablc for a deep water table arc soluble rocks, basalt flows containing open cracks, bracciatcd, vesicular and scoriaceous zones, fractured rocks due to faulting or other movements, and coarse boulder beds. Under this condition the water table is comparatively flat, and the ground water flows freely with a low gradient. When the walls and bottom of the stream channel are pcrmcable, there will bc loss from the stream into the rock. Such a stream is known as an influent stream. In the arca of cavcrnous limestone, the discharge of river water should be mcasurcd at regular intervals and the loss of water should be worked out. Similarly, if the cavernous limestone formation is folded into a synclinal structure as shown in Fig. 5, there are chances of loosing water, leaving an empty rcscrvoir behind the dam.

L

CAVERNOUS

LIMESTONE

FIGS LEAKAGE OFRESERVOIR WATER TRI-IOUGHSYNCLINALFOLDIN CAVERNOUS LIMESTONEBED

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofhdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of lndian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standaid along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that fio changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. RVD 5 ( 80 ).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF XNDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 83 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Tclc,crams : Manaksanstha (c.Ommon to all offices) Tclcphone 1 323 76 38 41 17

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/l4 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

1 337 84 86 99,337 26,337 85 9120 61

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022
-

( 60 38 20 43 25 Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 1 235 02 15 16,235`04 19,235 23 42 15 Western
: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUMBAI 400093

832 92 95,832 78 58 8327591,8327892

BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPU'RAM.
Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi-l 10015, India.

