( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9748- 1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR METALLIC SLIDE FASTENERS ( FOR AVIATION PURPOSES )

Fasteners
Chairman

for Consumer

Goods

Sectional

Committee,
Reptsenting

CPDC

22

SHRI S. MAJUMDAR

Directorate General of Technical New Delhi

Development,

Members SHRI B. S. BHATNAGAR SHRI B. DUTT ( Alternate ) SHRI T. A. DEVACNANAM Bengal Waterproof Works ( 1940 ) Ltd, Calcutta

Needle `Industries ( India) Ltd, Ketty P.O. ( Nilgiris ) SHRI G. V. MOHAN RAN~ARAJ ( Alternate ) Fleet Fasteners Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI RANJIT H. MALKANI SRRI N. S. PESWANI (Alternate) A. T. Industries, Delhi SHRI M. T. MATHAI Federation of Association of Small Scale Industries SHRI B. K. MEHAN of India, New Delhi SHRI B. S. NARAYANA RAO Bangalore Dress Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. N. RANG& RAO ( Alternate ) Associated Apparel Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. T. NUTANI Velcro India Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. V. PATEL Aero-Bio Engineering Unit, Bangalore WC CDR K. RAJAN SHRI SWADESH KUIWAR SETT (Alternate ) M. S. Pate1 & Co, Bombay SHRI M. R. SAMTANI SHRI R. K. SAMTANI (Alternate ) Development Commissioner Small Scale IndusSHRI T. R. SEHGAL tries, New Delhi Nylo Plast Industries (P) Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. K. SHROFF SHRI H. J. THACKER (Alternate) Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, SHRI D.N. SINRA Kanpur SHRI N. R. BOSE ( Alternate ) ( Continuedon page 2 ) 0 Copyright 1981 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :9748 - 1981
( Continuedfrom

page 1 ) Representing Additional Director General of Ordnance Factory, Kanpur Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) General, ISI ( Ex-ojkio Member)

Members SIIRI G.P. SINHA

MAJS. K. VERMA SIIRI K.R. GARB (Alternate) Director SHRI SOM PRAKASRA, Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs)

Secretary SHRI B. K. MAHATA Deputy Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ), ISI

Slide Fasteners
Convener MAJ P. N. MALH~TRA Members

Subcommittee,

CPDC

22 : 1

Ministry of Defence ( DGI )

to Maj P. N. Malhotra ) Rcngal Waterproof Works ( 1940 ) Ltd, Calcutta SURI B. S. BHATNAGAR SHRI B. DUTTA ( nlternate) Zip Industries Pvt Ltd, Madras SHRI J. K. JRAVER SHRI A. C. B~ASXARAN ( Alternate ) Bangalore Dress Manufacturing Co l'vt Ltd, SHRI B. S. NARAYANA RAO Bangalore Associated Apparel Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. T. NOTANI Fleet Fasteners Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. S. PESWANI Madhu Fasteners Co, Bombay SHRI M. K. SANGHAVI Aero-Bio Engineering Unit, New Delhi SHRI SWADESH KUMAR SETT SHRI V.`P. CHIRAYATH ( Alternate )

SHRI K. K. KAPUR ( Alfernate

2

IS:9748-

1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR METALLIC SLIDE FASTENERS ( FOR AVIATION PURPOSES )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 12 February 1981, after the draft finalized by the Fasteners for Consumer Goods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 0.2 The requirements for general purpose metallic slide fasteners have been covered in IS: 3148-1978*. This standard has been formulated keeping in view the recent development in the use of metallic slide fasteners for aviation purposes. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from F 121- 1964 - Metallic Slide Fasteners for Aeronautical Purposes, issued by British Standards Institution. 0.4 This standard contains clauses which call for agreement between the purchaser and the supplier and which permit the purchaser to use his option for selection to suit his requirements. The relevant clauses are 3.1.1.2,4.1,5.1,8.1 and 9.1. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in The number of significant places accordance with IS : 2-1960t.. retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the material, type and sire, designations, tests and performance requirements for metallic slide fasteners ( for aviation purposes ) . *Metallic slide fasteners, general purposes(sccondrcvision ). TRules for roundingoff numerical values (revised). 3

PS : 9748 - 1981 2. NOMENCLATURE 2.1 For
the 13uruow of

this standard.

the

nomenclature

for various

parts

as indicated'in

kig.

1 shall apply.

3.

MATERIAL
dirle fasteners shall tw mnnllfact~n-cd from

3.1 Metallic
mnt~~rials.

IS : 9748 - 1981
be attached along one edge of the tape to facilitate the attachment of the scoop and shall be either woven integrally or securely sewn. For specified length fasteners, the tape shall be continuous and without splices along the full length of the fastener including tape extensions. The tape shall also withstand the requirements given in 3.1.1-l to 3.1.1.4. 3.1.1.1 Moistureproofness and Rotproofness with a suitable moistureproofing material, rot-resistant: The tape shall be treated with zinc naphthenate as

a) Moistureproofness - When tested by immersion absorption method described in Appendix A, the tape shall not show absorption of more than 40 percent of water. b) Rotproofness - The tape shall contain not less than 0.8 percent and not more than l-2 percent of zinc when tested by the method described in 12 of IS : 3522 (Part I )-1966*. 3.1.1.2 Unless otherwise agreed to the supplier, the width of tape shall be:
Designation

between

the

purchaser

and

Width of tape

Medium Regular Medium Special Large Regular Large Special

16 mm
20 mm

3.1.1.3 The tape and bead shall be uniformly dyed to the same shade of colour as specified. 3.1.1.4
a)

Colour Fastness

Fastness

to light -The tape and sewing cotton thread shall be fast to light and, when tested by the method prescribed in A-5 of IS : 1895-19707 its colour fastness to light shall be of rating 5 or better.

b) Fastness to perspiration - The tape and sewing thread shall be fast to perspiration and, when tested by the method prescribed in IS : 971-19561, its colour fastness to perspiration shall be of rating 4 or better.
*Method for estimation ofcommon preservatives used in textile industry, Part I. tspecification for cotton tape NEWAR, grey or dyed (fizst revision). $Method for determination of colour fastness of textile materials to perspiration. 5

IS : 9748 - 1981
c) Fastness lo sea water - The tape and sewing thread shall be fast to sea water and, when tested by the method prescribed in IS : 690-1956*, its colour fastness to sea water shall be of rating 4 or better. d) Fastness to washing -The tape and sewing thread shall be fast to washing and, when tested by the method prescribed in IS : 765-1979?, its colour fastness to washing shall be of rating 4 or better. e) Fastness to organic solvents ( dry cleaning) - The tape and sewing thread shall be fast to dry cleaning and, when tested by the method prescribed in IS : 688-1956$, its colour fastness to dry cleaning shall be of rating 4 or better. 3.1.2 Chains -Slide fastener chains shall nickel, silver, zinc alloy or aluminium alloy. be fabricated from brass,

3.1.3 Components - Components used in the fasteners shall be fabricated from brass, nickel, silver or aluminium alloys. Slider and puller shall be fabricated from brass, nickel, silver or zinc alloy. 4. DESIGNATION AND SIZES

4.1 Slide fasteners shall be designated by type, that is, close-end or openend, and by the terms given in Table 1 according to the width across The length of the fastener shall be as required by the meshed chain. purchaser. The first 300 mm or part thereof and each subsequent 300 mm or part thereof shall be subject to a tolerance of + 5 mm. 4.1.1 The length of the fastener shall be taken as the total length of the metallic components of the fastener ( excluding the tape and the puller ) when completely closed and lying flat without tension. 4.1.2
TABLE

Slide fasteners

may be provided
AND

with locking

arrangement.
SLIDE FASTENERS
CHAIN

1 DESIGNATIONS
DESIGNATION

SIZES OF METALLIC
WIDTH Amoss

METHEII

Medium Medium

Regular Special

1

Over 4'5 mm but not more

than 6.5 mm

Large Regular Large Special

Over 6.5 mm but not nlore than 9.0 mm

*Method for determination TMethod for determination ( second revision ) . @lethod for determination

of colour fastness of textile materials to sea water. of colour fastness of textile materials to washing: of colour fastness of textile materials

Test

4

to organic solvents.

6

IS:9748 5. PROTECTIVE AND DECORATIVE FINISHES

- 1981

5.1 The purchaser shall advice the manufacturer and enter into an agreement regarding any protective finish to be applied for fasteners which are to be exposed to corrosive influences, such as sea water, strong acids and akalis. If special decorative finishes are required, they shall be subject to negotiations between the purchaser and the manufacturer. In addition, owing to many different applications of the various types of fasteners and widely differing colour fastness characteristics required, any special colour fastness of tape or metal components shall be negotiated between the purchaser and the manufacturer.
6. PERFORMANCE

REQUIREMENTS

6.1 The test specimen

shall be brought to standard atmospheric conditions in accordance with the requirements of IS : 196-1966*. The fasteners shall comply with the requirements stated below: a) Security b) Security c) Security of attachment of attachment of attachment of the puller to the slider of top step ( all types ), of bottom-stop of the retainer for closed-end fitted to open-end fastener, fastener ( all types ),

d) Security of attachment (longitudinal load), e) Reciprocating f) Breaking g) Resistance h) Resistance movement

of the slider under load ( all types), of chains ( all types ), fastener ), and

strength

cross-wise

of retainer

to lateral

load ( open-end

to deformation

of mouth of slider.

functioning of the slider shall 6.1.1 Security of Attachment of Puller -The be unimpaired after being subjected to the loading given below, in the manner described in Appendix B: Designation L"$ing Medium Medium Large Large Regular Special 300 340 420 580

Regular Special

*Atmospheric conditions for testing ( revised). 7

IS : 9748 - 1981 6.1.6 Resistance of Retainer to Lateral Load ( Open-End Fastener ) - The fasteners shall be subjected to the loading specified below, in the manner described in Appendix G after which they shall be unimpaired and the two halves shall be capable of being readily and successively separated and reassembled in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions:
Designation Medium Medium Large Large Regular Special Special 150 200 250 350

Regular

6.1.7 Resistance to Deformation of Mouth of Slider-The mouth of the slider shall be subjected to the loadings specified below, in the manner After completion of the test, the mouth of the described in Appendix H. slider shall not be deformed: Designation LoaP Medium Medium Large Large 7. MARKING Regular Special Regular Special 300 350 450 650

7.1 The individual
indelibly marked

fastener or the package, with the following: name,

or both,

shall and

be legibly

and

a) Manufacturer's b) Designation. 7.1.1 Mark. The fasteners

initials or trade-mark;

may

also be marked

with

the

IS1

Certification

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity.to that Details of conditions under which a licence for the standard as a further safeguard. use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

9

IS

:9748 -1981

8. SAMPLING 8.1 Sampling and acceptance criteria for metallic slide fasteners shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. A recommended scheme for the same is given in Appendix J. 9. PACKING

9.1 Fasteners
purchaser. instructions suitable.

shall be packed according to the instructions of the But each packet of the fastener shall be provided with fitting and an indication of typical applications for which it is

APPENDIX [Clause 3.1.l .l (a)]
IMMERSION ABSORPTION

A

METHOD TEST ON

FOR TAPE

MOISTUREPROOFNESS

A-l. APPARATUS
A-l.1 The apparatus used is shown in Fig. 2. ) -Approximately 400
x

A-1.1.1 Water Tank ( Non-corrosive mm or of other suitable size.
A-1.1.2 Steel Roller weigh 18 kg & 100 g. A-1.1.3 Vulcanized of 70 to 80 IRHD.

200 x 200
length to

750 f 5 mm diameter

and of suitable with

Rubber Pad -

300 x 300 x 15 mm

a hardness

A-1.1.4 Blotting Paper - 0.20 to O-25 mm thick and weighing 120 to 150 It shall be capable of absorbing O-3 ml of water in 30 seconds. ("`T"?s shall be tested by placing a 1 000 mm2 piece of blotting paper over a wire mesh, having approximately 2 meshes per centimetre, slightly dished, and releasing 0.3 ml of water from a suitable pipette within 2 seconds, the tip of the pipette remaining in contact with the paper during the release of water. The time of absorption shall be measured from the start of the flow till absorption of water is complete as indicated by no further distinct reflection of light from the paper when viewed at an angle. )

A-1.1.5 Suitable
diameter

Metallic Sinker ( Rod) -Approximately and 350 mm long with wire hooks.

10

mm

in

IS : 9748 - 1981
ROD, RECTANGULAR

/ /
I
WATER L@VEL

I
I

I
I

I
I

THREAD

WATER TANW

TEST SPECIMEN

SiNitER ROD

1 HOOKS STEEL ROLLER

VULCANIZED RUBBER PAD

1
FIG. 2 A-2. TEST

TEST

SPECIMEN

BLOTTING

PAPER

APPARATUSFOR IMMERSION ABSORPTION TEST

SPECIMEN

A-2.1 Dimensions
A-2.1.1 Length -

100 mm in all cases.

A-2.1.2 Width - Full width for tapes up to 62.5 mm wide. For tapes beyond 62.5 mm wide, the test specimen is cut to a width of approxlmately 60 mm and the edges frayed to give a width of 50 mm. 11

IS : 9748" - 1981 A-3. METHOD OF TEST

A-3.1 Five test specimens shall he prepared from the sample conditioned in an atmosphere of 65 to 70 percent RH and 27 & 2" C temperature for a period of 24 hours and weighed together to the nearest 10 mg ( M, ).
Wire hook shall be attached at one end of each specimen and a thread ( about 150 mm long) near the other. The specimens shall then be immersed in distilled water contained in the tank for 30 minutes at 20 f 2�C after attaching the metal sinker to the hooks so that the specimens remain immersed in water in a vertical position. The threads attached at the top end of the specimens shall then be passed over a suitable rod placed over the tank in order to keep the specimens steady in a vertical position during the immersion period. The water in the tank shall be sufficient to keep the top edges of the specimens about 50 mm below the water level. At the end of the immersion period, all the five specimens shall be removed from water and, after detaching the hooks and the threads, placed one over the other, edge to edge. Each side of the five specimens shall then be held in contact with the bottom surface of a tray ( which may be slightly inclined ) for 5 to 10 seconds, in order to allow the water to drain out after which they shall be laid flat. Thereafter, one test specimen shall be taken and enclosed between two layers of the blotting paper on each side. The size of the blotting paper pieces shall be such that they extend about 20 mm beyond each edge of the test specimen. The specimen shall be placed on the rubber pad and roller, with its length parallel to the long side of the specimen, passed over it once at an approximate rate of 10 mmis without exerting any additional pressure beyond that of the weight of the roller. The test piece shall then be removed from the blotting papers, enclosed in a fresh set of blotting papers as before and rolled once again in a similar manner. Thereafter, the test piece shall be placed in a spoutless beaker which shall be covered with lid. The above process shall be repeated on all the remaining test specimens in quick succession. ( It shall be permissible to take two or more test specimens at a time for rolling, if convenient, provided that they are placed side by side centrally and parallel to each other and that the distance between the adjacent specimens is not less than 40 mm ). The test specimens shall then be removed from the beaker and weighed collectively as quickly as possible to the nearest 10 mg and the mass noted (M, ). The difference between this weight and the original mass ( Ml ) before immersion shall be taken as the amount of water 12

IS : 9748 - 1981
absorbed mass: by the specimens and expressed as a percentage Mz MI AfI of the original

Percentage where

absorption

=

x

100

M, = mass in g of the samples taken for the test, and MS = mass in g of the samples after immersion.

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.1.1 )
METHOD B-l. OUTLINE
puller
is

B

OF TESTING SECURITY OF ATTACHMENT OF THE PULLER

B-l.1 The supported.
B-2.

subjected

to tension

while

the

slider

is rigidly

APPARATUS testing machine is of the constant-rate-of-traverse type and of the opening of the jaws is 102 f 13 mm per minute. The is such that the breaking load of the test specimen falls between percent of the maximum on the scale.

R-P.1 The the speed load range 15 and 85

NOTE - It is recommended that the load scale be calibrated at least once every 12 months; using dead weights added successively. Since calibration of these machines is normally carried out with maximum reading device in operative, the use of a maximum reading device at low loads may introduce serious errors.

B-2.2 A masking device for the slider, such as a face-plate is required so that tension is confined to the plate, attachment to the slider (see Fig. 3 ).
B-3.

or blanking-off puller and its

PROCEDURE

specimen is mounted in one gripping device of the testing machine with the puller passed through a hole in the mask. The mask is so arranged that the slider and the chain are rigidly clamped in place, only the puller being free. The end of the puller is then secured to the other gripping device so that tension is applied at 90" to the face of the slider. The testing machine is then set in operation until the specified loading is reached, unless the specimen fails earlier. 13

B-3.1 The

IS : 9748 - 1981

FIG. 3

ARRANGEMENT FOR PIJI.LERATTACHMENT

TEST

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.1.2 )
METHOD C-l. OUTLINE OF TESTING TOP AND

C

BOTTOM

STOPS

C-l.1 Each stop is subjected to tension while the fastener is secured in position, load being applied through the medium of the puller in such a way as to bring the stop under pressure from the slider.
C-2. APPARATUS testing machine as described arrangement is given in Fig. 4. in Appendix B is used. A

C-2.1 A schematic C-3.

PROCEDURE

C-3.1 Top Stop Test ( All Typ es of Fasteners) -- The test specimen The is in the closed position with the slider adjacent to the top stop. puller is secured in one jaw of the machine and the other end of the specimen in the other jaw, steps being taken to avoid damaging the chain. 14

IS : 9748 - 1981
The machine is then set in operation unless the specimen fails earlier. until the specified loading is reached,

C-3.2 Bottom Stop Test ( Closed-End Fastener ) - The test specimen The is in the open position, the slider being adjacent to the bottom stop. angle between the stringers* is the natural angle of opening, which is The remainder of the procedure follows as usually between 40" and 60". described in C-3.1.

TOP

STOP

BOTTOM

STOP

FIG. 4

ARRANGEMENT FOR TOP AND BOTTOMSTOPS ATTACHMENT TEST

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.1.3)

D
OF

METHOD OF TESTING SECURITY OF ATTACHMENT RETAINER FITTED TO OPEN-END FASTENER D-l. D-l.1
chain D-2.

OUTLINE
The retainer is subjected is in the closed position. to longitudinal load while the fastener

APPARATUS
as described testing machine arrangement is given in Fig. 5. in Appendix B is used. A

D-2.1 A
schematic

*A row of scoopsfittedon a textiletape. 15

IS : 9748 - 1981

FIG. 5

AJZRANGEMENT FOR SECURITY OF ATTACHMENT TEST FOR RETAINER FITTED TO OPEN-END FASTENER

D-3. PROCEDURE D-3.1 With the test specimen in the closed position, the interlocked chain is clamped into one jaw of the testing machine, steps being taken to avoid damaging the chain. A slotted plate, shaped to clear the tape, chain and pin and to bear against the whole of the top edges of the retainer is clamped into the other jaw. The machine is set m operation until the specified loading is reached, unless the specimen fails earlier. 16

IS : 9748 - 1981

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.1.4)
METHOD OF TESTING

E

RECIPROCATING OF SLIDER

MOVEMENT

E-l.

OUTLINE
of cyclic

E-l.1 The test specimen is subjected to a specified number operations while under lateral and longitudinal tensions.
E-2. APPARATUS

E-2.1 The testing machine, which operates in the vertical plane, is constructed on the lines shown in Fig. 6 and is such as to provide the following facilities: Means of holding the specimen firmly at the bottom the fastener in the closed position, steps being taken damaging the chain. end with to avoid

b)

Means of separately gripping the two stringers at the other end These gripping so that the fastener beyond the slider is open. devices form the means of applying longitudinal spring balance loads to the fastener and thus require connecting together by a swivel-plate or other similar device, so that the fastener may be centralized when the loads are applied. It is also necessary for the gripping devices to swivel at the points of connection to the swivel-plate to facilitate the operation of the slider on the test specimen. The distance between the gripping devices is such that, when the slider is at the lowest point in the cycle, the two ends of the fastener subtend an angle of approximately 60" ( see Fig. 6). Means of gripping the tapes securely midway along the traversed length at opposite points of the testing zone so that the clamps The may be subjected to load by means of spring balances. clamps are so mounted that they are `floating', that is, free to follow the natural direction of the opening of the fastener under test. The clamps are capable of moving 5 mm in the direction of the pulleys, and setting pads are provided to hold the clamps in position until they are secured to the tapes (see Fig. 6 ). 17

cl

tS : 9748 - 1981
The spring balances are of the tubular type and are of 9 kg capacity for the lateral tensions and of 4.5 kg capacity for the In each case, a scale of 35 mm represents a longitudinal load. 4.5 kg range. The overall length of the balancec when closed at zero reading, does not exceed 165 mm, excluding the holding ring and the hook. The extended length does not exceed 229 mm at full load extension, excluding the holding ring and the hook. The weight corresponding to the interval between consecutive graduations does not exceed 0'1 kg. These graduations, whi;: are permanent and legible, are not ICSS than 0.8 mm apart. error permitted on verification does not exceed the weight half the interval between consecutive corresponding to graduations, that is, not more than 0.06 kg. --Trs, SPCCIUCN

FIG. 6

RECIPROCATION TESTER

d) Means

of applying a regular harmonic reciprocating action through the medium of the puller, to the slider on the test The clamp or other gripping device is made in two specimen. parts fitting together by such means as V-grooves and springs. One part of the clamp is attached to the puller and the other indirect form of to the reciprocating device, so as to facilitate connection.
18

IS : 9748 - 1981 E-3. PROCEDURE E-3.1 The
test specimen is mounted in the vertical plane so that the bottom stop is upwards, The stringers are left separate at the other end The lateral so that they may be individually mounted in the machine. and longitudinal loadings are as follows: Designation Lateral Load on Each St$ger 25 30 30 40 Longitudinal Load on Each Stringer Jf 18 23 23 30

Medium Medium Large Large

Regular Special

Regular Special

The machine ( see Fig. 6 ) is so arranged that the length of traverse of the slider is from 76 to 89 mm in each direction, a to-and-fro movement of 152 to 178 mm forming a cycle. The detailed procedure thereafter is as under:

4 b) cl 4

Operate the machine by hand until the slider griper lowest position, and place in position the setting pads.

is in the

Insert the slider puller between the slider gripper plates, ensuring that any locking device is withdrawn, and engage V-grooves of attachment. Place the fastener Secure the fastener loosely in position in the top tape clamp. tape clamps. upwards without

ends in the bottom

e) i)

Take hold of the fastener at its top end and draw until stop pin prevents any further upward movement, Tighten the top clamp. stretching the tape.

ii) If, while carrying out step (e) (i), the fastener is completely closed, then the tape ends that are attached by the bottom tape To overcome this, release longitudinal, clamps are too long. lateral and top clamps and cut off a length of each bottom tape end. To reassemble start at (c). f) Apply the appropriate balances. longitudinal 19 loads by adjusting the spring

IS : 9748- 1981

9)

Secure lateral clamps to the fastener tapes. There should be gaps of 5 mm between the lateral clamps and the chain at the nearest points. Ensure that the centre line of the clamps coincide with the strings which pass over the pulleys. Also ensure that the lateral clamps are held firmly against the setting pads whilst securing clamps to the fastener tape. Withdraw the setting pads after fixing the clamps. Apply the balances. appropriate Iateral loads by adjusting lateral for spring

h) ii> k)

Set counter to zero. Put the machine in motion only to equalize the position of the fastener.

one cycle

Check the loadings of lateral and longitudinal spring balances and adjust when necessary. When the slider is in the lowest position set the adjusting screw 5 mm away from the lateral clamps. speed. The slider lateral of

m) Set the machine in motion at a constant should make 30 cycles per minute. n) Once the test has started, spring balances. do not readjust

the longitudinal

p) Leave the machine in operation until the specified cycles is completed, unless the specimen fails earlier.

number

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.1.5 )

F

RESISTANCE OF CHAIN METHOD OF TESTING LOAD AND BREAKING STRENGTH LATERAL CROSSWISE OF CHAINS F-I. OUTLINE test specimen is subjected to lateral load under while the fastener chain is in the closed position.

TO

F-1.1 The
conditions F-2.

controlled

APPARATUS machine as described in Appendix B is used. The other securing devices have a gripping surface `25 mm shall be so constructed and finished as not to damage to allow the specimen under test to slip ( see Fig. 7). 20

F-2.1 A testing gripping jaws or wide. The jaws the tape and not

IS : 9748 - 1981

FIG. 7

All dimensions in millimetres. LATERALLOADTESTFOR CHAINS OFALL TYPES

F-3. PROCEDURE
test specimen is secured in place with the gripping devices so arranged that at least half the width of each tape is gripped and there is at least 25 mm of closed chain on either side. The machine is then set in operation until the specified loading is reached, unless the specimen fails earlier.

F-3.1 The

APPENDIX ( anuse
METHODS OF TESTING TO LATERAL LOAD G-l. G-l.1
G-2.

G 6.1.6)

RESISTANCE OF RETAINER OF OPEN-END FASTENER

OUTLINE

The test specimen is subjected to straight lateral loading under controlled conditions while the fastener chain is in the closed position.

APPARATUS

machine as described in Appendix 13 is used. The The jaws shall be so constructed gripping jaws shall be 12 mm wide. and finished as not to damage the tape and not to allow the specimen under test to slip ( see Fig. 8). G-3.

G-2.1 A testing

PROCEDURE

G-3.1 The test specimen is secured in place with the gripping devices set approximately 3 mm from the side edges of the retainer and with one edge of each jaw aligned with the ends of the tapes ( see Fig. 8 ). The machine is set in operation until the specified loading is reached, unless the specimen fails earlier.
21

A = 6 mm for Medium

Regular

and 12 mm for other sizes. in millimetres.

All dimensions FIG.

8

LATERAL

LOAD TEST FOR RETAINER OPEN-END FASTENER

APPENDIX ( CZause 6.1.7 )
METHOD

H

OF TESTING RESISTANCE TO DEFORMATION OF MOUTH OF SLIDER

H-l.

APPARATUS in B-2.1 shall be used. A

H-l.1 The testing machine as described schematic arrangement is given in Fig. 9. H-2. PROCEDURE

H-2.1 One end of the fixture as shown in Fig. 9 shall be passed through the mouth of the slider and the other end of the fixture shall be clamped in the machine. The puller shall be clamped in the other jaw of the The testing machine shall be set in operation until the loading machine. as specified in 6.1.7 is reached. 22

IS : 9748 - 1981

t

r

PULLER

I SLIDER

Fxc. 9 FIXING ARRANGEMENT OF SLIDER FOR TESTING RESISTANCE TO DEFORMATION OF MOUTH OF SLIDER

APPENDIX

J

( Clause 8.1 )
SAMPLING SCHEME AND FOR METALLIC CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY SLIDE FASTENERS

J-1. SCALE

OF SAMPLING

J-l.1 Lot - All the slide fasteners of the same designation and manufactured from the same raw materials, under essentially similar conditions of manufacture, shall constitute a lot. J-1.2 The conformity of a lot to the requirements of this standard shall be determined on the basis of tests carried out on the samples selected from the lot. 23

IS : 9748 - 1981
J-1.3

The number of silde fasteners to be selected from a lot for testing shall depend upon the size of the lot ( see Table 2 ), and shall be selected at random from the lot.

J-l.4 The number of fasteners in the first sample (see co1 2 and 3 of Table 2 ) shall be first selected and subjected to all the performance tests. If in the first sample the number of defective fasteners, that is, those failing in one or more performance tests, is less than or equal to the corresponding acceptance number a ( see co1 5 of Table 2 ), the lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of the standard. If the number of defective fasteners in the first sample is greater than or equal to the corresponding rejection number r ( co1 6 of Table 2 ), the lot shall be considered as not conforming to the requirements of the standard. If the number of defective fasteners in the first sample lies between the corresponding a and r, a second sample ( co1 2 and 3 of Table 2) shall be taken at random from the lot and subjected to performance tests. Ifin the combined sample ( co1 4 of Table 2 ) the number of defective fasteners is less than or equal to the corresponding acceptance number a ( co1 5 of Table 2 ), the lot shall be considered as not conforming to the requirements of the standard.

TABLE
LOT

2

SAMPLE
SAMPLE

SIZE AND
SAMPLE SIZE

CRITERIA

FOR

CONFORMITY

SIZE

CUMULATIVE ACCEPT~IWX REJECTION SAMPLE SIZE NUMBER n NUMBER,?
(4)

(1)
up to 300

(2)
First Second First Second First Second First Second First Second

(3)

(5) 0
1

(6)
2 2

301 to

500

8 8 13 13
20

8 16

0

1
0

2'
2 2

501 to

1000

1
0

1 000 to 3 000

20

1
0

: 3 4

3 001 and above

2

3

24

