**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13040 (1991) : Dolly blocks for use in steel body repairs 
- General requirements [PGD 6: Earth, Metal And Wood 
Working Hand Tools] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13040: 1991 

^TTTsfVjr CTTarap ( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

WFffiT #T^TT *ft HT^cT #' WET stsft wTFPf 

Indian Standard 

DOLLY BLOCKS FOR USE IN STEEL BODY 
REPAIRS -GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

UDC 621-98-004-67 : 621-972 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1991 Price Group 2 



Eartkworking and.Metalworking Tools Sectional Committee, PE 06 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Earthworking and Metalworking Tools Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production 
Engineering Division Council. 

Dolly blocks are used in combination with body repair hammers or alone for finishing, dent removing, 
shaping, shrinking, etc of damaged sheet metals. Automotive industries, refrigerators, airconditioner 
body manufacturing industries and other sheet metal workers find their usage while working for the 
operations referred above. This standard gives a broad view of dolly blocks. For the time being, dimen- 
sions have not been included. After the data is compiled, dimensions standards shall be formulated 
separately. 

While preparing this standard, assistance has been taken from ANSI B 173.5-1979 'Safety requirements 
for body repair hammer and dolly blocks' issued by the American National Standards Institute (USA ). 



IS 13040: 1991 



Indian Standard 

DOLLY BLOCKS FOR USE IN STEEL BODY 
REPAIRS - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the general require- 
ments for the dolly blocks which are used while 
working with sheet metal body repairs. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are neces- 
sary adjuncts to this standard: 



IS No. 

IS 1875 : 1978 



Title 
steel billets, 



blooms, 
forging 



Carbon 

slabs and bars for 

( fourth revision ) 

IS 13093 : 1991 General requirements for sheet 
metal body repair steel hammers 

3 DEFINITIONS 

3,0 Definitions used in this standard are as 
given in 3.1 to 3.3. For nomenclature, reference 
may also be made to Fig. 1. 



FLANGING EDGE 



CROWN 



BEADING EDGE 




BEADING EDGE 



Fig. 1 Nomenclature for Dolly Block 

3.1 Beading Edge 

An edge of a dolly block with a rounded apex 
that is used to raise a bead. 

3.2 Crown 

A broad area of the working surface that is 
convex in shape. 

3.3 Flanging Edge 

An edge of a dolly block with an approximately 
right angle rounded surface that is used to form 
a flange. 



4 MATERIAL 

Dolly blocks shall be hot forged from special 
quality, fine-grain hot-rolled suitable carbon 
steel or alloy steels having good wear and shock 
resisting qualities. One of the suitable example 
of steel is 45C8 of IS 1875 : 1978. 

5 HARDNESS 

The hardness of the dolly block shall be be- 
tween 40 HRC and 52 HRC. 

6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Dolly Block Design 

Dolly blocks are designed for straightening, 
bumping, shrinking and finishing of sheet metal 
panels during the repair of damaged sheet 
metals and fender sections. They are intended 
for use with or without body repair hammers 
conforming to IS 13093 : 1991 but shall not be 
stuck directly with a hummer. 

6.2 Functions of Dolly Blocks 

Various typical styles of dolly blocks and their 
functions are described below and are shown in 
Fig. 2A to 2J. The names given here are 
those generally recognized in the body repair 
industry. Styles, however, are not limited to 
those named or illustrated, 

6.2.1 General Purpose, Crowned 

For use on crowned panels and flat portions of 
body panels. - 

6.2.2 General Purpose, Anvil 

For various curves and contours of body, door 
panels and deep skirted fenders. 

6.2.3 General Purpose, Rail 

For bumping, dinging, straightening, and finish- 
ing various portions of body, door panels and' 
fenders. A general purpose rail dolly block has- 
two beading and flanging edges. 

6.2.4 Bead 

The working surfaces are suitable for use on 
long curved fenders, beads and flanges. 

6.2.5 Heel 

The working surfaces are suitable for use on 
sharp corners and wide radii portions of panels. 



1 



IS 13040: 1991 

€.2.6 Toe 

Has a fiat face and flat edge for use in dinging 
flat surfaces. The crowned and curved contours 
are suitable for use on odd crowns and contours. 

6.2.7 Wedge 

The shape is suitable for use behind brackets, 
braces, and other areas containing 
reinforcements. 

6.2.8 Shrinking 

Has a low crown suitable for shrinking metal, 
raising beads, and moulding. 



6.2.9 Angle 

For use on various angles, creases, and curves. 

6.3 All dolly block surfaces shall be free of non- 
functional sharp edges, points, and surface 
roughness that may inflict personal injury on the 
user. 

6.4 No engraving, stamping, or other marks 
shall be impressed on the working surfaces of 
the dolly blocks. 

6.5 Dolly blocks shall be free from manufactur- 
ing and material defects such as seams ( in 
excess of commercially acceptable levels ), laps, 
pipes, and cold shuts. 






2A GENERAL PURPOSE, 2B GENERAL PURPOSE, 2C GENERAL PURPOSE, 
HIGH CROWN ANVIL RAIL 




2D BEAO DOLLY BLOCK 2E HEEL DOLLY BLOCK 2F TOE DOLLY BLOCK 




2G WEDGE DOLLY BLOCK 2H SHRINKING DOLLY 2J ANGLE DOLLY BLOCK 

BLOCK 

Fig. 2 Typical Styles or Dolly Blocks 

2 



IS 13040 : 1991 



7 TESTS 

Dolly blocks shall be tested for { hardness 
requirements as given in 7,1 and shall confirm 
to the requirements given in 5. 

7.1 Hardness Determination Test 

Hardness determination with respect to dolly 
blocks shall be made on a fixtured tool or on a 
suitable mounted or unmounted specimen that 
has been cut from the tool using the wet- 
abrasive or other equivalent method. 

8 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS AND 
LIMITATION OF USE 

8.1 Dolly blocks are special purpose tools desi- 
gned and intended only for use in the straight- 
ening, shaping, shrinking and finishing of 
damaged sheet metal panels normally found on 
bodies and fenders of motor vehicles. They are 
intended to be used either separately or toge- 
ther for these repair procedures. 

8.2 Dolly blocks shall not be struck directly by 
any type of hammer or other striking tool. 



8.3 To avoid physical injury, dolly blocks shall 
not be used to strike hard or hardened objects 
such as concrete, bricks, chisels, hatchets, axes, 
other hammers or steel tools or any object other 
than sheet metal panels. 

8.4 Safety goggles or equivalent eye portection 
shall be worn by the user and all persons in the 
immediate area in which any striking tool is 
being used to avoid possible eye injury from 
flying objects. 

8.5 Dolly blocks shall not be ground, welded, 
re-heat-treated or otherwise altered from the 
original condition as furnished by the manu- 
facturer, except as indicated in 7.1. 

8.5.1 Dolly blocks shall be inspected at regular 
intervals and their use discontinued at the first 
sign of chipping or cracking. Any mushrooming 
of the working surface of the dolly block from 
the tool usage shall be promptly redressed to 
the original contour by the use of a whetstone 
or file. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply 
with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard 
marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a 
further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

* 
BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc : No, PE 06 ( 5166 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I, T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Telephone 

/ 331 01 31 
[ 331 13 75 



87 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



53 38 43 

41 29 16 

6 32 92 95 



Branches : AHMADABAD. 
COIMBATORE. 



BANGALORE. 
FARIDABAD. 



BHOPAL. 
GHAZIABAD. 



BHUBANESWAR. 
GUWAHATI. 



HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANATHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, indie 



