IS 15000 : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


WA HAF 
fag (want) — wea a 
F Aa F faw stent 
(Tee FART ) 


Indian Standard 


HAZARD ANALYSIS AND CRITICAL CONTROL 
POINT (HACCP) — REQUIREMENTS FOR ANY 
ORGANIZATION IN THE FOOD CHAIN 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.020 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 4 


Food Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems Sectional Committee, FAD 15 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Food Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food 
and Agriculture Division Council. 


The HACCP system, which is science based and systematic, identifies specific hazards and measures for their 
control to ensure the safety of food. HACCP is a tool to assess hazards and establish control systems that focus on 
prevention rather than relying mainly on end-product testing. Any HACCP system is capable of accommodating 
change, such as, advances in equipment design, processing procedures or technological developments. 


HACCP can be applied throughout the food chain from the primary producer to final consumer and its 
implementation should be guided by scientific evidence of risks to human health. Besides enhancing food safety, 
implementation of HACCP can provide other significant benefits. The application of HACCP system can aid 
inspection by regulatory authorities and promote international trade by increasing confidence in food safety. 


Successful application of HACCP requires full commitment and involvement of the management and the workforce. 
It also requires a multi-disciplinary approach; this multi-disciplinary approach should include, where appropriate, 
expertize in agronomy, veterinary health, production microbiology, medicine, public health, food technology, 
environmental health, chemistry, and engineering according to the particular study. The application of HACCP is 
compatible with the implementation of quality management systems, such as, the IS/ISO 9000 series and 
IS/ISO 22000 and is a system of choice in the management of food safety within such systems. While the application 
of HACCP to food safety has been considered here, the concept can be applied to other aspects of food quality. 


Keeping in view the above, this standard was first published in 1998 based on the Guidelines for the Application 
of the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System (CAC/GL 18-1993) published by the Joint 
FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, Codex Alimentarius Commission, Rome and was identical to it. Codex 
later included the guidelines as Annex to the third revision of Recommended International Code of Practice — 
General Principles of Food Hygiene [CAC/RCP-1(1969), Rev. 3 (1997)]. The fourth revision of Recommended 
International Code of Practice — General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969, Rev. 4- 2003) has 
necessitated the first revision of this standard, wherein the text has been updated and aligned with the Annex of 
CAC/RCP 1-1969, Rev. 4- 2003. In this revision guidelines for small and/or less developed businesses which do 
not have the resources and the necessary expertise on site for the development of HACCP plan have been included 
to facilitate implementation of an effective HACCP plan by them. Further, record keeping system has been 
elaborated with additional examples. 


Nothing in this standard shall affect the operation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and regulations 
framed thereunder; Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1977 or any other law for the time being in force and 
shall be subject to the restrictions imposed thereunder, wherever applicable. 


IS 15000 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


HAZARD ANALYSIS AND CRITICAL CONTROL 
POINT (HACCP) — REQUIREMENTS FOR ANY 
ORGANIZATION IN THE FOOD CHAIN 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard sets out the principles of the hazard 
analysis and critical control point (HACCP) system and 
provides general guidelines for the application of these 
principles, while recognizing that the details of 
application may vary depending on the circumstances 
of the food operation. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contains provision which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


2491 : 2013 Food hygiene — General principles 


— Code of practice (third revision) 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Control (Verb) — To take all necessary actions 
to ensure and maintain compliance with criteria 
established in the HACCP plan. 


3.2 Control (Noun) — The state wherein correct 
procedures are being followed and criteria are being 
met. 


3.3 Control Measure — Any action and activity that 
can be used to prevent or eliminate a food safety hazard 
or reduce it to an acceptable level. 


3.4 Corrective Action — Any action to be taken when 
the results of monitoring at the CCP indicate a loss of 
control. 


3.5 Critical Control Point (CCP) — A step at which 
control can be applied and is essential to prevent or 


eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to an 
acceptable level. 


3.6 Critical Limit — A criterion which separates 
acceptability from unacceptability. 


3.7 Deviation — Failure to meet a critical limit. 


3.8 Flow Diagram — A systematic representation of 
the sequence of steps of operations used in the 
production or manufacture of a particular food item. 


3.9 HACCP — A system which identifies, evaluates 
and controls hazards which are significant for food 
safety. 


3.10 HACCP Plan — A document prepared in 
accordance with the principles of HACCP to ensure 
control of hazards which are significant for food safety 
in the segment of the food chain under consideration. 


3.11 Hazard — A biological, chemical or physical 
agent in, or condition of, food with the potential to 
cause an adverse health effect. 


3.12 Hazard Analysis — The process of collecting 
and evaluating information on hazards and conditions 
leading to their presence to decide which are significant 
for food safety and therefore, should be addressed in 
the HACCP plan. 


3.13 Monitor — The act of conducting a planned 
sequence of observations or measurements of control 
parameters to assess whether a CCP is under control. 


3.14 Step — A point, procedure, operation or stage in 
the food chain including raw materials, from primary 
production to final consumption. 


3.15 Validation — Obtaining evidence that the 
elements of the HACCP plan are effective. 


3.16 Verification — The application of methods, 
procedures, tests and other evaluations, in addition to 
monitoring to determine compliance with the HACCP 
plan. 


IS 15000 : 2013 


4 PRINCIPLES 


The HACCP system consists of the following seven 
principles: 


a) Principle 1 — Conduct a hazard analysis. 

b) Principle 2 — Determine the critical control 
points (CCPs). 

c) Principle 3 — Establish critical limit(s). 

d) Principle 4 — Establish a system to monitor 
control of the CCP. 

e) Principle 5 — Establish the corrective action 
to be taken when monitoring indicates that a 
particular CCP is not under control. 

f) Principle 6 — Establish procedures for 
verification to confirm that the HACCP 
system is working effectively. 


g) Principle 7 — Establish documentation 
concerning all procedures and records 
appropriate to these principles and their 
application. 


5 GUIDELINES FOR THE APPLICATION OF 
THE HACCP SYSTEM 


5.1 Prior to application of HACCP to any sector of the 
food chain, that sector should be operating according 
to IS 2491, the appropriate Indian Standards/Codes of 
Practice, and appropriate food safety legislation (Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and regulations framed 
thereunder). These pre-requisite programs to HACCP, 
including training, should be well established, fully 
operational and verified in order to facilitate the 
successful application and implementation of the 
HACCP system. 


5.2 For all types of food business, management 
awareness and commitment is necessary for 
implementation of an effective HACCP system. The 
effectiveness shall also rely upon management and 
employees having the appropriate HACCP knowledge 
and skills. During hazard identification, evaluation, and 
subsequent operations in designing and applying 
HACCP system, consideration should be given to the 
impact of raw materials, ingredients, food 
manufacturing practices, role of manufacturing 
processes to control hazards, likely end-use of the 
product, categories of consumers of concern, and 
epidemiological evidence relative to food safety. 


5.3 The intent of the HACCP system is to focus control 
at CCPs. Re-design of the operation should be 
considered, if a hazard which must be controlled is 
identified but no CCPs are found. 


5.4 HACCP should be applied to each specific 
operation separately. CCPs identified in any given 
example in any Indian Standard on Code of hygienic 


practice, or elsewhere, might not be the only ones 
identified for a specific application or might be of a 
different nature. 


5.5 HACCP application should be reviewed and 
necessary changes made when any modification is 
made in the product, process, or any step. 


5.6 The application of the HACCP principles should 
be the responsibility of each individual businesses. 
However, there may be obstacles that hinder the 
effective application of the HACCP principles by 
individual business. This is particularly relevant in 
small and/or less developed businesses. While it is 
recognized that when applying HACCP, flexibility 
appropriate to the business is important, all seven 
principles must be applied in the HACCP system. This 
flexibility should take into account the nature and size 
of the operation, including the human and financial 
resources, infrastructure, processes, knowledge and 
practical constraints. 


5.7 Small and/or less developed businesses do not 
always have the resources and the necessary expertise 
on site for the development and implementation of an 
effective HACCP plan. In such situations, expert advice 
should be obtained from other sources, which may 
include: trade and industry associations, independent 
experts and regulatory authorities. HACCP literature 
and especially sector-specific HACCP guides can be 
valuable. HACCP guidance developed by experts 
relevant to the process or type of operation may provide 
a useful tool for businesses in designing and 
implementing the HACCP plan. Where businesses are 
using expertly developed HACCP guidance, it is 
essential that it is specific to the foods and/or processes 
under consideration. 


5.8 The efficacy of any HACCP system will 
nevertheless rely on management and employees 
having the appropriate HACCP knowledge and skills, 
therefore, ongoing training is necessary for all levels 
of employees and managers, as appropriate. 


6 APPLICATION OF HACCP PRINCIPLES 


6.0 Application of HACCP principles consists of the 
following tasks as identified in the logical sequence 
for application of HACCP (see Fig. 1). 


6.1 Assemble HACCP Team 


6.1.1 The food operation should assure that the 
appropriate product specific knowledge and expertize 
is available for the development of an effective HACCP 
plan. Optimally, this may be accomplished by 
assembling a multidisciplinary team. Where such 
expertize is not available on site, expert advice should 
be obtained from other sources, such as, trade and 


10. 


11. 


12. 


IS 15000 : 2013 


Assemble HACCP Team 


List All Potential Hazards 
Conduct a Hazard Analysis 
Consider Control Measure 


Determine CCPs 
Establish Critical Limits for Each CCP 
Establish a Monitoring System for Each CCP 


Establish Corrective Actions 
Establish Verification Procedures 
Establish Documentation and Record Keeping 


Fic. 1 LOGICAL SEQUENCE FOR APPLICATION OF HACCP 


See Figure 2 


3 


IS 15000 : 2013 


industry associations, independent experts, regulatory 
authorities, HACCP literature and HACCP guidance 
(including sector-specific HACCP guides). It may be 
possible that a well-trained individual with access to 
such guidance is able to implement HACCP in-house. 


6.1.2 The scope of the HACCP plan should be 
identified. The scope should describe which segment 
of the food chain is involved and the general classes of 
hazards to be addressed (for example, Does it cover 
all classes of hazards or only selected classes?). 


6.2 Describe Product 


A full description of the product should be drawn up, 
including relevant safety information, such as, 
composition, physical/chemical structure [including 
water activity (Aw), pH, etc], microcidal/static 
treatments (for example, heat-treatment, freezing, 
brining, smoking, etc), packaging, durability and 
storage conditions and method of distribution. Within 
businesses with multiple products, for example, catering 
operations, it may be effective to group products with 
similar characteristics or processing steps, for the 
purpose of development of the HACCP plan. 


6.3 Identify Intended Use 


The intended use should be based on the expected uses 
of the product by the end user or consumer. In specific 
cases, vulnerable groups of the population, such as, 
institutional feeding, may have to be considered. 


6.4 Construct Flow Diagram 


The flow diagram should be constructed by the HACCP 
team (see 6.1.1). The flow diagram should cover all 
steps in the operation. When applying HACCP to a 
given operation, consideration should be given to steps 
preceding and following the specific operation. The 
confirmation of the flow diagram should be performed 
by a person or persons with sufficient knowledge of 
the processing operation. 


6.5 On-Site Confirmation of Flow Diagram 


The HACCP team should confirm the processing 
operation against the flow diagram during all stages 
and hours of operation and amend the flow diagram 
where appropriate. The confirmation of the flow 
diagram should be performed by a person or persons 
with sufficient knowledge of the processing operation. 


6.6 Conduct a Hazard Analysis [See 4(a)] 


6.6.1 The HACCP team should list all the hazards that 
may be reasonably expected to occur at each step from 
primary production, processing, manufacture and 
distribution till the point of consumption. 


6.6.2 The HACCP team should next conduct a hazard 


analysis to identify for the HACCP plan, hazards which 
are of such a nature that their elimination or reduction 
to acceptable levels is essential to the production of a 
safe food. 


6.6.3 In conducting the hazard analysis, wherever 
possible, the following should be included: 


a) The likely occurrence of hazards and severity 
of their adverse health effects; 

b) The qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation 
of the presence of hazards; 

c) Survival or multiplication of micro-organisms 
of concern; 


d) Production or persistence in foods of toxins, 
chemicals or physical agents; and 


e) Conditions leading to the above. 


6.6.4 The HACCP team should then consider what 
control measures, if any, exist which can be applied 
for each hazard. 


6.6.5 More than one control measure may be required 
to control a specific hazard(s) and more than one hazard 
may be controlled by a specified control measure. 


6.7 Determine Critical Control Points (CCPs) 
[See 4(b)] 


6.7.1 There may be more than one CCP at which 
control is applied to address the same hazard. The 
determination of a CCP in the HACCP system can be 
facilitated by the application of a decision tree (see 
Fig. 2), which indicates a logic reasoning approach. 
Application of a decision tree should be flexible, given 
whether the operation is for production, slaughter, 
processing, storage, distribution or other. It should be 
used for guidance when determining CCPs. This 
example of a decision tree may not be applicable to all 
situations. Other approaches may be used. Training in 
the application of the decision tree is recommended. 


6.7.2 If a hazard has been identified at a step where 
control is necessary for safety, and no control measure 
exists at that step, or any other, then the product or 
process should be modified at that step, or at any earlier 
or later stage, to include a control measure. 


6.8 Establish Critical Limits for Each CCP 
[See 4(c)] 


6.8.1 Critical limits should be specified and validated 
if possible for each critical control point. In some cases 
more than one critical limit will be elaborated at a 
particular step. Criteria often used include 
measurements of temperature, time, moisture level, pH, 
Aw, and available chlorine, and sensory parameters, 
such as, visual appearance and texture. 


6.8.2 Where HACCP guidance developed by experts 


(answer questions in sequence) 


Do control preventive measure(s) exist ? 


Q1 


Modify step, process 
or product 


Is control at this step 
necessary for safety ? 


Is the step specifically designed to eliminate or 
reduce the likely occurrence of a hazard to an 
acceptable level 2 


Q2 


Could contamination with identified hazard(s) 
occur in excess of acceptable level(s) or could these 
increase to unacceptable levels?” 


Not a CCP 


Will a subsequent step eliminate identified 
hazard(s) or reduce likely occurrence to an 
acceptable level ?” 


Q3 


Q4 


© Proceed to the next identified hazard in the described process. 


CRITICAL CONTROL POINT 


IS 15000 : 2013 


2 Acceptable and unacceptable levels need to be defined within the overall objectives in identifying the CCPs of HACCP 


plan. 


Fic. 2 EXAMPLE OF DECISION TREE TO IDENTIFY CCPs 


5 


IS 15000 : 2013 


has been used to establish the critical limits, care should 
be taken to ensure that these limits fully apply to the 
specific operation, product or groups of products under 
consideration. These critical limits should be measurable. 


6.9 Establish a Monitoring System for Each CCP 
[See 4(d)] 


6.9.1 Monitoring is the scheduled measurement or 
observation of a CCP relative to its critical limits. 


6.9.2 The monitoring procedures should be able to 
detect loss of control at the CCP. Further, monitoring 
should ideally provide this information in time to make 
adjustments to ensure control of the process to prevent 
violating the critical limits. 


6.9.3 Where possible, process adjustments should be 
made when monitoring results indicate a trend towards 
loss of control at a CCP. The adjustments should be 
taken before a deviation occurs. 


6.9.4 Data derived from monitoring should be 
evaluated by a designated person with knowledge and 
authority to carry out corrective actions when indicated. 


6.9.5 If monitoring is not continuous, then the amount 
or frequency of monitoring should be sufficient to 
guarantee that the CCP is in control. 


6.9.6 Most monitoring procedures for CCPs will need 
to be done rapidly because they relate to on line 
processes and there will not be time for lengthy 
analytical testing. 


6.9.7 Physical and chemical measurements are often 
preferred to microbiological testing because they may 
be done rapidly and can often indicate the 
microbiological control of the product. 


6.9.8 All records and documents associated with 
monitoring CCPs must be signed by the person(s) doing 
the monitoring and by a responsible reviewing 
official(s) of the company. 


6.10 Establish Corrective Actions [See 4(e)] 


6.10.1 Specific corrective actions must be developed 
for each CCP in the HACCP system in order to deal 
with deviations when they occur. 


6.10.2 The actions must ensure that the CCP has been 
brought under control. Actions taken must also include 
proper disposition of the affected product. Deviation 
and product disposition procedures must be 
documented in the HACCP record keeping. 


6.11 Establish Verification Procedures [See 4(f)] 


6.11.1 Establish procedures for verification. 
Verification and auditing methods, procedures and 
tests, including random sampling and analysis, can be 


used to determine if the HACCP system is working 
correctly. 


6.11.2 Verification should be carried out by someone 
other than the person who is responsible for performing 
the monitoring and corrective actions. Where certain 
verification activities cannot be performed in house, 
verification should be performed on behalf of the 
business by external experts or qualified third parties. 


6.11.3 The frequency of verification should be 
sufficient to confirm that the HACCP system is working 
effectively. Examples of verification activities include: 


a) review of the HACCP system and its records; 

b) review of deviations and product dispositions; 
and 

c) confirmation that CCPs are kept under 
control. 


6.11.4 Where possible, validation activities should 
include actions to confirm the efficacy of all elements 
of the HACCP plan. 


6.12 Establish Documentation and Record 
Keeping [See 4(g)] 


6.12.1 Efficient and accurate record keeping is essential 
to the application of a HACCP system. HACCP 
procedures should be documented. Documentation and 
record keeping should be appropriate to the nature and 
size of the operation and sufficient to assist the business 
to verify that the HACCP controls are in place and 
being maintained. Expertly developed HACCP 
guidance materials (for example, sector-specific 
HACCP guides) may be utilized as part of the 
documentation, provided that those materials reflect 
the specific food operations of the business. 


6.12.1.1 Documentation examples are: 


a) Hazard analysis, 
b) CCP determination, and 
c) Critical limit determination. 


6.12.1.2 Record examples are: 


a) CCP monitoring activities, 

b) Deviations and associated corrective actions, 
c) Verification procedures performed, and 

d) Modifications to the HACCP system. 


6.12.2 An example of a HACCP worksheet is given 
in Fig. 3 for guidance. 


6.12.3 A simple record-keeping system can be effective 
and easily communicated to employees. It may be 
integrated into existing operations and may use existing 
paperwork, such as, delivery invoices and checklists 
to record, for example, product temperatures. 


i 


IS 15000 : 2013 


Describe Product 
| Diagram Process Flow | 


Hazard(s) | Control CCPs Critical Monitoring ‘Corrective Record(s) 
Measure(s) Limit(s) Procedure(s) Action(s) 


Fic. 3 EXAMPLE OF A HACCP WORKSHEET 


7 TRAINING 


7.1 Training of personnel in industry, government and 
academia in HACCP principles and applications, and 
increasing awareness of consumers are essential elements 
for the effective implementation of HACCP. As an aid 
in developing specific training to support a HACCP plan, 
working instructions and procedures should be 
developed which define the tasks of the operating 


personnel to be stationed at each critical control point. 


7.2 Co-operation between primary producer, industry, 
trade groups, consumer organizations and responsible 
authorities is of vital importance. Opportunities should 
be provided for the joint training of industry and control 
authorities to encourage and maintain a continuous 
dialogue and create a climate of understanding in the 
practical application of HACCP. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 15 (2186). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


