( Reaffirmed 2006 )

%K@H'gDS. FOR MEASUREMENT .OF F@EQiUQ%$@Y A&U2 EQUIVALENT RESISTANCFJ -fl@ UNJWANTED RLESON AMCES OF Bl&TER -CRYSTAL 1 UNITS
Piezoclcctric Drvjcq
Sehio&l
~..,lI,II;Ii~~i'~a:i,:! ic

fb,r .Frequenc:y
C6mniitkq

Contqgl and Selection ETDC 5 1
Representing Ltd, Bangalore

:

,'

S,w .SrcwP?P !I.$
L:`l'l(i !ltiembmf i' ,I. SHKI SrP~~Brirot~ ' SHRI A. DAS GDP~A FWV. l%&NtiA~ SUE&$&IN FRANCIS

Bhharat Electronics Philips India

Ltd, Bombay

( Alternate)

`National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Directorate General of Posts +~d Telegraphs,, New Delhi Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRIA.N.GARUU Gent& Electronics Engineering Research Institute &\J. D&N. t' .' (CSTR ), Pilani Directorate of Coordination' ( Police Wireless ), &%!.I R'. %'RAI.i ! ,' ,I Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi SHRI M. S. SWAMINATHAN ( Alternate) Wireless Planning & Coordination ( Ministry of SHRI B. S. NARCAS (I 1, ,, Communications ), New Delhi ., : D' ectorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi' " ~v&Z%&!?2~ny~m ( Alternate !' Directorate General of All India Radio!-New Delhi RESEARCH ENGINEER Central Glass & Ceramic Rescarrh Institute ( CSIR ), 11~ P. SAIIA Calcutta . SHRI ANNAMALAI (Alternate) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposjls SHRI M. SANKARAUNGAM 11, /" ( Inspection Wing ) SHRI G. R. BHATIA (Alternate) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SIIRI N.S. SATHYANARAYANAN SIIRI H. S. ANANTHANARAYANA RAO ( Alternate ) . Ministry of Defence FLT LT S.C. SIXARMA ' Sam K. `PABMANA~SHA~ ( (AJternata ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI N. SNNIVASAN, DIRECTOR (ELECTRONICS) Secretary SHRI P. K. BISWAS Assistant Director ( Electronics @ Copyright INDIAN STANDARDS 1976 INSTITUTION

)

This publication is protected under the Indian Co@right Act (XIV d 1957) ,and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission ofthe publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8011.1976

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT ,OF FREQUENCY AND EQUIVALENT RESISTANCE OF UNWANTED RESONANCES OF FILTER CRYSTAL UNITS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 February 1976, after the draft finalized by the Piezoelectric Devices for Frequency Control and Selection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The object of this standard is to provide the methods for measurement of frequency and eqmvalent resistance of unwanted resonances of filter crystal units. 8.3 In preparing this standard assistance has been derived from the IEC Publication 283-1968 `Methods for the measurement of frequency and equivalent resistance of unwanted resonances of filter crystal units ' issued by the International Eiectrotechnical Commission. 6.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in .accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : Z-1960*. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard describes the methods for measurement of frequency and equivalent resistance of unwanted resonances of filter crystal units. 2. GENERAL 2.1 Two methods for measurement of frequency and intensity of unwanted responses of filter crystal units have been described in this standard. Both methods are based on the use of a measuring bridge in which balancing of the parallel capacitance is performed at a frequency removed from the main or any unwanted resonance. 2.1.1 The first method is termed as basic method for measurement unwanted resonances in titer crystal units ( set Section 1 ).
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

of

2

IS : 8011- 1976 2.1.2 The second method is termed as reference method for measurement of frequency and equivalent resistance of unwanted responses of filter crystal units ( see Section 2 ).
2.2 The intensity of the unwanted response is indicated by the maximum output voltage occurring during transmission of the unwanted resonance frequency. 2.3 According to the first method, the load capacitance and termination are specified. The intensity of the main and unwanted resonance is indicated by the corresponding level difference of the bridge output voltage with respect to its level when short-circuiting the crystal unit under test. According to the second method, which is a development of the first one, the load resistance of the bridge is chosen to be small and specified for each frequency range. 2.4 To determine the intensity of an unwanted response in addition to the initial balance of the bridge removed from resonances, an additional balancing is carried out at two frequencies which are symmetrical with respect to the unwanted response measured. The equivalent resistance of the unwanted response is calculated from the difference between the level of the two frequencies mentioned above and the level at the unwanted resonance frequency. 2.5 The second method requires more time for measurement one, but it can give more accurate measurement. SECTION I UNWANTED 3. SCOPE than the first

BASIC METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF RESONANCES IN FILTER X?RY~TAL UNITS

3.1 This section describes basic method of detecting unwanted resonances
in crystal units and methods of measuring the magnitude response deviation at these frequencies.

of response or

4. PRINCIPLE OF MEASUREMENT
4.1 The scheme of measurement used is to sup$y a continuously adjustable frequency to a standard bridge and to observe the transmission response over the frequency range specified for the individual crystal unit. 4.2 The standard bridge consists of a hybrid coil forming two arms of the bridge, the individual crystal unit under test and the balancing capacitor in the other two arms. This bridge represents a properly terminated, narrow band crystal filter with the widest possl%le pass band. The frequency of maximum transmission is not identical with the reso;ance _I frequency of the crystal unit.
n 3

IS t 8011- 1976 4.3 The bridge unbalance output is continuously indicated over the frequency range specified for the individual crystal unit to permit detection of irregularities from a normally smooth transmission characteristic, the irregularities being due to unwanted resonances of the crystal unit under test. 4.4 The magnitude of the transmission either of the following: response deviation is given by

4 b)

The Diferential Response - Difference in level expressed in decibels between the turning points of the characteristic in the vicinity of the unwanted response ( see Fig. 1 ). The Absolute Response - Transmission difference expressed in decibels at the unwanted resonance frequency with and without the crystal unit short-circuited ( see Fig. 1 ).

-DIFFERENTIAL

RESPOtisE-

UNWANTED

RESPONSE

FREQUENCY FIG. 1 ILLUSTRATION OF DIFFERENTIALAND ABSOLUTE RESPQNSE

5. MEASURING

CIRCUIT

5.0 Unwanted resonances are detected and measured by means of a circuit consisting of a power source, an attenuator, a bridge, terminating resistors and a detector or their electrical equivalents connected as shown in Fig. 2. 5.1 Requirements for the Power Source - Within f 10 percent of the nominal series resonance frequency of the crystal unit under test, side bands should be down by at least 80 dB. Harmonies of the output frequency and the selectivity of the detector should be such that the level of harmonics is at least 60 dB below the fundamental at the detection element. Harmonic suppression filters may be used, if necessary.

IS : 6011- 1976

1~~ = terminating resistor ( see 5.4 ). Used only when C, of crystal unit is less than 3.5 pF. CA = fixed capacitor 3.5 pF. CB = low-loss adjustable air capacitor 3.5 to 50 pF ( with ceramic insulators ) adjustability: O-002 pF at minimum capacitance @015 pF at maximum capacitance

R = matching resistor of attenuator
I = transformer. For a primary impedance matched to the attenuator, the secondary impedance shall be smaller than 5 R-75 51 75 Sz 110 Q >30 dB > 0.5 dB + = = = =

RT

5 percent = suggested values ( for example ) primary impedance secondary impedance secondary balance transformer loss variation over the frequency range to be used. FIG. 2

CIRCUIT DIAGRAM

- The sensitivity shall be such that the power source used, bridge output levels 85 dB below the output level with the crystal unit short-circuited may be detected. The differential sensitivity shall permit observation of O-1 dB changes in input level.

5.2 Requirements
in conjunction

for the Detector

with

The requirements for input capacitance in 5.3 and 5.4 respectively.

and ,resistance

are given

IS t 8011- 1976 `5.3 Requirements for the Bridge Circuit 5.3.1 Requirements for Balance - When using a high quality air capacitor in place of the crystal unit, the bridge shall be capable of balance to the degree specified in 6.12 over the scanned frequency range without further adjustment. 5.3.2 Requirements for Direct Capacitances - The direct capacitance between two conductors is the capacitance value equal to the charge produced on one of the conductors by the voltage between the two conductors divided It can be measured on a capacitance measuring bridge by that voltage. where both conductors are connected to the measuring terminals of the bridge; all other conductors are connected to the centre location (neutral The point ) of the bridge, SO as to exclude them from the measurement. limiting values of the direct capacitances shall be as specified below: Direct Capacitance Between Points ( see Fig. 2 ) D and C D and A D and B
NOTE-

Condition

Requirement PF 1 Max 3.7 Max 8 f 1

CA disconnected CB at minimum Terminals Y, and Ys open detector connected and powered

to earth when all other conductors are connectedto earth.

The

grounded capacitanceofa ,conductor is the capacitanceof this conductor by dis-

Measurement of the direct capacitances will be facilitated connecting the transformer T at points A and C.

The direct capacitance CDB, between points D and B, shall be determined by measuring the grounded capacitance CD of point D, the direct capacitances CDA between points D and A, and CDC between points D and C, and taking the differences as follows:
CDB = CD CDA CDC

5.4 Requirements for the Terminating Resistor - The value of the terminating resistor R T is based on the proper termination of the electrical The input resistance of lattice equivalent of the specified bridge circuit. the detector may be part of R T. It is determined as follows:

6

IS : 8011.1976 whichever is smaller where

fi = nominal series resonance \frequency in kHz of the crystal
unit under test; CB = C, + CA where Co is the parallel capacitance in pF of the crystal unit under test and CA is an additional capacitance; and Cn = the direct capacitance in pF between points B and D ( see Fig. 2 ) ; it has a value between 7 pF and 9 pF ( see 5.3.2 ). The terminating resistor should have a tolerance of *5 percent and preferably be chosen with a standard value. The shunt capacitance of the terminating resistor should not exceed 1 pF. 6. METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 6.0 The output of the power source is adjusted in such a manner that the maximum level of drive for the crystal unit under test is not exceeded for the specified condition of operation. Measurement of unwanted resonances is made by first balancing out the static capacitance of the crystal unit and then observing the bridge output over the frequency range to be scanned.
NOTE-Measurement shall be carried out under static conditions; frequency scanning shall be allowed provided that adequate correlation with the static method has been established.

6.1 Initial

Balance

6.1.1 The initial balance frequency should be sufficiently removed from the nominal series resonance frequency in order that the balance will primarily represent balancing of the parallel capacitance Co of the crystal unit. The balance frequency normally shall be such that the scanned frequencies lie within an octave each side of the balance frequency. 6.1.2 The initial balance value is the difference expressed in decibels measured at the balance frequency between the levels with and without the crystal unit short-circuited. The initial balance shall be one of the following: a) For absolute responses, at least 20 dB more than the specified limit of the crystal unit under test. b) For differential responses, at least 20 dB more than the level of the otherwise smooth curve at the unwanted response frequency. c) The greater of (a) and (b) above, if both absolute and differential response requirements have been specified for the crystal unit.

IS 8 8011-

1976 Response Measurement

6.2 Absolute

The frequency for maximum transThe initial balance is performed. mission at the unwanted resonance is adjusted. The attenuator setting for a given detector deflection is then noted. The crystal unit is short-circuited and the attenuator is adjusted for the same detector deflection. The difference in decibels between the two attenuator settings is the absolute response. 6.3 Differential
Response Measurement

The initial balance is performed. The frequency is adjusted to the peak of the unwanted response. The attenuator setting is noted for a given detector deflection. The frequency is slowly adjusted to the trough of the same unwanted response and the attenuator is readjusted to give the same detector deflection as for the peak of the unwanted response. The difference in decibels between the two attenuator settings is the differential response. SECTION 2 REFERENCE METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT FREQUENCY AND EQUIVALENT RESISTANCE OF UNWANTED RESPONSES OF FILTER CRYSTAL UNITS 7. SCOPE
7.1 This section describes reference method for measurement of frequency and equivalent resistance of unwanted responses of filter crystal units.

OF

8. PRINCIPLE

OF MEASUREMENT

8.1 The crystal unit to be measured is inserted in a measuring

bridge, the output of which is shunted by a low resistance. The parallel capacitance of the unit is balanced and the frequency is varied over the range to be explored. For any unwanted response encountered in this range, the frequency is determined as the frequency for which the unbalance output of the bridge shows a maximum.

The equivalent resistance can be calculated from the difference between the maximum and the minimum unbalance bridge output around that unwanted response. 9. MEASURING
9.0 The CIRCUIT

measuring circuit used for this me!&od is shown in Fig. 3. Explanation of this method is given in Appendix A. .o* 8

IS : 8011.1976
_A_-e-w--

9

P

--I

rAT

TENIJATOR

FIG. 3 MEASURING CIRCUITOF FREQUENCY AND EQUIVALENT RESISTANCE OF UNWANTEDRESONANCES OF FILTERCRYSTALUNITS BY THE REFERENCE METHOD 9.1 Power Source - At both sides of the frequency for which the power source is adjusted, and within 10 percent of that frequency, the total output apart from that at the adjusted frequency shall be at least 80 dB below the main output. When measured at the detection element, the output at any harmonic of the frequency for which the power source is adjusted shall be at least 60 dB below the output at the fundamental frequency. Harmonic suppression filters may be used, if necessary. 9.2 Detector -The sensitivity shall be such that, in conjunction power source used, it would be possible to detect: a) a change of 1 dB in input level, and b) an output level of the bridge 45 dB below the level obtained when a resistor equal to 100 R is connected instead of the crystal unit ( R = value of terminating resistor ) . The absolute value of the input impedance shall not be less than 30 R. Selectivity reference shall be in accordance with 10.1. 9.3 Bridge Circuit-The test given in 9.3.1. bridge circuit shall be s&h that it satisfies the
*> ..a" 9

with the

IS : 8011- 1976 9.3.1 A capacitor of high quality and of appropriate capacitance is connected instead of the crystal unit. The initial balance is performed in accordance with 10.1. The specified frequency range is scanned and the unbalance output voltage is observed, which shall not change by more than 10 dB.
NOTE - Commercially available admittancebridgesmay also be used, providedthat correlationhas been achieved.

9.4 Terminating Resistor R - The resistance of the terminating resistor R shall be much smaller than the absolute value of the impedance of the balance impedance. Practical values are:

R = 3 300 ohms for frequencies below 100 kHz R = 330 ohms for frequencies between 100 kHz and 1 MHz R 33 ohms for frequencies between 1 MHz and 10 MHz

RZ

10 ohms for frequencies between 10 MHz and 100 MHz percent. to the

The tolerance shall be f5

9.5 Load Resistor RL - The load resistors RL are matched characteristic impedance of power source and connecting cable. 10. METHOD OF MEASUREMENT

10.1 Initial Balance - The output of the power source is so adjusted that the maximum level of drive specified for this measurement for the crystal unit under test is not exceeded at any frequency within the test frequency range. The frequency is adjusted at a value well away from the resonance frequency of the main resonance; and away from any unwanted mode. This frequency shall, however, be such that the frequency range to be scanned is within one octave on either side. The detector deflection due to the residual unbalance output voltage across the terminating resistor R is noted and the attenuator is adjusted to give the same detector reading. The attenuation shall not be less than 85 dB. 10.2 Response Measurement - The specified frequency range is scanned and when an unwanted mode is detected, the bridge balance is readjusted to give an unbalance output at both sides of the maximum output which is at least 20 dB less than the maximum output at the peak of the unwanted response. The frequency is then adjusted to the peak of the unwanted resonancb and the detector reading is noted. The attenuator is adjusted to give the same detector reading. "

IS : 8011- 1976

I /

The ,equivalent resistance of the unwanted mode is then:

Rm = R x 10x/20 ,
where x = attenuator reading in decibels .

`~ 1 .

I

- When a series of equal crystal units has 10.3 Rhine Measurements to be measured, the balkce capacitor Cr may be replaced by a reference crystal unit having a series resonance frequency and a motional inductance within close tolerances of their nominal values: This reference crystal unit shall be free from unwanted modes within the frequency range to be scanned. \ The unbalance output `is then a direct, measure for the equivalent resistance of the unwanted response and the bridge output voltage may, therefore, be recorded as a function of frequency. f .. i

.' I ` >

APPENDIX I I _( C@se 9.0 )

A

%

EXPLANATION OF THE REFERENCE METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF FREQUENCY AND EQUIVALENT REFISTANCE OF JJNfVAFTED RESPONSE OF / FILTFR CRYSTAL UNITS

A-l. A crystal unit with unwanted resonances may be represented by an equivalent diagram with 12+ 1 ( see'Fig. 4 ), instead of one motional branch `( C, L, R; being that of the main mode ).

co

FIG. 4

EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT DIAGRAM OF A CRYSTAL UNIT WITH UNWANTED:RESONANCES

By b&&&g! &utc~L&p `p&f~llel~ &p&&i&~`: ~;`,;:`&`$&1,2;a#$g the frequency applied to the measuring circ& within a certain range, the resonant frequency of each of the unwanted modes in that range can be found. The value of the equivalent resistance is `derived from *a j&asurement of the difference between the minimum and the maximum krystal' unit im$edance around that u&ranted fesoiia&!e.`: ' I4 1 xdP2~f ,J `!`. i, " ,., .`I. I4 l'll:.`1>:)11[ d o? .I : I', .. In'thk &-&it desdi_i~ed'.`in',Fig."3','

~dte&omet& Rv for the real `&mponen~t7 A+$, `for the re&tive &i?ip'ciiient'." "

t )`)l(i fji.2,'

,,

I [I: t:, The resistors &_ are mat&ed,:to &e;rffpoier. sd~&i~,'~ `The'buQuJ of the bridge is shunted by the terminating resistor R with low resistance Vduk. The unbalance output U* is. continuously indicated during the frequency variation. ; ,,_ I _.. c
.
.I

,I

`.,,(`.Ik

,.,:,i

(1

Irregularities in the fieque&y chara&risl& are due to unwanted resonances of the crystal hnit under test. The ratio of the unbalance output voltage Uk to the oorresponding input `voltage Vi. on the bridge is measured by means of the attenuator. , ,Oj:j_:/ ;j I OGJ. For the initial balanie the .admittance, .r is ,approximately equal to The value of the terminating resistor k! is chosen much smaller than

I6:8011-1976
the crystal unit and the terminating resistor. This means that, at an unwanted resonance with equivalent resistance RDI, the following equation is valid: Rm=($l)R or, when Rm s R and therefore UI + UU:

The bridge can be used with sufficient accuracy, only when the equivalent resistance of the unwanted mode is much bigger than the load resistance RL. To measure Rm accurately, the bridge shall be balanced at the point Then the minima on both sides of intersection of the admittance diagram. of the maximum admittance are equal. This also makes it possible to measure the motional resistance of an unwanted mode with sufficient accuracy, if theadmittance circle of this mode is situated exactly on the admittance circle of the main resonance ( see Fig. 6 ).
BALANCE L' X FREQUENCIES

FIG. 6

ADMITTANCE CIRCLE

,

'

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS
CRYSTALS FOR

PIEZOELECTRIC
IS

FREQUENCY CONTROL

AND SELECTION

:

1885 ( Part V )-1965 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part V Quartz crystals 1885 ( Part XXXIII )-1972 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part XXX111 Piezoelectric filters 2916 ( Part I )-1969 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Part I General requirements and tests 2916 ( Part II )-1972 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Part II Type AA-01 2916 ( Part III )-1972 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Part III Type AA-02 2916 ( Part IV )-1972 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Part IV Type AA-03 2916 ( Part V)-1972 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Part V Type AA-04 2916 ( Part VI )-1972 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Part VI Type AA-05 2916 ( Part VII )-1975 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Part VII Type AA-06 2935-1964 Guide for use of quartz oscillator crystals 4570-1968 Crystal holders 5575 ( Part I )-1970 Temperature control devices for quartz crystal units (heating type): Part I General requirements and tests 6133 ( Part I j-1971 Piezoelectric filter for use in telecommunication and measuring equipment: Part I General requirements and tests Guide to the use of temperature control devices for crystal units 6537-1972 Guide to the use of piezoelectric filters: Part I Quartz crystal filters 7410 (Part I )-I974 Guide to the use of piezoelectric filters: Part II Piezoelectric ceramic 7410 (Part II )-1975 filters Basic method for the measurement of resonance frequency and equivalent 7957-1976 series resistance of quartz crystal units by zero phase technique in a xnetwork Methods of measurement for piezoelectric vibrators operating over the 7962-1975 frequency range up to 30 MHz Methods for the measurement of frequency and equivalent resistance of 8011-1976 unwanted resonances of filter crystal units

