**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



): Hurdles [PCD 22: Sports Goods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



^^^ '''-''''' 15:4614^1988 



Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

SPECIFICATION FOR HURDLES 
( First Revision ) 



1. Scope — This standard prescribes requirements and test for hurdles for men's and women's 
events. 

2.. Materials 

2.1 Frameworl^ 

2.1.1 Uprtglits ~ Metal or any other suitable material. 
2.1-2 Base members— Mild steel channels, angles or tubes. 
2.1.3 Counterweights — Metal or any other suitable material. 
2-1.4 Cross-bars — Metal or any other suitable material. 

2.2 Top Bar — Seasoned wood ar any other suitable material. The wood shall be seasoned to a 
moisture content not exceeding 14 percent. It shall preferably be straight grained and shall be free 
from sapwood, knots, cracks, shakes, spHts, borer holes, warp and other defects which are likely to 
reduce the life of top bar or affect its utility. The recommended species of timber are: 

Trade Name Botanical Name 

aini Artocarpus tiirsuta Lamk. 

ash Fraxinus sp. 

benteak Largerstroemia lanceolata Wall. 

chaplash Artocarpus chaplasli Roxb, 

deodar Cedrus deodra Loudon. 

dhaman Grewia tiliaefolia Vahi. 

kail Pinus waliicliiana A.B. Jacks. 

kokko Alblzia iebbecl^ 

laurel Terminalia alata 

sissoo Dalbergia sissoo Roxb. 

teak Tectong grandis 

white cedar Dysoxylum malabaricum 

3. Shape and Dimensions —Typical shape of the hurdles is shown in Fig. 1. The dimensions ofihe 
hurdles for men's and women's events shall conform, to those given in Table 1 and Fig. 1. 

4. Mass — The mass of the hurdles shall be as given in Table 1. 

5- Manufacture, Workmanship and Finish 

5.1 Theframeworkof the hurdle shall consist of two bases and two uprights supporting a rectangular 
frame, reinforced by one or more cross-bars, the uprights to be fixed at the extreme end of each base, 

5.2 The extreme ends of the uprights shall be flattened to a reasonable length to receive the wooden 
top bar which shall be fixed to the uprights by means of nuts and bolts. The bolts shall have a domed 
head which shall be countersunk in the top bar so as to be in level with the face of the bar. Further, it 
shall face the direction of running when the hurdle is placed in the field. 



Adopted 22 August 1988 



Q January 1989, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, « BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHi lieOOz 



18:4614-1988 



70 



■1200 max. 



22 S min. 



^ 



M 



HEIGHT 



10 T0 25HK 




rOP END ROUNDED 




-COUNTERWEIGHT 



CH^ 



700 max.- 




=£=3 



1^ 



700max.- 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 HURDLE, TYPICAL 





TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR HURDLES 






(Clauses Zand 4) 




Si RequirBment 
No. 


For Men 


For Women 


(1) (2) 


(3) 


(4) 


i) Mass. kg. Min 


10 


10 


il) Heightimm 


1067±3 (for 110-m event) 
914±3(for400-m event) 


840:k3(for100.mevent) 
762±3(for400-mevent) 


no Wimii, mm, Max 


1200 


1200 


Iv) Length of base, mm. Max 


700 


700 


v) Top bar: 

a) Width, mm 


70 


70 


b) Thickness, mm 


10 to 25 


10 to 25 



IS : 4614 -1988 

5*3 The hurdle shall be of such a design that a force of at least 3'6 kgf applied to the centre of the top 
edge bar shall be required to overturn it. 

5.4 The hurdle may be made adjustable in height for each event. In any setting, the top bar shall lie 
in the same horizontal plane and the two uprights shall be free from excessive play. The counterweights 
shall be adjustable so that at each height, a force of at least 3"6 kgf and not more than 40 kgf is 
required to overturn it. Further, means ishall be provided for locking the counterweights in position so 
that they do not get displaced easily when the hurdle is disturbed. 

5.5 The top bar shall be painted in black and white stripes or in some other contrasting colours in such 
a manner that the lighter stripes appear at the ends of the top bar and these shall be at least 225 mm in 
width. The hurdles shall be so placed on the track that the base members of the hurdles are on the 
side of the approach of athletes. 

5.6 All edges shall be rounded. 

6. Stability Test — To check the resisting force of the hurdles, a simple spring-tralance shall be used 
by the application of pulling force to the centre of the top bar. Alternatively, a cord with hook shall be 
applied to the centre of the top bar and the cord taken along over a pulley fixed conveniently and the 
other end of the cord loaded by adding required weights. 

7. Marking — Each hurdle shall carry the manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade-mark. 
7.1 Standard Marking — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 

8. Packing — The hurdles shall be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

9. Sampling — Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, the sampling 
procedure given in IS : 2500 ( Part 1 )-1973 'Sampling inspection tables: Part 1 Inspection by attributes 
and by count of defects {first revision)' shall be followed, with the definition of lot, type of plan, 
inspection level and acceptable quality level as given in 9.1 and 9.2. 

9.1 Lot — In any consignment, all hurdles of the same size and manufactured from identical materials 
under similar conditions shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

9.2 For all the requirements given in this specification, a single sampling plan with Inspection Level IV 
and Acceptable Quality Level 1*5 percent shall be followed. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first issued in 1968, This revision is brought out mainly to align the standard 
with the latest rules of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, as desired by the Consultative 
Committee of Parliament for the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports. In this revision, the 
requirements for the height of the hurdles and for the painting of the top bar have been modified 
besides incorporating certain other modifications. 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi. India 



