IMA Ah IS 18311 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ware al Scr — IS wet 
Sal AR STR STRAY Val F sik 
Sach afte cia areas & fee eae 
unge — fEyıtagt 


Smart Community Infrastructures — 
Smart Transportation for Rapid 
Transit in and Between Large City 
Zones and their Surrounding 
Areas — Guidelines 


ICS 13.020.20 


© BIS 2023 


AAA AR OT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


ey HAH MA, 9 SEITE IE MHC AMT, E Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2023 Price Group 7 


Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Cities 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Huge numbers of people travel, including commuting, to and from cities and their surrounding areas in a 
megalopolis on a frequent or daily basis. To meet their needs and provide suitable transportation services, rapid 
surface transit systems have been developed, including highway buses and trains on enhanced rail tracks. The 
effectiveness of each mode of transport depends on the travel distance and the number of passengers. Highway 
buses are convenient for travel distances ofup to 200 km. For distances ofup to 1 000 km, high speed rail (HSR) 
provides easy and rapid transit and has been developed and introduced in response to demand in these 
megalopolises, including for the purposes of inter-city commuting of less than 200 km. HSR uses trains with a 
large capacity which can reach speeds of over 200 km/h. Such trains run directly into city centers, removing the 
need for passengers to change services, and offer a high frequency of service, all for a relatively low price. This 
has proved very popular with residents in these megapolises, as shown in Annex A. 


HSR is a successful rapid transit system for people, especially in megalopolises. By installing HSR in 
megalopolises or on a route connecting a megalopolis and other cities outside this area, the rapid transit of people 
can easily be achieved and managed, resulting in short travel times that facilitate both political and economic work 
and promote commercial business. Using such transportation is one solution to a typical city issue in a 
megalopolis. 


Highway bus transportation systems have also been established as highway networks have been extended. Among 
the benefits of such systems is the ease of planning service routes and schedules, as well as the actual start-up of 
such bus transportation services, since these companies do not need to prepare extensive and expensive physical 
facilities such as those required for HSR operations, namely railroad tracks and civil engineering structures, that 
are built and financed by rail companies at their own or government expense. Itis also easy to change both service 
frequency and routes according to passenger flow. Therefore, highway buses can be an effective means of quickly 
conveying people for a distance of less than 200 km by optimizing the transport capacity between cities. 


These two transportation modes, highway buses and HSR, are examples of indispensable smart transportation for 
megalopolises which have specific issues regarding cost-effective, accessible and user friendly transport for 
travellers. 


This standard specifies a procedure to organize smart transportation that enables one-day trips by citizens between 
cities and in a large city zone, including its surrounding areas, and conveys a large number of people at a high 
frequency in a short time over distances of up to 1 000 km. 


In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ISO 37159 : 2019 ‘Smart transportation for 
rapid transit in and between large city zones and their surrounding areas” and Urban and Regional Development 
Plans Formulation and Implementation (URDPFI) guidelines, volume I, 2015. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


This standard also aims at satisfying some Sustainable Development Goals by United Nations, especially Goal 3 
‘Good health and well-being’, Goal 7 ‘Affordable and clean energy’, Goal 8 ‘Decent work and economic growth’, 
Goal 9 ‘Industry, innovation and infrastructure’, Goal 11 ‘Sustainable cities and communities’, Goal 13 ‘Climate 
action’ and Goal 15 ‘Life on land’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18311 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


SMART COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURES — SMART 
TRANSPORTATION FOR RAPID TRANSIT IN AND BETWEEN 
LARGE CITY ZONES AND THEIR SURROUNDING AREAS — 

GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies a procedure to 
organize smart transportation that enables one- 
day trips by citizens between cities and in a large 
city zone, including its surrounding areas, and 
conveys a large number of people at a high 
frequency in a short time over distances of up to 
1 000 km. 


1.2 Smart transportation aims to promote 
political and economic work and stimulate 
business activity by providing citizens with a 
manner of travel to complete a return trip from 
their home or place of work to destinations 
outside their cities on the same day. However, 
this standard does not designate a procedure for 
constructing smart transportation facilities. 


NOTE — “One-day trip” means travel from an origin to a 
destination and back to the origin on the same day. The 
purpose of such travel is out of the scope of this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision and parties 
to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent edition of these 
standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 17451 : 2020 Smart community infrastructures — 
Best practices for transportation — 
Guidelines 

IS 17457: 2020 Sustainable development of 
habitats — Vocabulary 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 17451, IS 17457 and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Large City Zone — Area that includes large 
cities or urban agglomerations connected or related 
for political or economic reasons. 


3.2 Urban Agglomeration — An urban agglomeration 
is a continuous urban spread constituting a town and 
its adjoining outgrowths (OGs), or two or more 
physically contiguous towns together with or 
without outgrowths of such towns. An urban 
agglomeration should consist of at least a statutory 
town and its total population (that is, all the 
constituents put together) should not be less than 
20 000 as per the 2001 census. 


3.3 Highway/Inter-City Bus — Transportation to 
convey people with buses operated on fixed service 
routes, on which highways are fully or partly 
incorporated. 


3.4 High-Speed Rail — Transportation to convey 
people with high-capacity trains at a high frequency 
in a short time over long distances. 


NOTE — High-speed trains are generally considered to be 
those trains running at over 200 km/h, although the 
International Union of Railways defines them as trains 
running at over 250 km/h. 


4 CONCEPT OF SMART TRANSPORTATION 
FOR RAPID TRANSIT 


4.1 General 


This standard describes the performance required 
for smart transportation to overcome a city issue or 
how one-day trips can be successfully provided to 
citizens by transporting a large number of people at 
a high frequency in a short time for distances of up 
to 1 000 km between cities located inside or outside 
a large city zones. 


IS 18311 : 2023 


The anticipated smart transportation modes for this 
purpose are highway/intercity buses, such as bus 
rapid transport system and high-speed rail (HSR). 
The former can transport people for distances of up 
to 200 km, the latter for distances of up to 1 000 km 
for one-day trips. Both transportation modes should 
be selected according to the distance and required 
capacity. For distances over 200 km, HSR should 
be selected, but either transportation mode is 
possible for distances of less than 200 km. The 
required capacity 1s also a criterion for the selection 
of a transportation mode. Highway buses have a 
smaller capacity than HSR. However, this capacity 
can be easily changed, since more buses can 
immediately be dispatched or cancelled depending 
upon the number of passengers received at any 
particular time. Capacity is usually fixed with HSR. 


One other advantage of using highway/intercity 
buses and HSR for this purpose is to directly connect 
the city centres in different cities without forcing 
travelers to change to local services before entering/ 
leaving the city centre. This is always required 
when travelling by airplane to/from an airport distant 
from the city centre. No check-in procedures are 
necessary for bus or train rides, especially when 
customers purchase paper or e-tickets in advance, 
enabling passengers to arrive at a station only a few 
minutes prior to departure. High-frequency services 
or those departing at fixed times every hour allow 
customers to travel without timetables. Bus or train 
services using exclusive highways or tracks enable 
on-time operation that is undisturbed by other 
traffic. These time reliable services promote the 
transportation business, resulting in financial 
stability. Buses and trains provide ‘lot transporting’ 
that is, the conveying of people in the same direction 
or to the same destination to the same schedule with 
the same vehicles at a time suitable to a number of 
citizens. If people travel in their own vehicles to 
their respective schedules, it causes large energy 
consumption and heavy traffic congestion, resulting 
in high CO2 emissions. Personal car use is 
uncontrollable traffic and one of the major sources 
of CO; emissions. 


When introducing highway buses and HSR, the 
capital cost is high compared with other 
transportation modes, due to construction of high 
standard public roads or railroad tracks. 
Furthermore, additional technologies need to be 
developed to operate such buses and trains. 
However, as every large city zone has already 
experienced, the higher the service speed offered, 
the more sharply and effectively the economy grows 
in the area, if successful. Thus, the introduction of 
high speed and high-capacity transportation will 
foster cities and large city zones or urban 
agglomerations. This alone shows that it is 
worthwhile introducing such transportation despite 


the high capital cost. However, it should be 
confirmed that the target area has a population large 
enough to financially support a transportation 
business that requires high initial capital costs when 
making decisions on the introduction of smart 
transportation. 


4.2 Applicable City Issues 


When the issue is to enable one-day trips by citizens 
between cities within a large city zone or urban 
agglomerations, including a metropolitan city, with 
this by a transportation service which can 
accommodate a large number of people at one time, 
this smart transportation is applicable. 


5 ADOPTION OF SMART TRANSPORTATION 
FOR RAPID TRANSIT 


5.1 Objectives 


As mentioned in 4.1, smart transportation to enable 
one-day trips by citizens in and between large city 
zones or urban agglomerations and their 
surrounding areas can be organized by determining 
a suitable transportation mode and then installing it 
while satisfying the requirements in 5.4. 
Transportation modes, except airplanes, applicable 
to smart transportation should be selected by 
following 5.5. 


5.2 Target Area 


A large city zone, including a metropolitan city, and 
surrounding areas containing cities within/between 
which a number of one-day trips are to be enabled. 


5.3 Applicable Transportation Modes for Smart 
Transportation 


Applicable transportation modes are shown below 
for smart transportation according to the 
transportation distance in a target large city zone: 


a) Both buses and HSR for transportation 
distances of less than 200 km; and 

b) HSR for transportation distances over 
200 km. 


When smart transportation is applied to 
transportation distances of less than 200 km, 
consider the conditions in 5.5. 

5.4 Requirements for Smart Transportation 
5.4.1 General 

The services provided by a transportation mode 


selected as smart transportation shall satisfy the 
conditions specified in 5.4.2 to 5.4.4. 


5.4.2 Customer Satisfaction 


5.4.2.1 Service frequency 


The transportation service shall be available every 
hour minimum, even in off-peak periods, and every 
5 min maximum during rush hours. 


5.4.2.2 Transportation capacity 


The possible capacity shall be over 500 persons per 
hour. 


5.4.2.3 Main station location 


Main stations shall be situated in or close to the city 
centre. 


5.4.2.4 Connection to/from the station for smart 
transportation 


Connection services by rail, bus, ferry, airplane, 
walking, bicycle, bike or car shall be provided to 
customers for their ease of access to smart 
transportation. 


5.4.2.5 Service route 


The route shall include as many cities as possible by 
avoiding excessive increases in travel time from 
terminal to terminal. 


5.4.2.6 Roads/tracks 


The roads/tracks to be used for smart transportation 
shall enable on-time operation of highway buses and 
HSR trains and have no level crossings. 


5.4.2.7 Schedule speed 


The schedule speed can be increased by improving 
acceleration. 


NOTE — Schedule speed is given by dividing the one-way 
distance between terminals by the scheduled travel time. 


5.4.2.8 Increases in number of stops/stations 


The number of stops/stations for smart 
transportation shall be increased, if needed, by 
consulting with municipalities on the service route, 
even after the services start. 


5.4.2.9 Transportation information 


Any transportation information helpful to customers 
in recognizing their departure and arrival stations 
and those for changes to other services shall be 
provided through maps and web applications. 


IS 18311 : 2023 


5.4.3 Safety 
5.4.3.1 Dispatching 


All service vehicles for smart transportation are 
dispatched and controlled at a dispatching/operation 
control center through wireless communication. 


NOTE — Dispatching centers are also called operation 
control centers. 


5.4.3.2 Immediate stopping 


The immediate stopping of vehicles in order to 
prevent accidents shall be ensured in the operation 
of smart transportation systems. 


5.4.4 Efficiency of Operation and Services 


5.4.4.1 Vehicle structures 


Lighter vehicles shall be used in order to help reduce 
the cost of infrastructure for smart transportation. 


5.4.4.2 Coach convenience 


Entry and exit from vehicles shall be easy and 
accessible for all, including the elderly and those 
with small children or disabilities, so that passengers 
are able to enter and exit with minimal or no 
assistance. Vehicles shall be equipped with 
handgrips and non-slip floors for safety and 
furnished with easy communication channels in case 
of emergency. Vehicles may also include space 
devoted to bicycles or other large items. 


5.4.4.3 Promotion of environmentally friendly 
vehicles and life-cycle performance 


Transportation systems which produce low 
chemical emissions, vibration and noise levels shall 
be used. Furthermore, positive application of 
technologies shall be promoted to develop 
environmentally friendly vehicles and enhance the 
life-cycle performance of the transportation. 


5.4.4.4 Ticket inspection 


No inspection work is required onboard for reserved 
seats. Tickets shall be inspected at entry of stations. 


5.4.4.5 Energy saving 


Transportation systems shall be used which can save 
energy by, for example, using recovered braking 
energy, minimizing energy consumption, optimizing 
operation schedules or controlling vehicle running 
performance. 


IS 18311 : 2023 


5.4.5 Strategies to Stimulate Business/ 


Commercial Activities 


Area around the station located in the city centre and 
designate for commercial business district are to be 
delineated. While delineating area for planning 
purpose, the forward and backward linkages of the 
parameters must be kept in mind and relevant 
parameters be selected for the delineation process. 


5.4.6 Finance and Funding 
5.4.6.1 Transport finance strategies 


The basic principle in financing would be that the 
government should provide the infrastructure but the 
users (direct and indirect beneficiaries within 
the city) must pay for the operating costs and the 
rolling stock. While considering transport finance, 
the following parameters should be taken into 
consideration: 


a) Willingness to introduce premium public 
transport systems that are priced high but 
offer better quality with a view to limit the 
subsidy requirements in normal services; 


b) Extent of resources likely from private 
participation; 

c) Initiatives taken to promote non-motorized 
transport and improve safe access to public 
transport; 


d) Willingness to price public transport 
systems in such a manner as to be 
financially sustainable at the operating 
stage or depend only marginally on public 
budgets; 


e) Extent of resources mobilized by the state 
government through exploitation of its 
land resources; 


f) Willingness to involve the private sector in 
operations under the overall supervision 
and coordination of a public agency; 


g) Willingness to divert funds from projects 
that add to road capacity towards public 
transit systems; and 


h) Institutional mechanisms set up by the 
State government to ensure a 
well-coordinated public transport system. 


5.4.6.2 Public/private partnership 


The private sector can be beneficially engaged, 
thereby saving financial resources for activities that 
only public agencies can best perform under 
conditions that strike a fair balance between the 


universal obligations of the government and the 
profit motive of the private operator. On balance, 
the Central Government should encourage the State 
Governments to involve the private sector in 
providing public transport services, but under 
well-structured procurement contracts. 


The private sector companies can add significant 
value to government’s efforts for promoting 
energy-efficient, low-carbon transport, including 
through: (i) Offering technical inputs to develop 
viable financial models and instruments, which 
encourage long-term private investments and 
capacity-development for building sustainable 
transport systems; (ii) Assisting standardization 
including for low-carbon fuels in relevant category 
of transport products; (iii) Investing in R&D to 
develop low-carbon, energy-efficient transport 
products and services including in developing 
country context; and (iv) Developing business 
models aimed at establishing low-carbon supply 
chain and partnering with suppliers with high share 
of energy consumption from renewable sources, 
among others. 


5.4.6.3 Value capture of assets 


Value Capture as practiced widely in the world is 
based on the principle that private land and 
buildings benefit from public investments in 
infrastructure and policy decisions of 
Governments (for example, change of land use or 
FSD. Some of the methods for value capture of 
assets are: 


a) Land value tax — is considered the most 
ideal value capture tool which apart from 
capturing any value increment, helps 
stabilize property prices, discourage 
speculative investments and is considered 
to be most efficient among all value capture 
methods; 


b) Fees for changing land use (agricultural to 
non-agricultural); 


c) Betterment levy — one-time upfront 
charge on the land value gain caused by 
public infrastructure investment; 


d) Development charges (impact fees) are 
area based and link the development charge 
to the market value of land by carrying out 
periodic revisions; 


e) Transfer of Development Rights (TDRs) 
— used for trading development rights; 


f) Premium on relaxation of rules or 
additional FSI/FAR — widely used in 
States such as Maharashtra, Karnataka, 
Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, etc, to allow for 


addition of a development rights beyond 
the permissible limits in the State Town 
Planning Laws and Regulations; 


g) Vacant land tax (VLT) — is applicable on 
those landowners who have not yet 
initiated construction on their lands; 


h) Tax increment financing (TIF) — is one of 
the most popular value capture tools in 
many developed countries, especially the 
United States; 


j) Land acquisition and development — 
acquiring and developing land could be 
adopted as a useful value capture method to 
mobilize resources; and 


k) Land pooling system (LPS) — is a form of 
land procurement where all land parcels in 
an area are pooled, converted into a layout. 


5.5 Selection of a Transportation Mode for Smart 
Transportation 


Select a transportation mode for smart transportation 
by considering the following transport conditions to 
solve specific city issues: 


a) Transportation distance of target sections; 

b) Transportation capacity required for target 
sections; 

c) Transportation service frequency requested 
for target sections; 

d) Fare payable by customers travelling in 
target sections; and 

e) Cost to facilitate transportation facilities 
and vehicles for smart transportation to be 
installed in target sections. 


5.6 Installation of Smart Transportation 


By using the transportation mode selected, a system 
of smart transportation shall be established in 
accordance with the requirements described in 5.4. 


IS 18311 : 2023 


6 MAINTENANCE OF THE QUALITY OF 
SMART TRANSPORTATION FOR RAPID 
TRANSIT 


6.1 General 


To maintain the performance of smart transportation 
for rapid transit and confirm its effectiveness, the 
parameters shown in 6.2 shall be periodically 
observed. If the effectiveness of smart 
transportation cannot be confirmed, modify the 
current smart transportation services by partly 
changing the transportation conditions described in 
5.4, where possible and reasonable. 


6.2 Parameters to be Observed 


To ensure that the performance of smart 
transportation is effectively organized, observe any 
changes in the following parameters: 


a) Population in the large city zone or urban 
agglomeration where smart transportation 
was installed; 

b) Traffic flows to/from the target area; 

c) The modal split of smart transportation in 
the target area; 

d) The required capacity of smart 
transportation; 

e) City zone axes of the target area; and 

f) Parameters developed based on proven 
measures for transit performance. 


6.3 Modification of Smart Transportation 


When identifying unwanted changes in the value of 
the parameters designated in 6.2, modify the 
conditions of smart transportation as laid out in 5.4, 
where possible. To correct the transportation 
parameters, analyse any unexpected or irregular 
occurrences in the area where smart transportation 
was installed. Modify the irregular conditions of 
the smart transportation system if the irregular 
conditions are not acceptable. 


IS 18311 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
EXAMPLES OF SMART TRANSPORTATION THAT WORKS AS RAPID TRANSIT SERVICES 


Table 1 shows typical examples of smart transportation between cities and in large city zones, including megalopolises, available to citizens making a one-day trip in 
the respective areas. 


Table 1 Typical Examples of Smart Transportation for Rapid Transit between Cities or within a Large City Zone 


City Zone (Megalopolis) 


SI No. Service New York - [Los Angeles] Vienna - Seoul- /Bangkok-|BosWash,| Blue |The Tokaido Beijing - Four Metropolitan 
Conditions  Philadelphia,- San Diego, Brno - Daejeon, | Pattaya, US Banana, | Megalopolis, Tianjin City Zone, Taiwan 
US US Prague, | Republic of | Thailand EU Japan Economy Zone, 
EU Korea China 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 


i) Population in the 10 13 3 12 6 52 100 67 36 14 
area/10° persons 
ii) Transportation |Highway bus| Highway | Highway |Highway bus| Highway HSR HSR HSR HSR HSR 
mode bus bus bus 
111) | Service distance/ 155 194 340 153 147 735 492, 515 120 345 
km between 
London 
and Paris 
iv) | Maximum service 60 60 110 15 30 60 60 5 5 5 


frequency (service 
interval)/min 


Table 1 (Concluded) 
City Zone (Megalopolis) 


IS 18311 : 2023 


Service 
Conditions 


Minimum service 
frequency (service 
interval)/min 


New York - 
Philadelphia, 
US 


Los Angeles 
- San Diego, 
US 


Vienna - 
Brno - 
Prague, 
EU 


(5) 


Seoul - 
Daejeon, 
Republic of 
Korea 


(6) 


Bangkok - 
Pattaya, 
Thailand 


BosWash, 
US 


Blue 
Banana, 
EU 


The Tokaido 
Megalopolis, 
Japan 


Beijing - 
Tianjin 
Economy Zone, 
China 


(11) 


Four Metropolitan 
City Zone, Taiwan 


Maximum service 
speed/km/h 


78 (schedule 
speed) 


83 (schedule 
speed) 


74 
(schedule 
speed) 


77 (schedule 
speed) 


49 
(schedule 
speed) 


Average service 
speed/km/h 


80 


90 


80 


80 


50 


Travel time 
between 
terminals/h 


IS 18311 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (G-1602, Pioneer Park, Sector 61, 
Gurugram - 122001) 


AECOM India Private Limited, Gurugram 


AFCONS infrastructure Limited, New Delhi 

Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 

All India Institute of Local Self Government, Mumbai 

Bhubaneshwar Smart City Limited, Bhubaneshwar 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 

Builders Association of India, New Delhi 

Central Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, New Delhi 

Cochin Smart City Limited, Kochi 

Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers” Association of 
India, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor 
Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Development 


Department of Telecommunication, Ministry of 
Communications, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry, 
New Delhi 


Greater Corporation Chennai, Chennai 


Greater Vishakhapatnam Smart City Corporation Limited, 
Vizag 


Representative(s) 
DR SUDHIR KRISHNA (Chairperson) 
SHRI PAWAN KUMAR JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI ADVAIT AUNDHKAR 


SHRI KAMALJIT DAS 
SHRI SAROJ RANJAN DASH (Alternate) 


SHRI J. K. PRASAD 
SHRI DHARMESH AWASTHI 
SHRI ARUN SAHAI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND JOSHI 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIMATI LEENU SEHGAL 
SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL (Alternate) 


CHAIRPERSON 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DIRECTOR (NT-II) (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT KOHALE 
Ms DEBASHISH ROY (Alternate) 


SHRI B. V. BABU 
SHRI S. SUDHAKAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Organization 
Gujarat International Finance, Tec-City Company 
Limited, Gandhinagar 
Guwahati Municipal Corporation, Guwahati 
Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 
Indian Green Building Congress, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 


Institute of Town Planners, New Delhi 


Jabalpur Smart City Limited, Jabalpur 

Jammu Municipal Corporation, Jammu 

Karki Associates, New Delhi 

Ministry of Commerce & Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, New Delhi 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi 
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 


New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Panchayati Raj, New Delhi 
Ministry of Power, New Delhi 
Ministry of Rural Development, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Tourism, New Delhi 


Ministry of Transport, New Delhi 


Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, New Delhi 


IS 18311 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRIK. P. ABRAHAM 

MS SHEETAL RAKHEJA 
REPRESENTATIVE 

PROF UTTAM K. BANERJEE 


SHRIB. C. DATTA 
PROF S. K. KULSHRESHTHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI RAJNISH KARKI 

SHRI SUDHANSHU PANDEY 


DIRECTOR (BIS) 
UNDER SECRETARY (BIS) (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJSHEKHAR 
SHRI G. BALASUBRAMANIYAM (Alternate) 


DR M. MOHAPATRA 
DR O. P. MISHRA (Alternate) 


Ms KAVITA BHATIA 
SHRI MAYANK (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 
SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. (Alternate) 


DR A. K. TRIPATHI 
DR G. PRASAD (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY 
SHRI SAURABH DIDDI (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI BRIJENDRA SINGH 
SHRI GOPAL SAHA (Alternate) 


DR RAVI KANT BHATNAGAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIR. K. JAIN 
SHRI G. C. PATI (Alternate) 


IS 18311 : 2023 


Organization 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 


National Association of Software & Services Companies, 
Noida 


National Highway Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Real Estate Development Council, New Delhi 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


North East Space Application Centre, Shillong 


Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, 
New Delhi 


Ranchi Municipal Corporation, Ranchi 
Saviram Engineering Consultants Private Limited, Noida 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shillong Smart City Limited, Shillong 


Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Sulabh International Social Service Organization, 
New Delhi 


Surat Smart City Development Limited, Surat 
Survey of India, Dehradun 


Svayam National Centre for Inclusive Environment, 
New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 


Udaipur Smart City Limited, Udaipur 


Unified Traffic & Transportation Infrastructure 
(P & Engg) Centre, New Delhi 


University of Delhi, New Delhi 


Urban Development Department, Town & Country 
Planning Branch, Kolkata 


Urban Governance, Administrative Staff College of India, 
Hyderabad 


V. V. Giri National Labour Institute, Noida 


Representative(s) 


SHRIN. KISHORE NARANG 


SHRI MANOJIT BOSE 
Ms RAMA VEDASHREE (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY SABARWAL 


SHRI NAVIN RAHEJA 
BRIG R. R. SINGH (Alternate) 


DR S. C. JAYANTHI 
SHRI B. D. BHARATH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 


SHRI VINAY MAITRI 
DR SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


PROF K. J. NATH 
DR N. B. MAZUMDAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI NAVIN KUMAR NAYAN 
SHRI J. M. SYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI NITIN KUMAR AZAD (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL 
SHRI MANISH VERMA (Alternate) 


DR C. R. BABU 


SHRI SATANU PRASAD KAR 
MS SANDHYATRA SAHA (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS CHARY VEDALA 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Organization 


WRI (India), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity Sarita Vihar, 


New Delhi - 110076) 


(L/109, 


In Personal Capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida - 201301) 


In Personal capacity (B-399, 2" Floor, Meera Bagh, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi - 110063) 


In Personal Capacity (1/3 Shabd Pratap, Asharam, 
Lashkar, Gwalior - 474012) 


In Personal Capacity (Isavasyam, TC 18/1023, B-8/2, 
Lakshmi Nagar, Kesavadasapuram, Pottam P. O. 
Thiruvananthapuram - 695004) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 18311 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI AMIT BHATT 
MS PRERNA V. MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 


DR SANDEEP GARG 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 


SHRI S. P. BANSAL 


SHRI V. SURESH 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SINAM HUDSON SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Working Group on Smart Cities, CED 59/WG1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (G-1602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector 61, Gurugram - 122001) 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Company 
Limited, Gandhinagar 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 
School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, 
New Delhi 


WRI (India), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (B-399, 2” Floor, Meera 
Bagh, Paschim Vihar, New Delhi - 110063) 


Representative(s) 


DR SUDHIR KRISHNA (Convener) 


SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


SHRI K. P. ABRAHAM 


SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. 


SHRIN. KISHORE NARANG 
DR SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI 


SHRIR. SRINIVAS 


MS PRERNA MEHTA 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication 8 Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 59 (21650). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


