UMATA Ah IS 14814 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ufatectta — arent fa 


(TEA FRAT ) 


Acetylene — Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 71.080.10 


© BIS 2023 


ARA Ach aT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM HAF, 9 TRL TE HHL AMT, ag Reet - 110002 
e MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Acetylene is the simplest member of the class of unsaturated hydrocarbons called alkynes or 
acetylenes. It is a colourless gas, slightly lighter than air, and chemically stable; however, extremely 
flammable in the presence of open flames, sparks, static discharge, oxidizing materials, ignition sources 
and heat. Pure acetylene has sweet smell (ethereal), whereas its commercial product gives garlic odour 
due to presence of impurities. 


It is one of the most important of all starting materials for organic synthesis, particularly in commercial 
operations. Because of its high chemical reactivity, acetylene is an extremely versatile chemical in 
industrial synthesis. Approximately 80 percent of total annual production in the world is used for 
chemical synthesis. Acetylene has come into increasing prominence as the raw material for a whole 
series of organic compounds among them vinyl chloride, neoprene, vinyl acetate, acrylonitrile, vinyl 
ethers, vinyl acetylene, trichloroethylene, and perchloroethylene. These compounds are used in turn to 
produce a diverse group of products including plastics, synthetic rubber, dyestuffs, solvents and 
pharmaceuticals. Acetylene is also utilized to manufacture carbon black. 


The remaining 20 percent of the acetylene production is principally used for oxyacetylene cutting, 
welding and heat treating and as a fuel for atomic absorption instruments. Small amounts are used for 
lighting purpose in buoys, lighthouses, beacons and similar devices. 


The elimination of accidents is vital to public interest. Accidents produce social and economic loss, and 
impair individual or group productivity. Realization of this loss has led the authorities to devote a good 
deal of attention to safety education. Apart from general precautions, some typical precautions are 
required to be taken during manufacture, storage and handling of acetylene. This code of safety lays 
special emphasis on these points. 


This standard was originally published in 2000. With a view to update the standard based on the 
experience of last two decades and on the currently available data, the Committee felt a need to revise 
the standard. 


In this revision all the amendment issued, and general properties have been incorporated and 
modifications have been made to update safety measures for controlling hazards and essential 
information on symptoms of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and 
employee safety. 


The various clauses of the standard have been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian 
Standards on code of safety of chemicals. 


There is no ISO standard on the subject. In preparation of this standard considerable assistance has also 
been derived from the following publications: 


a) Linde, acetylene safety data sheet P-4559, 2021; 

b) CRC handbook of chemistry and physics, 94" edition, Haynes, W.M. (ed.), 2013-2014; 

c) International chemical safety card on acetylene, 2003; 

d) Sittig’s handbook of toxic and hazardous chemical carcinogens, 5" edition volume, 2008; and 
e) NIOSH pocket guide to chemical hazards, 2010. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in 
Annex B. 


IS 14814 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
ACETYLENE — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard describes properties of 
acetylene, the nature of hazards associated 
with it and essential information on storage, 
handling, packing, labelling, disposal of waste, 
spillage/leakages, training of personnel, 
personnel protective equipment and first-aid. 


1.2 This code, however, does not deal with the 
specifications for design of buildings, chemical 
engineering plants, storage vessels, method 
and ingredients used in the manufacture, 
equipment for waste disposal and equipment 
for operation controls. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions which, through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. At 
the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions 
of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions 
given in IS 7062, IS 4155 and IS 4167 shall 


apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 


4.1 General Information 


Acetylene is a colourless flammable gas. It is 
slightly lighter than air. Pure acetylene is 
odourless, whereas its commercial product 
gives garlic odour due to presence of 
impurities. It is extremely flammable in the 
presence of open flames, sparks, static 
discharge, oxidizing materials, ignition sources 
and heat. Acetylene burns with a dazzling 
light. It is highly flammable gas with 
dangerous risk of fire and explosion, if not 
properly handled. 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — acetylene 


4.1.2 Common Names and Synonyms — 
ethyne, ecetylene, ethine, narcylene, vinylene 


4.1.3 Uses 


Acetylene is the most important starting 
material for organic synthesis, particularly in 
industrial synthesis. It is an important raw 
material for synthesis of a number of organic 
compounds such as vinyl chloride, neoprene, 
vinyl acetate, acrylonitrile, vinyl ethers, vinyl 
acetylene, acetaldehyde, 1,4-butanediol, 
trichloroethylene, tetrahydrofuran, 
cyclooctatetraene, perchloroethylene, and 
acrylates. These compounds are in turn used to 
produce a diverse group of products including 
plastics, synthetic rubber, dyestuffs, solvents 
and pharmaceuticals. Acetylene, as a 
compressed gas is principally used for 
oxyacetylene cutting and welding of metals, 
and heat treating and as a fuel for atomic 
absorption instruments. Small amounts are 
used for lighting purpose in buoys, 
lighthouses, beacons and similar devices. 
Acetylene is also utilized to manufacture 
carbon black and as a component in contact 
lens coating. It is used to ripen fruit and mature 
trees or flowers. 


4.2 Identification 


4.2.1 Formula — C2H2 (Structural Formula — 
H-C = C-H) 


4.2.2 CAS Number — 74-86-2 
4.2.3 UN Number — 1001 
4.2.4 UN Class — 2.1 

4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2SE 
4.3 Physical Properties 
4.3.1 General 


Pure acetylene is a colourless and odourless 
gas. Acetylene of ordinary commercial purity 
has distinctive garlic like odour. Acetylene can 
be liquefied and solidified with relative ease. 
However, in both the liquid and solid states, 
acetylene explodes with extreme violence 
when ignited unless special conditions of 
confinement are employed. Acetylene 
cylinders contain acetylene gas dissolved in 
acetone absorbed onto a porous mass. 


IS 14814 : 2023 


4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 26.04 


4.3.3 Physical State — gas (It liquefies at 
-84 °C and its boiling point is -75 °C) 


4.3.4 Colour — colourless 


4.3.5 Odour — odourless (commercial product 
gives garlic odour) 


4.3.6 Boiling Point — (-)84 °C at 100 kPa 
(1 atm) 


4.3.7 Melting Point (Triple Point) — (-)82 °C 
at 122 kPa; Sublime at -84 °C (1 atm) 


4.3.8 Vapour Density (Air = 1) — 0.91 
(slightly lighter than air) 


4.3.9 Specific Gravity 


a) gas (air = 1) at 15 °C and 1 atm pressure — 
0.906; and 


b) liquid (water = 1) at -80 *C — 0.613 


4.3.10 Viscosity (Gas at 25 *C) — 0.009 43 cP 
(1 atm) 


4.3.11 Vapour Pressure at 20 °C — 4 406 kPa 
4.3.12 Heat of Combustion — 312 kcal/mol 
4.3.13 Critical Temperature — 35.15 °C 
4.3.14 Critical Pressure — 6 059 kPa 


4.3.15 Latent Heat of Vaporization at Triple 
Point — 614 kJ/kg 


4.3.16 Specific Heat of Gas at 1 atm and 
15.6 °C — 1.60 kJ/kg 


4.3.17 Solubility in Water — 1.2 g/l (at 20 °C) 


4.3.18 Solubility in Other Solvents — It is very 
soluble in acetone, one volume of which will 
dissolve 300 volumes of acetylene at 
1 207 kPa. It is slightly soluble in ethanol, 
carbon disulfide and acetic acid. 


4.3.19 Light Sensitivity — not available 

4.4 Chemical Properties 

4.4.1 Reactivity 

4.4.1.1 Acetylene, because of its triple bond, 
reacts additively with a wide variety of 


reagents for example, hydrogen, halogens, 
hydrogen halides, hydrogen cyanide, alcohols, 


carboxylic acids, aliphatic amines and arsenic 
trichloride, etc. Acetylene burns in air with an 
intensely hot, luminous and smoky flame. The 
ignition temperatures of acetylene and of 
acetylene air and acetylene oxygen mixtures 
vary according to composition, initial pressure, 
initial temperatures and water vapour content. 


4.4.1.2 Acetylene forms readily under certain 
conditions, explosive acetylides with copper, 
silver and mercury. These acetylides can 
detonate under shock and friction. In normal 
service conditions involving contact with 
highly caustic salts or solutions or contact with 
other materials corrosive to copper or copper 
alloys can render the generally acceptable 
alloys unserviceable for this service. The 
presence of moisture, certain acids, or alkaline 
materials tends to enhance the formation of 
copper acetylides. 


4.4.1.3 In the liquid or solid state or in the 
gaseous state at moderate or high pressure 
acetylene can be decomposed rapidly with the 
formation of carbon and hydrogen and 
evolution of heat. The decomposition of 
acetylene can be initiated by heat. 
Decomposition of liquid or solid acetylene also 
can be initiated by mechanical impact. In a 
confined space, the heated decomposition 
gases can cause detonation and consequent 
equipment and piping failure. 


4.4.2 Polymerisation 

Polymerize in presence of transition metal 
catalysts to give polyacetylene polymers. The 
polymerization reaction is a highly exothermic 
reaction. 


4.4.3 Allotrope Formation — not available 


4.4.4 Corrosion Properties — acetylene is not 
corrosive (it acts as corrosion inhibitor) 


4.5 Fire and Explosive Hazard Properties 
4.5.1 Ignition Temperature — 325 °C 

4.5.2 Auto Ignition Temperature — 305 °C 
4.5.3 Flammability 


4.5.3.1 Lower explosive limits (LEL), with air, 
percent (v/v) — 2.5 


4.5.3.2 Upper explosive limits (UEL) — 82 


If an ignition source is present 100 percent 
acetylene will decompose with violence under 


certain conditions of pressure and container 
size and shape. 


4.5.4 Flash Point — (-)17.7 °C (closed cup) 
4.5.5 Fire Risk 


Acetylene presents combustion, explosion and 
fire hazards when released from containment. 
Because of its reactivity it is easier to ignite 
than most flammable gases and burns more 
rapidly. The latter effect increases the severity 
of combustion explosion and increases the 
difficulty of providing explosion venting. 
Government of India notification No. GSR 
625(E) dated 7-8-83 which declares that 
acetylene when liquid or when subject to any 
pressure or when in ad-mixture with air and 
oxygen in whatever proportion and whatever 
pressure and whether or not in admixture with 
other substances shall be deemed as explosive 
within the meaning of the said Act. 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


Acetylene is a simple asphyxiant and 
anesthetic. As acetylene is asphyxiant, it 
displaces oxygen from the air and results in 
hypoxia. Inhalation of 10 percent acetylene has 
a slight intoxicating effect in man. Marked 
intoxication occurs at 20 percent, loss of 
coordination at 30 percent, unconsciousness in 
7 min exposure at 33 percent and 
unconsciousness upon 5 min exposure at 
35 percent. Complete anesthesia, increased 
blood pressure, narcosis and stimulated 
respiration at 80 percent. No evidence exists 
that repeated exposure of tolerable levels of 
acetylene has deleterious effects on health. The 
maximum permissible limit for acetylene in 
any working environment should not exceed 
0.5 percent (5 000 ppm). Pure acetylene is non 
toxic at the beginning and if acetylene contains 
0.05 percent phosphine as impurity its 
maximum permissible concentration shall be 
500 ppm. OSHA permissible exposure limit 
(PEL-CL) for acetylene is 25 000 ppm. The 
main hazards associated with acetylene are fire 
and explosion. 


5.2 Route of Entry 
5.2.1 Skin 


It does not get absorbed through skin. Contact 
with rapidly expanding gas may cause burns or 


IS 14814 : 2023 


frostbite. 
5.2.2 Eyes 
Not much effect of irritation and burning 
sensation of the eyelids. Contact with rapidly 
expanding gas may cause burns or frostbite. 
5.2.3 Ingestion 
Route of entry being inhalation there is no 
effect on the digestive tract. Refer to the 
inhalation section. 
5.2.4 Inhalation 
Inhalation is the major route of exposure. 
Exposure to high concentration may cause 
dizziness, lethargy, headache, fatigue, 
tachycardia, tachypnoea, nausea, vomiting 
suffocation, hypertension or narcosis. 
5.2.5 Long Term Effects — no data available 
5.3 Toxicity Information 
Available toxicity values are given below: 

a) Threshold limit value - Time-weighted 


average (TLV-TWA) — Simple 
asphyxiant, TLV is 2 500 ppm 


b 


= 


Short term exposure limit (STEL) — 
not available 


c 


wm 


Immediately dangerous to life and 
health (IDLH) — not available 


d 


wm 


Lethal dose (LDso) — not available 


e 


wm 


Lethal dose (LD. (human) oral — not 
available 


f) Inhalation (rat) lethal concentration 

(LC) — Simple asphyxiant 
(> 500 000 ppm) 

5.4 Antidote 

There is no antidote for acetylene toxicity. 

5.5 Health Effects 

5.5.1 Signs and Symptoms 

Exposure to high concentration may cause 

dizziness, lethargy, headache, fatigue, 


tachycardia, tachypnoea, nausea, vomiting 
suffocation, hypertension or narcosis. 


IS 14814 : 2023 


5.5.2 Acute Toxicity 


As acetylene is a simple asphyxiant it 
displaces oxygen from the air and results in 
hypoxia. The most significant health hazard on 
acute toxicity is inhalation of oxygen-deficient 
air. These hazardous conditions cause 
symptoms such as shortness of breath, 
respiratory difficulty, headaches, ringing in 
ears, headache, dizziness, wheezing, vomiting 
and nausea. At high concentrations of 
acetylene exposure, unconsciousness or death 
may occur. The skin of a victim of over- 
exposure may turn to blue colour. 


5.5.3 Chronic Toxicity 


No data available on the adverse health effects 
associated with chronic exposure to acetylene. 


6 PERSONAL 
EQUIPMENT 


PROTECTIVE 


6.1 Availability and Use 


Personal protective equipment should include 
safety goggles while examining the porous 
mass of the cylinder and leather hand gloves in 
case cylinders are handled manually. Self- 
contained breathing apparatus shall be used in 
areas of high concentration. 


Safe working conditions, adequate ventilation, 
and intelligent conduct on the part of 
employees working with acetylene are the only 
practical means of protecting the workers. One 
should keep firmly in mind that personal 
protective equipment protects only the worker 
wearing it, and other unprotected workers in 
the area maybe exposed to danger. 


The correct usage of personal protective 
equipment requires the education of the 
workers in proper employment of the 
equipment available to him/her. Under 
conditions which are sufficiently hazardous to 
require personal protective equipment, its use 
should be supervised and the type of protective 
equipment selected should be capable of 
control over any potential hazards. 


6.2 Non-Respiratory Equipment 
6.2.1 Eye and Face Protection 


Adequate chemical splash protection as per 
IS 8520. 


6.2.2 Head Protection 


Head protection hard hats should be worn 


where there is danger of falling objects. 
6.2.3 Foot and Leg Protection 


Safety shoes should be worn while handling 
containers [see IS 15298 (Part 2)]. 


6.2.4 Body, Skin and Hand Protection 


Clothing made of leather, asbestos, rubber or 
other impervious materials may be worn to 
protect the body against the splashes. Working 
gloves should be worn for hand protection 
[see IS 6994 (Part 6) : 2021]. Fireproof 
overalls should be worn when operations 
involving acetylene fires are encountered 
(see IS 8519 and IS 8807). 


6.3 Respiratory Equipment 


Use air-purifying or air-supplied respirators, as 
appropriate, where local or general exhaust 
ventilation is inadequate. Adequate ventilation 
must keep worker exposure below all 
applicable limits for fumes, gases, and other 
by-products of welding with acetylene. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING 
AND TRANSPORTATION 


7.1 General 


Storage, transportation and handling of 
acetylene in cylinder shall confirm to Gas 
Cylinder Rules, 1981. All personal handling 
acetylene should use proper personal 
protective equipment. Appropriate firefighting 
equipment should be available in the vicinity 
while handling acetylene. Persons handling 
acetylene should have adequate training in use 
of firefighting equipment. 


7.2 Storage 


7.2.1 Acetylene is dissolved in acetone. 
Acetylene in its free state under pressure may 
decompose violently. The higher the pressure, 
the smaller the initial force required to cause 
an explosion. Therefore, use of gas in free state 
outside the cylinder is normally permissible at 
pressure of 0.612 atm. Under special 
circumstances and adequate safety measures 
and after obtaining clearance from the 
statutory authority (chief controller of 
explosives) acetylene gas in free state may be 
used at pressure of maximum 1.021 atm. 
Pressure exceeding this limit are utilized for 
chemical synthesis, however, special means to 
ensure safety are employed. 


7.2.2 Acetylene cylinders are filled with a 
porous material which holds the acetone. 
Dissolved acetylene cylinder means a portable 
vessel of approved design, having a valve, 
with or without safety devices, containing 
porous mass and acetone or other solvent for 
the storage of dissolved acetylene and the 
quantity of acetylene saturating the solvent at 
atmospheric pressure and at a temperature of 
15 °C. Acetylene cylinders avoid the 
decomposition characteristics of the gas by 
providing a porous mass packing material 
having minute cellular spaces so that no 
pockets of appreciable size remain where free 
acetylene in gaseous form can collect. The 
maximum working pressure of the cylinder 
charged with acetylene at 15 °C is equal to 
15.495 atm when acetone is the solvent. 


7.3 Handling 


7.3.1 Acetylene cylinders should be used or 
stored only in an upright position to avoid 
possibility of acetone leaking from cylinder. 
However, where this is not possible it is 
recommended that the cylinder be put in an 
upright position and left that way for about 
half an hour before being used. Acetylene 
cylinders should be handled very carefully to 
prevent damage which might lead to bursting 
of cylinders or leakage through the cylinder 
valve. They should not be banged, jolted, 
violently dropped or thrown about when being 
unloaded from a truck. The cylinder should be 
lowered gently. A suitable carrying device for 
acetylene cylinders should be used. Use only 
standard keys for operating the valves and 
make sure that these are free from oil and 
grease. 


7.3.2 When using acetylene, cylinder valve 
should be closed before shutting of the 
regulator to permit the gas to bleed from the 
regulator. Acetylene should not be used 
through blowpipes or other devices equipped 
with shut-off valves on the acetylene supply 
connections without reducing the pressure 
through a suitable regulator. 


7.3.3 Storage of acetylene and oxygen 
cylinders together is not permitted. They 
should be separately grouped. Before using 
acetylene ensure that all connections are gas 
tight and remain so. Always open cylinder 
valve slowly. Never use a hammer or mallet in 
attempting to open or close a valve. Do not 
open in acetylene cylinder valve more than one 
and one-half turns. 


7.3.4 Acetylene is highly flammable. 


IS 14814 : 2023 


Acetylene cylinders should not be stored near 
an open flame, nor where, in case of a leak, the 
gas can diffuse to a flame or spark from a 
motor. In premises for filling and storing 
acetylene gas in cylinders all electric meters, 
distribution boards, switches, fuses, plugs and 
sockets, electric fixed lamps, portable hand 
lamps shall be of flame proof construction 
conforming to IS/IEC 60079-1. The wrench 
used for opening the cylinder valve should 
always be kept on the valve spindle when the 
cylinder is in use. Any hand tools employed 
should be of the non-sparking type. 
Containers, pipes, valves or fittings made of 
copper or copper alloys (brass, bronze) should 
not be used. In installation for the manufacture 
or use of acetylene, safety devices must be 
provided to reduce pressure and flash backs 
and to prevent the formation of explosive 
mixture. 


7.3.5 When using acetylene, good ventilation 
should always be provided to remove any 
explosive mixture as rapidly as possible. The 
colour of the acetylene gas cylinder shall be as 
prescribed in IS 4379. 


7.3.6 When returning empty acetylene 
cylinder, ensure closing of the valves. 


7.3.7 There are rigid regulations covering the 
filling of acetylene cylinders and since this 
process may be hazardous, if improperly done, 
acetylene cylinders must be filled only by 
experienced and trained and authorised persons 
and strictly in accordance with Rules 45-50 of 
Gas Cylinder Rules, 1981. 


7.3.8 When installing acetylene cylinders, the 
user should comply with all local, state and 
municipal regulations. 


7.3.9 Safety devices in valves or cylinder 
should never be tampered with. 


7.3.10 No attempt should be made under any 
circumstances to transfer acetylene gas from 
one cylinder to another to refill acetylene 
cylinder, or to mix any other gas with 
acetylene in a cylinder. 


7.3.11 Acetylene cylinders should not be used 
as rollers or supports or for any other purpose 
other than storing acetylene. 


7.4 Labelling 


7.4.1 Use of hazard warning labels/symbols in 
plant area are recommended. 


IS 14814 : 2023 


7.4.2 Cautionary and warning notice should be 
displayed. 


SMOKING STRICTLY PROHIBITED 
NO NAKED FLAME 
AVOID LEAKAGES 


7.4.3 Information on Labels 


a) Every cylinder shall be labelled with 
the name of gas and name and address 
of person by whom the cylinder was 
filled; 


b) Date of last filling of gas in the 
cylinder; 


c) Weight of gas filled; and 


d) A warning in the following terms shall 
be attached to every cylinder: 


1) Do not change the colour and 
marking of the cylinder; 


2) This cylinder should not be 
filled with any gas other than the 
one it contains; 


3) No flammable material should 
be stored in the immediate 
vicinity of this cylinder or in the 
same room where it is kept; 


4) No oil or similar lubricant 
should be used on the valves and 
other fittings of this cylinder; 


5) Look for the next date of test, 
which is marked on a metal ring 
inserted between the valve and 
the neck of the cylinder, and if 
the date is over do not accept the 
cylinder; and 


6) Do not accept the cylinder 
without a valve. 


7.5 Transport 


7.5.1 Cylinders must be protected against 
dropping when being unloaded from a truck or 
platform. Do not drag or roll the cylinder. 


7.5.2 Transportation of cylinders in a two 
wheeled mechanically propelled vehicle is 
prohibited. 


7.5.3 Cylinders should be so transported as not 
to project in the horizontal plane beyond the 
sides or ends of the vehicle. 


7.5.4 There shall be no sharp projections on 
the inside of the vehicle. 


7.5.5 Cylinders should be adequately secured 
to prevent their falling from the vehicle and 
being subjected to rough handling, excessive 
shocks or local stresses. 


7.5.6 Cylinders transported in vehicles shall be 
blocked or braced and be so secured to prevent 
movement, striking each other or falling down. 


7.5.7 Cylinders should not be transported 
along with any other articles of flammable or 
corrosive nature and also along with the 
cylinders containing any other type of 
compressed gases especially oxygen. 


7.5.8 Lifting magnet, ropes or chain or any 
other device in which the cylinder itself forms 
a part of the carrier, should not be used for 
hoisting acetylene cylinders. When it is to be 
hoisted, a platform cage or cradle should be 
provided to protect the cylinder from being 
damaged and to keep it from falling out. 


7.5.9 Every acetylene cylinder when 
transported shall have its valves protected 
against damage. 


7.5.10 Ensure that the load space is separated 
from driver’s compartment while transporting 
on vehicle. 


7.5.11 Ensure vehicle driver is aware of the 
potential hazard of the acetylene and knows 
dos and don’ts in the event of an accident or an 
emergency. 


7.5.12 Before transportation of acetylene 
containers the following should be ensured: 


a) Adequate ventilation is there; 
b) Containers are firmly secured; and 


c) Cylinder valves are closed properly and 
not leaking; 


NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is 
involved it shall be carried out in accordance with 
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. While 
referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in 
the subsequent amendments of those statutes shall 
be taken into account. 


8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGES AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 General 


All personal attending to spill/leak should use 
proper personal protective equipment and 
firefighting equipment while handling 
acetylene. 


8.2 Spillage 


Because acetylene and air in certain 
proportions are explosive, care should be taken 
to prevent acetylene leakage, connections 
should be kept tight and hose maintained in 
good condition. 


8.3 Leakage 


8.3.1 Points of suspected leakage should be 
tested with soap solution. Never test the leak 
with open flame. 


8.3.2 If acetylene leaks around the valve 
spindle when the valve is open, close the valve 
and tighten gland nut. If this does not stop leak 
the supplier should be notified. 


8.4 Waste Disposal 


8.4.1 In case there is leak through the safety 
fusible plug, the cylinder should be removed in 
an open space well away from any possible 
source of ignition. Open the valve slightly to 
let the acetylene escape slowly. A sign to be 
placed near the cylinders warning persons 
approaching the cylinder with cigarettes or 
with any other open lights. When the cylinder 
is empty, close the valve and notify the 
manufacturer. 


8.4.2 Acetylene cylinder developing a leak 
during transport shall be promptly removed to 
an open isolated place away from any source 
of ignition and the person responsible for 
transportation shall immediately contact the 
filler or the consignor for necessary advice. 


9 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE 
FIGHTING 


9,1 Fire Prevention 


9.1.1 No persons shall smoke and no articles or 
substances of flammable nature or liable to 
spontaneous ignition or communicate fire or 
explosion shall be allowed at any time in 
proximity to a place where any cylinder for 
acetylene gas is being filled, stored or handled. 


9.1.2 No person in or near any place where 
acetylene is filled stored or handled shall have 
in possession any matches, fuses or other 
appliances for producing ignition or explosion. 


9.1.3 In premises for filling and storing 
acetylene gas into cylinders, all electrical 
meters, distribution boards, switch fuses, plugs 
and sockets, electric fixed lamps, portable 


IS 14814 : 2023 


hand lamps and motors shall be of flame proof 
construction. 


9.2 Fire Fighting 


Carbon dioxide can be used to extinguish the 
flame. Water spray may be used to keep fire 
exposed cylinders cool. Water spray or soda 
acid/pressured water CO, type extinguishers 
must not be used in case of fire in the calcium 
carbide go down or generator hopper for 
producing acetylene. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Persons handling or working in plant 
involving acetylene shall have training so that 
they can expected to carry out their jobs safely 
and effectively. They should be familiar with 
accepted methods of handling and hazards 
involved in producing, storing, handling and 
using of acetylene gas. During instructions 
stress should be given to particularly 
hazardous nature of the gas. All persons should 
be familiar with the location of fire alarm 
boxes, first aid boxes and fire extinguishers. 


10.2 Safety in handling acetylene depends to a 
great extent upon the effectiveness of 
employees education, proper safety 
instructions, intelligent supervision and strictly 
complying with safety rules and regulation. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID 
AND MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 
11.1.1 Personal Hygiene 
11.1.1.1 Employees should bath daily after 
finishing work. They should report any 
abnormality related to any inhalation or 


ingestion of acetone to medical department. 


11.1.1.2 Food should not be stored or eaten 
near the place where acetone is being handled. 


11.1.2 Physical Examination 

11.1.2.1 Pre-placement physical examinations 
Pre-placement medical examination should be 
directed toward medical fitness of employees 
for particular occupation. 


11.1.2.2 Periodic examination 


Periodic medical examination aim to detect 
susceptible workers for whom corrective 


IS 14814 : 2023 


actions are required before they develop overt 
occupational diseases. Meanwhile safety and 
health measures at work should be reviewed 
for necessary remedial actions. 


11.2 FIRST AID 
11.2.1 General Principles 


First-aid treatment should be started at once in 
all cases of contact with acetylene in any form 
otherwise further damage may result. Refer all 
injured persons to a physician even when the 
effect appears to be slight. Give the physician 
a detailed account of the accident. 


First aider must move the affected person to 
safe, well-ventilated area. First aider also 
should use PPEs. 


11.2.2 Contact with Eye 


If eye tissue is frozen, seek medical attention 
immediately; if tissue is not frozen, 
immediately and thoroughly flush the eyes 
with large amounts of water for at least 
15 min, occasionally lifting the lower and 
upper eyelids. If irritation, pain, swelling, 
lacrimation, or photophobia persist, get 
medical attention as soon as possible. 


11.2.3 Contact with Skin 


a) If frostbite has occurred, seek medical 
attention immediately ‘DO NOT 
RUB THE AFFECTED AREAS OR 
FLUSH THEM WITH WATER”. In 
order to prevent further tissue damage 
‘DO NOT ATTEMPT TO REMOVE 
FROZEN CLOTHING FROM 
FROSTBITTEN AREAS’; and 


b) If frostbite has not occurred 


‘IMMEDIATELY AND 
THOROUGHLY WASH 
CONTAMINATED SKIN WITH 
SOAP AND WATER’. 

11.2.4 Inhalation 


If a person breathes large amounts of this 
chemical, move the exposed person to fresh air 
at once. Other measures are usually 
unnecessary. 


11.2.5 Ingestion 


Ingestion is not considered a potential route of 
exposure. 


11.2.6 First-Aid Kit 


Exposure to high concentration of acetylene 
causes intoxication and loss of coordination. 
Workmen with these symptoms should be 
removed at once to uncontaminated air and a 
physician should be called. If breathing stops, 
given artificial respiration immediately and 
call for medical attention. If breathing is 
difficult, administer oxygen quickly. In all 
cases call for a doctor immediately. 


12 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


Additional information essential for particular 
equipment used for handling of acetylene, 
Security measures to be taken while handling 
of acetylene etc as essential for controlling 
hazards may be collected and applied. 


IS No. 
IS 4155 : 2023 


IS 4167 : 2020 


IS 4379 : 2021 


IS 6994 (Part 6) : 


2021 


IS 7062 : 1973 


IS 8519 : 1977 


ANNEX A 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Glossary of terms 
relating to chemical and 
radiation hazards and 
hazardous chemicals 
(first revision) 


Glossary of terms 
relating to air pollution 
(second revision) 


Identification of the 
contents of industrial 
gas cylinders (second 
revision) 


Protection of arms and 
hands: Part 6 Protective 
gloves against mechanical 
risks 


Glossary of terms used 
in gas industry 


Guide for selection of 
industrial safety 
equipment for body 
protection 


IS No. 
IS 8520 : 2023 


IS 8807: 1978 


IS 15298 (Part 2) : 
2016 


IS/IEC 60079-1 : 
2014 


IS 14814 : 2023 


Title 
Eye and face protection 
— Guidance on 
selection, use, and 
maintenance (first 
revision) 


Guide for selection of 
industrial safety 
equipment for 
protection of arms and 
hands 


Personal protective 
equipment: Part 2 Safety 
footwear (second 
revision) 


Explosive atmospheres: 


Part 1 Equipment 
protection by 
flameproof enclosures 
“d” (first revision) 


IS 14814 : 2023 


ANNEXB 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (1204, Bhumika Residency, Sector 20 
Block No 21 Roadpali Klambolinode, Navi Mumbai, 
410218) 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Government of India, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government of India, 
New Delhi 


Department of Space (ISRO), Bengaluru 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutes, Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association, Mumbai 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


10 


Representative(s) 


SHRIK. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRIK. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIH. S. DAS (Alternate) 


MS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRINISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRIMURALEEKRISHNANR. 
Ms LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRIH. M BHANDARI 
SHRIP. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRISANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRIRAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 


PROF SANDIP ROY 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Pet and Natural 


Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association of 
India, Mumbai 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (1-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 
Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


IS 14814 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DRD.K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
D SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST 
‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


MS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 


(CHEMICAL), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 07 (21594). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


