URAT ATE IS 1680 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


fra sik чети «ата are чїй 
TAA Фф RIE этет Ф SUA HI 
AfA fga 


( 907 JRIAT) 


Code of Practice for Treatment of 
Water for Low and Medium Pressure 
Land Boilers 
( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 27.060.01 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG gA 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Мач, 9 Ig Wes THX AUT, Ag {е - 110002 
Vee” МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2022 Price Group 8 


Water Quality for Industrial Purposes, CHD 13 


FOREWORD 


‘This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the Water Quality 
for Industrial Purposes Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council ’ 


There are two sides to a boiler; the fire side and the water side. Usually much care is devoted on keeping the fire 
side free from accumulations of deposits that would tend to interfere with adequate heat transfer. However, in 
spite of availability of many simple forms of modern water treatment in many of the low pressure boilers, little 
attempt is made to keep the water side free from deposits. Scale on the water side can be far more dangerous than 
deposits on the fire side. This may result in overheating of the metal and consequent failure and risk of explosion. 


This standard lays down conditions to be aimed at in boiler feed water and boiler water to overcome the troubles 
experienced on the water side of the boilers. Whist boilers operating at higher pressures are usually attended by 
qualified works chemists, low pressure boilers usually receive little attention. Particular attention has, therefore, 
been given in this standard to the needs of operators of low pressure boilers, that is, those operating below 2.0 
MN/m pressure. Quality requirement for boiler feeds and methods for treatment suitable for boilers working 
under higher pressure ир to 5.9 MN/m? (60 kgf/cm?) have also been given but it is recommended that advice of 
technical specialists in the treatment of water as also of boiler makers should be obtained to determine the special 
form of treatment suitable to meet the particular requirements. Whenever available, advice of these specialists 
may also be sought in operating low pressure boilers. 


This standard was first published in 1960. In the first revision, it included methods for elimination of oil in boiler 
water and to change the limits of dissolved oxygen and pH. In the second revision, specific objects and methods 
for water treatment was included and in the third revision, boilers operating pressure was changed to 5.9 MN/m? 
instead of 4.1 MN/m?. 


In this fourth revision the following changes have been incorporated: 


a) All the amendments issued till date have incorporated; 

b) Method of removal of oil and grease has been updated; 

c) Inpretreatment the method of dealkalization and reverse osmosis has been added; 

d) Use of sludge conditioners, oxygen scavengers and neutralizing amines have been added; and 

e) Boiling out procedure has been updated. 
In preparing this standard, the considerable assistance has been derived from BS 02486 : 1997 (2008) 
‘Recommendations for treatment of water for steam boilers and water heaters’ issued by the British Standards 
Institution and American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) guidelines. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 


observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 
2022 ‘Rules for Rounding off Numerical Values (second revision)’. 


IS 1680 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TREATMENT OF WATER FOR LOW 
AND MEDIUM PRESSURE LAND BOILERS 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard deals with the chemical methods 
of attaining the conditions to be aimed at for water 
for land/ Industrial boilers in order to overcome the 
troubles on the water side of boilers operating up to 
2.0 MN/m? ( 20 bar ) Low Pressure and between 2.0 
апа 5.9 MN/m? (20 bar and 60 bar) for Medium 
Pressures. 


1.2 Land boilers operating at pressure higher than 
5.9 MN/m? (60 bar) marine boilers and locomotive 
boilers are not covered in this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publications, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 3025 Methods of sampling and test 

(Part 21) : (Physical And Chemical) for 

2009 water and wastewater: Part 21 
Hardness (second revision) 


IS 3025 Methods of sampling and test 

(Part 46) (Physical and Chemical) for water 

1994 and wastewater: Part 46 
Magnesium (first revision) 


IS 3025 Methods of sampling and test 
(Part 61) : (Physical and Chemical) for water 
2008 and wastewater: Part 61 Total and 


free carbon dioxide (first revision) 


IS 10392 : Specification for feed water and 
1982 boiler water for low and medium 
pressure boilers 


IS 11671 : Glossary of terms relating to 
1985 boiler water 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 11671 shall apply, in addition to the 
following: 


3.1 Distribution ratio 


It is the ratio of product concentration in vapor phase 
to product concentration in liquid phase. 


4 IMPURITIES IN WATER 


4.1 A really satisfactory boiler feed water supply is 
never obtained free in nature. Rain water dissolves 
soluble gases from the air and as it begins to flow 
over the earth's surface or through its strata, it takes 
up more impurities, such as mineral salts, organic 
matter and clay. The water thus obtained in nature 
may contain the following: 


a) Dissolved gases; 

b) Dissolved solids; 

c) Suspended solids; and 
d) Living organisms. 


4.1.1 Dissolved Gases 


Rain water as it descends to the earth takes up 
oxygen, nitrogen and carbon dioxide from the air. 
The water also picks up carbon dioxide from 
decaying organic matter on the surface of the 
ground. Oxygen and carbon dioxide can cause 
corrosion and have, therefore, to be removed from 
feed water. Nitrogen is an inert gas and does not 
affect boilers. Carbon dioxide dissolves chalk or 
limestone; magnesium carbonate is also similarly 
dissolved. Calcium and magnesium bicarbonates are 
thus obtained in varying amounts in almost every 
natural water. 


4.1.1.1 The dissolved oxygen which is corrosive for 
feed lines, boiler and condensate return line system 
needs to be removed by using a deaerator and 
subsequently treated by oxygen scavengers or by 
using oxygen scavengers alone for low pressure 
boilers. The use of deaerator and oxygen scavengers 
make the treatment economical, reduce TDS in 
boiler water thereby reducing blow down and save 
energy. 


IS 1680 : 2022 


4.1.2 Dissolved Solids 


The dissolved solids are the ones which are present 
in dissolved state in water. The salts in soluble form 
(dissolved solids) dissociate to cations (positively 
charged) and anions (negatively charged) in water. 
All in water chemistry are expressed as mg/l as 
calcium carbonate (CaCO3) to balance the water 
analysis and to derive various interpretations used in 
water chemistry. Salts usually present in the 
dissolved state in natural water are those of sodium, 
calcium and magnesium. Salts of sodium are 
harmless unless present in very large quantity. 
Natural waters also contain varying amounts of 
silica. Iron is often present in the form of ferrous iron 
(Fe?*) which is converted to the thermodynamically 
stable ferric iron (Fe**) in the presence of dissolved 
oxygen in the pH range of natural waters. The 
oxidized ferric iron is brown in colour. 


4.1.2.1 The most important dissolved salts from the 
point of view of boiler feed are those of calcium and 
magnesium. Their presence makes water hard and a 
deposit or scale is obtained by the use of such water 
in boilers as most salts of calcium and magnesium 
precipitate due to their reduced solubility at high 
temperature. Silica also is important, particularly in 
the case of medium pressure boilers, as it forms a 
hard scale. Further, silica may be steam volatile, 
creating problems with turbine blades. 


4.1.2.2 The hardness of water is mostly present as 
calcium and magnesium salts of bicarbonates but 
may also present as salts of chlorides and sulphates. 


4.1.2.3 The alkalinity is mostly present as 
bicarbonate in raw water but decompose to 
carbonates completely and carbonates decompose to 
hydroxides partly at high temperatures in boilers. 
The bicarbonates, carbonates and hydroxides of 
calcium and magnesium give rise to ‘alkaline’ or 
‘carbonate’ hardness and the chlorides, sulphates and 
nitrates to 'non-alkaline' or 'non-carbonate’ hardness. 
The terms temporary and permanent hardness are 
now discarded and have been replaced by carbonate 
and non-carbonate hardness respectively. 


4.1.2.4 The hardness is removed by external 
treatment. The internal treatment is done to remove 
residual hardness by using chemical treatment by 
precipitating hardness with chemicals such as 
phosphate to a fluffy precipitates which do not settle 
on metal surfaces and are removed while giving 
boiler blow down. 


4.1.3 Suspended Solids 


Impurities which are held in suspension and can be 
removed by sedimentation and filtration, are 
mostlyin the form of clay, silt, insoluble 
inorganicsalts, organic matter or precipitated iron 
salts. They may get deposited in feed lines, 
economizers and boilers unless removed. 


4.1.4 Living Organisms 


Living organisms are present in varying numbers in 
all natural waters and are treated in pretreatment 
prior to the boiler by using oxidizing agents such as 
chlorine. 


4.2 Oils and Grease 


Sometimes oils and grease find their way into water 
used for boiler feed. Oils and greases are bad 
conductors of heat and when they form a film on the 
boiler plate or tube, they interfere with free transfer 
of heat to the water with the result that overheating 
takes place at some portions which may produce 
bulging or even bursting. Besides they also cause 
foaming in boilers. 


5 SOURCES OF WATER 


5.1 Water is obtained from different sources in 
nature and its composition is also found to differ 
widely with its source. It is therefore, necessary to 
study the characteristics of these supplies to treat 
them properly to obtain a supply of desired quality. 
The usual sources of water are as follows: 


a) Surface Water — from rivers, streams or 
lakes; and 

b) Underground Water — from wells and 
springs. 


5.1.1 Surface Water 


As water flows over the earth, it dissolves salts of 
sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, iron and 
aluminium, besides silica and traces of manganese 
and other heavy metals. In addition to these 
dissolved impurities, surface water particularly river 
water, contains significant concentrations of various 
colloidal clays of siliceous origin, referred to as 
turbidity. Turbidity is very high in rainy season. It 
also contains to a lesser degree hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic colloids of sewage and vegetative 
origin, depending on the degree of pollution from 
domestic and industrial waste waters. It contains 
carbonate and non-carbonate hardness in varying 
proportions. Iron, if present, may be in soluble or in 
insoluble state. 


5.1.2 Underground Water 


The character of underground water depends upon 
the strata through which it has passed. Usually, it 
may contains both carbonate as well as non- 
carbonate hardness. Underground waters in general 
are rich in free carbon dioxide and in bicarbonates. 
Silica content is sometimes high. In many cases iron 
and manganese are present along with bicarbonates. 


6 OBJECTIVES OF TREATMENT 
The objectives of treatment are: 


a) Depositcontrol to maintain boiler 
efficiency; 


b) Pitting corrosion control; 

c) Prevent caustic gauging/caustic 
embrittlement; 

d) Prevent corrosion of condensate return 
line system; 

e) Managing steam purity; 

f) Increasing equipment life; 

g) Prevent shutdown; and 

h) Safety of operations. 


6.1 When water is evaporated in a boiler, dissolved 
salts are concentrated and insoluble salts are 
precipitated. They may either separate out in the 
form of a non-adhering soft sludge which can be 
removed without difficulty or they may deposit on 
the sides of the boiler and the tubes as a firmly 
adhering scale. Accumulation of scale and deposit 
formation on heating surfaces considerably reduces 
the rate of heat transfer and introduces the risk of 
overheating and failure of effected surfaces. The 
effect of scale becomes more serious as the boiler 
pressure and heat transfer rates increase to a point 
when temperatures approach more closely the upper 
safe value for the materials used. 


6.2 Corrosion destroys the metal causing serious 
damage to the boiler. The corrosiveness of water is 
determined by the nature of salts present in it, pH 
and dissolved oxygen content. Under boiler 
conditions, concentrated alkalis and nitrates can also 
attack steel. The effect of neutral salts on corrosion 
is complex, but chlorides are known to increase it. It 
shall be remembered, however, that water of high 
purity may even be more corrosive than raw water, 
especially in presence of dissolved oxygen. 


6.3 Condensate can become corrosive as a result of 
the presence of certain gaseous impurities such as 
carbon dioxide in the steam, since the gaseous 
impurities dissolve in the condensate as it is formed. 
The gaseous, impurities that may be formed in the 
boiler are carbon dioxide, oxygen, ammonia, 
hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide and hydrogen. 
Of these carbon dioxide and oxygen are of greater 
significance in practice. Under certain conditions the 
water in the boiler produces foam, and a certain 
portion of it is carried forward by steam. This causes 
damage to fittings using steam. 


6.4 Water before use may, therefore, require 
treatment for: 


a) Removal of suspended matter; 

b) Prevention of scale forming salts; 

c) Prevention of corrosion and caustic 
embrittlement; 

d) Elimination of certain gases; 

e) Prevention of foaming; and 

f) Removal of grease and oils. 


IS 1680 : 2022 


7 TREATMENT OF FEED WATER 


7.1 The treatment to be employed to obtain the 
desired results is generally effected in the following 
two stages: 


a) External treatment; and 


It is intended to use treatment for make up water 
and in some cases treat Return Condensate. The 
external treatment equipment should be 
designed based on correct sample analysis 
taking into account all seasonal variations and 
alternative supplies. It comprises of following 
two stages: 


1) Pretreatment 


Pretreatment for removal of suspended 
solids, organic matter and colloidal silica, 
wherever necessary; and 


2) Softening/demineralization 


Treatment of raw water to remove scale 
forming ions or / and to remove dissolved 
impurities reducing total dissolved solids 
(TDS) which also remove scale forming 
impurities. 


b) Internal Chemical Treatment 


Addition of small quantities of chemicals to the 
final feed water or into the boiler drum, if 
necessary, to adjust its composition to meet 
particular conditions of the boiler plant. 


7.2 External Treatment 
7.2.1 Pretreatment 


The methods of pre-treatment commonly 
encountered are coagulation, sedimentation, 
clarification, floatation, filtration, chlorination and 
de chlorination. 


7.2.1.1 Sedimentation 


The water is passed through a tank of sufficient size 
to allow sediments to settle down with a defined 
retention time in the tank. The clear water is drawn 
from the top of the tank whereas sludge which gets 
settled at the bottom of tank is removed frequently. 
The suspended solids gets still carried over. 


7.2.1.2 Clarification and floatation 


The suspended solids which stay in a dispersed state 
due to electrostatically negatively charged particles 
consequently repelling each other due to presence of 
alkalinity are settled or floated by adding coagulants 
in the clarifier. The function of coagulants is to 
neutralize the charge of these negatively charged 
particles and agglomerate these particles to form 
flocs which settle down or float in the clarifier. 


The typical coagulants used are alum or ferric 
chloride or aluminium chlorohydrate (ACH) as 


IS 1680 : 2022 


inorganic coagulants. The new generation organic 
coagulants such as polydadmac is also used as 
alternative to Inorganic Coagulants. The polyamine 
is also used selectively where there are high organics 
in water. The superannuated clear water is taken 
from top of the clarifier. The best way to decide a 
coagulant and its dosage is to do jar test which 
should be done prior to finalizing the one. The user 
should verify purity, quality, effectiveness and 
portability (if water is used for drinking water) of 
coagulants before use. The sludge is removed from 
the clarifier. The user should also be careful about 
carryover of these coagulants if added in even in 
little excess and the implications on demineralizing 
resins or reverse osmosis membranes. 


7.2.1.3 Filtration 


The suspended solids/carried over flocs up to about 
above 50 microns can be removed by using a 
filtration plant. This is usually carried out by passing 
the water through a granular material such as sand. 
The filter units which often gets blocked by deposits 
or / and microbes should be cleaned by carrying out 
the open backwash. If soluble iron and manganese 
are present the same can be removed by using an 
aeration unit before filter converting soluble iron 
and manganese to insoluble particles which gets 
removed by filter. If oil or organic impurities are 
present the same can be removed by using activated 
carbon filter after the normal filtration unit in the 
stream or else it can foul Ion exchange resin and 
create problems in the boiler. 


7.2.1.4 Removal of oil and grease 


The oil and grease can be present in two forms as 
follows: 


a) Emulsified; and 


The deoiling polyectrolyte (DOPE) which is 
most commonly a polyamine, а cationic 
polyelectrolyte, is used to demulsify the 
emulsified oil and is added before dissolves air 
floatation unit (DAF) and the floating oil is 
removed. The jar test is conducted to find out 
the actual dosage which varies depending upon 
type of oil and its emulsification. 


b) Demulsified 


The demulsified oil and grease is removed 
through TPI or API or Trickling filter. A 
Cationic Polyacrylamide (Flocculant) can be 
used to improve the efficiency of oil removal. 


7.2.2 Softening and Demineralisation 


Three methods are available for softening water 
externally, namely, (a) precipitation method, (b) 
exchange method, and (c) distillation method. 


7.2.2.1 Softening by precipitation methods 


In the precipitation methods, hardness and carbon 
dioxide are reduced; the precipitates are then 
separated by sedimentation and filtration. 


a) Lime-soda process 


The oldest and the most widespread method of 
precipitation softening is the lime-soda process, 
hot and cold. In this process, water is treated 
with hydrated lime (calcium hydroxide) and 
soda ash (sodium carbonate). 


1) Hydrated lime treatment 


In theory, treatment with hydrated lime 
removes calcium carbonate hardness and 
uncombined carbon dioxide by 
precipitation in the form of calcium 
carbonate. At the same time magnesium 
carbonate hardness is removed Бу 
precipitation in the form of magnesium 
hydroxide. Another reaction of a slightly 
different type takes place between hydrated 
lime and magnesium поп-сагбопаѓе 
hardness. In this reaction, magnesium non- 
carbonate hardness is removed Бу 
precipitation in the form of magnesium 
hydroxide and replaced by an equivalent 
amount of calcium  non-carbonate 
hardness. The calcium non-carbonate 
hardness produced in this way together 
with that originally present in raw water is 
removed by treatment with sodium 
carbonate. In practice the chemical reaction 
between lime and magnesium hardness 
may not go to completion. When waters 
containing sodium bicarbonate are treated 
with hydrated lime, sodium bicarbonate is 
converted into sodium carbonate. 


2) Sodium carbonate treatment 


Treatment with sodium carbonate causes 
non-carbonate hardness to precipitate from 
solution in the form of calcium and 
magnesium carbonate. The calcium and 
magnesium salts are replaced by an 
equivalent amount of sodium salts. Thus, 
by means of treatment with hydrated lime 
and sodium carbonate in appropriate 
quantities, most of the carbonate and non- 
carbonate hardness can be removed and 
soft water produced with hardness of 
approximately 20 10/1 to 40 mg/1 in terms 
of calcium carbonate. 


3) Coagulants 


The coagulants generally used are sodium 
aluminate, magnesium oxide, alum, etc. 
The amount of coagulant used is normally 
very small and is always less than 30 mg/1 


of the water being treated. It is added to the 
lime-soda mixture. The improvements 
obtained are as follows: 


i) Magnesium is precipitated more 
efficiently, thus preventing, a 
difficulty associated with 
precipitation; 


ii) Less lime is required to complete 
the softening reactions; 


iii) Hardness of the softened water is 
reduced to 20 40 mg/1 to 40 mg/l as 
calcium carbonate; 


iv) Sedimentation is accelerated, and 
softened water of low suspended 
solids is passed to the filters; and 


v) Reactive Silica content of the 
softened water is generally reduced by 
precipitating silica with magnesium 
hydroxide. 


Rapid flocculation and sedimentation may 
be used to reduce the retention time, and 
this is valuable where a plant has to be 
overloaded. Another refinement which 
improves the characteristics of softened 
water is the establishment, in the softener, 
of a blanket of sludge through which the 
chemicals and the water are made to pass 
after leaving the mixing zone. Provided no 
short-circuiting takes place, a water of 
lower hardness and with less suspended 
solids may be produced. Another 
improvement with regard to precipitation 
softening is ‘sludge return’ or ‘sludge 
recirculation’. A small quantity of sludge is 
continuously withdrawn from the sludge 
zone of the clarifier and added to the 
incoming mixture of water and reagents. 
The return sludge gives a seeding effect to 
both flocculation and precipitation and 
results in better sedimentation and better 
softening. 


4) Partial softening 


When a fully softened water is not required, 
it may be partially softened by treatment 
with hydrated lime alone to precipitate a 
major part of the carbonate hardness, 
according to the degree of softening 
required. 


5) Hot softening 


The efficiency of any precipitation process 
of water softening increases considerably 
with rise in temperature but the degree of 
improvement is most marked in the lower 
temperature range (up to about 50 °C). The 
heat may be derived from waste steam, or 


IS 1680 : 2022 


live steam or water drawn from the boiler. 
If boiler water is returned to the softener, 
some modification of chemical charges 
will be required. Boiler water containing 
sodium orthophosphate sometimes retards 
the softening reactions when the 
temperature at the softener is below 70 °C 
and pH is less than 9. 


7.2.2.2 Exchange methods of softening 


If water containing calcium and magnesium salts in 
solution is passed through a bed of ion exchange 
materials, synthetic or natural, calcium and 
magnesium are retained by the material and are 
replaced by sodium so that the water leaving the 
mineral bed contains sodium salts instead of calcium 
and magnesium salts. Some of these synthetic ion 
exchange materials can operate at elevated 
temperatures up to 100 °C and under high pH 
conditions. In another method partial deionisation to 
reduce dissolved solids is carried out by passing the 
water through a bed of ion exchange resins in 
hydrogen ion form which converts carbonates and 
bicarbonates into carbonic acid; sulphates, nitrates 
and chlorides into their respective acids, and the 
cations are retained by the resin itself. The water is 
subsequently aerated to remove carbon dioxide and 
is either neutralized with sodium hydroxide to 
produce zero hardness water of low dissolved solid 
content or can be further treated by passing through 
a bed of anion exchange resin to remove all free 
acids. The water resulting from the latter treatment 
is demineralized water containing less than 5 mg/1 
of total dissolved solids. 


a) Base exchange process 


This is the name given to the original method of 
softening water by zeolites. The name is still 
applied to the general process whereby sodium 
is substituted for another metal by means of 
exchange materials not necessarily of the 
zeolite class. Calcium and magnesium are 
retained by the exchange material and an 
equivalent amount of sodium salts passes out 
with water leaving the exchange unit. Once the 
exchange capacity is exhausted, regeneration is 
carried out with a strong solution of sodium 
chloride. By this process, sodium is replaced in 
the exchange material, calcium and magnesium 
chloride pass out to drain, and the cycle can be 
restarted. The advantages of the base exchange 
method of softening are that there is no sludge 
to be disposed of; that it can be operated under 
pressure; and that it is simple in operation. 
However, in general the quantity of water 
wasted in regeneration is considerable and there 
are certain other disadvantages also. With 
precipitation softening, the dissolved solids of 
the water are reduced but, with base exchange 
method, they are slightly increased and all 


IS 1680 : 2022 


carbonate hardness salts appear as sodium 
bicarbonate. Thus the alkalinity of the raw 
water is unaltered. Generally a base exchange 
softened water is more corrosive to iron and 
steel than water in the un-softened state and a 
softened water containing a high sodium 
bicarbonate content may be unsuitable for some 
purposes, for example, laundry or boiler feed. 
These disadvantages can be overcome by the 
use of a split stream process which consists of 
dividing the water into two streams. One passes 
through a cation exchange resin in sodium form 
as in a base exchange process and the other 
through another cation exchange resin in the 
hydrogen form. The two treated streams are 
mixed and aerated to remove carbon dioxide. 
This process produces water of low dissolved 
solids and of any desired alkalinity. Many 
modifications of this process are available for 
various characteristics of the raw water. 


b) Cation exchange and anion exchange 
1) Cation exchange 


It is the exchange of one cation for another. 
The types of exchange most frequently 
used in water treatment are the exchange of 
calcium and magnesium for sodium by a 
softening and the exchange of calcium, 
magnesium and sodium for hydrogen by 
means of hydrogen exchange materials in а 
demineralization plant. The exhausted 
exchange material is regenerated by 
passing a solution salt or mineral acid, 
depending upon the unit. 


2) Anion exchange 


In the anion exchange process, the 
sulphate, chloride, nitrate ions, etc, are 
exchanged by hydroxyl ion. This exchange 
is effected by passing the water through a 
bed of a synthetic anion exchange resin. In 
practice, anion exchange is usually applied 
only to waters that have previously been 
treated by hydrogen exchange process and 
hence anion exchange process may be 
regarded as the conversion of dilute 
solutions of mineral acids into water. The 
exhausted anion exchange resin 15 
regenerated with caustic soda or soda ash 
and the waste sodium salts washed to drain. 


c) Demineralization 


Demineralization (sometimes referred to as 
deionization) is the process of cation exchange 
followed by anion exchange and mixed bed. 
The outlet of demineralization plant (DM) plant 
should give conductivity less than 1 uS/cm at 
25 °С and Silica less than 0.02 ppm as SiO2. 


d) Dealkalization 


The dealkalization is a process by which 
temporary hardness is removed by using a weak 
acid cation exchanger in the hydrogen form. In 
other words hardness equal to alkalinity, both 
expressed as calcium carbonate (СаСОз), is 
exchanged by hydrogen ions converting it to 
carbonic acid and stream is further passed 
through a degasser which removes most of 
carbonic acid (dissolved carbon dioxide). At the 
outlet of cation exchanger the alkalinity can be 
0 mg/l to 20 mg/l as calcium carbonate (CaCO3) 
giving pH in the range of 4.2 to 5.5 which rises 
after degasser. The total dissolved solids (TDS) 
gets reduced equal to the extent of alkalinity 
removed, the pH after degasser is further 
increased by adding sodium hydroxide 
(increases TDS) or neutralizing amine (does not 
increase TDS but conductivity increases by few 
units) to raise pH to 8.5 to 9.2. The permanent 
hardness does not get removed by dealkalizer 
and remains as it is. The advantages of 
dealkalizing with a weak acid cation exchange 
resin are as follows: 


1) For regeneration, acid of not more than 
105 per cent of the stoichiometric value is 
needed. This minimizes operating costs 
and environmental impact. 


2) The TDS value of the water is reduced 
(by the removal of bicarbonate salts) by 
either the amount of hardness oralkalinity, 
whichever is lower. Accordingly, the 
treated TDS value is also lower. 


3) The Dealkalizer is a low cost preferred 
option as compared to Base Exchanger 
(Softener), where temporary hardness is 
present in raw water and reduction of TDS 
in treated water can increase cycles of 
concentration in the boiler. 


e) Reverse Osmosis (RO) 


Reverse Osmosis works by using a high 
pressure pump to increase the pressure on the 
salt side of the RO and force the water across 
the semi-permeable RO membrane, leaving 
almost all (around 95 per cent to 99 percent) of 
dissolved salts behind in the reject stream. The 
amount of pressure required depends on the salt 
concentration of the feed water. The more 
pressure is required to overcome the osmotic 
pressure if the concentration of salts is more in 
RO feedwater. 


The water which gets demineralized, is called 
permeate (or product) water. The water stream 
that carries the concentrated contaminants that 
did not pass through the RO membrane is called 
the reject (or concentrate) stream. 


The reverse osmosis is capable of removing 
about (95 to 99) per cent of the dissolved salts 
(ions) from the feed water. An RO system does 
not remove gases such as carbon dioxides (СО») 
very well because they are not highly ionized 
(charged) while in solution and have a very low 
molecular weight. As an RO system does not 
remove gases, the permeate water can have a 
slightly lower than normal pH level depending 
on СО» levels in the feed water as the СО» is 
converted to carbonic acid. 


Reverse osmosis is the finest level of filtration 
available. The RO membrane acts as a barrier to 
all dissolved salts and inorganic molecules, as 
well as organic molecules with a molecular 
weight greater than approximately 100 gm/mol. 
Water molecules, on the other hand, pass freely 
through the membrane creating а purified 
product stream. Rejection of dissolved salts is 
typically of range 95 percent to greater than 99 
percent. 


The applications for RO are numerous and 
varied, and include desalination of seawater or 
brackish water for drinking purposes, 
wastewater recovery, food and beverage 
processing, biomedical separations, purification 
of home drinking water and industrial process 
water. 


Also, RO is often used in the production of 
ultrapure water for use in the semiconductor 
industry, power industry (boiler feed water), 
and medical/laboratory applications. Utilizing 
RO prior to ion exchange (IX) dramatically 
reduces operating costs and regeneration 
frequency of the IX system. Trans-membrane 
pressures for RO typically range from 75 psig 
(5 bar) for brackish water to greater than 1 200 
psig (84 bar) for seawater. 


7.2.2.3 Distillation process 


Raw water is distilled in an evaporator and the 
distillate which is almost completely free from 
dissolved solids is used. As the evaporator itself may 
be considered as a very low pressure boiler, the feed 
may, under certain conditions, require softening. 
Distillation process is not generally required for low 
pressure boilers. 


NOTE — Ion exchange methods as mentioned above at 
point nos. a), b) and c) and Reverse Osmosis above point no 
e) are preferable compared to other methods since they give 
better quality water, ease of operation with less waste 
generation, and are economical. 


7.3 Internal Treatment 


7.3.1 The residual hardness which is left out after an 
external water treatment need to be treated by an 
internal chemical treatment to keep the boilers 
completely free from deposits. The two type of 
chemical treatment used for boilers are as follows: 


IS 1680 : 2022 


a) Carbonate Cycle Treatment; 


The carbonate cycle treatment is used only up 
to a pressure of 20 bar. The calcium hardness is 
reacted with carbonates to precipitate it as a 
desired complex of CaCO3.Ca(OH)2 which 15 
fluffy in nature and is easily dispersed by using 
any sludge conditioner and does not settle on 
metal surface and is easily removed while 
giving blowdown. The carbonate and hydroxide 
alkalinity are needed in the boiler to precipitate 
calcium to CaCO3.Ca(OH)2 complex. The 
magnesium is precipitated with hydroxide in the 
boiler as Mg(OH)2 which is again a fluffy 
precipitate and can be easily dispersed and 
removed through blowdown. 


2CaCh+Na2CO3+2NaOH>CaCO3.Ca(OH)2+ 
4 NaCl...(1) 


The sludge conditioners are low molecular 
weight synthetic polymers which disperse these 
precipitates by imparting (-) ve charge to these 
particles and as a result these particles repel 
from each other and stay dispersed. Typically 
low pressure boilers do not have dearators but 
the feedwater should be heated to remove 
dissolved oxygen to the maximum. The 
corrosion by dissolved oxygen is generically 
prevented by using tannin which form a 
protective film on the metal which acts as a 
barrier between metal and dissoved oxygen. 
The corrosion by carbonic acid (formed from 
coz present in steam) in condensate return lines 
is prevented by neutralizing it with neutralizing 
amines, typically morpholine and 
cyclohexamine and raising the pH above 8.3, 
typically 8.5 to 9.5. (9.2 in case copper is 
present in the system) 


An alkalinity reserve is kept in the boiler to 
neutralize permanent hardness. The alkalinity 
demand in feed water will be as follows to 
maintain desired alkalinity reserve in the boiler. 


(Н — М) + (Alkalinity Reserve in boiler / 
C)...(2) 


Whereas Alkalinity Reserve in boiler represent 
desired Alkalinity Reserve as CaCO; and C as 
operating cycles of concentration. 


b) Phosphate Hydroxide Treatment 


Phosphate hydroxide treatment is 
recommended for boilers upto 60 bars. The 
phosphate such as trisodium phosphate 
(МазРОд) is used to precipitate calcium as 
Ca3(PO4)2.Ca(OH)2 which is termed as 
hydroxyapetite and forms in presence of both 
phosphate and OH alkalinity. Sodium 
Hexametaphosphate (SHMP) or Sodium 
Tripolyphosphate (STPP) may be used but these 


IS 1680 : 2022 


additions consume boiler water alkalinity and 
may reduce pH in the boiler. 


3 Са (HCO3)2 + 2 М№МазРО4 > Саз(РО4) + 
6 NaHCO3...(3) 


The use of trisodium phosphate (tsp) is also 
used to maintain phosphate reserve to neutralize 
ingress of hardness more than calculated and 
also to maintain hydroxide (OH) alkalinity 
reserve desired in the boiler by following 
reaction: 


Na3PO4+H20 3Na +НРО; + NaOH...(4) 


The OH Alkalinity in the boiler is also desired 
to maintain desired pH in the boiler, precipitate 
Magnesium Hardness as Mg(OH), and control 
Silica Volatility. 


7.3.2 Sludge Conditioners 


The sludge conditioners are the ones which keep the 
suspended particles / precipitates such as calcium 
carbonate, calcium phosphate, iron oxide and 
silicates in dispersed state by providing negative 
charge to these particles which repel from each other 
and stay in dispersed state. These are synthetic low 
molecular weight polymers, typically using Acrylic 
Acid. These may be homopolymers of acrylic acid 
with different molecular weights or use another 
monomer to give a copolymer to handle more 
difficult deposits. These polymers replace polymer 
of natural origin such as starch and tannin. The user 
must ensure that the synthetic polymers must be 
stable at the operating pressure of the boiler. 


7.3.3 Oxygen Scavengers 


The corrosion control in this type of treatment is 
achieved by neutralizing the residual dissolved 
oxygen in the feedwater. The Dissolved Oxygen 
must get neutralized in the feed itself before entering 
the boiler. That’s why now most often the catalyzed 
oxygen scavengers are used which increases the 
reaction rate substantially. 


The Oxygen Scavengers are of following types: 
a) Non Volatile Oxygen Scavengers 


The non volatile oxygen scavengers are the 
scavengers which do not get volatilized and 
travel with steam. The commonly used non- 
volatile oxygen scavengers are as follows: 


1) Sodium Sulphite 


It is most commonly used upto 40 bar but 
carefully used upto 60 bar as at high 
temperature and pressure beyond 60 bar it 
decomposes to sulphur dioxide and 
sulphides. Sodium  Sulphite reacts 
stoichometrically with oxygen requiring 8 
mg/l of sodium sulphite to react with each 
1 mg/l of dissolved oxygen. The by product 


of the reaction is sodium sulphates which 
adds total dissolved solid in the boiler. 


2) Iso Ascorbic acid (Erythorbic Acid) 


It is non-toxic and work upto 10.3135 
MN/m? and also gets involved іп 
passivation of metal. It requires 11 1 of 
active ascorbic acid to neutralize 1 mg/l of 
dissolved oxygen but the actual dosage 
may be higher for good oxygen scavenging 


b) Volatile Oxygen Scavengers 
Which partially travel along with steam 
depending upon their distribution ratios. The 
commonly used volatile oxygen scavengers are 
as follows: 


1) Hydrazine 


It reacts with dissolved oxygen producing 
nitrogen and water consequently not 
adding any dissolved solid to the boiler. It 
reacts with ferrous iron oxide to form a 
magnetite film. It requires 1 mg/l of 
hydrazine as N2H; to neutralize each 1 mg/l 
of dissolved oxygen stoichometrically but 
actual dose may be up to 2 ppm hydrazine 
as №НА per 1 mg/l of dissolved oxygen for 
good oxygen scavenging. Hydrazine is 
known carcinogenic and should be 
avoided. It has very low volatility and 
decompose to ammonia at higher 
temperatures. The higher ammonia levels 
can lead to corrosion of Copper and / or it’s 
alloys. 


2) N,N — diethylhydroxylamine (DEHA) 


It is a good option to replace hydrazine. It 
has relatively low toxicity. It also form the 
magnetite layer and add no dissolved solids 
in the boiler. It’s volatile and also travel 
with steam and protect the condensate 
return line corrosion (due to oxygen) as 
well. It’s by products at low pressure is 
acetaldehyde and acetaldoxime at pressure 
over 70 bar. It requires 1.24 mg/l per 1 mg/l 
of dissoved oxygen stoichometrically but 
actually2.8 mg/l of DEHA (100 per cent 
Active) to neutralize each 1 mg/l of 
dissolved Oxygen may be needed. 


3) Carbohydrazide 


It is a low volatility source of hydrazine as 
when heated produce hydrazine and carbon 
dioxide. It becomes safer than hydrazine in 
handling the product, nonetheless, as for 
any chemicals Personal protection 
equipments (PPEs) should be used and 
safety guidelines should be followed. It 
requires 1.4 mg/l of Carbohydrazide for 
each | mg/l of Oxygen stoichometrically 


but actual dose may be upto 2.5 times 
higher. 


7.3.4 Neutralizing Amines 


Neutralizing amines are used to prevent carbonic 
acid attack in condensate return line system by 
neutralizing it. The presence of amines also 
increases pH of condensate above 8.3 typically 
between 8.5 to 9.5 depending on the dosage. 
Usually, blend of amines are used to give protection 
all across the system — high, medium and low 
pressure zone in condensing zones. Ammonia is also 
used but it provides desired pH at almost end of the 
condensate i.e low pressure. It can also attack copper 
if higher than 30 ppb to 50 ppb. The use of blend of 
amines reduces iron pick up as compared to using 
ammonia alone. The different amines has different 
distribution coefficients as specified in Table 1 and 
that’s why the blends often works better. 


Table 1 Neutralizing Amines with their 
Distribution Ratios 


(Clause 7.3.4) 
SI No. Neutralizing Distribution 
Amines Ratios 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Ammonia 10.0 
ii) Cyclohexamine 2.0 
ш) Diethylhyroxylamine 1.260 
(DEHA) 
iv) Diethylaminoethanol 1.0 
v) Morpholine 0.40 


NOTE — It changes at different operating pressures. 
Amines with a distribution ratio more than 1.0 will have 
more amine present in the steam phase, while amines with a 
distribution ratio of less than 1.0 will have more amine 
present in condensate phase. 


7.4 Critical Controls 
7.4.1 pH 


The pH is a critical parameter for make up water, 
feedwater, boiler water and steam condensate. The 
pH of makeup water after demineralization unit, 
dealkalizer and reverse osmosis with or without 
mixed bed is raised range of 8.5 to 9.5. By dosing an 
alkalinity builder such as sodium carbonate 
(increases TDS) or a volatile amine (increase 
conductivity but not TDS) to ensure that there is no 
free carbon dioxide in makeup water. The feed water 
pH is also maintained typically in range of 8.5 to 9.5. 
The boiler water pH is maintained on higher side to 
control corrosion at a higher temperature and to 
ensure that a good magnetite layer is formed. The 


IS 1680 : 2022 


magnetite layer formation and to make it more 
stable, a pH in range 10.5 to 11.2 is most suitable. 
The condensate water pH is also maintained 
between 8.5 to 9.5. The pH of makeup, boiler feed 
and condensate between 8.5 to 9.5 is to ensure a 
reduced iron pick. The more of iron in feed water 
may result in undesirable iron oxide deposits in the 
boiler. The max pH in makeup, feed water and return 
condensate only can be max 9.2 if copper and it’s 
alloys are present in the system. 


7.4.2 Total Dissolved Solids or Conductivity 


The limits of total dissolved solids (TDS) reduce as 
the boiler pressure goes up as otherwise it increases 
the possibility of entrainment to boiler water with 
steam. At pressures greater than 40 bar some solids 
have a significant solubility in steam. The presence 
of these solids in steam can lead to deposits in post 
boiler system such as turbine blade and affect it’s 
performance. There is a relationship between 
conductivity and TDS as conductivity is due 
presence of dissolved ions in water. The 
concentration of total dissolved solids in boiler 
water should be generally kept as specified in Table 
2. 


Table 2 Concentration of Total Dissolved Solids 
based on Boiler Pressure 


(Clause 7.4.2) 
SINo. Boiler Pressure, Total Dissolved 
MN/m? Solids, mg/l, Max 
(1) О) (3) 
i) Upto 2.0 3 000 
ii) 2.1 to 3.9 2 500 
iil) 4.0 to 6.0 1 000 


NOTE — For utility boilers where turbines are used the total 
dissolved solid content shall be dependent on the steam 
purity requirements. 


Blow down of boilers may be intermittent or 
continuous as necessary to maintain the 
concentration of total solids within the above limits. 
Suspended solids also give rise to considerable 
trouble in the boiler and cause priming. Care should 
be taken to prevent their undue concentration by 
means of suitable blow down. 


7.4.3 Dissolved Oxygen 


The dissolved oxygen (DO) should be as less as 
possible in feedwater before addition of oxygen 
scavengers as it may require more quantity of 
oxygen scavengers or else it may lead to pitting 
corrosion in the boiler. The conventional method is 
to heat up the feed water by injecting steam for low 
pressure boilers. The use of deaerator is an efficient 
method to remove dissolved oxygen for any boiler, 
as a well operated deaerator can reduce upto 7 ppb 


IS 1680 : 2022 


of dissolved oxygen at the outlet. The oxygen 
content changes with changes in the feed 
temperature as shown in Fig 1. 


Variation in Oxygen 
Content with Temperature 


Feedwater Temperature °C 


FIG 1. VARIATION IN OXYGEN CONTENT WITH 
TEMPERATURE. 


7.4.4 Steam Purity 


A stringent steam purity may be often required for 
turbine operation or a process requirement. It is 
always challenging to control entrainment of solids 
in steam which depends upon boiler design, boiler 
operation, and presence of higher dissolved solids, 
suspended solids and alkalinity. The another reason 
is silica volatility which depends upon boiler 
pressure, pH, silica concentration in boiler and 
caustic alkalinity as shown in Fig 2. Generally 2.4 
ppm of hydroxide alkalinity is required for each 1 
ppm of silica as SiOz to keep silica in nonvolatile 
condition. The foaming may also happen due to any 
contamination or high TDS coupled high alkalinity 
or any contamination like oil etc. In such cases the 
use of antifoams may be helpful though prevention 
is better than cure. 


FIG 2. SILICA LIMITS IN BOILER WATER 


7.4.5 Prevention of Caustic Embrittlement 


7.4.5.1 Caustic embrittlement or intergranular 
cracking takes place only when the metal is under 
stress and a high concentration of caustic alkali is 
present. This can thus take place only on riveted and 
welded drums which have not been stress relieved. 


In modern practice, riveting is dying out and this 
difficulty will be avoided to a great extent. 


7.4.5.2 Caustic embrittlement can be prevented to a 
great extent by maintaining a ratio of sodium 
sulphate to caustic alkalinity to 2.5:1 or a ratio of 
sodium nitrate to caustic alkalinity to 0.4:1 in the 
boiler. As sodium sulphate is normally present in 
feed waters and also as sodium sulphite is injected 
into the boiler feed for the removal of dissolved 
oxygen which later converts itself into sodium 
sulphate, in many cases the ratio is maintained 
without further addition of sodium sulphate. If, 
required sodium sulphate can be added if ratio is not 
being maintained. Whereas, if it is desired to use 
sodium nitrate the same may have to be added in 
defined ratio with caustic alkalinity. 


8 CARE OF BOILERS 


8.1 Although boiling out, initial boiler filling and 
protection of standing boilers have been described 
briefly, chemical cleaning of boilers is given in IS 
10391. 


8.2 Boiling Out 


Before putting a boiler into service, it is necessary to 
remove all traces of oil and grease from the internal 
surface as it might lead to overheating and failure. 
For this purpose, it should be filled with clean water 
just below the working water level. The chemicals 
as specified in Table 3 should beadded. 


Table 3 Boilout Treatment Additives 


(Clause 8.2) 
SI No. Boilout Concentration in 
Treatment boiler, in mg/l 
Additives 
109) (2) (3) 
1) Trisodium 1 000 
Phosphate 
(Na3PO4.12H20) 
ii) Disodium 500 
Phosphate 
(Anhydrous) 
Ш) Surfactant 225 


The boiler shall be warmed through by a slow fire, 
keeping the manhole closed, immediately after 
adding the chemical and pressure is allowed to rise 
slowly. It should be raised sufficiently to give a 
strong blow of steam at the air cocks. It should be 
allowed to cool and later blown down for about 
15 sec on each blow down valve and refilled to about 
5 cm level in the gauge glass. On the following day, 
carry out the same process except that the pressure 
is raised to approximately 25 percent of the normal 


working pressure. Оп the third day carry out the 
same process and then drain the water as detailed 
below. When the pressure falls to 0.04 MN/m? 
(0.4 kgf/cm’), the unit is blown down completely 
until it is empty, refilled to flood the drum and 
superheater and blown down again. It should then be 
carefully inspected. If any trace of oil or grease is 
observed, the process of boiling out should be 
repeated. If the boiler is found free from grease or 
oil or sediment, it should be closed and filled with 
feed water as specified in IS 10392. 


NOTE — If the superheater is non-drainable, it should be 
filled with only treated demineralised or condensate water. 


8.2 Initial Boiler Filling 


When a boiler is to be filled with water for service, 
it is desirable that normal feed water is used after 
proper softening or demineralization and treatment 
chemicals are added. The sodium sulphate or 
sodium nitrate should also be added to ensure the 
safe ratio for prevention of caustic embrittlement. 


8.2.1 If normal feed would consist of a large portion 
of condensate and if the boiler is to be put into 
operation for the first time and no condensate is 
available, the best available water should be used 
after proper treatment, either external or internal. 
Sodium phosphate should be added to water as 
required to remove the residual hardness. The boiler 
should be blown down frequently to remove the 
sludge. Condensate should be collected and 
changeover to it should be made as soon as possible. 


8.3 Protection of Standby Boilers 


When boilers are temporarily at idle state, they are 
liable to be impacted by corrosion. If they are to be 
kept idle for more than a few hours, special 


IS 1680 : 2022 


measures, such as those given below, have to be 
taken to protect against corrosion during that period. 


8.3.1 Hot Standby or Banked Condition 


Such a condition lasts for few hours or an overnight. 
It is generally sufficient to keep the boiler on banked 
fire for short periods with water conditions that 
existed when it was steaming out in operation. If any 
water is added due to expansion or contraction, the 
water should be sufficiently treated with suitable 
external treatment and deaerated. The oxygen 
scavenger residuals should be leveled up. It is 
important to frequently check alkalinity and oxygen 
scavenger residuals to identify any short fall which 
is made up to desired levels. Special precautions 
should be taken to protect superheaters and expert 
advice should be sought 


8.3.2 Standby and Load Topping Boilers 


Boilers that are lightly steamed or kept up to 
pressure to act as standby or load topping boilers can 
lose boiler water, through level sensor checking, 
blowdown and sampling. The water lost will be 
replaced by feedwater with a lower dissolved solids 
content and normal water-conditioning chemicals 
are added. There will always be a chance for oxygen 
scavenger residuals to fall down. To avoid this, 
residuals of oxygen scavenger should be maintained 
3 times of the maximum specified value. It is 
important to test specified parameters more 
frequently than normal. 


8.3.3 Extended Periods (Wet Storage) 


The wet storage is done usually for 2 to 3 months or 
when the boiler may be needed in operation at short 
notice. The following treatment as specified in Table 
4 should be applied based on various conditions. 


Table 4 Treatment of Boilers During Wet Storage Under Idle Conditions 
(Clause 8.3.3) 


SI No. Boiler Operating Treatment 
Pressure 

(1) (2) (3) 

1) Low Pressure boiler Add sufficient alkali to maintain a pH of 10.0 to 11.5. The 
operating at < 250 psig minimum hydroxide alkalinity to 400 ppm as СаСОз and sodium 

sulfite residual to be 100 ppm to 200 ppm as Na2SO3. 

ii) Boiler operating at > 250 Add 300 ppm to 500 ppm cyclohexamine to maintain pH of 10 to 
psig, having a drainable 11.5 and sodium sulfite residual to be 100 ppm to 200 ppm as 
superheater Na2SO3 ог 100 ppm to 200 ppm hydrazine as N2H4. 

iii) Boiler operating at > 250 Add 300 ppm to 500 ppm cyclohexamine to maintain pH of 10 to 
psig having non drainable 11.5 and add 100 ppm to 200 ppm hydrazine as N2H40r 100 ppm- 
superheater 200 ppm Diethylhydroxylamine (DEHA) as DEHA. 


NOTE — In case of copper or its alloys pH should not exceed 9.2 


11 


IS 1680 : 2022 


АП parts, including the economizer and 
superheater, should be completely filled with 
correctly conditioned water. Non-drainable super 
heaters should be filled only with condensate 
quality water treated. It is most important that 
pockets of air should not be allowed to remain in 
the boiler and that there should be no leakage. 


Distribution of these chemicals throughout the bulk 
of the boiler water should be ensured by filling with 
a premixed solution, by use of a circulating pump 
or by heating the boiler when partially filled and 
then topping up with conditioned water. The 
oxygen scavenger reserve, pH value and alkalinity 
should be checked regularly. Additional treatment 
chemicals should be added as necessary and 
distributed to maintain the treatment levels within 
the recommended range. 


8.3.4 Extended Periods (Dry Storage) 


It is advisable to completely empty the boiler and 
dry thoroughly and remove all deposits to ensure 
that no moisture remains below them. Trays of 
quick lime or silica gel should be placed in the 
boiler drums before sealing them up. The amount 
of quick lime or silica gel required will be 1.5 
kg/m? of boiler drum and tube volumes. Lime or 
silica gel should be changed from time to time. 


9 CONTROL OF TREATMENT 
9.1 Testing 


It is absolutely necessary that raw water treated 
with softener, feed water and boiler water are tested 
at regular intervals and records are maintained. 
Routine tests on raw and treated water are few and 
simple. It should be the duty of some responsible 
person to examine these results interpret them and 
make necessary regulation in the chemical charges. 


9.1.1 The water softening plant should be kept 
clean and chemical proportioning gear and other 


mechanisms in good mechanical order. The 
softener-reaction tanks should be regularly 
desludged. The softer should, on no account, be 
operated above maximum rating advised by a 
manufacturer. 


9.2 Blow Down 


The boiler should be blown down periodically to 
maintain the concentration of dissolved solids 
within recommended limits. Blow down is also 
based on silica content in boiler water. The quantity 
of water to be blown clown is calculated as follows: 


Quantity of water to be blow down = 100 Y 
Х-Ү 


where 


Y = total dissolved solids in mg/l in feed 
water; and 

X = maximum permissible concentration in 
mg/l of total dissolved solids in boiler 
water. 

NOTE — Under all conditions, a small amount of 


continuous blow down may be desirable in addition to the 
periodical blow down to remove the precipitated sludge. 


10 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF WATER 


Chemical composition of feed water and boiler 
water is given in IS 10392. 


11 COMPUTATION OF INITIAL DOSAGE 
OF CHEMICALS FOR TREATMENT OF 
WATER 


In order to guide the user, simple directions for 
computing the correct initial dosage of chemicals 
for treatment of water are given in Annex A. This 
computation is based on regular chemical analysis 
of water. For detailed methods of test mentioned in 
Annex A, reference may be made as specified in 
Table 5. 


Table 5 Method of Test for Chemicals for Treatment of Water 
(Clause 11.1) 


SI No. Characteristic Method of Test 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Carbonate hardness IS 3025 (Part 21) 
11) Magnesium hardness IS 3025 (Part 46) 
iii) Free carbon dioxide IS 3025 (Part 61) 
iv) Non-carbonate hardness IS 3025 (Part 21) 


IS 1680 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 11.1) 


DIRECTIONS FOR COMPUTING DOSES OF CHEMICALS FOR TREATMENT OF WATER FOR 
LAND BOILERS 


A-1 CHEMICALS FOR PRECIPITATION 
SOFTENING 


A-1.1 The quantities given below are based on 
stoichiometric ratios of chemical reactions involved. 
In actual practice, a small excess over the 
theoretically required amount is found necessary to 
obtain best results and to maintain recommended 
alkalinity in feed water. In general а 5 percent excess 
is recommended. Where necessary, the charge may 
be further adjusted, as required, to obtain desired 
results. 


A-1.1.1 The quantities recommended are for pure 
chemicals. Commercials samples of lime vary 
considerably in their available lime content and this 
should be taken into consideration when calculating 
the dose. Same observations also apply to soda ash 
and sodium aluminate. 


a) Lime 
1) As Quick Lime (CaO) 


Quick lime (CaO) to be added, kg/1 0001 = 
0.000 56 [total alkalinity (as CaCO3) mg/1 
+ magnesium hardness (as СаСОз) mg/l + 
free carbon dioxide (as СаСОз) mg/l] 


2) As Hydrated Lime 


Hydrated lime to be added, kg/1 000 1 = 
0.000 74 [ total alkalinity (as СаСОз) mg/l 
+ magnesium hardness (as CaCO4) mg/l + 
free carbon dioxide (as CaCO3) mg/l ] 


b) Soda Ash 


Soda ash to be added, kg/1 000 1= 0.001 06 
[non-carbonate hardness (as CaCO3) mg/l] 


c) Sodium Aluminate 


1) Up to total hardness (as CaCO3) of 200 
mg/l sodium aluminate to be added, kg/1 
000 1 = 0.02 


2) Total hardness (as CaCO3) above 200 
mg/l sodium aluminate to be added, kg/1 
000 1 = 0.03 


A-2 OTHER CHEMICALS 


When sodium phosphate, sodium sulphate or 
sodium sulphite are to be used, sufficient quantities 
are to be added to maintain their desired 
concentration in water. 


IS 1680 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Water Quality for industrial purpose Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


Organization 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, Thiruchirapali 


Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute, 
Sharanpur 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research 
Institute, Bhavnagar 


Confederation of Indian Industry- Triveni Water 
Institute 


Consumer education and Research Centre, 


Ahmedabad 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


CECRI, Karaikudi 


Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, 
New Delhi 


Department of Science and Technology, 
New Delhi 


Delhi Jal Board 


Grasim Industries Limited, Nagda 


Indian Chemical Council 


Representative(s) 
SHRI К. P. BHATTACHARYYA (Chairperson) 


SHRI SHIVAYYANAMATH S. 
SHRI Т. K. DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI K. ANANDA BABU (Alternate) 


DR NEELAM NIGAM 
SHRIMATI POOJA MEHROTRA (Alternate) 


DR C. MURALIDHARAN 
DR K. SRI BALA KAMESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI NAZIMUDDIN 
SHRI VISHAL GANDHI (Alternate) 


DR NITIN ENDLAY 
DR SANJAY TYAGI (Alternate) 


DR SOUMYA HALDAR 
DR D. N. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


DR КАРП, К NARULA 
DR SIPIKA CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


MS ANINDITA MEHTA 
Ms DOLLY JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI. S. SHANKAR 


DR S. VASUDEVAN 
DR R. MALINI (Alternate) 


SHRI Т. S. G. NARAYANAN 
SHRI UDAY SINGH MINA (Alternate) 


DR NEELIMA ALAM 
DR SANJAI KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 


SHRI S. N. SASTRY 
SHRI ALOK SINGH (Alternate) 


DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 
SHRI KEDAR OKE (Alternate) 


Organization 


Ion Exchange India Limited, Mumbai 


Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Chandrapur 


Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty 
Alleviation, New Delhi 


National Environment 
Institute, Nagpur 


Engineering Research 


NLC Nalco India Limited, Kolkata 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Padarsh Pharmaceuticals Private Limited, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


The Energy and Resource Institute, New Delhi 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


Water and steam Chemistry Division, BARC 
facilities, Kalpakkam 


In personal capacity (514, Veer apt Sector 13 
Rohini Delhi 110085) 


In personal capacity 6/66, 5th Street, Ahemed 
Colony, Woraiyur, Tiruchirapalli-620003) 


In personal capacity (307, Dwarka Palace, Nipania 
opp to Samar Park Colony Indore-452010 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 1680 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SACHIN SAHA 
DR RENU SARAPH (Alternate I) 
SHRI. ANIL К. KHERA (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRI V. P. GHODMARE 
SHRI RAJESH DATTATRAYACHIVANE (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJASEKHAR 
SHRI SUMIT PRIYADARSHI (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
MS CHAITRA DEVOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. KHADSE 
DR V. ATUL MALDHURE (Alternate) 


DR ASHISH KUMAR SAMADDAR 
SHRI NADAN CHATTER JI (Alternate) 


SHRI L. K. NAYAK 
SHRI ANKIT VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUNEESHCHADDA 
SHRI MAHON 
(Alternate) 


MANOHAR KHANDEKAR 


DR VIVEK NARAYAN SINGH 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANSHUMAN 
DR SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR B. ANUP KUMAR 


SHRI D. K. JAIN 


DR A. LAWRENCE 


SHRI R. S. BAGHEL 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 


AND HEAD (CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT) [REPRESENTING 


DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 13 (18654). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


