**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1179 (1967) : Equipment for eye and face protection 
during welding [MTD 11: Welding General] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 : 117S • 1M7 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

EQUIPMENT FOR EYE & FACE 

PROTECTION DURING WELDING 



( First Revision ) 

Fourth Reprint JULY 1993 
( Incorporating Amendment No. 1 ) 



L'DC 61489I/893 ? 621*791 



© Copyright 1978 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NBW DELHI- 1 10002 

Gr 5 August 1967 



IS: 1179- 1967 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
EQUIPMENT FOR EYE AND FACE 
PROTECTION DURING WELDING 

(First Revision) 

Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDC 14 

Chairman Representing 

Siiri R. Ghosh Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

ShriJ. K. Ahluwai-ia Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri M. M. Ghosh ( Alternate) 
Shri F. V. Badami Directorate General of Technical Development 

Shri N. C. Baociii National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. P. Ghatterjke Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Ins- 

pection Wing), New Delhi 
Chemist and Metallurgist Integral Coach Factory, Feramhur ( Ministry of 

Railways) 
Shri B. N. Das National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Dr N. D. Desai Power Cables Pvt Ltd, Bombay; and Indian Engi- 

neering Association, Calcutta 
Shri S. K. Hari ( Alternate ) Indian Engineering Association, Calcutta 
Shri K. C. Jerath Engincer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters 

ShriJ. N. Malik ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director Research ( M & Ministry of Railways 
C), RDSO, Chittaranjan 
Production Engineer ( Shell ), 
ICF, Perambur ( Alternate \) 
Dy Director Research ( Met ) 
I, RDSO, Chittaranjan ( Alternate II ) 
Shri T. V. Mathew Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri Jagmohan Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Mitra Asiatic Oxygen & Acetylene Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri T. Biswas ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Nadkarni J.B. Advani-Oerlikon Electrodes ( Pvt ) Ltd, Bombay 

Prof G. K. Ooale Association of Principals of Technical Institutions 

(India), New Delhi 
Shri S. K. Pathak Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Col S. G. Pendsf. Directorate General of Employment and Training. 

New Delhi *' 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS 1 1179 -1967 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri K. G. K. Rao 



Representing 

Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 



Durgapur Steel Plant, Durgapur 

Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Public Works Department, Government of Madras 

Central Public Works Department 



Shri D. V. Rkddi 

Shri M. K. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Roy 
Shri S. C. Roy 
Shri S. Shanmuoasundaram 
Shri J. P. Sinola 

Executive Engineer (Electrical), 
Calcutta ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. R. Subramanian Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. C. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Velu Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Dr A. K. Chatterjee, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Stmc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. S. Naoaraj 

Assistant Director (Struc & Met), ISI 

Panel for Revision of IS : 1179-1957, SMDC 14/P-16 
Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 



Convener 
Shri S. V. Sambamurti 

Members 
Shri D. P. Chatterjee 

Shri N. V. Pandit 



Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection wing ), New Delhi 
Centra] Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Durgapur 



IS 1 1179 -1967. 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
EQUIPMENT FOR EYE AND FACE 
PROTECTION DURING WELDING 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 26 June 1967, after the draft finalized by the 
Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural 
and Metals Division Council. 

0,2 This standard was first issued in 1957. Due to the developments that 
had taken place in the field of safety devices for protection of eye, ear, face 
and neck during welding and similar operations, from radiation and other 
hazards, it was decided to revise this standard incorporating these 
improvements. 

0.3 The aspect of radiation has been specially considered and the protection 
to neck is also included. 

0.4 No protective equipment is considered necessary for resistance welding 
except the use of industrial goggles. Recommendations regarding the up- 
keep of eye protection equipment and their services are given in Appendix A. 

0.5 Special spectacles fitted with protective filters are also included as 
these are used by supervisory staff who are not actually engaged in welding. 
However, it is cautioned that it should not be used by welding operator 
as a protection against harmful radiation. 

0.6 The filter size has been* changed to 105 x 80 mm to give greater 
area opening. The need for screening welding operations, to avoid injury and 
distraction to others present in the shop floor, is also stressed. Portable 
screens of a fire resistant nature will meet with this need. It is not the 
intention to restrict the development of new forms of equipment which 
provide a satisfactory level of protection. 

0,7 Assistance has been derived from the following publications: 

A.S. No. B. 91-1951 Specification for protective filters against harmful 
radiations in welding and allied operations. Standards Association 
of Australia. 



IS: 1179- 1967 

A.S. No. B.99-1951 Specification for helmets, hand shields, face masks 
and goggles for protection against harmful radiations in welding 
and allied operations. Standards Association of Australia. 

A.S. No. CZ. 2-1951 Code of recommended practice for the protection 
of eyes against harmful radiations in welding and allied operations. 
Standards Association of Australia. 

DIN 465, r > : 1961 Shields and helmets to protect the eyes from intense 
rays of light sources and from mechanical injuries. Deutscher Nor- 
menausschuss. 

B.S. 1542-1960 Equipment for eye, face and neck protection against 
radiation arising during welding and similar operations. British 
Standards Institution. 

GGG - G -513 Goggles, industrial, eyecupr; and lenses, goggles, indus- 
trial. Federal Supply Service, USA. 

GGG - H - 211a Helmet, welder's; and shield, welding, hand held. 
Federal Supply Service, USA. 

0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.0 This standard covers the requirements of goggles, hand shield and 
helmet intended to protect an operator above the shoulder, from harmful 
radiation, spark and particles of hot metal during welding, cutting and 
similar operations employing a gas flame or electric arc. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Filter — The device through which the wearer of the equipment views 
the welding or cutting operation and which provides protection to the eyes 
against glare, injurious radiation, or sparks or hot particles of metal or a 
combination of these hazards. 

2.2 Filter Cover — A transparent cover to protect the surface of the filter. 
♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( nvistd ). 

4 



IS: 1179 -1967 

2.3 Goggles — A device worn over the eyes and held in place by a headband 
used for protecting the eyes and eye sockets from flying particles and 
injurious radiations. 

2.4 Hand Shield — A device held in the hand and designed to give protec- 
tion during welding and cutting to the eyes, cars, face, neck and 
part of the top of the head of the user. 

2.5 Helmet — A device supported on the head and designed to give protec- 
tion, during welding and cutting, to the eyes, cars, face, neck and part of the 

top of the head of the user. 

3. PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS AND EQUIPMENT 
NECESSARY 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, operations in welding and cutting 
have been classified in the ascending order of the degree of hazard involved. 
Table 1 indicates the protection equipment permissible for each class of 
hazard. 

TABLE 1 SELECTION OF EYE AND FACE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT 

Hazard Involved Permissible Equipment Clause 

Reference 

Direct exposure to moderate Goggles. Hand shields and C and 7 

injurious radiation of light and helmets may also be used 

heat and to sparks, for example, 
in gas weldi*"* and cutting 

Direct expos high in, y Hand shields or helmets 7 

radiation ^i. , ind heat, 

sparks an particles of hot 
metal, for example, in electric 
arc welding and cutting 

Exposure by direct radiation and Helmets but with provision for 7 

by retire lion to large amounts auxiliary heat-absorbing filter 

of infra red radiation, for as recommended in IS: 5983-1971* 

example, in gas shielded metal 
arc welding and rutting 

•Specification for protective filters for welding, cutting and similar operations. 



4. FILTERS 

4.1 Filters used with the equipment shall meet the requirements of 
IS : 5983-1 97 1* and be of the appropriate shade for the service for which 
they are intended. 

•Specification for protective filters for welding, cutting and similar operations. 



ISt 1179- 1967 

4.2 Filter covers used with the equipment shall meet the requirements of 
IS.-5983-1971*. 

4.3 Sizes of filters and filter covers shall be one of those specified in 6.2.5 
and 7.2.3.1. 

4.4 Filters and filter covers shall be capable of easy replacement without 
the use of special tools. 

5. MATERIALS 

5.1 Corrosion Resistance — Samples of all metallic materials except 
headbands and adjustable nose-bridges, used for the equipment, shall 
be subjected to the test given in Appendix B. At the end of the test, the 
materials shall on visual examination show no signs of roughening of the 
surface resulting from corrosion. 

5.2 Disinfection — All materials shall be such as to withstand, without 
visible deterioration or discoloration, washing in detergents and warm 
water, rinsing to remove all traces of detergent and disinfection by immersion 
for 10 minutes in a solution of formalin made by placing one part of 40 per- 
cent formaldehyde solution in 9 parts of water at room temperature. 
The manufacturer may recommend alternative methods of disinfection in 
addition. 

5.3 Skin Irritation — All materials which come into contact with the 
user's skin shall be of a kind which is known not to cause irritation. 

5.4 Flammability — Specimen of any material, other than metal, used 
for the equipment ( except headbands ) when subjected to the test given 
in Appendix G shall not burn at a rate greater than 75 mm per minute. 

5.5 Thermal Conductivity — All metals which arc likely to be exposed 
to radiation during use and which come into contact with the operator 
shall have a thermal conductivity of not more than 0*35 x 10~ 3 cal cm/cm 2 
degC. 

6. GOGGLES 

6.1 General Requirements — The goggles shall consist of a frame, 
lens or lenses and a means of support such as ah adjustable headband to 
retain the goggles in front of the eyes. The lens need not be of the same 
material as the frame or an integral part of the frame. The frame shall be 
opaque and the interior shall have a permanent dull, low reflecting finish. 
The edge of the frame in contact with the face shall be flared so as to prevent 
cutting of the face and shall have a surface free from roughness or irregu- 
larities which may cause discomfort. 



•Specification for protective filters for welding, cutting and similar operations. 

6 



IS 1 1179 -1967 

6.1.1 Ventilation — The interior of the goggles shall be ventilated in 
a manner to permit circulation of air. The ventilation openings shall be 
baffled to prevent the passage of intense stray light or any particles into the 
interior of the goggles. 

6.1.2 Workmanship — The workmanship shall be such that the goggles 
when worn in the normal manner shall not allow direct entry of any particle 
or radiation to the interior. 

6.2 Detailed Requirements 

6.2.0 Goggles shall be of one of the following types: 

a) Cup-type goggles, consisting of two eye-pieces adjustably connected 
across the nose; and 

b) Box-type goggles, providing total enclosure of both the eyes and 
having separate filter holders or a single filter. 

6.2.1 Materials used in manufacture of goggles shall conform to the 
requirements of 5. 

6.2.2 The method of attachment of lenses to the frame shall be such 
that the lens will not be inwardly dislodged from its seat when it is subjected 
to the impact test specified in Appendix D. The lens retaining mounting 
shall also be such as to accommodate a filter lens, a filter cover and, in 
between, a gasket of fibre or other durable material approximately 0*25 
mm thick and of such inner diameter that it will not restrict the field of 
vision. 

6.2.3 Eyecup type goggles shall be provided with rigidly constructed 
screw-on types lens retaining rings of metal or plastic. These shall provide 
a complete clamping action against the lenses. 

6.2.4 After the eyecups are subjected to the heat deformation test specified 
in Appendix type E, the retaining rings shall.fit snugly but not tightly and the 
dimensions shown in Fig. 1 shall' not exceed the original dimension by 
1 percent for dimensions A and B and 5 percent for dimension C. 

6.2.5 The dimensions of filters for goggles shall be as follows: 

a) Circular filters and filter covers 52 ±!j mm diameter 

b) One piece window filters Sufficient material to give un- 

obstructed vision through two 
circles, each 57 mm diameter 
at 62 mm centres, taken 
equally about the vertical 
centre line of the filter. The 
outer part of the filter is also 
required to enclose all points, 
marked X on Fig. 2. 



IS: 1179 -1967 

6.2,6 When properly adjusted for the wearer, the distance from the pupil 
of the eye to the inner surface of the filter shall be such as to permit an 
effective angle of vision of not less than 105 degrees for each eye but shall 
in no case be less than 14 mm. 




TEMPLE 
SIDE 



BRIOGE 
SIDE 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Dimensions of Eye and Goooles 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 2 One Piece Window Filter 

8 



18:1179-1967 

6.2.7 In the cyecup type goggles, the two cups shall be joined by a 
suitably shaped nose-bridge which shall be adjustable easily by hand to 
allow accommodation to various pupillary distances. 

6.2*8 Headbands shall be capable of holding the equipment in correct 
position when properly adjusted. They shall be capable of adjustment 
continuously ( not stepwise ) without the aid of special tools. The means 
of adjustment shall be designed to be non-slip. 

7. HELMETS AND HAND SHIELDS 

7.0 The helmet and hand shield are basically the same in design, the differ- 
ence being that the helmet has a headgear by which it is supported on the 
head while the hand shield has, attached to the bottom, a handgrip by which 
it is held in the hand. 

7.1 General Requirements 

7.1.1 The helmet and hand shield shall consist of a body, a filter 
arrangement, suitable headgear in the case of the helmet and a handgrip 
in the case of the shield. 

7.1.2 The body of the helmet and hand shield shall be of such size and 
shape as to protect the face, top of the head and the neck to a vertical 
line back of the ears. The body shall be opaque and the interior shall have 
a permanent dull low-reflecting finish. 

7.1.3 The helmet and hand shield shall have in the front of the body a 
window with filter which allows the wearer to see the welding or cutting 
operation, yet prevents harmful radiation, sparks or hot metal particles 
from reaching his face or eyes. 

7.1.4 All interior parts shall be free from sharp edges or any irregularities 
which may be a hazard to the user. 

7.1.5 The workmanship shall be such that the helmet and hand shield 
when used in the normal manner shall not allow direct entry of any particle 
or radiation to the interior. 

7.2 Detailed Requirements 

7.2.1 Materials used in the manufacture of helmets and hand shields 
shall conform to the requirements of 5. 

7.2.2 Any metal parts, including rivets which extend through the material 
of the body of the helmet or shield, and which may touch the user's head 
or face, shall not be exposed on the inside of the helmet or shield. Such 
metal parts shall be insulated by means other than lacquer or varnish. 



IS: 1179 -1967 

7.2.3 A window-type filter holder shall hold securely a filter and two 
filter covers of sizes specified in 7.2.3.1. The clear opening in the filter 
holder shall be 95 mm x 70 mm. Permissible tolerance is ±3 mm. 

7.2.3.1 The filter and filter cover used shall be of the nominal dimension 
105 mm X 80 mm. Permissible tolerance is ± J. 

7.2.4 The headgear shall retain the helmet comfortably and firmly in 
place on the wearer's head but shall permit the helmet body to be tilted 
back over the head. The headgear shall be adjustable, without the use of 
tools, so as to permit the setting of the filter in the line of vision of the wearer. 

7.2.5 The design of the helmet shall be such that the inner surface of 
the filter shall be not less than 50 mm from the eyes of the wearer. 

7.2.6 Hand shields shall be provided with a handgrip which shall either 
be fixed inside the shield or be provided with other means of protection 
for the hand. 

8. MARKING 

8.1 Goggles, helmets and hand shields covered in this specification shall be 
marked with the manufacturer's name or trade-mark. 

8.1.1 The equipment may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked 
products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a 
further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI 
Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained 
from the Indian Standards Institution. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 0.4 ) 

UPKEEP OF EYE-PROTECTION SERVICE 

A-l. SCOPE 

A-l.l This appendix covers the recommendations for securing the 
efficient upkeep of a service to provide protection for operative's eyes 
against the harmfal effects of radiation in welding operations. 

10 



IS 1 1179 -1967 
A-2. STORING OF EYE-PROTECTION EQUIPMENT 

A-2.1 When not in use eye-protection equipment, should be properly 
stored in some central place. A useful scheme is to install, in each depart- 
ment, a small cabinet containing a series of hooks; under each hook should 
be placed the name of the employee to whom the device has been assigned. 
If such provision is not made, it will be found that operatives who do not 
require to use the devices continuously will place them behind machines 
or in drawers, lockers or tool kits. As a result, the equipment will sometimes 
be difficult to locate, and usually will quickly become covered with dust and 
grime. 

A-3. GOGGLE CASE 

A-3.1 Goggles are likely to be damaged if carried loose in the pocket or 
with tools. When carrying cases are provided the operative is more likely 
to carry the goggles with him and will thus have them at hand when they 
are required. Provision of substantial cases also indicates to the operative 
that the goggles are valuable, such items of equipment should not be treated 
carelessly. 

A-4. SPARE PARTS 

A-4.1 An adequate supply of spare parts should be kept on hand except 
where broken devices are periodically returned to the manufacturer for 
repair. 

A-5. REPLACEMENT OF DEFECTIVE DEVICES 

A-5.1 The operative should be made responsible for reporting immediately 
any broken or otherwise defective protective device and for making applica- 
tion to the employer for its repair or replacement. It should be the res- 
ponsibility of the employer to make suitable arrangements for the proper 
replacement of protective devices or of defective parts. Employees should 
be instructed never to wear defective devices. 

A-«. INSPECTION 

A-6.1 Eye-protection equipment should be inspected frequently to ensure 
that it is in good condition. In general, the responsibility for reporting 
defective equipment should rest with the operative ( see A-5. ), but complete 
reliance should not be placed on this procedure for maintaining devices in 
good condition. The judgement of the operative will often be found not 
to be in agreement with what may be considered the best practice in the 
maintenance of the devices. A responsible officer should be detailed to 
make frequent inspections of eye-protection equipment and to see that all 
defective devices are either properly repaired or placed out of commission. 

11 



IS: 1179- 1967 

A-7. CLEANING AND DISINFECTING 

A-7.1 After eye-protection equipment has been used it should be cleaned 
and disinfected before being issued to another operative. Equipment used 
continuously by one person should be cleaned and disinfected at regular 
intervals. 

A-7. 1.1 Before being disinfected the device should be thoroughly scrubbed 
and cleaned with soap and hot water to remove grease, dirt or other subs- 
tances which may prove to be harmful. Where it can be done conveniently 
devices should be taken apart and the separate parts brushed or sponged in a 
warm solution of soap and water. They should then be rinsed in warm 
water and dried. The use of solvents such as carbon tetrachloride, gasoline 
or naptha is not to be recommended for cleaning eye-protection equipment 
because of the danger of causing skin irritation. The use of certain of these 
solvents also introduces a fire hazard into the cleaning operation. 

A-7.1 .2 After the equipment has been thoroughly cleaned it should be 
disinfected. Recommended methods of disinfection are as follows, but 
this shall be such that it has no detrimental effect on the equipment: 

a) Immersion in boiling water for a period of 5 minutes, 

b) Immersion in live steam for a period of not less than 5 minutes, 

c) Immersion in 70 percent solution of ethyl alcohol followed by air 
drying ( not suitable if textile materials are present ), 

d) Dipping in a solution of 1 part sodium hypochlorite in 10 parts 
on warm water followed by rinsing in cold water and drying, 

e) Irradiation with ultra-violet light ( satisfactory only if the rays 
reach all parts of the device ), and 

f ) A combined sterilisation and cleansing method may be employed 
by using one of the detergent-antiseptic solutions. 

A-7. 1.3 Where sodium hypochlorite solution or ethyl alcohol is used as a 
sterilising agent, it is suggested that the operations be carried out in a 
closed but ventilated metal container. This will protect the operative from 
the irritating effect of the fumes. Operatives sterilising with cither of these 
solutions should be provided with rubber gloves, aprons, goggles and protec- 
tive equipment for the respiratory tract. It is a good practice to provide 
lanoline, cold cream, vaseline or some similar preparation to be rubbed on 
the hands and lower arms to replace the natural skin oils that may have 
been dissolved out by the action of the sterilising compounds. 

Note - - Formalin, either in solution or as a gas, is sometimes used for the disinfec- 
tion of eye-protection equipment. It has the disadvantage that skin irritation may 
result if any of the disinfecting agent ramains on the equipment when it is put to use 
after treatment. 

12 



IS: 1179 -1967 
A-8. COMPLAINTS OF UNCOMFORTABLE DEVICES 

A-8.1 All complaints of uncomfortable equipment should be investigated 
carefully by a responsible officer. It is possible that imperfect filters may 
have escaped detection, that the devices may not have been adjusted cor- 
rectly, that they may need cleaning, or may not be of the correct type. 

A-9. FITTING AND DEVICES 

A-9.1 It should be the duty of the employer to ensure that each operative 
is provided with properly fitting protective devices, and it is desirable to 
detail a responsible officer to supervise such fitting. Time spent in adjusting 
the devices to the facial contours of the operative and in making sure that 
the eyelashes do not touch the filters, will help to secure his co-operation in 
the eye-protection scheme adopted in the works. 

Devices which are fixed in position by means of a headband should 
be worn in such a manner that the band passes around the head above the 
ears, and then down towards the base of the skull, with just enough tension 
to hold the device comfortably in its proper position* The headband should 
not be worn so that it passes around the widest part of the head. A tight- 
fitting headband may cause headaches and may be responsible for undue 
perspiration. The headband will be at approximately the correct tension 
if the wearer can place two fingers beneath the band without appreciable 
increase in the pressure of the device against the face or other point of 
pressure. 

A-10. OPERATIVES REQUIRING PRESCRIPTION LENSES 

A-10.1 Many operatives normally wear vision-correcting spectacles. Such 
spectacles may usually be worn without discomfort when hand shields, face 
masks or helmets arc used, but may interfere with the wearing of cyecup or 
spectacle goggles. In the latter cases the goggles should be of such a type 
that they may be worn comfortably over vision-correcting spectacles. 
Alternatively, the filter provided should be ground to the same prescription 
as the vision-correcting spectacles. In such a case care should be taken 
when fitting the Slters to avoid rotation on their axes. 

A-ll. FOGGING AND UNCOMFORTABLE PERSPIRATION 

A-ll.l Important factors contributing to the operative dispensing with the 
use of a protective device are the fogging of the filters and the inability 
to remove perspiration from the eyes. To overcome these disadvantages, 
operatives should be provided with sweat pads to be worn on the forehead, 
and with suitable anti-fogging compounds for application to the filters. 
One such compound consists of glycerine soap in the form of a pencil. In 
some cases one application of anti-fogging compound every three or four 
hours will be sufficient; in other cases, particularly where the operative is 

13 



IS 1 1179 -1967 

subjected to frequent changes in temperature, applications every hour, or 
even more frequently, may be necessary. Anti-fogging compound should 
be applied lightly and the filters polished with a clean cloth so that there 
is no interference with vision. A suggested composition for glycerine soap 
pencils is given in A-ll.1.1. 

A-l 1.1.1 Preparation of Glycerine Soap Pencils — Take 325 ml of glycerine, 
heat to boiling point and dissolve in it 50 g of stick sodium hydroxide. 
Add the solution, with constant stirring, to 625 g of stearic acid melted 
in a large kettle. When action has ceased pour the mixture into moulds. 
If softer pencils are required for winter use the proportion of glycerine should 
be increased; in general, however, pencils prepared as given above will be 
suitable for both summer and winter conditions. 

The above quantities should make about 500 pencils. 

A-12. RE-CONDITIONING OF FILTERS 

A-12.1 Reconditioning of filters by immersing them in acid or by grinding 
to remove pitted substances is not to be recommended. If the foreign subs- 
tance is dissolved out by the acid the pit will remain in the filter and cause 
distortion. If the filters are ground they are weakened and may not give 
full protection. It is safer to replace used filters with new filters. 

A-13. COVER GLASSES 

A-13.1 For reasons of economy it is desirable to provide filters with cover 
glasses which, on becoming pitted, may be discarded and new ones inserted. 
The life of the more expensive filter is thus lengthened. 

A-14. ISSUE OF ORDER 

A- 14.1 If it is decided that protective devices should be used in connection 
with any particular operation, an order should be issued by an executive of 
the company stating the hazards involved and specifying the type of device 
to be used. 

A-15. EDUCATION IN USE OF DEVICES 

A-15.1 The operatives should be instructed before taking up duties, and 
at regular intervals thereafter, in the purpose and importance of using eye- 
protection equipment. 

A-16. EXAMPLE BY EXECUTIVES 

A-16.1 It will be valuable in securing the use of eye protective devices 
by the operatives if all persons, regardless of their position in the organization 
or of the fact that they may be visitors to the plant, wear suitable protective 
equipment when in the vicinity of any operation likely to produce hazards 
to vision from injurious radiation or flying particles. 

14 



15:1179-1967 
APPENDIX B 

{Clause 5.1 ) 

TEST FOR RESISTANCE TO CORROSION OF METAL 
COMPONENTS 



B-l v PREPARATION 

B-H„The metal components are prepared by first removing all contamina- 
tion, particularly oil and grease, from the surfaces. 

B-2. METHOD 

B-2.1 The metal parts are immersed in a boiling 10 percent ( by weight) 
aqueous solution of sodium chloride for a period of 15 minutes. The 
components on being removed from this solution are immediately im- 
mersed in a 10 percent ( by weight ) aqueous solution of sodium chloride 
at room temperature for a further 15 minutes. After removal from this cold 
solution, without having the adhering liquid wiped off, they are allowed 
to dry for 24 hours at room temperature. The metal parts are then rinsed 
in lukewarm water and allowed to dry after which they are visually examined. 



APPENDIX C 

( Clause 5.4 ) 

TEST FOR FLAMMABILITY 



C-l. PREPARATION 

C-l.l A specimen approximately 125 mm long, 15 mm wide and of a 
thickness equal to the thinnest section intended to be used in the equipment 
is cut from the sample of the material in such a manner that the strip is as 
flat as possible. Lines are drawn across the specimen at 15 mm intervals 
measured from one end along the 125 mm length. The other end is clamp- 
ed in a rigid support so that the long axis of the specimen is horizontal* 
An alcohol lamp or gas burner with a flame 10 to 20 mm in height is placed 
under the free end of the specimen, and adjusted so that the flame tip is just 
in contact with the material under test. 

15 



18:1179-1967 

G-2. METHOD 

C-2.1 A stop-watch is started when the flame is placed in contact with the 
specimen. At the end of 10 seconds the flame is removed and the specimen 
allowed to burn. The rate of burning per minute is observed from the 
marked lines. 

C-2.2 Three specimens are tested and the rate of burning is calculated from 
the average of the results of the tests. 



APPENDIX D 

( Clause 6.2.2 ) 

IMPACT TEST FOR GOGGLE LENSES 

D-l. IMPACT TEST 

D-l.l An eyecup with lens shall be supported on a wooden block of such 
size as to fit into the eyecup securely without touching the lens. A 22 mm 
steel ball weighing approximately 44 g, shall be freely dropped from a 
height of 1 "25 m on to the horizontal outer surface of the lens. 



APPENDIX E 

( Clause 6.2.4 ) 

HEAT DEFORMATION TEST FOR tfYECUP GOGGLES 



E-l. Goggles shall be tested for heat deformation by mounting the eyecup 
on a wooden block with the facial edge of the cup downwards and the filter 
and cover glass horizontal. The bridge side of the eyecup shall be fastened 
to the block by means of a piece of wire. The eyecup shall rest on the edge 
of the block which has been rounded to a radius of 5 mm. A 680 weight 
shall be suspended from the eyecup by means of a piece of wire, one end 

16 



IS: 1179 -1967 

of which is attached to the weight and the other end fastened in the temple 
side headband hole ( see Fig. 3 ). The whole assembly shall be placed for 
one hour in a forced-draft oven maintained at 70° ± 10°C. At the end of 
this period the assembly shall be removed from the oven and allowed to 
cool, after which the dimensions A, B and C shown in Fig. 1 shall be measured. 
Dimensions A and B shall not exceed the original dimensions by more than 
1 percent and dimension C shall not exceed the original dimensions by more 
than 5 percent. The retaining ring and the cup of the eyecup shall show 
a close, but not tight, fit. 



BRIDGE 

SIDE 



TEMPLE 
SIDE 



WIRE HOLDING 
EYECUP IN PLACE 




680 g 
WEIGHT 



Fio. 3 Apparatus for Heat Deformation of Goggles 



17 



BUREAU OP INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mara. NEW DELH1 110002 
Talaphonas : 331 01 31, 331 1375 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all offices ) 



Regional Officer, 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 

NEW DELHI-1 10002 
•Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700064 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, 

CHANDIGARH 160036 



Southern 
tWestern 



C. I. T. Campus. MADRAS 600113 



Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marof, Andheri (East), 
BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices: 
'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg. Khanpur, 

AHMEDABAD 380001 
tPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalora Tumkur Road 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotrl Complax, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road. T. T. Nagar, 

BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewia Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
63/6. Ward No. 29. R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane. 

GUWAHATI 781003 
6-8-66C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhlater Marg, C Scheme. JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208006 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 
T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam 

TRIVANDRUM 696035 
Inspection Office (With Sale Point) : 
Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shlvajl Nagar, 

PUNE 411005 



Telephones 

1331 01 31 

1.331 1375 

36 2499 

121843 

1316 41 

2442 

2519 

2916 

6 32 9296 



f41 

I 41 
Ul 



T2 6348 

1.2 83 49 

[384955 

138 49 69 

6 6716 

5 36 27 
3 3177 

2310 83 

T6 34 71 

U 98 32 

T216876 

1218292 

6 2305 

re 21 04 

16 2117 



2 6171 
62436 



•Se'ee Office In Calcutta Is st 8 Chowrlnghee Approach, P.O. f rlneep 17 SB OS 

Street, Cslcutta 700071 

tSslcs Office In Bombay Is at Novelty Chambere, ©rent Rosa, M OS U 

Bembey 400007 

tSales Office In Bangalore le at Unity Building, Naraslmhare|a Square tt «• 71 

Bengalore 500001 

Print** et Slmae Prtnttno PrM*. Orthl. leOta 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 JUNE 2008 

TO 

IS 1179 : 1967 EQUIPMENT OF EYE AND FACE 

PROTECTION DURING WELDING 

( First Revision ) 

[Page 7, clause 6.2(b)] — Insert the following at the end: 

'c) Gas cutting goggles to be worn over power corrected spectacles shall have 
a pair of flip- up type cup with screw cap arrangement to hold the filter 
lenses and protective plain glass.' 

(Page 7, clause 6.2.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

The goggles shall be made out of Bakelite/PVC material with smooth finish and 
shall conform to the requirements of 5.' 

(Page 7, clause 6.2.4) — Add the following before the existing first 
sentence: 

'Eye caps shall have two pairs of clear glass in size 50 mm dia. One pair to be 
fixed in the frame with a screw ring for protecting the eyes while filter lens are 
lifted up and another pair in the flip-up frame as protective cover to filter lens. 9 

(Page 9, clause 6.2.8) — Add the following new clauses: 

6.3 Gas cutting goggles to be worn over power corrected spectacles. 

6.3.1 Goggles shall be made out of bakelite/PVC material with smooth finish, 
suitable to wear over the spectacle. 

6.3.2 They shall have a pair of slip-up type cut with screw cap arrangement to 
hold the filter lenses and protective plain glass. 

6.3.3 They shall have two pairs of clear plain glass in size SO mm dia. One pair 
to be fixed in the frame with a screw ring for protecting the eyes while the filter 
lenses are lifted up and another pair in the flip-up frame as protective cover to 
filter lenses. 



Amend No. 2 to IS 1 179 : 1967 

(Page 9, clause heading 7, and clauses 7.1.2 to 7.1.3 and 7.1.S) — 
Substitute the words 'Helmet, Head Shield and Hand Shields'/^ 'Helmet and 
Hand Shields' wherever appear. 

(Page 9, clause 7.2.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

Helmets and Shields shall be mould out Fiber material to the thickness of 
1 .5 mm with clear Finish and shall conform to the requirement of 5/ 

(Page 10, clause 7.2.4) — Insert the following new clause 7.2.4 and 
renumber the existing clause 7.2.4 as 7.2.5 after modification as given below: 

1 7.2.4 It shall have a provision to allow the head shield drop gradually or step by 
step and have a stopper to arrest the fall and hit at the chest. 

7.2.5 The headgear shall have a ratchet type adjustable headband made up of 
PVC and provided with soft cellulose sponge at the front side of the headband 
which must be covered by Rexine cloth. It shall retain the helmet comfortably 
and firmly in place on the wearers head but shall permit the helmet body to be 
tilted back over the head. The headgear shall be adjustable, without the use of 
tools, so as to permit the setting of the filter in the line of vision of the wearer. It 
shall have the 4 mm wing Nut with spring attachment or any suitable 
arrangement for easy positioning.' 

{Page 10, clause 7.2.6) — Insert the following new clause 7.2.6 and 
renumber the existing clauses 7.2.5 and 7.2.6 as 7.2.7 and 7.2.8: 

'7.2.6 The window shall have a flip-up door arrangement to lift up the filter lens 
with the provision of clamp to hold the Filter Lens and Protective plain glass.* 

(Page 10, clause 7.2.8) — Insert the following new clauses at the end: 

7.3 Welding Head Shield 

7.3.1 Welding head shield shall be mould out fibre material to the thickness of 
1.5 mm with clear finish. 

7.3.2 It shall have the 4 mm wing Nut with spring attachment or any suitable 
arrangement for easy positioning. 



Amend No. 2 to IS 1 179 : 1967 

7.3.3 It shall have a ratchet type adjustable headband made up of PVC and 
provided with soft cellulose sponge at the front side of the headband which must 
be covered by Rexine cloth. 

7.3.4 It shall have a provision to allow the head shield drop gradually or step by 
step and have a stopper to arrest the fall and hit at the chest. 

7.3.5 The total weight of the head shield shall not exceed 400 g and hand shield 
shall not exceed 350 g. 

7.4 Flip-Up Type Welding Helmet 

7.4.1 Flip-up type welding helmet shall be mould out of fibre material to the 
thickness of 1.5 mm. 

7.4.2 It shall have the window with the provision of clamp to hold the protective 
plain glass. 

7.4.3 The window shall have a flip-up door arrangement to lift up the filter lens 
with the provision of clamp to hold the filter lens and protective plain glass. 

7.4.4 It shall have the 4 mm wing Nut with spring attachment or any suitable 
arrangement for easy positioning. 

7.4.5 ft shall have an ratchet type adjustable headband made up of PVC and 
provided with soft cellulose sponge at the front side of the headband which must 
be covered by rexine cloth. 

7.4.6 It shall have a provision to allow the head shield drop gradually or step by 
step and have a stopper to arrest the fall and hit at the chest. 

7.4.7 The total weight of the head shield shall not exceed 400 g. 

7.5 Auto-Darkeoing Welding Helmet 

The auto-darkening feature of the helmet facilitates to view the workpiece 
through lens. The lens reacts to the arc instantly and selects the darkness to the 
selected shade level automatically. 



Amend No. 2 to IS 1 179 : 1967 

The selected shade level corresponds to a lens shade number as selected 
normally depending upon the welding process used for a particular application. 
The number just denotes the amount of darkness provided by that particular lens 
and should be used by operators as a guide to select the one that is most 
comfortable and yet provides good visibility for the particular application. 

Welding arcs emit both IR and UV wavelengths of light. Unprotected from this 
light, both eyes damage and discomfort can occur. Since high-quality auto- 
darkening helmets provide UV and IR protection even when the helmet is not 
activated, eyes are always protected. However, for maximum comfort, a high 
quality helmet that has a response darkening time of 4/lOths of a millisecond is 
desired. Less than a millisecond is not perceivable by the human eye and will 
provide the most comfort. 

Two varieties, that is, battery-operated and solar-powered of auto-darkening 
helmets are available. In most cases, it simply is a choice of personal preference 
and what is most convenient to the operator. These helmets offer a feature that 
will automatically turn off the battery after the helmet has been kept idle. Solar- 
powered also offers the convenience of not having to worry about changing 
batteries. 

)f the same arc welding proce&& is used on the same material, a fixed shade is 
sufficient. But if a variety of materials and welding processes are used for a 
number of different applications, it is better to select a variable shade, which will 
adjust to the correct darkness for the particular process. 

Besides looking for something that is lightweight, the other important 
consideration would be to find a helmet that has a sensor bar. With this feature, it 
will limit the field of response so the other welding arcs nearby won't trigger the 
helmet. A helmet that has a curved clear spatter shield over the optics will 
provide the best optical clarity. In addition, a helmet that is fully adjustable is 
important. Some helmets can only adjust the tilt of the helmet to the chest. A 
fully adjustable helmet also provides adjustment on how close the helmet is 
located to the face. This is especially important for those who wear glasses. 



(MTD II) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



