( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 1250- 1958

Indian

Standard

PROOF CORRECTIONS FOR PRINTERS AND AUTHORS
Documentation Sectional
Editor, Annals

Committee,
of Library

EC 2
New Delhi

Science,

Central Indian University

Roanl Council of

of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi of Agricnltural Research, New Delhi Delhi, Delhi

Indian Library Association. Calcutta Photo I.itho l'rrhs Mintstry of Works, Housing & Supply All-Indi.1 I+dcr,~tion of Master Printers, Calcutta

(

)

National Archives of India, New Delhi Ministry of Lalmur & En~ploynwnt National Lilraryr Calrntta F'nblicatinns Div~siw~, >linlhtry of Information & Broadcasting Incliarl N;6orlxl Scientilic L)ocowon~;~tion Cents ( INSDOC New Delhi

),

Chirf

Editor,

LSI

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
I!HA\`AN. 9 BAHADUR

INSTITUTION
StlAII ZAFAR MARC

NEW DELHI

11OOo2

IS : 1250 - 1958

Indian

Standard

PROOF CORRECTIONS FOR PRINTERS AND AUTHORS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the I;ldian Standards Institution on 12 July 1958, after the draft finalized by the Documentation Settional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee 0.2 T!lis stalls-I,ird has been prepared with a view to assisting authors and printers to follow a uniform system in correcting proofs by the use of symbols that are easily recognizable 0.3 Taking into consideration the views of printers and authors in the country, the Sectional Committee responsible .for the preparation of this standard felt that, as far as consistent with our present day needs, the standard should be related to the practice followed at present in the country in this field. Due consideration has also been given ta the need for jnternational co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world using the Roman script. These considerations led the Committee to derive assistance Irom the following standards and publications: NRN 288 __-PROOF COKKECTION SIGNS FOH MANUSCKIPTS OF TYPE1953 WRITTEN TEXTS. Tnstitut Rclge de Normalisation. RANGANATHAN,S. R. SOCIAL EIBLIOCRAPHYOR PHYSICALEIBLIOGRAPHYFORLIBRARIANS. DELHI. University of Delhi, 1952 ( p. 265). B.S. 1219 : 1945 PRNERS' AND AUTHORS' PROOF CORRECTIONS. British Standards Instittltion. 0.3.1 As proof correction work in India has so far followed the British practice, a number of symbols being used in this work consist of English terms, such as ` stet `, ` trs `, ' see copy `, ` insert rule `, ` rule `, ` small type `: etc. With widespread increase in literacy in the country, there is a considerable increase in reading material, especially in Tndian languages. Need has, therefore, arisen to have standard proof correction symbols which could be used uniformly throughout the country by all the presses whether dealing with publications in the l51glish language or in the various Indian languages. Accordingly, linguistic ~symbols, including those mentioned above, have been rc@aced in this standard by non-linguistic symbols. 0.3.2 The elimination of linguistic symbols iI> this standard paves the way for world-wide co-ordination of prpof teading practice which would be applicable to all language groups. 0.4 It is necessary to distinguish between proof correction work and introduction of editorial changes in the proofs. In the interest of expeditious 2

IS : 1250- 1958 and economical production, it is @ssential that the latter should be reduced It is also important that errors at the composing stage to the minimum. With this end in should not be attributable to defects in the manuscript. view, ret ommenda-tions to be followed in the preparation of the copy for the printer have been included at Appendix A. 0.5 The use of this standard requires reference to the latest *IS : 12-1958 Guide for Drafting Indian Standards ( Revised ). version of

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes two sets of symbols to be used in correcting proofs, one in the margin and the other at the place in the text where the correction is to be made. It also includes some recommendations for preparation of copy for the printer. 2. SYMBOLS 2.1 Symbols in proof corrections, both in .the margin and in the text, shall be used as specified and illustrated in Table I.
the proof correction NOTE - For convenience of reference, grouped under the following successive headings: B. Punctuation C. Spacing A. General D. Alignment P. Type symbols are

3. CORRECTIONS 3.1 All corrections shall be given only in the margin. 3.1.1 The correction in the margin shall be given opposite to the line to which it belongs. 3.1.2 If a correction cannot be accommodated opposite to the line in the margin, and has, therefore, to be given elsewhere, the line to which it belongs should be indicated. 3.1.3 In the text, appropriate symbol shall be used to indicate the place of correction. 3.2 When two or more corrections occur in one line, the corrections may be suitably divided between the left and right margins, the sequence being always from left to right, irrespective of the margin in which they appear. 3.3 Author's Corrections - Author's corrections should be avoided as far as possible. 3.3.1 Where author's corrections are indispensable, they shall be made in such a way that a minimum amount of extra work at the press is involved.
NOTE - In making these corrections, where it is necessary to add a word, attempt should be made to delete a word or words of about the same number of letters nearby; if a word is to be deleted, a word of about the same length may be added. Similarly, if a line is to be added, a line may be knocked out, even if it is a line of only one word. If these suggestions are acted upon, they will help avoid whole patagraph(s) having tn be reset. ._____Y_P * Second revision in 1964.

3

iS : 1250 - 1958 4. CHECKING 4.1 The proof corrections carried out by the press may be verified in the printed copy, correction by correction, as indicated in the margins of the corrected proofs. 4.2 In the case of matter composed by linotype, the whole line in which a correction has been made shall be checked.
NOTEof the

In linotype xomposition, entire line.

even a single correction

requires

the rcsettiog

4.3 In the case of insertions and d,eletions, since it is possible that a number of composed lines or even a whole paragraph may be affected, care should be taken to determine the affected lines or paragraph, and to check the entire affected matter afresh.
NOTE -This will eliminate the possibility of remaking of composed matter. of new errors creeping in as a result

APPENDIX ( czuuse 0.4 j
RECOMMENDATIONS

A

FOR THE PREPARATION FOR THE PRINTER

OF

COPY

A-l. MANUSCRIPT A-l.1 The mamlscript should be type-written on one side of paper in doable spacing. In unavoidable circumstances, it may be written out, byt in a perfectly legible hand and on one side of paper only. A-l.2 The manuscript should be made up of sheets of uniform size, leaving a margin of not less than 3 cm on the left-hand side. A-l.3 The pages should be numbered consecutively, and fastened securely together at the left-hand top corner. A-l.4 If, after the sheets have been numbered, it becomes necessary to delete a passage extending over a whole sheet of manuscript, the passage should be clearly mark_$d through and the sheet left in place. A-l.5 The manuscript should be carefully revised, and all corrections in the copy should be made, not in the margin, but in the text, in ink, If, as a result of revision, extensive scoring out all .rejected matter. alterations have to be made, the paragraphs or pages concerned should The manuscript as sent to the printer be re-typed and checked again. should represent the final version of the text.
KOTE - The time to consider altrratioas is 6ejore sending manuscript to press and not at the time of proof reading. Manv authdrs subject their typescripts before sending them to press to two en&rely different kinds of checking operations - one to read, re-read, and, if necessary, amend until satisfied that the meaning has been conveyed as they wish it to be, and the second to eliminate any inconsistency in style, punctuation, capitalization or spelling.

`4

IS : 1250- 1955 A-1.5.1 Notwithstabding A-1.5, when a printed copy is sent to the press as original, the corrections may be made in the margin, the margm being extended by pasting strips of paper on to it A-2. MATERIAL OTHER THAN RUNNING MATTER except informal table

A-2.! Each diagram, illustration, map and table, ( see%: 12-1958 ), should be on separate sheet.

,\anx -- The processes available for reprotluction of diagrams, ilh~strations. m,rpy, ctc, are so varietl that the author would be well advised to consult his pubhnhnr or printer on this matter.

A-3.

FOOTNOTES

A-3.1 Footnotes should be avoided as far as possible. When used, they should not be placed at the foot of the sheet, but immediately under the The footnote should be separated from the text line to which they refer. by two horizontal lines drawn across the sheet, one above and the other below the footnote. In addition, to meet the convenience of printers and to save time in seeing the manuscript through the press, all the footnotes should be copied out on separate sheets in the same sequence as in the, manuscript and with appropriate references to their positions in the text. A-4. TYPE

A-4.0 Unless overall instructions for the use of ditt'erent kinds of type have been given to the press, authors may be well advised to indicate the kind of type required in different places in the manuscript in accordanck with the following suggestions. A-4.1 Words to De printed in capitals should be undcrlincd by three lines, and in small capitals by two lines. Words in italics should be underlined by single line and in bold type by a wavy lint:. \Vortls and word-groups to ht. printed in caps and small caps should br encircled, and the appropriatiz symbols given against them in the margin. A-4.2 hlattcr to be printed in small type should be indicated by a vertical line in the margin by the side of the matter with the allpropriatc symbol Clvt'n in the: margin. A-4.3 I<cginning of new paragraphs and indenting sl~ould bc clearly r!~i:ltctl by the use of the appropriate symbols speciticd in Table I.
A-4.4 Any special requircmr*nts as to tlic arrangement of tlic sh~n~l~l br written in thcb ni;u-gin headed ' Mofc to Pritlld:r `_

in-

setting

A-5.

REFERENCES
CtC,

A-5.1 Al1 rcafcrcnces to publisllc(1 articles, books, according to the style laid d(J\vIl in?S : 12-1958.
*

sliall

b(b givcbn

Seconcl

revision

in

1963. 5

IS : 1250 - 1958
TABLE I PROOF CORRECTION SYMBOLS ( c:auscs 2.1
St

PROOF CORRECTION SYMBOL
I

MBANINO
3

No.
In the Text In the Margin (3) A. 1 through the word to be altered (4)

(1-l

(2)

GENERAL
preceded stituted by Substitute word

/ word to be subby / preceded letter to be substituted

2

/ through

the letter to be alter&d

Substitute

letter

3

/ through

the letter or -through the word to be deleted posltiun

4
x
preceded by matter to be inserted .,...

Delete

4

1 in required

Insert

new matter

5

. . .

l

. under letters or words to remain

Leave

as printed

6

Encircle inverted

letters

to be

Invert

type

7

Encircle altered

letters

to be

x

Replace

broken letter

8

1

hetwecn letters or words

Transpose words

the order of letters or

9

Encircle words or figures to be spelt out in full 4 in required position

The abbreviation spelt out in full

or figure to be

10

X'X 0

Insert omitted portion of copy NOTE - The relevant section of the copy should be returned with the proof. the omitted portion being clearly indicated.

6

IS:1250 -1958
AND EXAMPLES and A-4.3)
EXAMPLBS OF PROOF CORRECTIONWORK

ILLUSTRATING

THEIR USE

Text

as Marked

for Correction IS1

Text

as Corrected

05)

A.

GENERAL example in This is the first example table. in this

This is the +remee+ this table.

The pres proofs of these documents have be n received and corrected. 9 This letter f should &be deleted.

The press proofs of these documents have been received and corrected. This letter should be deleted.

This is an example ofkmgtter.

for

insertion

This is an example of new matter.

for insertion

A wrong correction is put right by placing w under the word which has been incorrectly struck through. An eerted type is encircled so that it may be inverted back toits correct position. Broken letters are encircled, and $;,rcIevant s@ given in the marLetters or words out of order are

A wrong correction is put right by placing dots under the word which hasbeen incorrectlystruckthrough. An inverted type is encircled so that it may be inverted back to its correct position. Broken letters are encircled, and the relevant sign given in the margin. Letters or words out of order are indicated by a transposing sign, which shows the correct sequence. Figures and abbreviations. such as hundred and October, which require to be spelt out in full are encircled.

The modern form of the book was originally `called because of the blocks of wood w a ich were used as their protecting covers.

The modern form of the book was originally called * Codex `. It was so called because of the blocks of wood which were used as their protecting covers. ( Contd )

7

IS : 1250- 1958

TABLE SL No.
,

I

PROOF

CORRECTION
MEANING

SYMBOLS

PROOF

CORRECTION
*

SYMBOL In the Margin (3)
\

In the Text (21 A.

(1)

(4)

GENERAL-Co&f

? 0
I

Refer to appropriate authority the encircled item, the accuracy ox suitability of which is doubted.

12

No symbol

in the text

Symbol to separate different corrections in the same line in the margin

B. 13 4 in required position

PUNCTIJATIOti ax Insert full stop

NOTE -The correction symbol lor insertion to be used correction symbol in the text and in the margin shall 14 x. in required position 9 x Insert comma

15' 16

x in required x in required

position position

: OX
; x

Insert lnsert

colon semicolon

17 18 19

x

in required

position position position

?X

Insert

interrogation

mark mark

x* in required x in required

Insert exclamation Insert apostropric

8

IS : 1250- 1958

AND

EXAMPLES

ILLUSTRATING EXAMPLES Text as Marked

THEIR OF PROOF

USE

-

Contd WORK Text as Corrected (4 '

CORRECTION

for Correction

(5) A. GENERAL-Confd You wrii read

You will read more words per minute

more

words

per

Indian Standards are prepared to meet specific needs.

B.

PUNCTUATION The vast majority of sentences are statements made about a subject, and a full stop is then the appropriate stop.

The vast majority of sentences are statements made about a subject, and a full stop is then the appropriate stopi

be/

in

the text and. in the margin is instead of X :

i `.

In case

of

substitution

the

. . OX
i x

9x

This Indian Standard covers a subThis Indian Standard covers a subject of vital interest to authors x ject of vital interest to authors, printers and publishers. printers and publishers. Be strong and of good courageLbe not afraid, neither dismayed. Wisdom is the principal thingk therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting, get understanding. Which sentences should an interrogation markA you missed end with the Be strong and of good courage: be not afraid, neither dismayed. Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting, get understandmg. Which sentences should end with an interrogation mark ? Ah! you missed to introduce exclamation mark. the

?X !X .

to introduce

interest to be It is in the autho acquainted with f roof correction symbols.

It is in the author's interest to be acquainted with proof correction symbols. ( Confd )

9

IS : 1250 - 1958
TABLE SL 1~ PROOF CORRECTION MEANING , In the Text In the Maqin (3) B. 20 21 x in required required position position PUNCTUATION-C~ontd Jrd Insert single quotation Insert double quotation mark mark (4) SYMBOLS

PROOF CORRECTION SYMBOL
I-

No.

(1)

(2)

Aill

22

x
x

in required

position

Cx

Insert

a 3-dot

leader

23

in required

position

...

x

Insert ellipsis

24 25 26 27 28 29 30

x x

in required in required required required required

position position position position position position position {I ?!j! j--x 1 @

Insert slant stroke Insert square bracket Insert crooked bracket

C/(O~lX

kin kin Ain

Insert parenthesis Insrrt hyphen Insert half em rule Ins& one em rule

x in required Ain required

10

IS : 1250 - 1958

AND EXAMPLES

ILLUSTRATING

THEIR

USE-Cod
WORK 3 Text as Corrected (6)

EXAMPLES OF PROOF I Text as Marked .

CORRECTION

for Correction (5)

B.

PUNCTUATION-Conld A ' printer's devil ' sometimes surprises even the best of workers. It is said, " Prevention than cure " CONTENTS is better

A Aprinter's deviIL sometimes surpriscs even the best of workers., It Is said, than cureA. APrevention is better

CONTENTS

Page 5.5 60

Page 55 60

Commonwealth Conference Meets in New Delhi . .. . .. Extracts from Report of Commonwealth ConferenceA

Conference Commonwealth Meets in New Delhi . . . . . . Extracts from Report 01 Corn. monwealth Conference ...

The Chairman said, " The responsibility of the Committee is likely to grow with the future meetings we are going to haveA We have, of course, besides the Certification Marks Scheme of ISI, already quality marking a nllmbf2-r of schemes organized by State Governments". Please refer Pub-DocA57, Simplify: [2xs-8x4-x A 2x0 -4x(2x'+tik to your letter No. dated 18 June 1957.

The Chairman said, " The responsibility of the Committee is likely to grow with the future meetings WC arc going to have. . . We have, of course, besides the Certification Marks Scheme of ISI, already a number of quality marking schemes organized by State Governments". Please refer to your letter- Yo. Pub-Dot/57, dated 18 June lRS7. Simplify: [2xr-8x4-x (2x4-4x(2x*+3))]

Please insert ` makeAup `.

hyphen

in the

word sym-

` make-up `.

Please insert hyphen in the word symgood

For general proof correction bols, see items l/12. I taught him a lesson/a

For general proof correction bols, SETitems 1-12. I taught lesson. him a lesson-a

good lesson.

IS : 1250- 1958
I PROOF CORRECTION
MEANING , (4)

TABLE No. Ill

SYMBOLS

SL

#P

PROOF CORRECTION SYMBOL * In the Text (2) B. In the Margin (31 PUNCTUATIO.N-Contd

31

k in required

position

Insert

two em rule

32 33

-

under

words

affpcted

_A

0

Underline

word or words

Draw a line where required

0

77

Insert

a line

34
35 36 37

x in required position
Encircle letters to be altered x* m required or figures position

Insert

superior

figure figure

Substitute Insert

superior figure

inferior

Encircle letters, or figures to be altered C. SPACING

Substitute

inferior

figure

>

38
39

x
/

in required

position

#X 4 #

Insert space Delete and leave <pace

across letter or sign to be deleted 1 between words

40

@D

=

Make space equal

41 42 ",

1between

words

#< A

Reduce

slice

between WOW' space hetween

linking letters

Close up; letters

delete

IS : 1250- 1958
AND EXAMPLES ILLUSTRATING THEIR USE - Contd

EXAMPLES OF PROOF CORREC~ON WORK

.

Text

as Marked

for Correction (3)

Text

as Corrected (6)

.

B.

PUNGTUATION

-CContd

Nors

-The style in this case is the same as in 29 and 30, except to be given in the margin. A rule is inserted_ under be underlined. PRESIDENT'S AD,DRESS Headquarters rememwords to

for the symbol

A rule is inserted under words to be underlined. PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS+

*Delivered at IS1 on 28 March 1957.

l Dehvered

at ISI Headquarters on 28 March 1957.

Every school boy has to ber the identities: (a + bL( = as + bs + 2ab (a-b@= as+ bs-2ab

Every scho61 boy has to remember the identities: (a + b)* = as + b* + 2ab (a - b)* = as j- b* - 2ab The chemical formula for water is HsO. Sulphuric acid (HrSOJ is an important chemical for many industries.

industries. C. the SPACING text is indi-

Space required in the text is indicated by sign given in the margin. Complete change over to metric system is expected to be achieved within ten years. When space between unequal, the correction ed as shown here. words f is indicat-

Complete change/over to metric system is expected .to be achieved within ten years. When [space lbetwe,nlwordsbs[unequal, the correctjon IS indicarcd as shown here. To (_reduce the sign (#<) Vn3anted between words, 1space is used in the margin. space is irritating.

To reduce space between words, the sign (WJ is used tn the margin. Unwanted space is zrrltating. ( Cnnrrf )

13

IS : 1250-- 1958
PROOF- CORRECTION
MEANING \

TABLE

f

SYMBOLS

If:*
c

PROOF

CORRHCTION

SYMBOL

In the Text

In the Margin (3) C.

(1)
43

(2)

(4)

SPACING-Cd
Space and close up

/ where spaceA required and letters to bexked on

#=i
Close up and space J Delete and close up z s enclosing ligature required enclosing diphthong required Use ligature ( e.g. ff ) instead separate letters

44

~?II

letters to be Imked and / where space is required letters out to be to to

45 46 47

TLxos.3 btaken -

enc!osing letters be altered

of

~enclosing letters be altered A rule between lines

Use diphthong (e.g. oe) instead of separate letters Increase space paragraphs between lines or

48

#>

49

Encircle

space

affected

1,
D.

Push down space

ALIGNMENT
Correct vertical II alignment

so

affected lines, as the II need may be

on either side of the

51 52

=

through lines to be straightened over lines to be raised T

Straighten Raise lines

lines

f

14

IS : 1250- 1958
AND EXAMPLES ILLUSTRATING THEIR USE Could

EXAMPLES OF PROOF CORREC~~N WORK ,
Text as Marked (5) C. for Correction Text as Cbrrected (6)

SPACING-Cod
The type face of the entry element in the name of each person shall be the most dominant.

~h;hp&~f~~~&~~~~~
the most dominant.

g
LI

found you a? arguI am not obhged to Ligature &ould word like &t. bc used in
a

Sir, I have found you an argument; but 1, am not obliged to find you an understanding. Ligature should word like flat. be used in a

g-P #>
I

It requires great skill to manzuvre a car into a garage from a narrow street. Space is introduced between lines

It requires great skill to mnnmuvrc a car into a garage from a narrow street. Space is introduced rected like this. between lines

or paragraphs, if the proofs are corrected hke tlus. space, which has come ill be pushed down.

or paragraphs, if the proofs are cor-

The quad space, which has come up her?, will be pushed down

D. ALIGNMENT
When the lines are not vertically aligned, two vertical lines are marked in the proof on the affected side of these lines, as shown in the example. Two par&cl lines are put thiounh the lines which are not straight. When lines are to be raised up, the fact is indicated by the sign as gi8& in the margin. When the lines are not vertically aligned, two vertical lines are marked in the proof on the affected side of these lines, as shown in the example. Two parallel lines are put through the lines which are not straight. When lines are to be raised up, the fact is indicated by the sign as given in the margin. ( ConM )

II

15

IS : 1250 - 1958
TABLE SL
r
PIIOO? CORRItCTlON SYMBOL

I

PROOF CORRECTION
MEANING

SYMBOLS

No.

In the Text

In the Margin

\

(1)

(2)

(3) D. ALIGNMENT-Crmfd

(4)

53 -around the portion to be raised up

Raise up to show it separate from existing matter

54

Ir.

lowered

under

lines

to

be

Lower

lines

portion 55 ~-~_,around the _ to be lowered down

Lower down to show it separate from existing matter

\/

Place in centre of lines

around matter to be indented

Indent

one em

around matter indented

to be

Indent

two ems

at left side of group to be moved

Move lines to the right

60

at right side of group to be moved

Move lines to the left

16

IS : 1250 - 1958
AND EXAMPLES ILLUSTRATING THEIR USE-Cod

EXAMPLES OF PROOF CORRECTION WORK ` Text as Marked for Correction (5) 1 Text as Corrected (6)

D.
U 7whergA =

ALIGNMENT-Conrd
volume in ml of standard wtassium hydroxide' solution. where A volume in ml of standard notassium hydroxide* solution.

When lines are to be lowered, the i fact is indicated by the sign as given in the margin. ISI Bulletin ( Published Eve Two Months ) Single Copy . . . . . . * Annual Subscription . . . Rs 6.00 P$a;ae;lace Indian \ the following address

When lines are to be lowered. the fact is indicated by the sign as given in the margin. ISI Bulletin (Published Two Months ) Single Copy . . . . . . Annual Subscription Please place the following in order: Indian Music School, Sangeet Bhavan, New Delhi. Every Rs 2.00 Rs 6.00 addrw

Music School, Sangeet Bhavan, New Delhi. I is ths style of in-

The following denting :

The following denting:

is the style

of in-

by the specilic proof correction symbol that these lines are to be indented by cne cm only.

Indicate by the specific proof correction symbol that these lines are to be indented by one em only.

Nora

c-me style in this case is the same be given in the margin.

as in 57 above,

except

for the symbol

to

<

When the lines are to be moved to the right-hand side, it is indi< cated as in the margin. When the movctl side, as in the lines are to to the is it margin.

When the lines are to be moved to the right-hand side. it is indicatcd a:: ia t!lc margin. When the lines arc to be moved to the left-band indicated side, it is as in the margin.

t Conld I

17

TABLE

I

PROOF

CORRECTION

SYMBOLS

P~OOP CORREC~ON SYVSOL , * In the Text In the ,Margin 1

MEANING

B). ALIGNMENT-COW 61 c in required position c Take letter or word from end o one line to the beginning of the following line Take letter or word from beginning of a line to the end of the preceding line Begin a new paragraph

62

3 in required

position

7

63

-I-

before the first word of new paragraph

64 (2

between the paragraphs

2
Cl
E.

Combine

the paragraphs

limits 1at position

of required

Move portion of matter it comes within the indicated

so that position

66

s

under words or letters to be altered

s 0

TYPE Change to capitals

67

=:

under words or letters to be altered

= 0
18

Change

to small

capitals

AND EXAMPLES

ILLUSTRATING

THEIR USE-Contd

EXAMPLES I

OF PROOF

CORRECTION WORK ,

Text

as hlarked (5) D.

* for Correction

Text

as Corrected 63

ALIGNMENT-CCbnrd Please take over letter or word from end of this line to the next line of this example. Please take back the letter or word of the second line of this example to the first line. Use the symbol given in the margin to indicate the beginning of a new paragraph. After dealing with two more symbols, we shall give proof correction symbols for the category ' Type `. T0 be an effective user of your language, you must have facts. Your haziest impressions and opinions have some relation to facts, even if they are incorrectly recollected or interpreted. MEMOS, ENGAGEMENTS JUNE 1957

I: 3

Please take over letter or word from end of this line to the @ext line of this example. Pease take back the letter or wor 4 of the second line of this example to the first line. Use the symbol given in the margin to indicate the beginning of a new paragraph.IAlfer dealing with two more symbols, we shall give proof correction symbols for the category ' Type ' To be an effective user of vour

2 Cl

opinions have some relation to facts, even if they are incorrectly recollected or interpreted. c MEMOS. ENGAGEMENTS UNE 1957 IJ

E. TYPE
When an author places three lines under a word and puts down the appropriate symbol in the margin, the press knows that the author desires the word thus underlined to be printed in capitals. = Words which are twice underlined are printed in Sm& Cpitals. When an author places three lines under a word and puts down the appropriate symbol in the margin, the press knows that the author desires the word thus underlined to be printed in CAPITALS. Words which are twice underlined are printed in SMALL CAPITALS. ( Conid )

= = O/o

= 0

19

IS : 1250- 195s

TABLE PROOF CORRECTIONSYMBOL

I

PROOF

CORRECTION

SYMBOLS

SL

MEANING

No.

,
(1)

L In the Text (2) E. In the Margin (31 TYPE-C&d Use capitals for initial letters and small capitals for the remaining letters

. (4)

68

Encircle the word or word-group to be altered

69

Encircle altered

letters

to be

70 -under

letters or words to be altered under letters or words to be altered

e 0

Change to lower case

Change to bold face

71

-

Change to italics

72

Encircle letters to be altered Encircle changed letters

or words

Change to roman

type

73

to be.

Wrong fount; replace bY letters c correct fount

74

Vertical line on the left along the text Vertical line iin the left along the text

Change to smaller type

75

Change

to bigger

type

IS : 1250 - 1958
AND EXAMPLES ILLUSTRATING
EXAMPLES c

THEIR

USE -Co&d

OF PROOF CORRECTION WORK L

Text

as Marked

for Correction

Text

as Corrected

.

(5)
E. TYPE-Conid
Please print the names of ail Committee members including the Chairman, Dr. S. R. Ranganathan. in capitals and small capitals. The Chairman's name will then read in the printed copy as DR. S. R. RANGANATHA types are indicated by letters to be altered. Bold types are indicated by putletters or po;~z v lilirrder +z Short words make clcarsut, vivid, deep impressions. Kill is more clearcut and vivid thaniassinate love aaT--* more more than &ctioq an m than illumination.

(6)
Please print the names of all Comrnittec members including the Chairman, Dr. S. R. Ranganathan. in capitals and small capitals. TheChairman's name ~111 then read in the printed copy as Da. S. R. RANGANATHAN

o/G

== 0

Lower case types arc indicated by encircling the letters to be altered. Bold types are indicated. by putting a wavy lint under letters or words to be altcrcd. Short words make clear-cut, vivid, deep impressions. Kill is moro clear-cut and vivid than assassinafa. love more than afjccfion and right more than illutninalron. Words or letters which are to bc changed to Roman type are cncircled.

Such letters or words as are sot in wr@ fount are to be encircled so that the compositor can replace them by letters of correct fount. REFERENCES VOGEL, A. L. Practical Organic Chemistry. Longman Green % Co.,`;on~?* 1956. ZUTSHI, P.tE.0.R. p. 88-91 L. Vol ( 1956). N. & SADGOPAL. 47. No. 3,

Such letters or words as arc set in wrong fount are to be encircled so that the compositor can rcplaco them by letters of correct fount. REFERENCES VOGEL, A. L. PracticatOrganicCh;;jg; ~~s:psl. LongmanCrern & Co.,

N.L. & SADCOPAL. PAE.0.R. Vol 47, No. 3, p. 88-91 ( 1956 ).
ZUTSHI,

21

