rte IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Frater vaa eters inu 


TT 10 Waa Sarat NII 


Construction Project 
Management — Guidelines 


Part 10 Human Resource Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


© BIS 2021 


anda get St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay ect 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 8 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 10) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

A construction project is an endeavor undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 
b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 


procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 


c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off; 


d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation, if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the built 
facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time overruns, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal 
is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial and 
other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and technical 
processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top management 
commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of the public 
domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for construction project management’: Part 1 General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This has been followed by publication of other parts. The other parts in this series are as follows: 


Part 2 : 2013 on Time management 

Part 3 : 2015 on Cost management 

Part 4 : 2015 on Quality management 

Part 5 : 2013 on Health and safety management 
Part 6 : 2015 on Scope management 

Part 7 : 2020 on Procurement management 
Part 8 : 2015 on Risk management 

Part 9 : 2018 on Communication management 
Part 11 : 2021 on Sustainability management 
Part 12 : 2016 on Integration management 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR CONSTRUCTION 
PROJECT — MANAGEMENT 


PART 10 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 10) covers guidelines for human 
resource management aspects of construction project 
management. 


1.2 Human resource management aspects considered in 
this standard include the stages subsequent to the stage 
of approval (when a decision to implement the project 
including its financing is taken) till commissioning and 
handing over of the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with other parts of IS 15883. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
7337 : 2010 Glossary of terms in project 
management (second revision) 
10400 : 2013 Glossary of terms in inventory 
management (second revision) 
15198 : 2014 Glossary of terms in human 
resource development (first 
revision) 
15883 Construction project 
management — Guidelines 
(Part 1): 2009 General 
(Part 2) : 2013 Time management 
(Part 3) : 2015 Cost management 
(Part 4): 2015 Quality management 
(Part 5) : 2013 Health and safety management 
(Part 6) : 2015 Scope management 
(Part 7) : 2021 Procurement management 


Title 


Risk management 


IS No. 
(Part 8) : 2015 
(Part 9) : 2017 
(Part 11) : 2021 
(Part 12) : 2016 


Communication management 
Sustainability management 


Integration management 


IS/ISO Occupational health and safety 
45001 : 2018 management systems — 
Requirements with guidance 
for use 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 7337, IS 10400 and IS 15198 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Every construction project is unique and its 
successful delivery depends to a large extent on the 
experience, competence and skill of human resources 
during the project life cycle. Construction projects have 
significant and varied human resource requirements 
depending upon the stage and type of project. These 
need to be sourced, shortlisted, selected, deployed, 
developed and inspired from the pre-construction stage 
of the project to final close out stage to achieve the 
intended purpose, desired quality, at reasonable cost 
and within an acceptable timeframe. 


4.2 The activities under human resource management 
may be grouped under the following stages: 


project 
and 


a) Pre-construction stage including 
development, planning for construction, 
tender action; 


b) Construction stage; and 
c) Post construction and closure stage. 


4.3 The requirements prescribed in various central 
and state regulations including Building and other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and rules framed 
thereunder with respect to managing safety and 
well-being of human resource in construction projects, 
shall be complied with. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


4.4 Organizational Structure for Human Resource 
Management 


Organizational structure depends on the project delivery 
model. As an example, a typical organizational chart 
for human resource management in a design-bid-build 
model is given in Fig. 1. 


4.5 The organizational structure for human resource 
management process may vary from project to project 
depending on size of the project, procurement route, 
delivery model and construction methodologies. On 
large and medium value projects, it may be necessary 
to have a separate human resource management team 
for each agency who in turn shall report to the project 
manager. In small value projects, this role may be 
merged with some other functions. 


5 HUMAN RESOURCE 
REQUIREMENTS 


MANAGEMENT 


5.1 Human Resource Policy 


The agencies involved in the project development, 
such as the owner, consultant and contractor jointly or 
separately shall have a written statement prescribing 
the human resource policy of the organization. 


The human resource management policy conveys the 
management commitment and intent of the organization 
towards human resource recruitment, training/ 
development, wages and performance appraisal, 
welfare/amenities and safety in construction. It 
provides a framework for establishing, maintaining 
and periodically reviewing human resource objectives 
and targets. 


For safety, health and environmental aspect of human 
resources, the policy shall meet the requirements of 
Building and other Construction Workers (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 
and rules framed thereunder, IS/ISO 45001 and 
IS 15883 (Part 5). The policy shall be communicated 
to all stakeholders through display and other means. It 
shall also be displayed in local language(s) which may 
be understood by majority of the workmen. 


5.2 Project Specific Human Resource Planning 


The most important resource to a project is its people, 
the project team. Projects require specific expertise 
at specific stages of its life cycle. The strategy for 
mobilizing the expertise to execute the project can 
vary widely. They can be assigned to the project by 
executing organization from their internal resources 
(employees on their payroll) or alternatively they 
can be engaged by recruiting specifically on contract 
basis to meet the project need. Timely identification 
and deployment of human resources is a critical 
aspect for successful project execution. Sourcing and 
coordinating these human resources, in tandem with 
managing the time aspect of the project, is critical to 
success. 


5.2.1 A project specific human resource plan shall be 
developed. Project specific labour requirement plan 
shall be submitted to the labour commissioner for 
approval wherever legally required before mobilizing 
the same under intimation to the owner/client. This 
includes the requirements of sub-contractors also. On 
approval, the project human resource plan shall be the 
reference document for implementation, control and 


OWNER / CLIENT OR 


HIS REPRESENTATIVE 


PROJECT MANAGER 


CONSULTANTS 


CONSTRUCTION 
AGENCY 


HUMAN QUANTITY 
KESOURCE PLANNING DESIGN SURVEY 


SERVICES CIVIL WORKS 


l 


ELECTRICAL / OTHER 
MECHANICAL SERVICES 
WORKS 


NOTE — ‘CONSULTANTS’ MAY COVER IN-HOUSE TEAMS OR OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS. 


Fig. | TYPICAL ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE FOR HUMAN RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT IN DesIGN-Bip-BuILD MODEL 


monitoring of human resource aspects of the project 
by the owner/client, consultants and other parties 
concerned. 


5.2.2 Project human resource plan shall describe 
how the project specific human resource objectives 
and targets shall be achieved. It shall define the road 
map for achieving the standards that an organization 
lays down for itself so that efforts can be coordinated, 
synergized and monitored. 


5.2.3 Human resource plan shall explain the means of 
establishing a positive human resource development 
culture in the project. It shall identify and enumerate 
the control measures to mitigate the risks to the project 
completion arising out of human resource issues so that 
the project is allowed to proceed without interruption 
and executed as per schedule. The following salient 
aspects may be covered in the project human resource 
plan: 


a) Project specific human resource qualitative 
requirements based on stage of the project and 
client’s requirements; 


b) Legal and other statutory requirements 
including minimum wages, provident fund and 
miscellaneous provisions as per the various acts/ 
regulations like contract labour, migrant labour 
acts, etc for employees and other personnel 
including sub-contractors/piece rate workers, etc; 


c) Human resource organization; 
d) Welfare and health/medical needs and services; 
e) Human resource requirements to be followed by 
sub contractors/consultants; 
f) Safety of employees and sub-contractors/labour; 
g) Skill-set and training of the workmen; 
h) Training and development of managers, officers 
and supervisors; 
j) Human resource appraisal and performance 
monitoring system; 
k) Promotion and reward/development based on 
objective performance appraisal; and 
m) Other aspects of HR 


5.3 Principal Function of Human Resource 


Management 


The principal functions of human resource management 
team in a project are as follows: 


a) Planning for human resource — Establishing 
roles, responsibilities, reporting relationships, and 
creating a staff management plan. 

b) Building project team — Mobilizing required 
resources. 


c) Developing project team — Keeping the 


mobilized resources motivated. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


d) Managing project team — Identifying skill-set 
gaps, training and skill improvements. 

e) Updating skill inventory — Maintaining and 
updating skill register against each resource 
deployed. 

f) Demobilizing project team — Demobilizing the 
resource on timely basis. 


g) Site administration and accounting. 


5.4 Planning for Human Resource 


Human resource planning process shall be carried out 
by identifying, documenting, assigning the project 
roles, responsibilities, and reporting relationships. 
These roles may be assigned to individuals or to groups. 


HR management team shall develop the human 
resource management plan, which is a component of 
the project management plan [refer IS 15883 (Part 12)]. 
The activity resource requirements (ARR) will be the 
key document in planning for human resource. The 
human resource management plan shall be developed 
through: 


a) Identifying set of activities to be performed in 
each stage of the project. 


b) Preparing execution strategy to accomplish project 
objectives and identifying the skills required for 
implementing the strategy. 


c) Change and configuration management plans. 


d) Monitoring and updating the schedules/updates 
may sometimes require revision of baselines as 
a result of change in scope. The alteration to the 
human resource plan if any to meet the revised 
execution plan of the project. 


e) Communication needs and methods (keeping 
stakeholders informed). 


5.5 Human Resource Planning Tools and Staff 
Management Plan 


See Annex A and Annex B. 
5.6 Building Project Team 


5.6.1 This shall be carried out in the relevant stages 
of the project upon finalization of resource needs. It is 
the process of confirming human resource availability 
and obtaining the team necessary to complete project 
activities. In short, staff sourcing is getting the right 
people assigned to the project. The following shall be 
considered while sourcing project team: 


a) Project manager or project management team 
shall effectively negotiate with others who are in 
a position to assign the required human resources 
for the project. 

b) Failure to acquire the necessary human resources 
for the project may affect project schedules, 
budgets, customer satisfaction, quality, and risks. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


c) Insufficient human resources or inadequate 
skill-set of the people deployed decrease the 
probability of success. 


d) If the human resources with required skills are 
not available due to constraints, due to external 
or internal factors, the project manager or project 
team may be required to assign alternative 
resources and train them for the skill required. 


5.6.2 The project manager or project management team 
will be required to reflect and be updated on the impact 
of any unavailability of required human resources in 
the project schedule, project budget, project risks, 
project quality, training plans, and the other project 
management plans. The following tools shall be used 
while sourcing the project team, 


a) Pre-assignment — The existing resources shall be 
pre-assigned during initiation stage of the project 
itself based on the availability and needs to be 
mentioned in the project charter/brief [see also 
IS 15883 (Part 6)]. 


b) Negotiation — The agreements shall be reached 
with functional managers and other project teams 
for their current team members who can be 
rearranged for new rolls. 


c) Sourcing — Resource hiring shall be performed 
when a participating organization does not have 
the requisite staff or they become unavailable 
unexpectedly due to various reasons. 


d) Virtual teams — An offsite virtually participating 
team may be setup based on the scenarios 
and project needs. Modern communication 
methods can be used to ensure collaboration 
and participation of virtual team members on a 
regular basis. 


5.7 Developing Project Team 


Continuous effort is required by the HR team to improve 
the skill-set, interactions among team members, and 
the overall team environment to improve project 
performance. For the team development process, HR 
team shall focus on, 


a) improving the ability of team members to 
contribute as individuals. 


b) improving the ability of the team to function 
effectively (includes team spirit, cross-training, 
and mentoring within the group). 


c) improving trust and cohesiveness among team 
members. The bonding within the project team 
needs to be developed throughout the project life 
cycle. For the project team development process 
tools like human resource plan, project staff 
assignment and resource calendars, etc may be 
used (see Annex C). 


5.8 Managing Project Team 


5.8.1 The HR management team, on a continuous basis, 
shall be tracking the team performance, providing 
feedback, resolving issues, and coordinating changes. 
Important management skills required for managing 
the project team include communication, negotiation, 
conflict management and leadership. Management 
of the team is complicated when members report to 
more than one superior (a common challenge in matrix 
organizations wherein employees report to a functional 
manager as well as a project manager). Management of 
these dual reporting relationships is a critical success 
factor in project management. 


5.8.2 The documents like human resource management 
plan, project staff assignments and work performance 
report, shall be used to as key input for managing the 
project team. 


5.8.3 The project team shall be managed using following 
methods: 


a) Observation and conversation — These techniques 
shall be used to remain in touch with the feelings of 
team members and identifying any problems that is 
developing at the beginning stages. 

b) Project performance appraisals — The project 
performance appraisal methods shall be used for 
recognizing and appreciating the contribution 
by the project team in accomplishing the project 
objectives. Feedback for appraisals of the team 
members may be collected from supervisors 
directly observing the project work or it can come 
from external sources. A common practice involves 
the use of 360 degree feedback from multiple 
sources (peers, superiors, subordinates, customers). 


c) Conflict management — The conflict 
management techniques needs to be adopted 
wherever it is applicable. Team members are 
responsible for initially attempting to resolve 
conflict at their own level (before escalating to 
higher levels). If conflict escalates, the project 
manager should ensure that the issue is addressed 
early, and involves a collaborative approach. 
See Annex D. 


d) Interpersonal skills — The Interpersonal skill 
are key in bringing the best from their team 
members. Appropriate interpersonal skills help the 
project management team in fulfilling the project 
objectives. The examples of some interpersonal 
skills are as follows: 


1) Leadership — Among other things, leadership 
is the ability to effectively communicate a 
vision and inspire individuals and team to high 
performance. 


2) Influencing — Ability to be persuasive, clearly 
articulate positions, listen effectively, consider 
all perspectives, gather important information, 
and promote trust. Influencing is crucial because 
many project managers have little or no direct 
authority over key stakeholders (functional or 
weak matrix organizations). 


3) Decision making — The ability to negotiate, 
identify alternatives, and make a timely decision. 


e) Based on the IT available, human resource 
information system (HRIS) should be put in place 
for managing the system efficiently. 


5.9 Updating Skill Inventory 


The HR management team shall update skill inventory 
of the project team members at a regular frequency to 
ascertain and identify the skill gap in a project. Updating 
skill inventory is a cyclic and continuous process. During 
the course of project progress the project resources 
undergo various skill trainings. This skill upgrading 
process remains one of the key information for future 
redeployment of resource (See Annex E). The skills can 
be updated based on their respective functional areas 
as well as technical domains. Human resources would 
need to be sourced based on skill certificate issued by 
authorized agencies. This should be made mandatory in 
the procurement documents. 


5.10 Demobilizing Project Team 


Demobilizing the project resource in timely manner 
is critical for maintaining cost efficiency and resource 
productivity while managing the project budget. The 
demobilization process needs to commence little earlier 
than actual completion of phase/project. The resources 
need to be clearly appraised about the redeployment or 
disengagement plan/projects to reduce anxiety. It also 
helps them to plan for relocation, if any. When team 
members are released from a project, the costs associated 
with those resources are no longer charged to the project, 
thus reducing project costs. To ensure proper resource 
productivity humane approach regarding the same is 
essential. 


6 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN 
DIFFERENT STAGES OF THE PROJECT 


6.1 During the stages of a construction project, activities 
may be undertaken as follows: 


a) Pre-construction stage — Human resource 
management during this stage may be carried out 
in-house and/or through a consultant. 


Construction stage — This is carried out 
generally through one or more contractors. Each 
contractor may engage sub-contractors, although 
the main contractor remains responsible for the 
overall performance of the contract. Typical 
human resource organizational structure is 
given in Fig. 1. 


b 


eS 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


c) Post-construction and closure stage — While 
the contractors may hand over the project or the 
concerned component, owner may also be involved 
in commissioning and subsequent operation of the 
project. 


6.2 Pre-Construction Stage 


6.2.1 Pre-construction stage activities of the project 
shall be required to be reviewed before the project 
management processes are initiated for the construction 
stage. It is desirable to assess decisions of the briefing 
and feasibility stage outputs, such as overall planning 
and construction methods affecting human resource, 
which may have bearing on construction stage. The HR 
requirements are to be planned based on the following 
phases: 


a) Project development phase — Upon development 
of project needs and finalization of objectives, the 
human resource team of a project shall prepare 
initial resource plan based on available input 
about the project. The initial resource plan will get 
further elaborated during planning phase of the 
project. 


b) Planning phase — The planning phase of the 
project comprises of development of project 
management plan, human resource management 
plan, finalization of cost baseline and time baseline, 
etc. During this phase the project team shall also 
be responsible in identifying and documenting 
the project roles, responsibilities and required 
skills, reporting relationships, etc. The planning 
phase of project will result in development of 
organizational charts, staff deployment plan, 
training matrix and staff demobilization plan. The 
project management and HR team will perform 
planning for human resource and sourcing/ 
recruitment process during planning phase. 


c) Design and development phase — During 
design and engineering phase of the project, the 
requirement of the project objectives and concept 
are analyzed, before commencement of actual 
design process. The requirement of engineering 
and management is the key process which governs 
the rest of design process itself. Initially, design 
ideas are tested and developed, and as design 
continues in a series of phases, further details are 
getting added. 


6.2.2 Depending upon the size and nature/complexity 
of the project, the human resource management system 
shall be planned from the pre-construction stage itself. 
The tender documents of the project shall clearly 
communicate the human resource requirements of the 
project including the qualifications and experience and 
number of key personnel including the project manager 
to the prospective bidders. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


The qualification and experience of project manager 
and other key members of the project team from client 
and contractor should be commensurate with nature 
of the proposed project. Minimum qualification and 
experience of key personnel/staff should be laid down 
in procurement documents based on the nature, size 
and complexity of the project. 


The construction agencies may be asked to submit a 
project specific human resource plan proposing the time 
frame for deploying, mobilizing and managing human 
resource and indicating their qualification/capability in 
completing the project in a planned and cost effective 
manner. 


The proposed key human resources of the construction 
agencies and their past human resource performance 
shall be considered as one of the criteria during 
pre-qualification and selection of construction agencies. 


6.3 Construction Stage 


6.3.1 Prior to the start of construction work, detailed 
planning shall be carried out which may include: 


a) identifying aspects of design that have bearing on 
human resource during construction stage. 


b) While scheduling the various activities of the 
construction, making adequate time allowance 
to carry work in accordance with good industry 
practice requirements. 


c) planning and establishing the facilities for 
implementation of human resource development 
such as workmen training facility, health centre 
for medical checkup and first aid, access control 
of employees, etc. 


d) ensuring that the temporary establishments at 
project site, such as site offices, workmen camps, 
toilets, canteens and rest sheds, etc, are created 
meeting the requirements of the relevant statutes 
and standards. 


6.3.2 Project manager shall ensure that the challenges 
are understood and planned to meet the project specific 
human resource requirement through appropriate 
skill-set. 


6.3.3 Human resource measures need proper 
coordination and such efforts shall be reviewed, 
monitored and appropriately guided by the owner/ 
client and consultants. 


6.3.4 In respect of sub-contractors, project manager 
shall ensure that the sub-contractors meet the human 
resource requirements of the project. Human resource 
control and monitoring shall be established specific to 
the needs of the project. 


6.3.5 It is also necessary to review and asses the need 
for enhancing the coordination amongst the owner/ 


client, design and other consultants and contractors 
for taking appropriate actions for timely deployment, 
upgradation/development and demobilization of human 
resources. 


6.4 Post-construction and Closure Stage 


During completion and handing over of the project, 
effectiveness of human resource measures and 
management system shall be reviewed for future 
planning. Human Resource skill related records shall be 
handed over to the client/owner for efficient operation/ 
maintenance purposes. 


7 SITE 
ACCOUNTING 


ADMINISTRATION AND 


The following points required the attention of the 
personnel entrusted with the responsibility of site 
administration and accounting. 


7.1 Adequate knowledge/skill of dealing with various 
provisions of acts, rules and regulations required for 
site construction activities. Some of the acts are as 
follows: 


a) Payment of Wages Act, 1936; 


b) Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952; 


c) Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948; 


d) The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) 
Act, 1970; 


e) The Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1996; 


f) Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979; 
and 


g) Employees (Workmen) Compensation Act, 1923. 


7.2 Sourcing of site manpower requirements and 
initiating action to cope with the need-based workmen 
engagement through reliable vendors/contractors. 


7.3 Ensuring the payment of minimum wages to the 
workmen as per relevant act and rules. 


7.4 Procuring the required licenses, no objection 
certificate, approvals/permissions, etc, from different 
local/government authorities. 


7.5 Liaising with all internal and external agencies 
like traffic police, fire authorities, hospitals, labour 
department authorities, etc, for various purposes. 


7.6 To be responsible for preparing monthly/quarterly/ 
annual reports/returns required under various labour 
laws, rules and enactments and submission of the same 
to relevant authorities in due course. 


7.7 To deal with on-site administration activities 
and maintain statutory compliances with respect to 
day-to-day work. 


7.8 To ensure arrangement of employment cards, 
preparation of muster roll of workmen and monthly 
overtime reports, etc. 


7.9 To look after the on-site logistic arrangements 
like labour colony, staff guest houses maintaining 
hygienic work environment, canteen facilities ensuring 
availability of hygienic eatables, drinking water facility, 
toilet cleanliness, arrangement of accommodation and 
transportation for staff and deal with other welfare 
measures. 


7.10 Interact with the workforce and maintain cordial 
relations with them. 


7.11 Maintain details of electricity bills, water bills and 
telephones bills and ensure timely payment of the same. 


7.12 Avail and maintain office infrastructures for 
example, furniture, etc, at office and guest houses. 


7.13 Monitoring usage of monthly vehicles deployed at 
site and allocated to project in-charges. 


7.14 Maintain first-aid centre/dispensary and arrange 
required medical checks for well-being of workmen. 


7.15 Maintain record for Incoming and outgoing 
communications and couriers. 


7.16 Ensure smooth functioning of telephones/fax/ 
photocopiers, etc and payments thereof to the concerned 
service providers. 


7.17 Prepare accident report and submit the same to 
concerned authorities for workman compensation 
claim. 


7.18 Maintain payment of wages register for 
subcontractor workmen and daily wages workmen, 
and subcontractor details, like P.F. challan, gate pass 
of workmen. 


7.19 Preparation of MIS, employee relations, exit 
process, handle employee grievances, complete joining 
formalities, security, general administration, handle 
petty cash, bank account opening work, preparation of 
monthly attendance sheet of regular staff, etc. 


7.20 Dealing with vendors and service providers, 
negotiation, contract agreements. 


7.21 Develop congenial work atmosphere and positive 
relation with all stake holders. 


7.22 Deal with sub-contractors and comply with the 
requirements in policy implementation. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


7.23 Gender equality should be maintained in 
appropriate roles by giving equal opportunity in safety, 
quality and planning aspects for female staff and 
workers. 


7.24 It is advisable to establish access control measures 
at the construction project to control movement of 
workmen and visitors. Access control may be achieved 
by entry pass, bar-coded cards and biometric systems or 
other suitable means. Implementation of access control 
system helps in the following manner: 


a) It ensures that only competent and trained 
workmen are deployed for work; 


b) It helps in monitoring of working hours of 
employees so that working hours do not exceed 
the statutory limits; 


c) Head count in case of emergencies becomes easy 
as it is known how many employees are at work at 
any point of time; and 


d) Utilization of technology — GPS 
monitoring/tracking device may be assigned to a 
group of workmen to identify their actual position 
in major construction sites. 


8 RESOURCES, ROLES, RESPONSIBILITY 
AND AUTHORITY 

8.1 Roles and Responsibility 

Project manager shall define, document and 


communicate the roles, responsibilities and authorities 
of all personnel who manage, perform and verify 
activities having an effect on human resource risks. It 
shall also include subcontractors and visitors. 


Ultimate responsibility for human resource shall rest 
with top management of the respective organization, 
be it the owner/client, consultants or contractor. The 
line management personnel who are responsible for 
execution of activities are directly responsible for 
human resource in the work under their control. 


Human resource department/function and human 
resource officers are responsible for guiding the top 
management on human resource issues and facilitating 
the implementation of human resource in the project 
site. For qualification, duties and responsibilities of 
human resource officers, reference shall be made to 
Building and other Construction Workers (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1996 and rules framed thereunder. Managers shall 
administratively report to the project manager and 
functionally report to the senior human resource 
representative of the organization. Officers and 
supervisors shall report to their respective managers. 
Management shall provide adequate resources essential 
to effectively manage the human resources requirements 
of the project. The resources shall include human 
resources, organizational infrastructure, technology 
and financial resources. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


8.2 Skill-set, Training and Awareness 


8.2.1 Training needs of the different category of 
employees shall be identified at the beginning of the 
project and updated every year and a training matrix 
and training plan shall be prepared for implementation. 


8.2.2 The objective of human resource training shall be: 


a) to equip the employee with necessary knowledge 
and skill to perform the work assigned to him in an 
efficient, cost effective and safe manner; 


b) to foster continual improvement; 
c) to work as an effective member of the team; and 
d) to share knowledge. 


8.2.3 Preferably, the training should be carried out 
away from the working place of the participants to 
ensure focused attention on the training for both trainer 
as well as trainees. 


8.2.3 Training Assessment 


After completion of training due procedure shall 
be followed for obtaining the feedback from the 
participants on the effectiveness of the training. 
Effectiveness of training imparted shall be monitored 
for continual improvement and necessary corrections 
in implementation. 


8.3 Sub-contractor Management 


Past human resource performance and capability of 
sub-contractors to complete the job efficiently and 
safely shall be given due consideration during selection 
of sub-contractors. The project specific human resource 
requirements shall be clearly communicated to the 
sub-contractors and a commitment obtained from them 
on meeting the requirements. 


The human resource performance of sub-contractors 
shall be monitored on a regular basis and necessary 
directive and support shall be given to achieve the set 
Human Resource objectives and targets. 


9 MONITORING AND CONTROL 


9.1 Human Resource Performance Reporting 


Procedures shall be established for timely recording 
and reporting of information required for continual 
improvement of human resource performance. The 
reporting procedures shall cover statutory reporting 
requirements and stakeholder reporting. The recording 
of reporting of human resource performance shall be 
clearly documented in the project human resource plan. 


9.2 Performance Monitoring and Improvement 


The human resource performance monitoring and 
measurement procedures shall provide for: 


a) both qualitative and quantitative 
appropriate to the project; 


measures 


b) monitoring the extent to which project human 
resource objectives are met; 


c) proactive measures of compliance that measures 
compliance with human resource plan, operational 
control procedures and legislation; 


d) reactive measures of performance to monitor 
accidents, ill health, near misses and 
non-conformances; and 


e) human resource audit, the details being as given in 
human resource plans. 


9.3 Review of Performance 


9.3.1 Reward for Good Performance 


To motivate the employees and organization to work 
efficiently and safely the following measures can be 
implemented based on the suitability: 


a) Selection and rewarding on a periodic basis, the 
best performance. 


b) Sub-contractors and employees may be rewarded, 
when the project achieves productivity standards 
and safe working standards. 


9.3.2 Monitoring of Poor Performance 


Poor human resource performance in the form of 
repeated violations, absence without a sufficient 
cause and poor workmanship/quality and safety 
consciousness including mishaps/accidents shall be 
dealt with firmly. Depending on the seriousness of the 
violation the following options shall be considered: 


a) Issue of violation memorandum and obtaining 
written commitment for future behaviour; 


b) Suspension or termination of the employee; 


c) Suspension or termination of contract in case of 
construction agency/sub-contractor; 


d) Imposition of penalty; and 
e) Deprivation of promotion/increment. 


When penalties are imposed, due records shall be 
maintained in a transparent manner. The funds thus 
accrued may be spent transparently in the form of 
rewarding employees for their sincere efforts towards 
improving the human resource performance. 


9.4 Promoting a Positive Work Culture 


9.4.1 The owner/client, consultant and contractor shall 
jointly endeavor to promote a positive Work culture at 
the project. 


9.4.2 Top management of the organizations should 
exhibit a visible management commitment and 
leadership towards human resource. This shall be 
achieved by participating in team building and 
leadership activities. 


9.4.3 The top management should clearly communicate 
that it considers ethics, integrity, professional conduct, 


efficiency, quality and safety as core values and it shall 
not allow it to get compromised. Such a message when 
it reaches down the level in the organization will enable 
to create a positive work ethos and culture. 


9.5 Human Resource Management Inspections/ 
Audit 


Human resource audit is a systematic and independent 
examination to assess whether the planned arrangements 
and activities are effectively fulfilling organization’s 
human resource policy, plan and objectives. 


Project human resource management audits provide 
the method for monitoring and controlling human 
resource activities and procedures throughout the 
life of the project. Audits can be internal or external. 
Internal audit can be conducted by the persons from 
the same organization who are not directly connected 
with the work site to be audited. The external audits are 
performed through external professional experts. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


10 REVIEW OF PROJECT, ACTION PLAN 
AND LESSONS LEARNT 


During the close out stage it is important to have 
experienced members of project design and execution 
teams who should not only be able to document technical 
details like ‘as built’ drawings but also document 
various actions taken to address the problems, manage 
risks, monitor and control the project. More importantly 
a review should be conducted based on feedback 
received from key stakeholders and members of the 
team of designers, architects, consultants, contractors 
and sub-contractors, PMC organizations and above all 
the client’s representatives. Based on the above lessons 
learnt should be disseminated to all concerned for an 
action plan for future. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 5.5, B-2 ) 
HUMAN RESOURCE PLANNING TOOLS 


A-1 During planning for human resource, the following 


tools 


a) 


shall be used where ever applicable: 


Organization Chart — Organization chart shall 
be prepared for every project to identify and 
maintain roles and responsibilities of project 
human resources. Organization chart forms the 
primary document to depict the responsibilities 
and hierarchy. The key features and supported 
documents of organizational charts are: 


1) A detailed WBS (work breakdown structure) 
depicting the deliverables and work packages, 


2) An OBS (organizational breakdown structure) 
displays departments, units, or teams and can 
show what work they are responsible for, and 

3) RBS (resource breakdown structure) displays 

individual resources (human, equipment, 

facilities) and can show what activities they 
are involved in. 


b) Matrix — For Every project activity or group 


This 
(see 


activities, it is important to identify: 

1) R - (Responsible) Through whom (A) will get 
the work executed. 

2) A-(Accountable) Who will be accountable for 
the activity deliverable. 

3) C - (Consult) Who are required to be consulted 
during activity progress. 

4) I - (Informed) Who are the people to be 
informed about the activity status. 


is usually tracked through RACI table 
Table 1) in a project. In a typical RACI table 


overlap of accountability for an activity between two 
people should not be there. 


c) Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM) — It is 


d 


wa 


the primary tool used to display information about 
roles and responsibilities (who does what). It may 
be defined initially at department and functional 
level, later at individual level once the person is 
identified. 


Staff Management Plan (see Annex B) — The 
staff management plan shall be prepared by 
HR team which describes when and how project 
team members will be acquired and how long 
they will be needed. The staff management 
plan can be formal or informal, highly detailed, 
or broadly framed, depending upon the needs 
of the project. The plan is updated continually 
during the project to direct ongoing team 
member sourcing and development actions. 

Information in the staff management plan varies 

by application area and project size, but items to 

consider include: 

1) Project staff estimates — The number of 
personnel required, the expertise knowledge 
required, the duration of engagement required. 

2 


wa 


Staff sourcing strategy — Whether mobilized 
from internal resource of participating 
organization through specific new 
recruitment. 


or 
3) Staff training and the skill-set required; 
identification of skill gap in the deployed 
resources, schedule of training programmes 


Table 1 Illustrative RACI 
( Clause A-1 ) 


SI No. Activity (Sample) Project Resource 
a n—anwvw—m 8; eons _—_ 
Person 1 Person 2 Person 3 Person 4 Person 5 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Create project management plan A R I I I 
ii) Create drawing control Index I A R C C 
iii) Submit structure drawings I A R R C 
iv) Procurement of packages I C A R C 
v) Building A : Structure I I C A R 
vi) Building A : Finishes I I E R A 


NOTE — R = Responsible, A = Accountable, I = Inform and C = Consult 


10 


for skill building and the identification of 


participants. 


e) Team building — The networking process shall 
be carried out through Informal interactions for 
the purpose of understanding potential untapped 
Skill-set of the resources deployed in the 
project. Networking may also assist in building 
specialized skills or in establishing beneficial 
external partnerships. Examples of networking 
include informal conversations, lunch meetings, 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


f) Expert judgment — The domain experts based on 
their experience in similar kind of projects can 
facilitate the HR team in developing the human 
resource plan: 


1) 
2) 


Preliminary requirements and required skills. 


Assessing roles, preliminary effort level, and 
number of resources. 


Lead times for staff. 


Identifying risks associated with building, 


3) 
4) 


attendance at conferences, and recreational retaining, and releasing staff members. 
activities (see Annex C). 5) Compliance with government and union 
agreements. 
ANNEX B 
[ Clauses 5.5 and A-1 (d) ] 
STAFF MANAGEMENT PLAN 


B-1 PURPOSE 


The staff management plan details the project’s 
human resources requirements and how those 
requirements will be fulfilled. The staff management 
plan includes several sections: 


a) Project Roles and Responsibilities — Summarizes 
the responsibilities for each role required to 
conduct the project work. 


b) Project Staff Estimates — Identifies estimated 
staff requirements. 


c) Sourcing Strategy — Describes when, how, and 
from what sources staff will be acquired. 


d) Training Plan — Identifies skills gaps and details 
specific training requirements for each project 
team member. 


e) Organizational Chart — Displays project 


reporting relationships. 


B-2 PROJECT ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 


Describe the roles and responsibilities of each 
position required to conduct the project work. This 
description may be accomplished with responsibility 


summaries for all roles combined with a responsibility 
assignment matrix (RAM), which is also referred to as 
a responsible/accountable/consulted/informed (RACI) 
chart (see Annex A). 


B-3 PROJECT STAFF ESTIMATES 


The terms used in the Table 2 are defined as follows: 

a) Role — High level identification of each required 
function on the project (for example, project 
manager). 

b) Team — Identification of the team(s) to which the 
role is assigned. 

c) Responsibilities — Identification of the works 
assigned. 

d) Skill-set — Description of the skill set necessary 
for each role for the project to be successful. 

e) Estimated start date — Description of the 
estimated date when the resource will be needed. 

f) Estimated duration — Description of the length of 
time the resource will be required. 

g) Time commitment — Description of the required 
time commitment of each resource. 


Table 2 Project Staff Estimates 
( Clause B-3 ) 


Role | Team | Responsibilities Skill-set 


(Required Skills) 


Estimated 
Start Date 


Estimated 
Duration 


Time Commitment 
(Part/Full Time) 


11 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


B-4 STAFF SOURCING STRATEGY 


Determine the names of staff (if currently known) 
to be assigned to each role. Assess whether each 
resource possesses the reguired skills to perform the 
responsibilities, and document all skill gaps. Describe 
the sourcing strategy to obtain the needed resources. 
The sourcing strategy may vary as temporary resource, 
permanent resource, acquired as consultant or through 
third party service provider. The staff sourcing strategy 
are given in Table 3. 


B-5 STAFF TRAINING PLAN 


The training detailed is required to enable the skill to 
successfully execute the project. 


After determining all skill gaps above, assess whether 
staff members require any training to competently 
fulfill their project duties. Training needs should be 
considered for all Project Team members, including 
own employees and contractors. Summarize the 
results of this analysis in the table below. If anticipated 
project team members do not have the required level 
of skill-set, identify the training required, and include 
the training costs in the baseline cost of the project. 
Also, consider helping project team members obtain 
professional certifications that will benefit the project. 
The staff training plan requirements are detailed in the 
Table 4. 


Table 3 Staff Sourcing Strategy 
( Clause B-4 ) 


Role Resource Name Skill Gap Sourcing Strategy (Agency/Contract) 
Table 4 Staff Training Plan 
( Clause B-5 ) 
Role Required Name Training Timeframe needed | Estimated Cost | Training Source 
ANNEX C 


[ Clauses 5.7 (c) and A-1 (e) | 
ILLUSTRATIVE TEAM BUILDING PROCESS 


C-1 TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES IN 
BUILDING PROCESS 


TEAM 


The HR team can use following tools and techniques in 
appropriate scenarios: 


a) Interpersonal Skills — Also called ‘soft skills’, 
the following interpersonal skills shall be used for 
team development: 

1) Problem solving, defining the problem, 
identifying alternatives, and making a timely 
decision, 

2) Leadership, developing a vision and strategy 
and motivating others to achieve that vision, 


3) Influencing, getting things done even with 
limited formal power Negotiation and Conflict 
management, conferring with others to reach 
an agreement or to overcome a problem, and 

4) Motivation, energizing people to high levels of 
performance. 

Also the HR team need to consider emotional 

intelligence, team building, and group facilitation 

skills as appropriate for developing the team. 


b 


wm 


Training — HR Team shall create activities to 
enhance performance; which can be formal or 
informal and may involve classroom, on-line, 
on-the-job, mentoring, or coaching. 


c) Team-building activities — HR team shall create 


activities which can vary from a quick exercise 
during a meeting to a professionally facilitated 
off-site experience. These activities shall be 
undertaken primarily to improve team motivation 
and performance. The following are the five 
stages the project team shall undergo based on 
appropriate scenarios: 


1) Forming — Team members shall meet 
and learn about the project and their roles. 
Members often experience confusion and 
uncertainty at this point. Members tend to act 
in an independent manner and not be open to 


other team members. 
2) Storming — As work begins, team members 
may clash and compete for desired assignments 
and outcomes. Opposing sub-groups may form 


and differing ideas may produce conflict. 


3) Norming — Team members begin to adjust 
behaviour and support the team. Team 
begins to trust each other and share ideas and 
information. 


4) Performing Team functions as a 
well-organized, cohesive unit. Issues are 
handled smoothly. 


5) Adjourning — The work is completed and the 
team is released from the project. Team may 
feel separation anxiety if they had matured 
effectively into the performing stage. 


13 


d) 


e) 


f) 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


The above stages vary based on needs and 
scenarios. 


Ground Rules — The HR team shall establish clear 
expectations regarding behaviour. The following 
behaviours like listening, being on time, taking 
responsibility for communication, “be hard on the 
issue but not on the person are’ examples of team 
rules. HR team shall facilitate in forming these 
ground rules by team itself and enforce throughout 
project life cycle. 


Collocation HR team will facilitate the 
collocation process by placing team members 
in the same physical vicinity (also known as a 
tight matrix) enhances communication and other 
team development issues. When collocation is 
not possible, HR team also shall consider a ‘war 
room’ to create a better sense of identity with the 
project. 


Recognition and Rewards — HR team shall create 
set of actions that promote or reinforce desired 
behaviour. Project teams along with HR team 
shall implement their own systems in line with the 
policy frame work of the parent organization. The 
rewards may include Compensatory time for a job 
well done, access to education opportunities, a 
chance to showcase their achievements and skills 
through the presentation to the entire project team, 
appreciation certificate, assistance in getting a 
computer upgrade. 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


D-1 CONFLICT MANAGEMENT 


ANNEX D 
[ Clause 5.8.3 (c) | 
CONFLICT MANAGEMENT 


who understand conflicts and know how to resolve 
them. 


Conflict management is the practice of being able 

to identify and handle conflicts sensibly, fairly, and The HR team shall adapt following five methods while 
efficiently. Since conflicts in a project are a natural part responding to conflict. 

of the workplace, it is important that there are people 


SI No. 
(1) 


Technigue 


(2) 


Description 


(3) 


i) 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


Confront/Collaborate 


Compromise/Reconcile 


Smooth/Accommodate 


Withdraw/Avoid 


Force/Direct 


a) Approaching conflict as a problem to be solved 


b) Using open exchange of information; searching for alternatives that 
satisfy the needs of both parties 


c) Used when the issues are too important for compromise 


a) Searching for solutions that bring “some degree of satisfaction” to 
both parties (partial wins) 


b) May be a back-up approach if problem solving fails or powerful 
parties cannot agree or there is time-pressure for a solution 


a) Emphasizing areas of agreement rather than areas of disagreement 
b) Conceding one’s position to maintain harmony and create goodwill 
c) Used when contentious issues threaten ability to reach an agreement 


d) Concern: the agreement may be temporary because the difficult issue 
was not resolved and will re-emerge 


a) Retreating (temporarily) from conflict 


b) Used when angry, belligerent behaviour threatens both the agreement 
the and personal working relationships 


c) Used when the issue is not vital to you and you do not wish to risk 
damaging the relationship 


a) Satisfying your needs at the expense of others 

b) Results in a win-lose 

c) May be used in an emergency 

d) Should be used sparingly because of the following 2 problems: 
1) creating antagonism (an enemy waiting to get you back), 


2) stalemate (the other party has more power than you believed or 
simply gets angry and won’t cooperate) 


14 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 5.9 ) 


SKILL INVENTORY MATRIX - TEMPLATE 
(To be filled for all the people participating in the project) 


RESOURCE NAME : DESIGNATION : 
RESOURCE ID: DATE OF JOINING : 
SI No. Function Technical | Managerial | Skill Level | Experience | Remarks 
Skill Skill (Yrs) 
i) Construction Enabling 
Works 
ii) Design 
iii) Procurement 
iv) Construction 


a. Civil Structure 


b. Finishing Works 


c. MEP Works 

d. Façade 
v) Testing and Commissioning 
vi) Administration 


vii) Health and Safety 


viii) Quality Control and 


Assurance 
ix) Plant and Machineries 
x) Project Planning and Billing 


xi) Project Close Out 


NOTE — Rate the Skill Level to the Scale 10. 


15 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


ANNEA F 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 
Organization Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (102, Sraddha Temple Tree, Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 
Rustom Bagh, Old Airport Road, Bengaluru) 


AECOM India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI PAWAN JAIPURIAR 

SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi Suri G. D Gupta 

Suri M. NN Rao (Alternate) 
Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai Suri H. S. PASRICHA 


SHRI SANJAY Soni (Alternate) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Suri M. K. SHARMA 
SHRI SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


Construction Industry Development Council, SHRI P. R. SWARUP 

New Delhi Suri O. P. Gupta (Alternate) 
Construction Skill Development Council of SHRI ANAND Kumar SINGH 

India, New Delhi Ms Jancy Mathew (Alternate) 
Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt SHRI AMAN DEEP 

Ltd, Ghaziabad 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Dr Acuat K. MITTAL 

Roorkee Dr Asay Chaurasia (Alternate) 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi ENGINEER MEMBER 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DEsIGN) (Alternate) 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI PRAMIT KUMAR GARG 
Suri Ravi Kapoor (Alternate) 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI AMITAVA PAL 
SHRI RAVINDRA Kumar (Alternate) 
GMR Infra and Airport, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE 
Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Mumbai SHRI AVINASH Harpe (Alternate I) 
Ms Pooja DESHMUKH (Alternate IT) 
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi CHAIRMAN & MANAGING DIRECTOR 
SHRI S. K. Jam (Alternate) 
Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi SHRI DEEPAK NARAYAN 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, DR K. C. IYER 
New Delhi Dr J. UMA MAHEsHwar! (Alternate) 
Kaleidoscope, Noida SHRI AMOR Kooi 
Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai Suri M. P. NAIDU 


SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


16 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


M. N. Dastur & Company (P) Limited, Kolkata SHRI SOUMIK SEN 
SHRI ALAKES BHATTACHARYYA (Alternate I) 
Suri AGNI Gupta (Alternate II) 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Bric M. J. KUMAR 


Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), CoL Y. S. Dhaka (Alternate) 
New Delhi 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme DEPUTY DIRECTOR GENERAL (PI) 
Implementation, New Delhi DIRECTOR (Ipmp) (Alternate) 
NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ALOK RASTOGI 


Suri P. S. Rao (Alternate) 


National Institute of Construction Management DR ANIL AGARWAL 


and Research, Mumbai DR ARUN CHANDRAMOHAN (Alternate) 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 
NITI Ayog, New Delhi SHRI SHATRUGHAN LAL 


SHRI SANJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai SHRI SUVARNA NAIKDESAI 
SHRI SESHA Sal (Alternate) 


School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi Pror V. K. PAUL 
SHRI ABHIJIT RASTOGI (Alternate) 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida SHRI ManoJ KUMAR MITTAL 
STUP consultants, Mumbai REPRESENTATIVE 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata SHRI BIPIN CHAND 


In personal capacity (B-31, Manas Apartments, ` Suri V. K. SHARMA 
Mayur Vihar-1 Extension, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, SHRI KRISHNA KANT 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, DR VANITA AHUJA 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
PPD Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, 
Thiruvananthapuram) 


In personal capacity (411, Technology, Suri R. P. LAHIRI 
Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (P//2, Block 2, Silver Estate Bric Vinop NAKRA (RETD) 
Sector 50, Noida) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (Civil ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C? (Crvit ENGINEERING), BIS 


17 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (102, Sraddha, Temple Tree, 
Rustom Bagh, Old Airport Road, Bengaluru) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


RICS School of Built Environment, 
Amity University, Noida 


School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay 
Khana-ll, Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (477, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, 
LP. Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (B-31, Manas Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 

In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD 
Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Trivandrum) 


In personal capacity (P//2, Block 2, Silver Estate, 
Sector 50, Noida) 


18 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 


CHIEF ENGINEER-CSQ 
SHRI SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 
SHRI A K. TRIPATHI 


SHRI A. K. MISHRA 
Suri D. Jana (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. IYER 


Suri M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 


PROF JosEPH V. THANIKAL 
Pror V. K. PAUL 
SHRI ABHIJIT RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 

SHRI IFTIKHAR A. DRABU 
SHRI CHANDRA PAL 

SHRI KRISHNA KANT 

Dr S. N. MANDAL 

Suri V. K. SHARMA 

DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
SHRI JOSE KURIAN 


Bric Vinop Nakpa (RETD) 


IS 15883 (Part 10) : 2021 


Working Group on Human Resource Management, CED 29/P1/WG 10 


Organization Representative(s) 
Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai Suri M. P. Naidu (Convener) 


In personal capacity (P//2, Block 2, Silver Estate Sector ` Bric Vinop Narra (RETD) (Co-Convener) 
50, Noida) 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 

Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Chennai SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN 
NBCC Ltd, New Delhi SHRI K. GANESHIYA 

Simplex Infrastructures Ltd, New Delhi SHRI PRAMOD MISHRA 


Ms REENA SHERWOO (Alternate) 


19 


(Continued from second cover) 


This standard (Part 10) has been formulated with the aim to provide human resource management guidelines 
relating to performance management, organization development, safety, wellness, benefits, employee motivation, 
training, etc for completing the project in an efficient manner. 


Nothing stated in this standard shall be construed to nullify any rules, regulations, safety standards or statutes of 
the state governments or those contained in the various acts of the government of India. The specific acts, rules 
and regulations pertaining to the employment and regulation of human resources and workmen by the local/state 
authority or central government take precedence over whatever is specified herein. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (15035). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


