**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 984 (1988) : Method for Determination of Colour Fastness 
of Textile Materials to Washing in the Presence of Sodium 
Hypochlorite [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 984 - 198a 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



imiian Standard 



METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 

COLOUR FASTNESS OF TEXTILE 

MATERIALS TO WASHING IN THE 

PRESENCE OK SODIUM HYPOCHLORITE 

(First Revismn ) 



UDC «?70]fi-47'(:S3y^5'2 



BUREAU OF [[VDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK AHA VAN, & BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAk JWARG 

n&W DELHJ |]0(U2 



Cr2 ScpfemlKr ]9«9 



IS : 984 > 1988 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 

COLOUR FASTNESS OF TEXTILE 

MATERIALS TO WASHING IN THE 

PRESENCE OF SODIUM HYPOCHLORITE 

(First Revision J 



0. FOREWORD 



0,1 This Indian Standard (First Revision) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
20 July 1888, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council, 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1962 and 
has been revised on the basis of experience gained 
during its use. Changes have been made in the 
preparation of composite specimen, sampling, 
apparatus and assessment of colour fastness 
ratings to bring it in line with other similar Indian 
Standards on colour fastness tests. 

0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of 
considerable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and 
the depth of shade of the dyestuflf used but also 
upon the nature of the fibre and the method of 



dyeing or printing employed; the same colouring 
matter, when used in dyeing or printing different 
fibres or when applied by different methods upon 
the same fibre, may give vastly different results. 
Formulation of standard methods of test for 
determining colour fastness of textile materials to 
different agencies likely to effect change in colour 
is, therefore, necessary. 

0.4 The colour fastness of textile materials is 
affected when they are washed at high tempera- 
tures in the presence of sodium hypochlorite. The 
method of test prescribed in this standard is 
intended to evaluate the colour fastness of textile 
materials when treated thus. 

0.5 Since certain fibres ( for example, protein 
fibres, like wool ) are damaged by such treatment, 
this method is applicable only to those fibres 
which are capable of withstanding such conditions. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for 
determination of colour fastness of textile materials 
of all kinds and in all forms to washing at high 
temperatures in the presence of sodium hypochlo- 
rite. It is applicable only to those fibres which 
are capable of withstanding such conditions. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with 
specified adjacent fabrics is agitated in a solution 
of soap, sodium carbonate and sodium hypochlo- 
rite, rinsed and dried. The numerical ratings for 
change in colour of the specimen and staining of 
the adjacent fabrics are evaluated with grey 
scales. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine the conformity of a lot 
of coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the relevant 
material specification or as agreed to between the 



buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fastness of 
the material in the lot shall be held to be 
representative of the lot. 

4. COMPOSITE SPECIMEN 

4.1 Two Adjacent Fabrics — Each measuring 10 x 
4 cm, one piece made of same kind of fibre as 
that of the textile to be tested, or that predomina- 
ting in the case of blends, the second piece made 
of the fibre as indicated below, or in the case of 
blends, of the kind of fibre second in order of 
predominance, or as otherwise specified. 



If First Piece is: 


Second Piece to be: 


cotton 


wool 


wool 


cotton 


silk 


cotton 


linen 


cotton 


viscose 


wool 


acetate 


viscose 


polyamide 


wool or viscose 


polyester 


wool or cotton 


acrylic 


wool or cotton 



1 



IS : 984 - 1988 



4.2 Preparation of Composite Specimen 

4.2.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, draw a 
10 X 4 cm specimen from the sample and place it 
between the two pieces of adjacent fabrics 
( see 4.1 ); sew around all four sides to form a 
composite specimen. 

4.2.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn, knit or 
weave some of the sample into fabric, draw from 
it a 10 X 4 cm specimen and place it between the 
two pieces of adjacent fabrics ( see 4.1 ); sew 
around all four sides to form a composite 
specimen. Alternatively, taking an amount of 
yarn weighing approximately half the combined 
mass of the pieces of adjacent fabrics ( see 4.1 ), 
prepare a 10 x 4 cm specimen in the form of 
parallel lengths of yarn. Place it between the two 
pieces of adjacent fabrics and sew around all four 
sides to hold the yarn in place and to form a 
composite specimen. 

4.2.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, 
comb and compress an amount of fibre weighing 
approximately half the combined mass of the 
pieces of adjacent fabrics ( see 4.1 ), into a sheet to 
make a 10x4 cm specimen. Place the sheet 
between the two pieces of adjacent fabrics and 
sew around all four sides to form a composite 
specimen. 

5. QUALITY OF REAGENTS 

5.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and 
distilled water ( see IS: 1070-1977* ) shall be used 
where the use of water as a reagent is intended. 

Note — *Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals 
that do not contain impurities which affect the test 
results, 

6. APPARATUS 

6.1 Suitable Mechanical Device— consisting of a 
water bath containing a rotatable shaft which 
supports, radially, glass or stainless steel containers 
{IS ±5 mm diameter x 125 ± 10 mm high ) of 
approximately 550 i 50 ml capacity, the bottom 
of the containers being 45 ± 10 mm from the 
centre of the shaft. The shaft container assembly 
is rotated at a frequency of 40 i 2 min-i. The 
temperature of the water bath is thermostatically 
controlled to maintain the test solution at the 
prescribed temperature ± 2°C. 

Note — The wash wheel sponsored by the Society of 
Dyers and Colourists, or the launderometer sponsored 
by the American Association of Textile Chemists and 
Colourists, or any other mechanical device giving identi- 
cal results may be used for this test. 

6.2 Stainless Steel Balls — Ten, each approxi- 
mately 6 mm in diameter. 

6.3 Grey Scales for Evaluating Change in Colour 
and Staining 



♦Specification for water for general laboratory use 
( second revision ). 



7. REAGENTS 

7.1 Soap-Soda Solution— containing 5 g of soap 
and 2 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate per litre 
of solution. The soap shall contain not more than 
5 percent moisture and shall comply with the 
following composition (based upon dry mass): 

Free alkali, calculated as 0*3 percent 
NagCOg, Max 

Free alkali, calculated as 0*1 percent 
NaOH, Max 

Combined fatty acids, cal- 85 percent 
culated as Na salt, Min 

Titre of mixed fatty acids 39°C 

prepared from the soap, 
Max 

Iodine value of fatty acids, 50 

Max 

7.1.1 The soap shall be free from optical 
brightening agents. 

7.2 Sodium Hypochlorite Solution — containing 
10 g/1 of available chlorine, freshly prepared, 
having a/?H between 10-8 and 11-2, 

7.3 Acetic Acid Solution — containing 0*14 g of 
glacial acetic acid per litre. 

8. PROCEDURE 

8.1 Place the composite specimen in one of the 
containers of the apparatus together with 10 
stainless steel balls. 

8.2 Take the necessary amount of soap and soda 
ash solution ( see lA ) previously heated to 
83 ± 2°C. Add to the hot solution, sufficient 
amount of sodium hypochlorite solution ( see 7.2 ) 
to make a final concentration of 0*1 g/1 of 
available chloirne and to give a liquor ratio 
of 50:1. 

8.3 Pour the solution as obtained in 8.2, into the 
container ( see 8.1 ). 

8.4 Treat the specimen in the apparatus for 45 
minutes at 83 ± 2°C. At the end of this period, 
drain out the liquor from the container. 

8.5 Pour 100 ml of distilled water at 40 ± 2°C 
into the container and rinse the specimen in the 
container for one minute, shaking the composite 
specimen vigorously with water. Drain out the 
water from the container. Repeat this procedure 
once more. 

8.6 Put 100 ml of acetic acid solution ( see 7.3 ) 
into the container, shake the container vigorously 
with the specimen and the acetic acid solution at 
27 ± 2°C for one minute. Drain out the acid 
from the container. 



IS : 984 - 1988 



8J Rinse the specimen repeatedly in cold water 
until it is free from acid. 

8*8 Wring the specimen and dry it in air in shade 
at a temperature not exceeding 60**C. 

8»9 Remove the specimen, open it out and separate 
the two pieces of adjacent fabrics. 

8.10 Evaluate the change in colour of the treated 
specimen by the method prescribed in IS : 768-1982* 
and the degree of staining of the two pieces of 
adjacent fabrics by the method prescribed in 
IS: 769-19821. 



♦Method for evaluating change in colour ( first revision ). 
fMethod for evaluating staining ( first revision ). 



Note 1 — Treated specimen and the two pieces of 
adjacent fabric should have cooled after drying and 
should have regained their normal moisture content 
before evaluation. 

Note 2 — In case of doubt in the colour fastness 
ratings as assessed by an observer, the assessment should 
be done by at least three observers and the overall 
average rating should be reported. 



9. REPORT 

9.1 The report shall state : (a) The numerical 
rating for change in colour of the test specimen 
and (b) The numerical ratings for staining of the 
two pieces of adjacent fabrics used in the prepara- 
tion of the composite specimen. 



