Wdta Ah IS 14603 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ara Ze — géit Hiat 


(TEM TAT ) 


Potato Grader — Test Code 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.060 


© BIS 2023 


dit Ae St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 gei MTE pt AMT, Ag ect - 110002 
Nese” ` MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 8 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and 
Agriculture Division Council. 


Potato is an important food and vegetable crop, which is grown in India. One of the post-harvest operations for 
which potato growers and cold storage owners are presently facing hardships is the separation of potatoes into 
different size-grades. This is known as ‘grading’. Grading helps the farmers in getting higher profit for their 
produce when sold in the market. Different types of potato graders have been developed and are being 
manufactured in the country. Therefore, a need was felt to formulate this standard in order to have a uniform test 
procedure to evaluate the performance of potato graders. 


This standard was originally published in 1998. In this revision, the damage index parameter has been incorporated 
as additional performance assessment requirement. Further, the provision for accelerated bruising assessment has 
been incorporated. Also, the standard has been brought out in the latest style and format of the Indian Standards. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex J. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. 


IS 14603 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
POTATO GRADER — TEST CODE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the method for testing of 
hand and power operated potato graders. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Potato Index (J) — It is defined as below: 


Li 
I = — 
WT 
where 


L = greatest length, mm; 
W = greatest width, mm; and 
T = greatest thickness, mm. 


The dimensions L, W and T are respective averages 
from corresponding measurements of at least 
50 tubers. 


Depending upon the values of J the tuber shape can 
be defined as follows: 


Round From 100 up to and including 
160 
Oval Above 160 up to and including 
240 
Long Above 240 up to and including 
340 
Very long Above 340 


2.2 Square Measure — Pass at least 50 potatoes 
through a set of 7 square mesh sieves. The mesh 
width ranges from 25 mm to 55 mm in 5 mm steps. 
The square measure is indicated by stating the 
minimum size sieve through which none of the 
sample will pass and the maximum size through 
which whole of the sample will pass. It is expressed 
as mm/mm; for example, 35 mm/50 mm. 


2.3 Bulk Density — Mass per unit volume of potato 
tubers expressed in kg/m’. 


2.4 Size Range — It is calculated on the basis of 
tuber width by the following expression: 


Size range = W SD 


where 


W = mean tuber width; and 
SD = standard deviation. 


2.5 Grading Efficiency — The percentage of 
number of potato tubers conforming to a desired 
grade separated by a grader to the total number of 
tubers fed into the machine in a given lot. It can also 
be specified on the basis of the mass of desired grade 
tuber separated to the total mass of tubers in a given 
lot. It can be obtained by subtracting the grading 
error (see 2.8) from 100 when expressed in 
percentage. 


2.6 Skinning Damage — The percent damage 
caused to the potato tubers by the action of a grader 
on the basis of the percent skin of the potato tubers 
removed. 


2.7 Cutting Damage — The percent damage 
caused to the tubers due to the cut injuries resulting 
from the action of the grader. 


2.8 Bruising Damage — The percent damage 
caused to the potato tubers as a result of the bruising 
sustained to the tubers due to the operation of the 
grader. Bruising, essentially, implies the damage or 
rupture of the tissues of potato tubers without 
breaking of the skin. A bruised tuber develops a dark 
spot at the place of bruising after a few days. 


3 SELECTION AND PREPARATION OF 
GRADER FOR TEST 


3.1 Selection 


For the commercial test, the grader shall be selected 
at random from the production line as directed by 
the Test Station. The Grader shall be complete with 
all accessories and in a condition generally offered 
for sale. The grader shall be new and shall not be 
given any special treatment or preparation for the 
test. The manufacturer can submit his machine for 
confidential testing, if so desired. The nature of test 
required by the manufacturer shall be stated. 


3.1.1 The manufacturer shall give a specifications 
sheet for the grader comprising all items listed in the 
specimen format given in Annex A and any further 
data required to carry out the tests. 


IS 14603 : 2023 


3.2 Preparation of Grader for Test 
3.2.1 Running-in 


The grader shall be run-in before the test, under the 
supervision of the manufacturer. It shall be checked 
for its completeness. Particular attention shall be 
paid to the power transmission system and other 
moving parts, bearings, functioning of the grading, 
units/members, tightness of various fasteners 
namely, nuts, bolts, keys etc. The test report shall 
mention the place and duration of the running in. 


3.2.2 Preliminary Adjustments 


Necessary adjustments may be made by the 
manufacturer during the running-in period. Once the 
grader is prepared for the test, the adjustments shall 
not be changed during the test. In case, it becomes 
necessary to change the settings, alterations made 
shall be reported. 


4 INSTRUMENTATION 


4.1 The accuracy of measuring instruments shall 
have maximum allowable errors as follows: 


a) Rotational speed, rev/min + 0.5 percent; 
b) Time, s + 0.2; 

c) Length, m or mm + 0.5 percent; 

d) Force, N + 1.0 percent; 

e) Mass, kg + 0.5 percent; 

f) Atmospheric pressure, kPa + 0.2; and 
g) Atmospheric temperature, °C + 0.5. 


5 CHECKING OF SPECIFICATIONS 


The specifications supplied by the manufacturer 
shall be checked and reported in the format given in 
Annex A. 


6 CHECKING OF MATERIAL 


The material of construction of various components 
of the grader shall be reported in the format given in 
Annex B. 


7 VISUAL 
ADJUSTMENTS 


OBSERVATION AND 


7.1 The grader shall be examined visually and 
following observations shall be reported: 


a) Adequacy of marking of feed trough and 
outlets; 

b) Adequacy of marking of direction of 
rotation of main drive shaft; 

c) Adequacy of protection of bearings against 
the ingress of dust; 


d) Adequacy of safety arrangement, 
especially at moving points and at feed 
trough; 

e) Provision for lubrication of moving parts: 

f) Provision for belt tightening; 

g) Provision for transportation; 

h) Provision for changing of components 
requiring replacement; 

j) Provision for replacement and cleaning of 
grading spools/sieve/conveyor; 

k) Provision for anti-corrosive coatings; 

m) Welding of seams; 

n) Tightness of bolts, nuts and other fasteners; 
and 

p) Other observations. 


7.2 The grader shall be examined for following 
provisions for adjustments: 


a) Feed rate; 

b) Speed; 

c) Pitch of sizing rollers/sieves; 

d) Grade sizes; and 

e) Slope of collecting platform/grading 
outlets. 


8 TESTS AT NO LOAD 
8.1 Installation for Testing 


The grader shall be installed on a level, preferably, 
hard surface and set the slope of the sizing bed or 
conveyor(s) in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
recommendations. As far as possible, the test shall 
be conducted under still-air condition. The grader 
shall be attached with a suitable prime over, 
preferably an electric motor fitted with energy meter 
or transmission dynamometer for measuring the 
power input. The power delivered to the grader 
should be supplied in either of the following ways: 


a) Direct coupling of the prime mover with 
the main driving shaft; or 

b) Connecting the prime mover with the help 
of flat or V-belt and pulleys with main 
driving shaft of the grader. 


In case of (a) the power delivered to the grader will 
be the power output of the prime mover; whereas in 
case of (b) the allowances for flat belt and V-belt 
drive losses may be taken as 6 percent and 3 percent 
respectively. 


8.2 Energy Consumption 


8.2.1 The energy meter shall be set by running the 


grader for 10 minutes and the initial readings of the 
energy meter shall be recorded. The energy 
consumption shall be measured at no load for one 
hour. 


8.3 The data shall be recorded as well as visual 
observations during and after the test in the format 
given in Annex C. 


9 TESTS AT LOAD 
9.1 Short-Run Test 


9.1.1 The grader shall be installed as specified in 8.1 
if no-load test was conducted at different place. 


9.1.2 Operation and Collection of Data 


Sufficient quantity of potatoes of each variety shall 
be taken for conducting the short duration test. The 
grader shall be operated at the specified speed of the 
grading unit for one hour at the maximum input 
capacity. During the one hour run period the 
following samples and data shall be collected : 


a) Three sets of samples shall be taken at an 
interval of about 20 minutes including the 
time for sample collection from the 
different outlets of the grader; 

b) The speed of the different shafts by 
revolution counter or a hand tachometer 
shall be recorded; and 

c) In case of electric prime-mover, the 
readings of energy meter or dynamometer 
shall be taken at an interval of one hour. 


At the end of one hour operation, the grader shall be 
run idle for some time, so that the material earlier 
fed into the grader comes out. The graded material 
collected from different outlets shall be weighed. If 
an engine has been used as prime-mover, the fuel 
consumption during the operation period shall be 
recorded. 


9.1.3 The test given in 9.1.2 shall be repeated for 
minimum three times at different feed rates covering 
the rated input capacity and approximately 
50 percent of the maximum input capacity at 
specified speed; speed 15 percent higher than 
specified speed, and speed 15 percent lower than the 
specified speed. 


9.1.4 The data shall be recorded as well as visual 
observations in the data sheet as given in Annex D. 


9.1.5 Analysis of the Sample 


The samples obtained at different outlets of the 


IS 14603 : 2023 


grader for different feed rates shall be analyzed for 
the following: 


a) For cut tubers, by number and by mass, for 
each outlet; 

b) Skinned tubers, by number and by mass, 
for each outlet; 

c) Bruised tubers, by number and by mass for 
each outlet; and 

d) Damage Index. 


The average for three sets obtained at different feed 
rates shall be reported. 


9.1.5.1 The data shall be recorded in data sheet as 
given in Annex E. 


9.1.6 Calculation 
9.1.6.1 Grading error 


It shall be calculated on the basis of the tuber 
numbers or tuber mass. The following formulae 
shall be used for the calculations: On the basis of 
tuber mass: 


a) Percent grading error for Grade 1: 


 — MM-M) x 100 
on "E 


b) Percent grading error for Grade 2: 


 — (= My) -M, x 100 
a (M — Mı) 


c) Percent grading error for Grade 3: 


_ (M — Mı — M2) — M; x 100 
an (M — M, — Mp) 


Hence overall grading error for the Grader: 


_ Ey + Ey + Ey 
Se 


M = Total mass of tubers, kg; 

Mı = Mass of tubers for Grade 1, kg; 

Mz = Mass of tubers for Grade 2, kg; and 
M; = Mass of tubers for Grade 3, kg. 


Similarly, overall grading error for the grader shall 
be calculated on the basis of numbers of tubers 
collected in each grade. 


IS 14603 : 2023 


9.1.6.2 Skinning damage 


It shall be calculated as follows: 


M, x 100 
= 
or 
N, X 100 
si N 
where 
D, = skin damage, percent; 
Ms; = mass of potatoes with damaged 
skin, kg; 
M = total mass of tubers in a sample, kg; 
Ns = number of tubers with damaged 
skin; and 
N = total number of tubers, in a sample. 


9.1.6.3 Cutting damage 


It shall be calculated as follows: 


9.1.6.4 Bruising assessment 


As bruise one potato will normally take 3 days or 
4 days to develop, the bruising process can be 
accelerated by storing a sample in warm humid 
conditions overnight. A hotbox is ideal for this. The 
hot box needs to be able to maintain 34 °C to 36 °C 
and 95 percent to 98 percent RH. 


Once the sample has been stored in hot-box 
overnight, the assessment can be completed. Careful 
peeling shall be done around the tuber to look for 
black/grey discolouration of the flesh below the 
skin. The findings shall be categorized as Nil, Slight 
or Severe. The slight bruises being removed by 
2 peels and severe bruises not being removed by 
2 peels. It is suggested to assess samples in batches 
of 25 tubers, which makes it easy to calculate 
percent bruising in each category. 


a) Size of Hotbox — Hotbox shall be of three 
sizes as illustrated in the table below 
depending on the testing material. 


b) Material — Hotbox shall be made of 
strong, insulated UPVC casing with sealed 
door and wipe-clean surfaces. 


_ M, x 100 
M c) Bruising categorization 
or 
Sample of 25 numbers of potato tubers shall be taken 
_ N, x 100 and bruising assessment shall be carried out as 
Se N follows: 
Bruising type Number of tubers 
1) Nilbruising ` Geen 
where 2) Slight `. ëch == 
D. = cutting damage, percent; Be sypou pun er rete 
M. = mass of cut tubers in a sample, kg; EES 
M = total mass of tubers in a sample, kg; The percentage of slight and severe bruising shall be 
Ne = number of cut tubers in a sample; and calculated. 
N = total number of tubers in a sample. 
Tub Dimensions 
uber j 
Hotbox Size capacity Trays . ; VE le 
(number) (width x depth x height) (kg) 
(cm) 
Hotbox 125 125 5 89w x 70d x 72h 45 
Hotbox 250 250 10 89w x 70d x 120h 76 
Hotbox 750 750 30 153w x 70d x 176h 160 


d) Bruising damage percentage: It shall be 
calculated as follows: 


_ My x 100 
Pe M 
or 
_ Np x 100 
PO N 
where 
D», = bruising damage, percent; 
M, = mass of bruised tubers in a sample, kg; 
M = total mass of tubers in a sample, kg; 
N = a of bruised tubers in a sample; 
an 
N = total number of tubers in a sample. 


9.1.6.5 Damage index 


Depending on how much damage is being 
encountered, the sampling should be repeated at 
various times throughout the day, especially if the 
variety has been changed or the machinery setting 
have been re-adjusted. 


A sample size shall be of 15 kg to 20 kg of tubers. 
All traces of soil should be carefully washed from 
the sample. It is suggested to use copious amounts 
of water and a sponge (mechanical washers tend to 
cause some damage which may interfere with 
assessment). Tubers should then be inspected and 
divided into categories — Undamaged, Scuffed, 
Slight, and Severe. 


“Scuffed” — broken skin only, with no flesh 
damage. 

“Slight” — flesh damage removable by 2 strokes 
of a peeler. 

“Severe” — damage not removed by 2 strokes of a 
peeler. 


Then their percentages based on weights of their 


IS 14603 : 2023 


corresponding fractions shall be determined by 
using following formula: 


Damage Index = (% Scuf fed) + (% Slight x 3) 
+ (% Severe x 7) 


Index (d) should be as low as possible and the lower 
the index the less damage is being caused. 


9.1.7 Determination of Energy Consumption 


9.1.7.1 In case of energy meter fitted with prime 
mover, the difference between two consecutive 
readings shall give the energy consumption for 60 
minutes. Calculate the energy consumption for 1 
hour giving due allowances to the type of drive. The 
allowances for flat belt and V-belt drive losses shall 
be taken as 6 percent and 3 percent respectively. 


9.1.7.2 In case of dynamometer fitted with prime 
mover the average reading taken shall give the 
average torque. The power requirement shall be 
calculated by the following formula: 


Torque (N.m) x Speed(rev/min) 


Power (kW) = 9 549.297 


9.1.7.3 The data shall be recorded in data sheet as 
given in Annex F. 


9.1.8 Determination of Rated Capacity 


The feed rate at which the grading errors are within 
+ 5 percent shall be selected. Capacity in terms of 
energy consume shall be calculated by dividing the 
capacity by power consumed. 


9.1.8.1 The data shall be recorded in data sheet as 
given in Annex F. 


9.1.9 Determination of Output Capacity 


The mass of graded potatoes received at different 
outlets shall be taken and recorded in the data sheet 
given in Annex F. 


Damage Type Weight of Tubers, g % Total Weight Factor Damage Index, d 
Undamaged a c = (a/b*100) 0 =c x factor 
Scuffed S1 1 dı 
Slight ER 3 d2 
Severe S3 7 d3 
Total B = s1 + S2 + S3 d = dı + dz + d3 


IS 14603 : 2023 


9.2 Long Run Test 


The grader shall be operated for at least 10 hours at 
load which should be covered by continuous run of 
at least 5 hours. The major break-downs/defects 
developed and repairs made shall be recorded in data 
sheet as given in Annex G. 


10 SUMMARY 


For the guidance of the users, a summary report shall 
be compiled in data sheet as given in Annex H. 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 3.1.1 and 5.1) 


IS 14603 : 2023 


PERFORMANCE INDICATORS FOR POTATO GRADING MACHINES 


A-1 GENERAL 


Potato-grading machines designed to work on small- 
scale farms in the developing world must satisfy 
both technical and economic requirements, as well 
as considering social factors for successful 
technology adoption. Machines must not only be 
suitable for use in harsh physical conditions, but 
they must also be profitable to the farmer. 


A-2 SPECIFICATIONS SHEET 


A-2.1 General 


a) Make 
b) Model 
c) Type 


d) Year of manufacture 


A-2.2 Power Unit 


a) Provisions for installation of power 
unit 

b) Type of prime mover recommended 

c) Rotated power, kW 

d) Type of drive 


A-2.3 Main Drive 


a) Type 

b) Size of belt or chain, mm 

c) Size of pulley or size of sprocket, mm 
d) Diameter of main shaft, mm 


a) 
b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


A-2.4 Feeding System 


Method of feeding 

Height of feeding-trough, if any 
Type of feeding conveyor, if any 
Width of feed conveyor, if any 
Conveying distance: Horizontal 
Vertical 

Feed-conveyor drive 


A-2.5 Grading System 


Type 

Number of spools/sieves/grading 
conveyors 

Pitch between spools or size of holes 
in the grading sieves or grading 
conveyors 

Minimum (mm) 

Maximum (mm) 

Width of spools or grading 
sieves/conveyors(mm) 

Drive 


A-2.6 Collecting Platform/Delivery Chutes 


Length and breadth (mm x mm) 
Slope (deg) 

Number of dividers provided 
Number of grading outlets 


Performance Indicators for Potato Grading Machines 


Technical Indicators 


Rate of sorting Capacity of the machine to sort potatoes (tubers/h) 

Accuracy of sorting Capacity to correctly classify potatoes (% correctly sorted tubers) 

Damage Capacity to grade the potatoes without causing undue damage to the tuber (% 
damaged tubers) 

Economic Indicators 

Investment Amount of initial capital investment (Rs.) 

Profitability Lifetime profitability of the machine (Internal rate of return) 


Social Indicators 


Flexibility and usability Ease of use and flexibility of the machine (Qualitative evaluation) 
Transportability Ease with which it can be transported between farms and regions (Qualitative 
evaluation) 


Safety Assessment of risk of injury by grader (Qualitative evaluation) 


IS 14603 : 2023 


A-2.8 Transport Wheels 


a) Number and size of wheels 
b) Type of wheel-bearings 
c) Type of towing arrangements, if any 


A-2.9 Overall Dimensions 


a) Length with feed conveyor (mm) 
b) Length without feed conveyor (mm) 
c) Width (mm) 


d) Height with feed conveyor (mm) 
e) Height without conveyor (mm) 


A-2.10 Number of Man Power Required to 
Operate the Machine 


A-2.11 Tool Weight (kg) 
A-2.12 Input Capacity (kg/h) 


IS 14603 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 6.1) 
CONSTRUCTION OF VARIOUS COMPONENTS OF THE GRADER 


B-1 DATE OF TEST 
B-2 MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION 


SI No. Component Material Size 
i) Frame 
il) Feed conveyor(s) 
iii) Grading conveyors/sieve(s) 
iv) Shaft 
v) Pulleys/chains 
vi) Transport wheels 
vii) Platform 
viii) Outlet 
ix) Transport wheels 
x) Others 


IS 14603 : 2023 


(Clause 8.3) 


ANNEX C 


DATA SHEET FOR TEST AT NO-LOAD 


C-1 ENERGY CONSUMPTION 


a) Source of power; 

b) Type of drive; 

c) Total time of run; 

d) Average energy consumption for one 
hour; 

e) Speed of feed conveyor; and 

f) Speed of grading conveyor(s)/sieves. 


C-2 VISUAL OBSERVATIONS 


a) Presence of any marked vibrations 
during operation; 


2) 


Presence of undue knocking or 
rattling sound; 

Frequent slippage of belts; 

Smooth running of shaft in their 
respective bearings; 

Any unusual play or slackness in any 
components; 

Any marked rise in temperature of 
bearings; and 

Other observations. 


IS 14603 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 9.1.4) 


DATA SHEET FOR TEST AT LOAD 


a) Source of power 

b) Power rating 

c) Type of drive 

d) Variety of potato 

e) Potato index 

f) Size of different grades of potatoes 
g) Speed of feed conveyors 

h) Speed of grading conveyors/sieves 
j) Slope of collecting platform 

k) Test data 


Date | Starting | Stopping | Duration | Speed | Feed Power | Number Weight (kg) Total 
Time Time of (rev/ | Rate | Required of weight of 
Operation | min) | (kg/h) (kW) Samples graded 
potatoes 
(kg) 
Grade | Grade | Grade 
I II III 
(2) (3) (4) (5) (6) OI (8) (9) (0) (1) 


NOTES 


1 The data should be taken for the tests conducted at different feed rates. 
2 Tests should be conducted at specified speeds and at speeds 15 percent less and 15 percent higher than specified. 


IS 14603 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 9.1.5.1) 
DATA SHEET FOR ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES 


Sl Feed rate Speed of main shaft Mass of samples (kg) from Mass (g) 
No. (kg/h) (RPM) 
Grade I Grade II Grade II Cut Bruised Split Skinned 
Tubers Tubers Tubers Tubers 
UI (2) (3) (4) (5) 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 9.1.7.3, 9.1.8 and 9.1.9) 
DATA SHEET FOR GRADING ERRORS, ENERGY REQUIREMENT AND CAPACITY 


IS 14603 : 2023 


SI Item Tests Grader | Feed Power Mass of 
No. 2 3 Speed | rate required Tubers 
(RPM) | (kg/h) (kW) collected 
at 
different 
outlets 
(kg) 
UI (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 7) 
i) Skinned tubers, 
percent 
ii) | Cut tubers, percent 
iii) | Bruised tubers, percent 
iv) | Split tubers, percent 
v) | Skinned tubers, 
percent 
vi) | Damage Index 
vii) | Rated input capacity 
(kg/h) 
viii) | Rated input capacity 
(kg/kWh) 
ix) | Output capacity (kg/h) 


IS 14603 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 9.2) 
DATA SHEET FOR LONG RUN TEST 


LÉNGT 
27 “Nariety- of DON ee ee ee eed a Da 
3s: + Output capacity: Oe eisereen dese ENEE Reg 
4. “Totalaunning time: Ehl Näerden de ARENS 
5. Continuous running time (hl... 
6; ‘Break downs, Em dek Ee eres EEN 
7. Major repairs conducted, if ann, 
8. Persons needed for operation. 66. ccece cece e eee eee eee een eee ee ea a 
a) Man-hour needed for operatton.. 0... .c cece cee cene eee eeeeeeeeeee eee eneeeeneeaees 
b) Man-hour needed for removing the bags eee eneeeenees 
9. Any other observations. .............cc cece cece eee e ee eee eee enn eee eee eee nent tenes 


SOV ne ho 


ANNEX H 
(Clause 10) 
SUMMARY REPORT 


Name of the manufacturer, cece ec eeec eee eeeenene neta ee enenenenenaens 
Model number: : 24: cessation ee 
Name of testing centre. see EE dean dies ered ae AED ee 
Brief description of the gerader.. cece ee eee eee eeneeene neta enenenennees 
Variety of potatoes used in the test... 


POtato IMdeX ss ost eee ies aele eat NEEN 


Adjustments 


a) At NO DO ad Sst eases yee ea asa ahd eee AEE OG HEE PONS 
b) Speed of main ConNVEYOL.......... 0. ccece cee ce cence nee e eee eeeeeeaeeaeeaeaeeas 
c) Speed of different grading Convevorslaieves. ees 
Power requirement; KWa ne a E See deen 
a): “At nodoad BEE EE 
b) At load using rated input CapacHtv..... cece ence eee ee eneeas 
Percentage of skinned tubers eee eee eens eeeeeeaeeaees 
. Percentage of cut berg... 
. Percentage of split bere... 
. Percentage of bruised berg... 
» Damage Indexes ote tests hie slits, dese a blir ese eao eia re a 
. Rated input capacity, keib,... neneeeeeeaeneaenenned 
. Variation of rated input capacity........... ccc cee cee cece eee eee ee eeeeaeneeaenas 
a) At 15 percent more than specified speed... 
b) At 15 percent less than specified speed... 
. Rated input capacity, kg/KWh. 1. cece cece cence eee ee eee neneneneenenes 
- Output capacity, kg/h NR oes dacs reni Seve E canis aes ENER NN 
. Output capacity, kekwhn. 0... ccc cence ence eect eect e eee eee eaenaes 
. Grading efficiency, percent......... 00... cece cece nce ee eee ec eee eee enennenaenes 
. Any marked observations affecting performance... 
. Any marked breakdowns. eee neneneeeneeeeeeneneneneneeaens 


. Other obsaervatons. 


IS 14603 : 2023 


IS 14603 : 2023 


ANNEX J 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


Organization 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Agriculture Machinery Manufacturers Association, Pune 


CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar 


Dr Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, Akola 


Essen Multipack Limited, Rajkot 


ICAR — Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR — Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 


ICAR — Central Institute of Women in Agriculture, 
Bhubaneswar 


ICAR — Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


ICAR — Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and 
Technology, Ludhiana 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship 
and Management, Thanjavur 


Indosaw Industrial Products Private Limited, Ambala 
Cantt. 


Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri 


Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture, 
New Delhi 


National Committee on Precision Applications in 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship 
and Management, Sonipat 


North Eastern Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Biswanath Chariali 


Representative(s) 


DR SHYAM NARAYAN JHA (Chairperson) 


DR SURENDRA SINGH 
SHRI MITUL PANCHAL (Alternate) 


DR RAVI GUPTA 


DR SUCHITA V. GUPTA 
DR BHAGYASHREE N. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILDIP WAGH 


Dr S. K. GIRI 
DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Alternate) 


DR V. G. ARUDE 


DR SACHIDANANDA SWAIN 
ER CHAITRALI S. MHATRE (Alternate) 


DR A. CAROLINA RATHINA KUMAR 
DR S. BHUANESWARI (Alternate) 


DR SANDEEP MANN 
DR R. K. VISHWAKARMA (Alternate) 


DR KANCHAN K. SINGH 
DR PANNA LAL SINGH (Alternate) 


DR S. BHUVANA 


DR VINOD H. KALBANDE 


PROF VIKRAM PARASHARAM KAD 


SHRIC. R. LOHI 
SHRI Y. K. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 


DRP. K. NEMA 


DRP. P. RAO 
SHRI S. G. PAWAR (Alternate) 


Organization 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing 
Institute, Hisar 


Osaw Agro Industries Private Limited, Ambala 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


In Personal Capacity (320 Ist E cross HRBR layout 
3rd block St Thomas Town Post, Bangaluru - 
560084) 


In Personal Capacity (8/22, 5th Cross Ramalinga Nagar 
South Extension Triuchirappali - 620017) 


In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link 1, 
Greater Noida - 201315) 


In Personal Capacity (MIG - 154, E-7 Sector Aerea Colony, 
Bhopal - 462061) 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar, A Block 
Civil, Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore - 641014) 


IS 14603 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MUKESH JAIN 


SHRI JAGDISH SINGH 


DR SANDHYA SINGH 
DR MANINDER KAUR (Alternate D 
DR ROHIT SHARMA (Alternate II) 
DR R. THIRUPATHI 
DR P. RAJKUMAR (Alternate I) 
DR P. SUDHA (Alternate II) 


SHRI JIX ANTONY 


DR K. ALAGUSUNDARAM 


SHRI PITAM CHANDRA 


SHRI S. D. DESHPANDE 


DR R. VISVANATHAN 


BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST 'E'/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DEBASISH MAHALIK 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
AND 
SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 20 (20704). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` ` 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


