IS : 2364 - 1987
(Reaffirmed 2004)

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMSWOVEN FABRICS ( Second Revision )

ULX

001-4 : 677.074

Q C'ojpright 1988

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 7

Alay 1988

IS : 2364 - 1987

Indian Standard

GLOSSARYOFTEXTILETERMSWOVENFABRICS (Second Revision )
0.
FOREWORD
based on the prevalent practices and usage in the Indian textile industry and trade, and are of technical nature and need not necessarily tally with those coined by excise or customs departments for the purpose of levying taxes or excise duties. In the preparation of this standard, due weightage has also been given to the need for international coordination among the standards prevalent in difIerent countries of the world. Assistance has also been derived from a number of publications including the following: The `Mercury' Manchester Manchester, Dictionary of Textile Terms. Textile Mercury Limited, UK. ed. UK. Callaway 7. 1975. Mills, 0.1 This Indian Standard ( Revised ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 10 November 1987, after the draft finalized by the Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1963 and subsequently revised in 1979 with a view to eliminating ambiguity or confusion arising from various interpretations of terms relating to different types of fabrics made from natural fibres. The standard has now been revised to include some more terms and also to carry out the modifications necessary to make the existing definitions more explicit and up-to-date. The definitions pertaining to the use of man-made fibres as blends with natural fibres have also been kept in view while updating the standards. However, the definitions pertaining to the jute have been excluded in view of publication of IS : 3476-1986* exclusively for jute fabrics. 0.3 The definitions given in this standard are

Textile Terms and' Definitions. Textile Institute, Manchester, Callaway Textile Georgia, USA. Dictionary.

*Glossary of terms pertaining to jute (first reuision ). 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the definitions textile terms relating to woven fabrics. A Indian term for light weight fabric in Adhi -An plain weave. It is used as shirting in tropical countries, and also as the ground fabric for Chikan, Kamdani, etc ( see also Chikan and Kamdani ). Aeolian - A warp rib dress material made of cotton warp and silk, man-made fibre or worsted weft. The cloth is light in weight, has a glossy finish, and is piece dyed. Alpaca fibres. Fabric A fabric made from alpaca of

0.4 For ease of reference, the definitions of this standard have been arranged in alphabetical order. cross borders, generally as part of the traditional worn over the shoulders dress in South India. for a cotton hand-

Angocha - An Indian term loom fabric used as a towel. Angola Denotes

yarn as well as fabric:

a) Angola Yarn - Yarn made from wool and cotton, or wool and man-made fibres, blended together. b) Angola Fabric - A plain fabric made from angola angola yarn weft. Angora or twill weave yarn warp and

4

Angora Fibre ( genus: Lepus mohair.
NOTE-

The hair of Angora caniculus ).

rabbit

Alwan - An Indian term denoting fabric in plain weave made from pushmina or merino wool or other fibres and used as a shawl. Angavastram - A superfine fabric, mildly scoured or bleached, approximately 2 m long and 1 m wide, with colour-woven or jari borders and

The hair of Angora goat is referred to as

b)

Angora Tarn -An extremely soft yarn made from the hair of Angora rabbit. It may contain a small proportion of other fibres to facilitate Spinning.

I

c) Angora
Angora

Fabric yarn.

A

fabric

woven

from

The use of this term to refer to union NOTE fabrics containing mohair weft is not recommended.

32 ends/in ( 80 ends/dm ) 2-18s ( 295 to 32 tex ) warp- with 280-400 picks/in ( 700 to 1 OOO/dm ) of 20~16s weft ( 30-37 tex ) piece-dyed, and having a short, soft `nap' on the back when finished. It is a heavier fabric than imperial sateen. Bedford Cord - A cloth showing rounded cords in the warp direction with pronounced sunken lines between, produced by the nature of the weave. The weave on the face of the cords is usually plain but other weaves may be used. There are weft floats on the width of the cords on the back. Wadding ends may be used to accentuate the prominence of the cords. Bed Ticking - A strong, closely woven, twilled cotton material which may be yarn dyed or printed, usually in stripes. It is used for beds, mattresses and pillows. Belting ( Industrial and Mechanical ) - A generic term covering all forms of belts, and rolls of material from which belts are made up,that are designed for the transmission of power or for the purpose of conveying or elevating. BangalineA cloth with a more or less striking warp-rib appearance running across the fabric, produced from cotton or worsted yarns, silk or other continuous-filament yarns, or in part from any of the materials named, a typical example being silk warp and worsted weft. The warp-rib or corded effect may be produced by employing any of the following methods: (a) suitable thickness and setting of warp and weft threads, (b) suitable warp-rib weaves, and(c) a combination of (a) and (b). Billiard Cloth - A plain woven, heavily milled woollen cloth with closely cropped fibrous finish, made from fine merino wool and usually dyed in green colour. Binding - A narrow fabric designed to protect, support and give a finish to carpets, garments, blankets, books, shoes and other articles.
NOTE - Certain kinds of tapes, and braids are also used as bindings. webbings, ribbons

Astrakhan Fabric, Woven A curled-pile fabric made to imitate the fleece of a still-born or very young karakul lamb. The effect is obtained by special manufacturing process or by a pre-treatment of the pile yarn, which is set while held in the form of a helix. B Baby Flannel - A light-weight children's garments. flannel used for

undyed cloth used to Back Grey - Absorbent support and carry fabric being printed, and also to protect the blanket from contamination by surplus print paste. Bafta - An Indian term for a fabric made wirh silk warp and cotton weft, used as dress material. Baize - A plain woven, heavily milled, woollenspun, fine merino wool fabric with raised pile surface, piece dyed in bright colours, usually red or green, ,and used for covering tables, screens, lining for instrument boxes and the like. the same Balanced Cloth - A fabric having count of yarn in warp and weft and the same number of ends and picks per unit length. Bandage Cloth See Gauze. of cotton, of flags,

Banner Cloth - A plain weave fabric wool or silk used for the fabrication banners and buntings.

Barathea - A heavy worsted fabric of pebbeled appearance in rib or twilled hapsack weave. It may be made from merino wool or its blendswith man-made fibres and given a clear finish for use as dress material. Barras Hessen - A coarse linen fabric similar to sack cloth; originally produced in Holland. Batik system. A plain woven fabric printed by Batik

NOTE - The method of dyeing in which wax is applied to the cloth and then removed at places where the dyeing is to be done.

Birdseye - A fabric having a pattern of very small and uniform spots, the result of the combination of weave and colour. Blanket - A heavy compact fabric of plain or twill weave made from wool, cotton, rayon, manmade fibres or their blends and given a soft nappy finish. Blankets made from wool are usually felted by heavy milling. Their size varies considerably but usually it is 1.5 to 2 m in width and 2 to 25 m in length. The weight of the blanket may vary from 1 to 3 kg. Blanket Cloth - A heavy weight fabric with a soft, raised finish. overcoating

Batiste - A soft, fine, plain-woven fabric, originally of flax. It may now be made in a variety of other fibres. Beaver Cloth - A heavy, firm texture cloth, made from woollen yarns, which is milled, raised and cut close on the face so as to simulate natural beaver skin. Beaverteen - A heavily wefted fabric of the moleskin type, used chiefly for heavy trouserings. Example, a popular cotton variety consisting of

Bleeding Madras - A cotton fabric, usually handwoven, from coloured yarns, in check designs.

2

IS I 2364 - 1987 The coloured yarns bleed mildly during finish ing and the subsequent washes and tint the rest of the fabric and create a mutation effect. The count of warp and weft used is generally 60s ( 10 tex ) and 40 ( 15 tex ) respectively. Body Carpet - Plain or unbordered patterned carpet in piece form, traditionally 680 or 900 mm wide, mainly used for makin.g-up into larger areas by seaming or otherwise joinmg edge-to-edge.
Greater widths ( traditionally less than 1800 mm ) are occasionally designated body carpet.

Builder Fabric - A square-woven heavy cotton duck made from very heavy ply yarns; it was formerly used in the carcase of rubber-treated tyres, but has now been largely replaced by tyrecord warpsheet. Bunting Bunting Burlap See Banner Cloth. Cloth.

Cloth

See Banner

See Hessian.

NOTE-

C
Calico - A generic fabric heavier than tely having a weight 120 g. Cambric weave fabric term for plain weave muslin and approximaper square metre of up to plain

Bolting Cloth - A light weight open fabric characterized by its fine and uniform mesh, used for sifting flour or screen printing. Both warp an d weft threads are accurately spaced and are wove n in gauge or other non-slip construction in order to maintain the mesh size. Book Binding Cloth - Fabrics normally made from cotton, used in book binding. It is usually coloured and heavily sized. Book Muslin - A lightweight stiff finished open cotton fabric used in book binding and also as lining for cheap cloth. Boota or Butta - An Indian term for cotton fabric ornamented with spots formed usually by extra warp or weft threads in weaving. Boski -A closely woven dress material from spun silk warp and weft. usually

A lightweight closely woven usually with a stiff finish.

Canton Crepe - A sturdy silk dress material with a pebbly crepe surface with six S threads and six Z threads in arrangement and two S picks and two Z picks. Usually woven on box looms. Canvas - A cloth usually made from c:otton, flax, hemp or jute in weights traditionally ranging from 180 g/m2 ( 6 oz/yds ) and above. The weave is plain or double end plain. In cotton canvas, the yarns may be singles but are frequently plied; in other canvases, the yarns are generally singles. The warp predominates, and a feature of the heavier canvases is the very close packing of the warp, which is highly crimped over a straight weft. The term canvas covers eloths with a great variety of uses, but the salient features of all are strength and firmness ( see also Duck ). Capella - A 2/l twill weave mulberry generally used as a dress material. siIk fabric

Box Cloth - An all-wool, woollen-spun fabric with a fibrous surface and firm handle. The surface should be completely covered with fibres so that no threads are visible. It is woven in a variety of weaves, depending on the weight required. It is used for purposes as loggings, coachman cloths and billiard cloth. Brace Web - An elastic or rigid fabric, primarily intended for the braces. Bribe A synonym for a woollen wovan narrow manufacture of fent. fabric of

Carpet - A floor-covering generally having cut pile surface, traditionally woven, but currently also produced by other methods, for example, tufting, bonding or stitching the pile to a backing or supporting base ( see also IS : 11205-1984 ). A light to medium weight Casement Cloth weft faced fabric of cotton or man-made fibre yarns generally used for curtains and upholstery. Casement Repp - A fabric havier than repp used for curtains, hangings, etc, it usually has three to four times more ends than picks. Cashemire De Soie - A high grade taffeta, usually made of fine silk yarn, which is given a finish to resemble Cashmere fabric. fabric in Cavalry Twill - A firm warp-faced which the weave gives steep double twill lines separated by pronounced grooves formed by the weft. The name was originally applied to firm heavyweight fabric for making riding breeches for cavalry, but was later extended to cover cloths used for raincoats and other clothing purposes. 3

Broad Cloth, Cotton - A light-weight poplin type, used for shirtings.

Broad Cloth, Wool - Merino wool fabric in plain or twill weave, heavily milled and given a dress face finish. Brocade-A jacquard weave fabric of rich rance. Unlike the design in a (Damask' appears to be Aat with the surface of the the design in a brocade looks as if it were or embroidered. Brushed Fabric one or both surfaces brushing. Buckram a lightweight appeawhich fabric, raised

A fabric in which fibres on have been raised by means of

A stiff fabric made by impregnating open cloth with adhesives and fillers,

IS : 2364 - 1367 Cellular-A term describing a fabric constructed so as to have a close and orderly distribution of hollows or holes. In woven fabric, this can be achieved by (a) honeycomb, (b) leno, or (c) mockleno weaves.
NOTE iq restrictively

In certain sections of the trade, the term used to describe leno cellular fabrics.

Compound Fabric, Woven - A generic term for layered fabrics in which the separate layers or plies, each with its own warp and weft, are produced simultaneously and stitched together in one weave process. Cloths comprising two plies are known as double ( or two-ply ) cloths and others by the number of plies they contain, for example, three-ply cloth. Corduroy - A cut-weft-pile fabric in which the cut fibres form the surface. The binding points of the pile wefts are arranged so that after the pile has been cut, cords or ribs are formed in the direction of the warp.
a corduroy appearance.

Chambery - A dress material from silk or manmade fibre warp and worsted weft in twill weave. Charmeuse - Silk, cotton or rayon dress fabric with a satin weave that has a dull back and semilustrous surface and drapes well. Used for payamer dresses, especially drapped gowns. Charsuti - An with four parallel Indian term for cotton yarns working as one. fabric

NOTE -Velveteen Flannel -

fabrics are sometimes cut to give

Checks - A variety of fabrics having rectangular patterns formed by two or more colours of warp and weft. Checks may also be brought about by the use of fancy yarns, cross dyeing, printing, etc. Cheese Cloth - An open lightweight plain weave made from carded cotton nally used for wrapping cheese, meat, fabric with yarn origietc.

Cotton Cover

See Flannelette.

a) The degree of evenness and closeness of thread spacing. Good cover gives the effect of a uniform plane surface and cannot be obtained with hard-twisted yarns. b) The degree to which, in fabric processing, the underlying structure is concealed by the finishing materials or treatments. Cover Factor ( Woven Fabrics ) - A number that indicates the extent to which the area of a cloth is covered by one set of threads. By introducing suitable numerical constants, its evaluation can be made in accordance with any system of counting. For any cloth, there are two cover factors, warp cover factor and weft cover factor. The traditional cover factor in the cotton system ( sometimes known as "Peirce's cover factor" ) is the ratio of the threads per 25 mm ( inch ) to the square root of the cotton yarn count. Crepe - A fabric, charaterized by a crinkled, puckered or pebbly surface, with highly twisted yarns in warp or weft or both. Similar effect is also obtained by using normal twisted yarn and crepe weave. Crepe-De-Chine -A finely crinkled plain fabric with a smooth and lustrous surface tionally soft, light-weight and well-draping. effect is obtained by alternating two weft twisted in one direction with the next two twisted in the opposite direction. D DamaskA firm, lustrous reversible a satin or twill ground and somewhat appearance to brocade but more flat. fabric with similar in with and weave excepCrepe yarns yarns

Chaddar - An Indian term for cotton fabrics usually, in plain weave, twill, diamond or honeycomb weave, used as a bed sheet or body cover. Chiffon - A very light, sheer, open-mesh fabt ic made from hand twisted filament yarns in plain weave. Chikken ( or Chickan ) - An Indian term for any fabric ornamented with eyelet embroidery obtained by a mixture of punch work with button hole stitch using stem and flat stitches, also for producing conventional foliage and other effects. Chindies -Cut pieces of cloth, arising during the normal course of manufacture and packing, which are 23 cm or less in length. Chintz - A plain woven, brightly coloured, printed fabric with a glazed finish. The glazed finish may be a temporary friction-calendered type ' or permanent cellulose type. Chintz is generally used for drapperies and dresses. Chunri ( Chungri or Chungidi ) - An Indian term originally for cotton and silk sarees dyed by the knot tying method. Clearer Cloth A thick dense nap used for covering fabric with a short cleaning devices.

Coated Fabric - A textile fabric on which there has been formed in situ on one or both surfaces, a layer or layers, of firmly adherent coating material. Combined Fabric, Laminated Fabric - A material composed of two layers, at least one of which is textile fabric, adhering closely together by means of an added adhesive or by the adhesive properties of one or more of the component layers. 4

Dedsuti - An Indian term for matt fabric two threads working as one in warp direction single weft thread ( see also Oxford ).

IS:2384 Denim A warp-faced twill cloth made from yarn-dyed warp (usually blue or brown) and grey weft yarn. A typical cotton construction is 3/l twill weave and used for making apparel. Dupatta - An Indian fine scarf made from fibre, worn by ladies.

- 1987

term for a kind of open cotton, silk or man-made

Dhoti - An Indian term for a piece of cotton cloth, white, 3.5 m and above long with narrow coloured border and heading. Yarns used cover a wide range of counts but the construction is more or less square, generally used by men. Doria ( Doriah)-Plain weave cotton cloth grey, bleached or dyed, finished hard or soft with corded effects produced by cramming the warp ends. Dosuti-An Indian term for a matt fabric, where two warp threads are working in pairs and two weft threads are placed in the same shed. Double Cloth - A compound fabric in which a face cloth and a back cloth each with its own warp and weft are combined during weaving. It is used for coatings, blankets, upholstery cloth, beltings, etc. Dress Materials/Goods-A applied to a great variety intended for use as dresses. comprehensive term of fabrics of all kinds 3/l

Dussa-A woollen fabric having fine texture and coloured selvedges having a length of 5.5 metres and weighing 1 to I.5 kg and manufactured out of merino or pashmina wool. It is used as shawls in colder climates by men. Duster See Jharan. E Elastic Fabric - A textile fabric made from an elastomer either alone or in combination with other textile materials. Elastic Narrow Fabric - A narrow fabric incorporating natural or synthetic rubber threads with the object of permitting stretch warp-way and/or weft-way with virtually complete recovery on removal of the stretching force. NOTE- The definition EI. Leane See Aeolian.
excludes crepe.

Drill - A warp-faced twill fabric commonly or 2/l. twill weave ( see IS : 177-1977* ).

Drip Dry - A term applied to fabrics and garments which, on line drying after washing, shed the wrinkles and creases developed during use. Drugget - A coarse heavyweight material used as floor covering, woven with cotton, spun silk, sunhemp, or jute yarn in warp and woollen, sunhemp, spun silk or jute yarn in weft. Duchesse -A silk fabric made with a dense warp, very lustrous, smooth in hand and popular for women's wear. Duck - A closely woven, plain-weave cloth, usually made from cotton or linen yarns, similar to canvas. The terms canvas and duck have become almost generic and are usually qualified by terms that indicate the use of the cloth, for example, Royal Navy canvas, artists canvas, duck suiting, belting duck. Dungaree - A 3/l or 2/l twill fabric used for overalls; some cloths are piece-dyed; better qualities are made from dyed warp and weft yarns (see also Denim ). Dupion Silk - Silk thread reeled from double cocoons which are spun by two silkworms. The yarn is uneven and resembling irregular slub yarn. Durrie (or Durry) - An Indian term plain weave weft faced fabric generally floor covering. While most of the durries from cotton, some are made from coarse are often referred to as druggets. for coarse used as a are made wools and

Embossed Cloth/Crepe - A pebbly effect in imitation of a true crepe, produced by subjecting a cloth-commonly cotton print to the action of a suitably engraved roll in an embossing calender. The effect will not stand laundering in case of cotton fabrics. Emery Cloth - A plain or twill weave strong fabric coated on one side with powdered emery. Empress Gauze - A fine flower figured fabric originally woven with raw silk and linen. The raw silk is employed for the ground weave while the linen is used for the designs in satin weave. Epingline - A warp rib dress material made of silk warp and worsted weft. The cloth has a pebbled effect and feel similar to crepe. Etoile a) A lustrous satin cloth used as dress material. b) A star design made by weft in the meshes of the net foundation. F Fabric (Textile) - A manufactured assembly of fibres and/or yarns which has substantial surface area in relation to its thickness and sufficient mechanical strength to give the assembly inherent cohesion.
NOTE - Fabrics are most commonly woven or knitted, but the term includes assemblies produced by lace-making, tufting felting, net-making and the socalled non-woven processes.

*specification for cotton drills ( third recision ). 5

Felt - A textile matted condition it is composed.

characterised by the densely of most or all the fibres ofwhicb

IS:2364

-1987
Three broad classes of felt can be distinhaving a woven or knitted fabric

NOTE 1 guished as:

a) Materials structure;

the count range of 18~30s and square in construction. Gada is mostly sold in the grey state and used as apparel and household textile. Gadlapet - An Indian for making bedding. term given to cloth used

b) Materials relying for their construction upon the ability of the constituent fibres, such as wool and fur, to mat together to form a composite body with neither warp nor weft; and c) Needle-felts. NOTE 2 - The felts that clothe the press sections of paper-making machines conform to the above definition In the case ofthe so-called dryer felts, which clothe the drying sections, the term `felt' is a misnomer because the great majority of dryer felts have a woven structure and are not subjected to any wet-finishing.

Gauze-A light, open-mesh, loosely woven fabric in plain, leno or mock-leno weave. It finds use in bandages, sanitary goods, surgical dressings, etc. Georgette Crepe - A fine lightweight, open texture fabric, usually in a plain weave, made from crape yarns, usually two Z-twisted and two S-twisted yarns in both warp and weft. Ghicha-Ghicha - Fabric made out yarn both in warp and weft. of Ghicha

Felt (Floor Covering)-A riot-r-woven felt highly matted by heavy mulling generally embroidered and primarily used as a floor covering ( see also Namda ) . Fents - Cut normal course ing length: (a) 1 m or more, than 1 m. This pieces of cloth, arising during the of manufacture and packing, havranging from 45-90 cm for widths and (b) 65-135 cm for widths less excludes cut pieces of towels.

Gbicha-Noil -Fabric produced by using Ghicha and noil yarn mostly on handloom.
NOTE - Ghicha yarn is drawn by hand out of Tasar pierced cocoons by putting false twist with the help of palm and earthen pitcher.

NOTE - The term ramnants has been used as a synonym for fents. These are usually short lengths of fabric that accumulate in the marketing of textile material,

Gingbem - A light-to-medium-weight cotton fabric in plain weave made from dyed yarns and normally in checks. It is used as dress and curtain material. Grey Goods, fabrics as they that is, before treatment has Greige Goods -Woven or knitted leave the loom or knitting machine, any bleaching, dyeing or finishing been given to them.

Filter Cloth - A plain, leno, or twill weave fabric varying much in yarn count, texture and weight. It is used for filtering purposes in sugar, chemical, food, paint, petroleum and similar industries. There are various types of fabrics known by . this _. name and made from natural ok man-made nbres. Flannel - A fabric, originally all-wool and now" usually containing some wool of plain or twill weave with a soft handle and of 200 g/m2 or more. It may be slightly milled and raised. Flannelette - A fabric originally made from cotton warp and soft spun cotton weft, the fabric being subsequently raised on both sides to give an imitation of wool flannel. The weave may be plain or twill with two warp threads woven as one. Fur Fabric - A wide range of pile fabrics made to imitate various furs. In most cases, the pile is comparatively long and the fabric is subject to special finishing processes to imitate a particular fur. G Gaberdine - A firmly woven, clear-finished, warp-faced cloth in which the ends per centimetre considerably exceed the picks per centimetre thus producing the twill line at a steep angle. Usually woven in 2/l and 2/Z twills. It is largely used for raincoats, suitings and sportswear. Gada - A term commonly used in South India to denote cotton fabrics produced from yarns in 6

NOTE- In some countries, particularly in the North American continent, the term greige ( alternative spelling, griage ) is used.
wed

For woven goods, the term loomstate is frequently as an alternative. In the linen and lace trades. the term brown goods is used.

H Habutai - A soft, light but closely woven, Japanese silk fabric woven from raw silk filature yarn with little twist. Various types of weave are used according to the weight, which varies from 2.5 to 60 mommo. Honan - Silk pongee cloth made from wild silkworms raised in the Honan area in China. The fabric is noted for its uniformity of colour. Hosiery a) In the generic sense, all types of knitted fabrics and goods made up therefrom. b) In the restricted sense, knitted the feet and legs. I Impregnated Fabric - A fabric in which the interstices between the yarns are completely filled with the impregnating compound throughout the thickness of the material, as distinguished from sized or coated materials, where these interstices are not completely filled. coverings for

IS : 2364 - 1987 Industrial Fabrics - A variety of fabrics for non-apparel purposes in industry. used Katia See Jhuri- Jhuri. a handloom silk sari generally Bengal, with twisted degummed woven in plain weave with design and palm, brought out by throw

Insulating Tape - A narrow strip of fabric impregnated with a resin having a high dielectric constant, which is further coated with an adhesive on one side used for insulation. Tapes and polymer films coated with adhesive on one side can also be used. Coloured yarn are frequently used for the purpose of identifying specific electrical circuits. Inter-Lining Cloth - A fabric, woven or nonwoven, used as a layer between the outer cloth and inner lining of garments or between two layers of the same cloth, for example, in collars, to give stiffness, shape and/or warmth; better quality interlining cloth is often chemically treated and/or imp regnated with suitable polymers to obtain permanent stiffness.

Kerial - It is woven in West silk yarn. It is or plain border shuttle loom.

Khadi'( or Khaddar ) An Indian term for fabric woven on handlooms from handspun yarns of natural or man-made fibres or blend of two or more of such fibres. Khes -An Indian term for denoting plain, twill, striped, check or double cloth with woven all-over designs commonly used as bed sheets or bed covers in some parts of India. Kincob or Kinkhab See Brocade. Kora Cloth - Printed sarees, scarf and printed dress materials for ladies are made from kora cloth or fabric. Kora cloth is a silk fabric mainly of mulberry silk used both in warp and weft in undegummed and untwisted condition. Kora cloth is classihed in two varities: a) Single - Where the warp is of single and weft is of 2 ply, and b) L)ouble - Where the warp weft is of 3 ply or more. yarn

J
Jamdani - An Indian term used for superfine cloth produced on handlooms with characteristic designs. Jharan - An Indian term for handloom, coarse cloth made with or without borders on all sides and sometimes with check designs. It is used as duster cloth. Jhoot Silk Coating - It is a plain weave thick coating fabric produced on handlooms in West Bengal, 2-ply degummed jhoot warp and 2 or 3 ply jhoot weft is used. Jhoot yarn is produced from reeling silk waste. Jhuri- Jhuri -A plain-woven thick fabric produced on handloom mostly in Bihar out of reeled tussar silk waste hand-spun yarn. It is used for dress material, furnishing, etc. Jean - A 2/l warp-faced twill fabric used chiefly Typical cotton particulars were for overalls. 18s x 28s, 90 x 60.
NOTE - The term jcanette is sometimes used to describe the lighter-weights and these may be used for linings.

is of 2 ply and

Kosa - A light weight fabric handwoven from tussar yarn in warp and weft, and is generally printed. L Label Cloth-A heavily sized plain weave cotton fabric, used for tags and labels. Lace - A fine open work fabric with a ground of mesh or net on which patterns may be worked at the same time as the ground or applied later, and which is made of yarn, by looping, twisting or knitting, either by hand with a needle or bobbin, or by machinery; also a similar fabric made by crocheting, tatting, darning, embroidering, weaving or knitting. Lamp Wick - A narrow flat or tubular cotton fabric made with coarse soft spun yarns. It is used for wick in lamps, stoves, etc. Lappet Cloth - It is a lightweight muslin like cotton cloth with coarse extra warp figuring threads. The figuring ends transverse horizontally and are bound by means of weft at the reversing point. Each figure is made from one thread only. Lapping Cloth - A wide cushiony fabric used around the cylinder of cloth printing machine. Virgin wool is used in the warp and weft (seeBack Grey ). Lawn - A fine, plain-woven cloth of linen or cotton, made in various qualities to produce fine, sheer fabrics. Various finishes may be applied to a fabric of this type in which case the cloth is known 7

K Kamblee ( Camblee ) - An Indian term for fibrous coarse blanket made out of wool or a mixture of wool and other animal fibres, which are not milled. Kamdani ornamentation ( see Adhi ). Kashmere right-hand Kashmere An Indian term for fine fabric with made with gold and silver threads 2/l

Silk - Silk fabric made with twill weave that gives a soft finish. Worsted See Ll)hi.

Katan Cloth - A plain weave mulberry silk fabric in which double and twisted yarn is employed both in warp and weft.

IS:2364 - 1987
by the name organdie., of the finish used, for example, Lungi - An Indian term for fabrics of varying texture and quality used as loin cloth. It generally comes in dyed, printed or in checks. M Makhmal - An Indian term for cotton or rayon or silk velvet sometimes embroidered with gold threads. It is used as dress material, in canopies, etc. Malida-An Indian term for an all wool embroidered fabric of fine and soft construction made from pashmina wool and slightly felted, used for coating, jackets, etc. Malmal - An Indian term generally fine cotton fabric slightly heavier than applied muslin. to,

Leather Cloth - A cloth having a woven or knitted ground structure coated on one side with an oil or rubber compound, cellulose derivative, or s>;nthttic, polymer material, which is embossed to give a leather-like appearance, the other side sometimes being raised. In other cases, both sides of the fabric are coated and embossed. Lerno-A fabric in which warp threads are made to cross one another, between the picks, during leno weaving. The crossing of the warp threads may be a general feature of plain leno fabrics (as in morquisette and some gauzes and muslins) or may be used in combination with other weave ( as in some cellular fabrics ). Limbric - A light to medium-weight, closely woven, plain-weave, cotton cloth made from goodquality yarns. The wett is coarser and more closely spaced and has a lower twist factor than the warp thus giving a soft cloth in which the weft predominates on both sides. LinenDescriptive fibres. Descriptive yarns. Descripitive adornments, flax fibres. of yarns spun entirely of fabrics woven from flax from linen from from

Marble Silk - A light-weight silk dress material which has mottled appearance caused by the use of multicoloured weft yarns or by warp printing prior to weaving of the cloth to simulate the veining of marble. Marquisettee - A light, open-textured, finequality gauze, in which slipping is reduced by crossing the warp threads by means of the leno principle used as curtain and dress materials ( see Len0 ). Matka - Yarnspun by hand appliances out of mulberry pierced and unreelable cocoons after degumming. Matka-Matka Matty See Matka. Shirting.

of articles which, apart are made of yarns spun

some. usage of the term in nonNOTE . - Despite . . .. techmcal circles as a generic one, tor example, lmen department, baby linen, household linen, it is incorrect to apply it to individual articles that do not comply with the definition.

See Cellular

Lining Cloth-A separate entity used in making up garments and other articles, consisting of a single layer or multiple layers of material loosely held in place along one or more edges. It does not modify the properties of the main fabric with which it is associated but can impart certain performance characteristics to the articles as a whole. Lint -A plain-weave, with one raised fleecy poses, it is sterilized. highly absorbent material surface. For surgical pur-

Mazri - This is a coarse cotton fabric produced from a blend of grey and black dyed cottons. The fabric is usually woven in plain construction in a relatively open reed and pick. MeltonA heavy-weight fabric, all-wool, or with cotton warp and woollen weft, which is finished by heavy milling and cropping. The fibres in the cloth are tightly matted together by the milling process, and this gives the fabric a felted appearance, It is usually made in a 2/2 twill, especially if all-wool, but it is sometimes made in other weaves to facilitate milling and the covering of the cotton warp. Moire Fabric -A ribbed or corded fabric that has been subjected to heat and heavy ipressure by rollers after weaving so as to present a rippled a.ppearance. The effect arises from differences in reflection of the flattened and the unaffected parts. This type of fabric is also correctly described as `watered'. Moleskin Fabric - A thick and heavy cotton fabric, heavily wefted and with a smooth face, used chiefly for workmen's clothing. Only one warp is used, but the picks are arranged two face and one back It is slightly raised on the back and piece-dyed.

Lohi - An Indian term for a woollen fabric in twill weave with two picks in shed, made in Kashmir from wool of the local sheep. Its length is about 2 m and weighs from 600 to 900 g. It is used as shawl in colder climates by men. Long Cloth - A cotton fabric in plain weave of nearly balanced construction and somewhat heavier than cambric and lawn. Lump - A length of unfinished fabric longer than the customary piece length. usually

NOTE - This term appears to originate in its literal meaning as applied to the appearance of woven cloth when removed by hand from the loom.

8

IS : 2364 - 1987 Mosquito Netting - A mesh fabric, woven or knitted and used for protection from mosquitoes.

0
Organdie - A plain-weave, transluscent fabric light weight and with a permanent stiff finish. of

Muffler

-

A long narrow knitted or woven piece

of fabric normally made of wool, and worn as a protection for the neck or head against cold. Usually it is less than 1 m long and 30 cm wide. Muga Cloth - Fabric woven by using Muga silk both in warp and weft. 2'he Muga is a semidomesticated silkworm of Antherea Assamonsis species. Mulls - Plain cotton cloth of relatively open texture made from fine yarn and used for dress and other purposes. The cloth is soft finished and usually bleached. Muslin - A generic term for a light weight open cloth of plain or plain gauze weave. Normally muslins do not exceed b8 g/m*. Some of these cloths are used in the grey ( butter muslin and cheese cloth ). Whereas other ( dress muslin ) are bleached and dyed. N -A fine, light, Nainsook cloth with a soft finish. Namabali-An Indian and silk fabrics printed as outer covering on Hindus. Namavali plain-woven, cotton

Organzipe-Silk yarn used as warp fbr weaving, or for knirting. comprising single threads that are first twisted and then folded together two, three or four-fold, and then twisted in the direction opposite to that of the single twist. Ottoman -Ottoman is made out of silk, acetate, rayon and cotton. It has a larger and heavier diagonal rib. The original weave was a 12 harness 75" Jeft hand twill. Oxford - A woven fabric which has two warp ends working as one. Fancy-weave effects can be incorporated, and dyed yarn;, are used to form stripes ( see also Dedsuti ). P Pagree or Pagri - An Indian term for a head dress fabric in plain weave produced in white, dyed, checks or printed designs. Panama-A piece-dyed, lightweight and smoothfinished worsted dress fabric in plain weave made from hard twisted yarns, used for tropical suitings. Patka See Pagree or Pagri. Pershia-A lightweight piece dyed woollen fabric, usually woven from worsted yarns. It is generally used tor making ladies dresses. Pick-and-Pick a) Descripitive of a woven fabric in which the alternate picks are of different colours or yarns.
NOTE - If the weft is inserted by shuttles, this fabric must be produced on a pick-at-will loom.

term for handloom cotton with religious names worn ceremonial occasions by

See Namabali.

Namdas - An Indian term for handmade, felted rug made of all wool or blends of wool with cotton and man-made fibres, with embroidery work done with woollen yarn and used mainly as floor covering. Napkins - A piece of fabric, generally of cotton ( plain or patterned ) and used for wiping hands, etc. Narrow Fabric not exceeding 45 cm

b) Descripitive of a shuttle loom alternately from opposite sides.

that picks which

Pile Fabric -A fabric with a pile surface, may be cut or uncut ( loop ):

a)

a) Any woven fabric ( 18 in ) in width.

NOTE - The upper limit of width recognized by the Brussels Nomenclature is 30 cm ( 12 in ).

Warp Pile Fabric - A pile fabric with loop or cut pile formed by the warp yarn such as terry towels, warp plushes, velvets, etc ( set also Velvet ). Weft Pile Fabric - A fabric whose surface consists of warpway ( weft rib ) or weftway ( warp rib ) raised lines or ridges ( see Rib Fabric, Warp Rib and Weft Rib ) ( see also Velveteen ).

b)

b) Any braid

or trimming. in which of twist, may be knotting afirm strucinterlocking produced by or on a lace

Net -An open, mesh fabric ture is ensured by some form or knitting of the yarn. It gauze weaving, knitting or machine.

Newar - An Indian term originally for a kind of cotton tape usually woven in plain, twill or herring bone weave, used for cots. 9

Pique - A cloth showing rounded cords in the weft direction, with pronounced sunken lines between them, which are produced by the nature of the weave. The weave on the face of'the cords is plain. There are warp floats on the ,width of the cords on the back. Wadding picks are used to accentuate the prominence of the cords.

IS : 2364 - 1987
NOTE - For many years, the term pique has been applied on a much less expensive white cloth made in a light-weight Bedford cord weave.

charred area produced a test flame.

by the application

of

Plaid

Cl Shower/
A pattern consisting of coloured stripes or bars crossing each other at right angles. Plaid usually infers a multi-coloured pattern of comparatively large repeat, while the word check usual!y is applied to similar patterns on a smaller scale and of fewer colours. The rectangular garment or piece of cloth, usually worn by both sexes in Scotland in place of cloak. The woollen fabric from which plaids are made; now, any fabric with a cross-barred woven or printed design.

a)

Water Rep&ant - A fabric resistant to the absorption and penetration of water at the same time retaining a degree of permeability to air. Smozclder combustion withdrawal A fabric resistant to flameless ( glowing or smouldering) after or extinct`ion of a test flame.

4

e) Water

b) 4

- A fabric highly resistant to absorption and penetration of water possessing a low degree of permeability to air. fabric resistant action of moth larvae. to the degradative

f > Moth-A g) h)

Rot - A fabric resistant to the degradative action of bacteria in soil or water. Mildew -A fabric resistant fungel micro-organisms. R to the action of

Plaid Pack-An overcoating made on the double cloth principle. The face warp and weft are of dark, conservative colours; the back warp and weft are of lighter colours arranged to form a plaid pattern which will be on the inside of the garment and often takes the place of the lining. Plaid Flannels - Plain or twill woven flannels of cotton or wool made with colourful, yarn-dyed, plaid patterns. Finished with a soft nap and used for shirting, also for rubberizing, linings, etc. Plaitting Cloth - The felting of wool and for fibres for hat bodies, by means of heat, steam, moisture and pressure. Shellac is. sometimes used when stiff finishes are required. Plisse - A French term meaning pleated, that is, applied to fabrics with a puckered or crinkled effect ( see Soorsucker ). Pongee - Originally a Chinese silk cloth, tan or ecru in colour and very light in weight. Tussar silk is used and the fabric is woven on handlooms. The term `Pongee' is stated to have been derived from the Chinese word `Punki'which means woven at home on one's own handlooms. Poplin - A plain weave fabric with high warpsett, with characteristic series of fine ribs running across the cloth from selvedge to selvedge; generally used as shirting and dress goods. Preshrunk-A term applied to a textile material that has been shrunk to predetermined dimensions in order to minimize shrinkage in use. Puttee - An Indian term for a narrow woollen or cotton webbing with tapes attached to one or both ends and used as a kind of gaiter wrapped around the calf. Proofed - Descripitive of material that has been treated to render it resistant to a specified agency:

Rags - Cut pieces of cloth, arising during the normal course of manufacture and packing, having length: a) 23 cm but less than 45 cm where the width of the fabric is one metre or more; and b) more than 23 cm but less than 65 cm where the width of fabric is less than one metre. Repp-A fabric of plain-weave with ,a prominently weftway-rib effect, made from two warps and two wefts. Both the warp and the weft threads are arranged alternately coarse and fine. Coarse ends are raised above coarse picks and fine ends above fine picks, the rib effect being accentuated by different tensions in the warps.
NOTE - Less expensive fabrics are new often made with one warp and one weft but with the general ribbed effect.

Rib' Fabric - A fabric whose surface consists of warpway ( weft rib ) or weftway (warp rib) raised lines or ridges ( see Warp Rib and Weft Rib ).

4

Warp Rib - A fabric with ribs running in the direction of weft due to the weft being coarser than the warp or due to two or more picks being put in the same shed. In warp rib, there are usually three to four times as many ends as picks per unit length so that the weft is completely covered. Weft Rib - An effect produced by the use of a weft cover approximately twice the warp cover, the weft being made to bend around the warp, which remains substantially straight. This leads to the formation of rounded weft-faced cords running down the cloth. The prominence of the cords can be accentuated by: (a) using coarser warp than weft, and (b) weaving two or more ends at once.

b)

a) b)

Fire tion.

A fabric resistant

to

rapid combus-

Flame - A fabric resistant tion of a flame beyond

to the propagathe edges of the 10

IS : 2364 - 1987 Ripple Cloth - A fabric made from coarse woollen yarns. The face is raised and finished so .as to give the fabric a rippled or wavy appearance usually used for dressing gowns. -Rubberized Fabric/Cloth Cotton, silk or man-made fibre fabric whieh has been given a waterproof treatment to be used for definite purpose, such as table covering or sheeting. Generally one side of the cloth is coated. Much of the ,cloth is used in raincoat fabric. vague term indicating .Rug -A ing and blankets. both floor coverSeersucker - A fabric characterised by the presence of puckered and relatively flat sections, particularly in stripes, but also in checks.
NOTE The effect may be produced in a variety of ways, for example (a) by wea\ing from two beams, with the ground ends tensioned and the ends for the puckered stripes woven at lower tension and (b), by treatment of cellulosic fabrics, particularly linen and cotton, with caustic soda solution, which causes the treated parts to contract.

S
Sacking-A general term applied to double warp coarse fabrics used chiefly for the making of bags or sacks. They are often made of jute or hemp, in which case the threads per centimetre may vary from 2 to over 12, the yarns, which are coarse, being from 240 tex upwards. Saree ( or Sari ) - Cotton, silk, wool, man-made fibre or blends thereof, dress wear for ladies, popular in India. It is woven or knitted generally characterized by cross border ( Pallu ) in 4.5, 5.5, 6.5 and 8.5 m lengths. Gold and silver threads are also used for borders or for designs in the body of material. The sarees are distinguished by different according to the place of production, names designs, etc. Sateen-A fabric with a lustrous surface obtained by a sateen weave with lower warp sett and higher weft sett. heavy Sateen, Duck - A weft-face sateen weave, mainly used for suitings. fabric with

Selvedge, Woven; List; Listing - When used without qualification, this term refers to the longitudinal edges of a fabric that are formed during weaving, with the weft not only turning at the edges but also passing continuously across the width of the fabric from edge to edge.

NOTE - Selvedges are often up to 20 mm (3/4 in ) wide and may differ from the bodv of the fabric in construction orweave or both, or they'may be of exactly the same construction as the body of the fabric and be separated from it by yarns of different colour. Selvedges may contain fency effects or may have brand names of fabric descrintions woven into or minted on them but their main p;rpose 1s to give strength to the edges of the fabric so that it will behave satisfactorily in weave and subsequent process.
Serge-A clear finished suiting worsted fabric 212 twill weave and characterized by prominent diagonal lines on both sides. It is also made sometimes with a mixture of wool and man-made fibres. Serviette - A napkin made of cotton or linen with figured affect produced on dobby or jacquard. Shahtosh ( Shah-Tush ) - It is manufactured out of wool procured from animal called Ibex available on higher altitudes in Tibet. This is perhaps the lightest and warmest variety of woollen cloth. It is available in piece length and as well as in shawl dimensions. Shantung or rubbed tussah silk have been -A plain weave fabric with a slubbed texture originally made from yarns of in which the natural yarn irregularities retained.

Satin -A fabric with a lustrous surface, obtained by a satin weave with higher warp sett and lower weft sett. Satin Damask See Damask.

.Satin, Double Faced - A silk fabric employing two sets of warp yarn and one set of weft so as to present a satin face on both sides. Both warps interlace with the weft. Satranji - An Indian term for a large size floor .covering woven from coarse, dyed cotton yarn with or without designs ( see also Durry ). Scarf - A square, rectangular or a triangular piece of fabric made generally from silk or manmade fibres. It is generally worn by children, ladies and men on the neck or head. Seam Binding - A woven narrow fabric of fine texture. usually of cotton or rayon, in plain weave and with gross grain selvedges, and intended for use in covering or strengthening seams or edges in clothing. The widths range from 10 to 20 cm. Seconds - Textile products which, owing to some fault or imperfection, do not reach an agreed standard of quality.

Shawl - An Indian term for a usually oblong piece of fabric worn as a loose covering for the shoulders. Made in a wide range of sizes and from many different material. Sheer -A class of thin, light-weight, diaphanous fabrics, such as sheer crepe, sheer velvet, georgette chiffon, etc. Sheeting - A medium-weight, closely woven, plain weave or 2/2 twill weave cloth, made from yarns of medium linear density and used primarily for bed coverings. Condenser-spun weft may be used. Examples of high quality cotton sheetings are: a) Plain weave,
17s X

18s, 64 x 58 16s, 60 x 72

b) 2/2 twill weave, 11

28s x

IS : 2364 - I?87 Shirting - Any fabric used in the manufacture dyed or of shirts. May be plain or fancy woven, printed. Silesia - A lining cloth with a smooth face. Originally, a plain-weave cloth, but now chiefly in a 2/l or 212 twill weave. The cloth may be piecedyed, colour woven in stripes or printed. Sizing FlannelsFabrics used for wrapping the rollers of sizing machines. They are usually all wool fabrics, made from cross-bred wools. The fabrics usually have their face side raised to provide a spongy surface for absorbing the sizing solution and are finished in natural white or bleached condition. Sizing flannels may also be made with linen or synthetic fibre warps for increased strength and life. Spindle Tape -A woven narrow fabric of width normally not greater than 50 mm ( 2 in ) usually of high warp density, and designed for the transmission of power to pulleys of small diameter, for example, as on textile spinning and twisting machinery.
some sections of the textile industry, NOTE -In similar or somewhat similar tapes up to 100 mm ( 4 in ) in width are known as listings.

Tape width.

Narrow

fabric,

not

exceeding

10 cm in

Tapestry - A closely woven figured fabric of compound structure in which the pattern is developed by the use of coloured yarns in the warp or in the weft or both; a fine binder warp and weft. It is normally used for may be incorporated. upholstery.
NOTE - Originally, the term was applied to furnishing fabrics in which the design was produced by means. of coloured threads inserted by hands as required. Modern tauestrv fabrics are woven on iacquard looms, coloured yarns being used to produce thd de$red pattern; There are various cloth structures in whichTwo or more warps and wefts of different colours and in some cases of different materials may be used. The face of the cloth is usuallv of uniform texture. the design being developedin various colours, but in some tapestry fabric; figures of the brocade type formed by floating some of the threads, are also formdo.

Teensuti cotton fabric yarns.

An Indian term for a very strong in plain weave made from three-ply waterproofed

Tent Cloth - Dense cloth usually and used in the fabrication of tents. Ticking See Bed-Ticking. A fabric Tie and Dye ( Fabric) and Dye' method.

Square

Fabric

-

See Balanced

Cloth.

dyed by `Tie

Sujae'An Indian term for a bed cover in wide width with woven coloured designs of either diamond or honeycomb effect. Surgical Lint - A highly absorbent sterilized fabric in plain weave, with a raised fleecy surface used for surgical dressings. Susi-Fine plain weave cotton fabric with narrow coloured and white warp stripes. Warp and weft yarns are bleached. Suzni -See Sujae. T Tabby a) A soft silk fabric usually printed, plain woven and employing untwisted raw silk as warp and weft. b) A full width sample of tyre cord, usually 1 metre long with two tabs at its ends to enable its removal from the roll. Taffetta-A term applied to various cloths made with the plain weave, especially when made of rayon or silk. Tafettas are closely woven, smooth and crisp, and characterized by a fine cross rib. This rib is due to the construction as the ends considerably outnumber the picks. Tarry Fabric-A medium to heavy weight cotton fabric woven with loop piles on one or both sides. The loops may cover the entire surface of or form stripes, checks, designs, etc ( see Pile Fabric ).

is a handicraft method of NOTE - Tie and dye producing patterns on a fabric by gathering small portions of the cloth andtying them with threadsin compact knots by virtue of which the tie areas resist the penetration of the dye on subsequent dyeing and thus remain undyed, forming a pattern of small dots on the dyed ground, these dots may be white or coloured depending upon the original fabric.

Tissue - Fine fabric, made from silk or manmade fibre, richly coloured and ornamented and usually interwoven with gold and silver threads. It is used as dress material. Tosh - It is an unembroidered shawl of normal size 2 x 1 m manufactured out of fine variety of marino wool. It is an imitation of shahtosh [ see Shahtosh ( Shah-Tush ) 1. Towelling - A variety of coarse, absorbent fabrics (buck-a-back honeycomb, terry weave) woven in continuous length with or without heading, usually made of cotton or linen, used for making towels, bath robes. beach wear, etc. Tracing Cloth - A cloth specially prepared for use of draftsman in making ink tracings. The base fabric is a lawn from fine combed cotton yarn and free from slubs, thick and thin places or other imperfections. Filled on one side and given a firm, parchment like transparent finish. Tulle ( Lace ) - A fine, soft, .very lightweight, machine-,made net with hexagonal mesh, made from silk yarns. Tulle ( Woven )--A very fine net fabric plain weave from silk yarns. made in

12

IS : 2364 - 1987 Tussah `Tussore -

A fabric made from tussah silk. having ribbed effect

- A plain fabric .and used for coating. `Tweed -

120 cm finished width and is bleached or dyed printed in rich colours for the end use as saree.

A medium to heavyweight woollen fabric with a rough unfinished appearance but soft .and flexible in texture, in twill weave, used for outer wears. It is usually featured by soft, broken effects of colour attained by blends; also made in plain colours and in checks and plaids.
`Type W,riter Ribbon Fabric - A very fine quality fabric of plain weave, made from single combed yarns in very high thread counts and cut into strips and specially ,finished. Continuous filament nylon is also used as alternative to cotton. `Tyre Cord Warp Sheet - Fabrics which comprise the main carcass of pneumatic tyre. These have a planar textile structure consisting of tyre cord warp with widely spaced weft threads. The latter merely serve to hold the cords together for processing, U Umbrella Cloth - A closely woven fabric in -plain, twill, satin or combination weave used for covering umbrellas. The fabric may be of cotton, :silk, man-made fibres or blends of two or more such fibres which is usually given a waterproofing finish. Union Fabric - A fabric made with warp and .weft of different fibres. V Velvet - A warp pile fabric, having a cut pile, rich in appearance and soft to the touch.

b)

Full

Voile - Otherwise known as 2 x 2 voile, this employs two-fold yarns for warp and weft. Singles are usually fine combed. Cotton yarns spun with normal turns per metre whilst doubling is done in the same direction as singles but with a doubling twist factor of 6-O to 7.0. Usually the doubled yarn is singed. The ends/cm in reed is low and ranges between 52 to 64. Ends are usually drawn as one per dent in the reed and with 12 mm wide border. The fabric is bleached, dyed or printed for the end use as saree. or 2 x 1 Voile This class of fabric is similar to full-voile except in weft where instead of high twisted two-fold yarn, single yarns of equivalent count is employed.

4

Half-Voile

4

Fancy Voile-This

is a full voile dress material fabric woven in 90 cm finished width in a reed heavier than that employed for saree and ornamented with extra warp and/or weft forgings.
W

Warp

Pile Fabric

-

See under Pile Fabric.

Velveteen - A weft pile fabric similar to corduroy but having a surface uniformly covered with a short fall cut pile. The weft is soft spun, which when cut gives a soft smooth velvet pile. Voile - A light weight, approximately square, .open textured, plain weave cloth made from fine yarns of sufficient twist to produce round compact thread. Woven one thread per dent unless the number of ends per cm is so high as to render -this impossible.

- A term applied to fabric and garments which satisfactorily retain their original during wear and after wrinkle-free appearance laundering, with little or no ironing. Many of the synthetic fibres possess that property inherently; in case of the other fibres, suitable chemical finishes are employed to obtain this effect. Wash and Wear

non-spreading material.

Water-Repellent

- A state characterized by the of a globule of water on a textile

NOTE- The term is not normally applied to a water-repellent finish impervious to air, this is generally referred to as `waterproof'. Weft Pile Fabric See under Pile Fabric. Worsted - `A wide range of fabrics made from worsted yarns. In general, they are closely constructed of smooth, well-twisted yarns. Only a minimum of finishing is required and the fabrics are left with a clear surface. For this reason, fancy weaves and yarn-dyed materials are commonly used. Worsted include suiting fabrics, gaberdine, serge, tropical worsted, dress fabrics, crepes, etc. Woven Fabric-A

a) Semi Voile - This is a typical cotton voile fabric employing high twisted single yarns for warp and weft using counts 50s and finer spun with a twist factor of 5.5 to 6.0. The yarn is usually not singed and is woven in a reed 52 to 64 with similar picks. Because of the openness of the structure such fabrics are provided 12 mm wide selvedge. The cloth is usually woven in

of weaving.

fabric produced by the process

13

BUREAU
Headquarters: Manzk Bhavan, Telephones: 9 Bahadur

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Shah Zafar

Marg, NEW DELHI 113002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone

3310131, 3311375

Regional

Offices: 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Maniktola, 160036

Central: Manak Bhavan, NEW DELHI 110002

3310131, 3311375 362499 21843, 31641 412442, 412519, 412916

*Eastern: l/14 C I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern: Southern: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH C.I.T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 Andheri

TWestern: Manakalaya, BOMBAY 400093 Branch `Pushpak' Offices: Nurmohamed

E9 MIDC,

Marol,

( East )

6329295

Sheikh

Marg,

Khanpur,

AHMADABAD Road, Nagar,

380001

26348, 26349 384955, 384956 66716 53627

Peenya Industrial BANGA'LORE

Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur 560058 Road, T.T.

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada BHOPAL 462003

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane,

751002 GUWAHATI 781003

231083 63471, 69832 216876, 218292 62305

5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Patliputra Industrial Nagar, KANPUR Estate, PATNA 208005 800013 TRIVANDRUM 695035

T C. No. 14/1421, University Inspection Offices (With

P.O., Palayam, Sale Point ):

16637

Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205A West High Court Road, Shankar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers Pune 411005 ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji

Nagar Nagar,

25171 52435

*Sales Office in Calcutta Is Elf 5 Chowringhee
Calcutta @ales 700072 is at Novelty Ofnce in Bombay

Approach, Grant

P. 0. Princep Road, Bombay

Street, 400097
Printed at New lndla Wntlng

276800 896528
Press. Khuria, India

Chambers,

