NAT Aled IS 17076 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


UA 15 seq — feet à mafia 
Blt Alot Sst St Set h BUT À 
Ponta Aerator Ue Teresa AT 
anra — farts 


M15 Fuel — Admixture of Anhydrous 
Methanol and Motor Gasoline 
as Fuel for Spark Ignited 
Engines — Specification 


ICS 75.160.20 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH APT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2019 Price Group 8 


Petroleum and Their Related Products of Synthesis or Biological Origin Sectional Committee, PCD 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Petroleum and 
Their Related Products of Synthesis or Biological Origin Sectional Committee was approved by the Petroleum, 
Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


Methanol is considered as an alternative fuel source that offers environmental friendly characteristics associated 
with its use. ASTM D 1152 and IMPCA (International Methanol Producers and Consumers Association) provides 
specification of Methyl alcohol for wider application and not limited to Automotive. The blends may be produced 
by admixture of this anhydrous methanol with automobile fuel such as motor gasoline (IS 2796). 


However, it is observed that use of methanol blend in existing motor gasoline engines will require modification in 
engine, fuel system components and engine calibration, to match the performance and emissions of the vehicle. 
The term M15 fuel pertains to an admixture of anhydrous methanol ( IS 17075 : 2018), at 15 percent by volume 
and methanol free motor gasoline (IS 2796) at 85 percent volume which can be used as fuel in the vehicles with 
spark ignition engine or industrial engines which may require modifications as mentioned above. 


It has to be ensured that vehicles running on M15 fuel have no adverse effects on fuel system materials, emission, 
on-board diagnostics (OBD) systems, or drivability. Original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) need to identify 
such vehicles with proper identifications to indicate M15 capability. The engine control unit adjusts engine fueling 
relating to the oxygen content and reduced energy content of M15 fuel in order to maintain the proper air/fuel 
ratio under the various engine operating loads and conditions. The vaporization characteristics of M15 fuel tend 
to be different from normal petrol and therefore the engine fueling strategies under engine cold-start and warm-up 
conditions need to be addressed for this fuel. If M15 fuel has to be used in a conventional vehicle, fuel system 
materials and components may be affected over a time and may lead to concerns like material compatibility, 
drivability, performance and emissions. Since this fuel has to be used in spark ignition engine vehicles with 
relevant modification, the fuel properties of M15 should be very similar to motor gasoline. 


Due to hygroscopic characteristics of methanol, special care should be taken to keep storage and handling system 
as dry as possible. Further, direct contact of this fuel through hand or mouth may be potentially lethal. 


While preparing this specification for M15 fuel, the Committee deliberated on the properties of M15 fuel and 
observed properties like Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP), Vapor Lock Index (VLI), research octane number and motor 
octane number are important. Since, anhydrous methanol has higher octane rating, the M15 fuel shall give user 
the benefit of improved octane, by about 4-5 units over base motor gasoline. 


Since, this specification of M15 fuel being formulated for the first time, all test procedures followed in Annexes 
of IS 2796, are to be considered. 


The possible contaminants in M 15 fuel, mainly originating from Methanol are being controlled in IS 17075 
‘Anhydrous methanol for use as a blending component in fuels — Specification’. 


The composition of the Panel for Methanol Fuels, PCD3:1/P-1 and Committee responsible for the formulation of 
this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rule for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Indian Standard 


M15 FUEL — ADMIXTURE OF ANHYDROUS 
METHANOL AND MOTOR GASOLINE AS FUEL 
FOR SPARK IGNITED ENGINES — 

SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes requirements, methods of 
sampling and test for M15 fuel, an admixture of 
anhydrous methanol meeting IS 17075 at 15 percent 
by volume and methanol free motor gasoline meeting 
IS 2796 at 85 percent volume, for use in vehicles 
equipped with spark ignition engines, stationary and 
industrial engines specially designed for using such fuel. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text constitute the provisions 
of the standards. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject 
to revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
517: 1986 Specification for methanol 
(methyl alcohol) (second 
revision) 


1447 (Part 1) Petroleum and its products — 


: 2000 Methods of sampling: Part 1 
Manual sampling 
1448 Methods of test for petroleum 


and its products: 


[P : 15] : 2016/ 
ISO 2160 


Petroleum products — 
Corrosiveness to copper strip 
test (third revision) 


IS No. 


[P : 27] : 2013/ 
ISO 5164 : 2005 


[P : 28] : 2008 / 
ISO 7536 : 1994 


[P : 29] : 2016/ 
ISO 6246 : 1995 


[P : 39] : 2012/ 
ISO 3007 : 1999 
2796 : 2017 


17021 : 2018 


17075 : 2018 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Title 


Determination of knock 
characteristics of motor fuels — 
Research method 


Determination of oxidation 
stability of motor gasoline — 


Induction period method 
(fourth revision) 
Petroleum products — 


Gum content of light and 
middle distillate fuels — Jet 


evaporation method (third 
revision) 
Determination of vapour 


pressure reid method 


Motor gasoline — Specification 
(sixth revision) 


E 20 fuel — Admixture of 
anhydrous ethanol andmotor 
gasoline — Specification 


Anhydrous methanol foruse as a 
blending component in fuels — 
Specification 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Methanol 


[P : 16] : 2014/ 
ISO 3675 : 1998 


[P : 18]: 1991 


[P : 23] : 2004/ 
ISO 3837 : 1993 


[P : 26] : 2013/ 
ISO 5163 : 2005 


Laboratory determination of 
density — Hydrometer method 
Distillation of 
products 


petroleum 


Determination of hydrocarbon 
types — Fluorescent indicator 
adsorption method 


Determination of knock 
characteristics of motor and 
aviation fuels — Motor method 


Methanol is essentially anhydrous methyl alcohol, 
which is meant for blending with motor gasoline, can 
be used as fuel and shall confirm to the requirement of 
17075. 


3.2 Motor Gasoline 


Motor gasoline is fined petroleum distillate free 
from un-dissolved water, foreign matters and visible 
impurities and shall confirm to the requirement of 
IS 2796. 


IS 17076 : 2019 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Description 


M15 fuel is an admixture of 15 percent (by volume) of 
anhydrous methanol (3.1) with 85 percent (by volume) 
of methanol free motor gasoline fuel (3.2). 


4.2 The material shall also comply with the requirements 
given in Table 1, when tested according to appropriate 
methods prescribed under ‘P’ series of IS 1448 or other 
test methods, reference to which is given in col 4 of the 
Table 1 shall be used. 


4.3 Methanol Content 


The methanol content of the material shall be subject to 
the provisions of Table 1, SI No. (xx). M15 automotive 
fuel may need to be added with stabilizing agents such 
as higher alcohols to have consistent fuel mixture. 
Suitable additives (4.3.1 to 4.3.3) in appropriate 
concentration are permitted be added to improve the 
stability of M15. 


4.3.1Corrosion Inhibitors 


Suitable doses of corrosion inhibitors shall be added to 
methanol to prevent corrosion, due to its hygroscopic 
nature. It is observed usage of triazole/amine based 
corrosion inhibitors provide required protection. 


NOTE — ASTM D665 (modified)/NACE TM0172/SAE J1747 
and SAE 1748 may be considered for testing corrosion protection. 


4.3.2 Antioxidants 


Suitable antioxidants are generally added to motor 
gasoline and may be added to M15 fuel in sufficient 
concentration, if required, to meet the requirements for 
oxidation stability as specified in Table 1, S1 No. (xvii). 
Some antioxidants of proven chemistry used in motor 
gasoline are listed below for reference: 
a) N, N’—disecondary — butyl-paraphenylene diamine; 
b) 2,4 — dimethyl-6-tertiary butyl phenol; 
c) 4—methyl-2, 6-ditertiary-butyl phenol; 
d) N, N’— di-isopropyl-paraphenylene diamine; 
e) N — Normal butyl-p-aminophenol; and 
f) Mixture of N,N- disecondary-butyl- 
paraphenylene diamine and disalicylidene-N- 
methyl dipropylene triamine. 


4.3.3 Metal Deactivators 


Suitable metal deactivators are already added to motor 
gasoline and shall be added in sufficient concentration 
to M15 fuel if required, to meet the corrosion test 
requirements. Some metal deactivators of proven 
chemistry used in motor gasoline are listed below: 


a) N, N’— disalicylidene-propylene-diamine; 
b) N, N'- disalicylidene-ethylene diamine; and 


c) N, N- disalicylidene-methylamine-dipropylene- 
triamine. 


4.3.4 Dyes 


Purple colour dye shall be added at 4 to 6 mg/kg 
concentration so as to satisfy the requirements for 
colour mentioned in Table 1, SI No. (ii). 


4.3.5 Multi Functional Additives 


Motor gasoline multifunctional additives (MFA), 
other than those mentioned in 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 such as 
detergent/dispersant, dehazer, defoamant additives 
may be added in appropriate concentration to 
improve the quality of the fuel. Additives containing 
metals such as Iron, manganese (MMT) shall not be 
used. 


4.4 Organic Oxygenates 


4.4.1 Permitted Components 


The following components shall be used either 
singly or as mixtures as blending components or as 
stabilizing agents to prevent phase separation of the 
M15 fuel: 


Alcohols: Iso-propyl alcohol, iso-butyl alcohol, etc. 
with final boiling point not exceeding 210°C and 
containing three or four carbon atoms. 


4.4.2 Content 


When tested, the content of the individual components 
listed in Table 1 shall comply with the limiting 
requirements as given against the respective 
components. 

In M15 fuel, the individual components defined 
in 4.4.1 or their mixtures are permitted but the total 
oxygen content shall not exceed 10 percent by mass 
and the content of any of the individual components 
given at SI No. (xxi) of Table 1 shall not exceed the 
corresponding limiting requirements. 


4.4.3 Methanol shall comply with the requirements 
for general purposes prescribed for anhydrous methyl 
alcohol for use in fuel. 


4.5 Phosphorous 


In order to protect automotive catalyst system, 
phosphorous containing additive shall not be used 
in M15 fuel and no external addition of other metal 
additives including lead is permitted. 


5 GRADES 


There shall be two octane grades each (RON 95 and 98) 
of BS IV and BS VI categories in M15 fuel as given 
below: 

a) 15 percent MBMG BS IV Regular (RON 95); 

b) 15 percent MBMG BS IV Premium (RON 98); 


c) 15 percent MBMG BS VI Regular (RON 95); 
and 


d) 15 percent MBMG BS VI Premium (RON 98). 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Table 1 Requirement for 15 Percent Methanol Blended Motor Gasoline M15 Fuel 
( Clause 4.1, 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 ) 


SI Characteristics Requirements Ref to Test Method as Part 
No. BS IV BS VI of IS 1448/ASTM/ISO/EN 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 


i) Appearance Clear and bright, free from un- Clear and bright, free from un- Visual 
dissolved water, foreign matter dissolved water, foreign matter 


and other visual impurites and other visual impurites 


ii) Colour Purple” Purple” Visual inspection 

iii) Density at 15°C, kg/m* 720 - 775 720 - 775 [P : 16]?/ ISO 12185/ ASTM 
D 4052 / D 1298/ IP 160 

iv) Distillation [P : 18] °/ISO 3405/ASTM 


D 86 


10 - 55 (Summer) 
10 - 60 (other months) 


a) Percent evaporated at 70°C 
(E70°C), percent v/v 


10 - 55 (Summer) 
10 - 60 (other months) 


b) Percent evaporated at 100°C 45 - 78 45 - 78 
(E100°C), percent v/v 
c) Percent evaporated at 150°C 85 85 
(E150°C), percent v/v, Min 
d) Final boiling point, °C, Max 210 210 
e) Residue, percent by v/v, 2.0 2.0 
Max 
v) Research Octane Number [P : 27]?/ ASTM D 2699 
(RON), Min 
Regular grade 95 95 
Premium high octane grade 98 98 
vi) Motor Octane Number [P : 26]?/ASTM D 2700] 
(MON), Min 
Regular grade 83 83 
Premium high octane grade 86 86 
vii) Gum content (solvent washed), 40 40 [P : 29]/ ASTM D 381” 
g/m>, Max 
viii) Total sulphur, mg/kg, Max 50 10 ASTM D 2622 / D 5453”? / D 
3120 / D 7039 / D 7220 
ix) Lead content (as Pb), mg / kg, 5 5 IP 224/ASTM D 5059 / 
Max ASTM D 3237 
x) Reid vapour pressure at 38°C, 70 70 ASTM D 5191 (Dry method) 
kPa, Max, / EN 13016/ Annex A” (Dry 
method) (see Note 2) 
xi) Vapour lock index (VLI), Max Calculation 
a) Summer” 1050 1050 Caos et), 
b) Other months 1100 1100 
xii) Benzene content, percent by 1 1 ASTM D 5580 / D 6277 / 
v/v, Max D6839/ ISO 22854” 
xiii) Copper strip corrosion (3 h at Class 1 Class 1 [P : 15] ASO 2160 / D130 
50°C), Max 
xiv) Water tolerance of gasoline- Annex B 
alcohol blends, temperature for 
phase separation, °C, Max: 
a) Winter” -10 -10 
b) Other months 10 10 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Table 1 (Continued) 


SI Characteristics Requirements Ref to Test Method as Part 
No. BS IV BS VI of IS 1448/ASTM/ISO/EN 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

xv) Engine intake system Report- MFA Used Report- MFA Used (see Note 5) 
cleanliness 
xvi) Olefin content, percent by v/v, 18 18 [P : 23P/AISO 3837/ASTM 
Max D 1319/D 6730 / D6839 
xvii) Oxidation stability, minutes, 360 360 [P : 28}/ISO 7536/ASTM 
Min D 525/IP 40 
xviii) Aromatic content, percent by 35 35 [P : 23]/ISO 3837/ASTM D 
viv, Max 1319/D 6730/D 5580 / D6839 
xix) Oxygen content,” percent by 10 10 EN 1601/EN 13132/ ISO 
m/m, Max 22854” / ASTM D 6839 
xx) Methanol content, percent, 15 15 ASTM D 6839 / IP 566 / EN 
vh, D 13132 / EN 1601 
xxi) Co-Solvent (C3, C4 alcohols) Report!” Report! ASTM D 4815 / D 6839 ® 
content percent by v/v"), Max 
xxii) Motor gasoline content, 100 — (Methanol + Co- 100 — (Methanol + Co- By Calculation 
percent, v/v Solvents Content) Solvents Content) 
xxiii) Water content, mg / kg, Max 500 500 ASTM D6304 / ASTM 
E1064 
NOTES 


1 The colour of the M15 fuel was decided by oil manufacturers after due testing, and no change was observed in the properties of 
M 15 fuel as defined in the Table 1. 


2 The dry vapour test method given in Annex A shall be followed. RVP limit mentioned is specified based on the available data on fuel 
testing, limitation and constraints of vehicle emission, performance and drive ability. The studies with higher RVP fuel are in progress. 
The outcome of this study will be reviewed for revision, if any. 
3 Summer shall be considered as the period from April to July. 


4 In winter (November to February), it is expected the temperature may go up to -10°C in the northern / hilly region. Phase separation 
shall not take place till -10°C with the recommended co-solvents dosage of 3 to 5 percent. Further, it is observed during laboratory 
testing, phase separation does not take place till -20°C, up to 500 mg/ kg moisture in M15 fuel and with the above co-solvents in 
recommended dosage. 


5 Use of multifunctional additives (MFA) is a requirement for assuring adequate fuel system and intake system cleanliness performance 
in engines. Refiners/Marketers of motor gasoline have to ensure the MFA has proper credentials from internationally accepted test 


laboratories/authorities, of having passed a minimum of one of the tests in each of the two categories of deposit control performance 
indicated below: 


Deposit Type Test Test Equipment Test Method Pass Limit 
No. (Average IVD (Weight) 
a) Intake Valve Deposit (IVD) 1 BMW IVD Test ASTM D 5500-16 100 mg/valve, Max 
2 MB M102E IVD CEC F-05-A-93 50 mg/valve, Max 
3 FORD 2.3 Lite IVD ASTM D 6201 90 mg/valve, Max 
4 MB MI111-IVD Test CEC F-20-A-98 50 mg/valve, Max 
Limit (percent injector flow 
loss) 
Pass limit (percent injector 
flow loss) 
b) Port Fuel InjectorDeposit (PFD 1 Chrysler PFI Test ASTM D 5598-01 5, Max 
(2012) 
2 PFI Deposit Rig ASTM D 6421 10 percent, Max 


Other performance tests may be added as and when they reach qualified/standard test status. 


MFAs which are certified against National Generic Certification Option as per US EPA-97 final Rule (40 CFR Part 80 Certification 
Standards for Deposit Control Additives) can also be used by fuel refiners/Marketers at treatment levels not less than the Lower Additives 
Concentration (LAC) limits, as these MFAs meet the criteria for acceptance mentioned above. 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


6 Aromatic content relaxation and time frame, if any, for fuel processed from Assam Crude, may be guided by the notifications issued 
by Government of India, from time to time. 

7 Blending of Methanol shall be carried out at supply point of Oil Marketing Company’s (OMC) Depot / Terminal as per the directives 
of MoP&NG from time to time. OMCs shall ensure homogeneous blending of Methanol in motor gasoline in the range 14 to 15 percent 
for M15 fuel. 


8 In the M15 fuel, 5 percent, Max, permissible soluble stabilizers /stabilizing agents / co-solvents may be added. The oxygen content in 


M15 shall be maximum 10 percent m/m. 
9 In case of dispute, this method shall be the referee method. 


10 The name and percentage of the co solvent shall be reported. 


11 No external addition of silicon, chlorine based materials and metallic additives are allowed. 


12 All the test methods referred to in this standard include a precision statement. The Interpretation of results shall be based on test 


method & precision data of test method whenever applicable. In case of dispute the procedure described in ISO 4259 shall be used. 


6 PACKING AND MARKING 


6.1 Packing 


The Material shall be packed as prescribed and supplied 
in suitable containers as per shipping regulations laid 
down by PESO (Petroleum and Explosives Safety 
Organization), India time to time. 


6.2 Marking 


6.2.1 Each container shall be marked with the following 
information: 


a) Name and Grade of the material; 

b) Indications of the source of manufacturer, Symbol 
or trade mark, if any; 

c) Volume of contents, in liter; 

d) Year of manufacturing and packing; and 

e) Any other statutory requirement. 


6.2.2 Pump Marking and Labelling 


Information to be marked on dispensing pumps used 
for delivering M15 fuel to retail customer. It shall be 
clearly visible, easily legible and displayed at any point 
where M15 fuel is made available to the consumers. To 
help the customer to identify M15 fuel in retail outlets 
the labelling shall be done as below: 


Grade/ Category To be labeled as 

15 percent MBMG BS IV BS IV MG 95 
Regular (RON 95) (M15) 

15 percent MBMG BS IV BS IV MG 98 
Premium (RON 98) (M15) 

15 percent MBMG BS VI BS VI MG 95 
Regular (RON 95) (M15) 

15 percent MBMG BS VI BS VI MG 98 
Premium (RON 98) (M15) 


NOTE — It is recommended that dispensing pumps may 
include a clearly visible warning of health hazard from this 
fuel in a situation of direct contact with human body parts. 


6.2.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The container shall be also marked with standard mark. 


6.2.3.1 The use of standard mark is governed by the 
provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and 
the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details 
of the conditions under which the licence for use of 
the Standard Mark may be granted to manufactures or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


7 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of the material shall be drawn 
as prescribed in IS 1447 (Part 1). 


8 QUALITY ASSURANCE 


8.1 M15 fuel quality assurance is based on batch 
certification of base gasoline during production at 
refineries and quality of methanol used for blending. 
It is essential that refineries ensure batches are 
homogeneous, test results are representative of product 
supplied. Similarly blending terminals (at which the 
Methanol blending happen) ensure the methanol meets 
the required specification and results are representative 
of the product used for blending. 


8.2 At the point of manufacturing or blending, the 
refinery/terminal shall issue a quality certificate 
certifying the batch of motor gasoline fuel complies 
with all the requirements of this standard. 


8.3 The minimum requirements of information to be 
shown on the fuel’s batch quality certificate at point of 
manufacture are us under: 


a) Specification name / number and any amendment 
number if any; 


b) Name and address of the testing laboratory; 
c) Batch number or unique identification number; 


d) Properties tested including specification limit, test 
method and result of test; 


e) Identification of the signatory certifying the 
report; 


f) Date of certification; and 
g) Quantity certified. 


IS 17076 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
[ Table 1, SI No (x) | 


TEST METHOD FOR VAPOUR PRESSURE OF 
GASOLINE-ALCOHOLBLEND (DRY METHOD) 


A-1 GENERAL 


This test method covers the determination of the 

absolute vapour pressure of gasoline and gasoline- 

oxygenate blends. 
NOTE — Because the external atmospheric pressure is 
counteracted by the atmospheric pressure initially present in 
the air chamber, the ‘vapour pressure’ is an absolute pressure at 
38°C in kilopascals. This vapour pressure differs from the true 
pressure of the sample due to some small sample vaporization 
and the presence of air in the confined space. 


A-2 SUMMARY OF TEST METHOD 


The fuel chamber of the vapour pressure apparatus 
is filled with the chilled sample and connected to the 
air chamber at 38°C. The apparatus is immersed in a 
bath at 38°C and is shaken periodically until a constant 
pressure is observed on the gauge attached to the 
apparatus. The gauge reading, suitably corrected, is 
reported as the vapour pressure. 


A-3 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


The method mentioned in IS 1448 [P : 39] cannot be 
used to determine the vapour pressure of gasoline 
oxygenate blends which contain water-extractable 
oxygenates because the fuel sample comes into contact 
with water. This test method is a modification of 
IS 1448 [P : 39] where contact with water has been 
eliminated. 


A-4 APPARATUS 

The construction of the required apparatus is described 
in 3 of IS 1448 [P : 39]. 

A-5 REAGENTS 


A-5.1 Purity of Reagents 


Use reagent grade chemicals in all tests. Unless 
otherwise indicated, it is intended that all reagents 
conform to the relevant Indian Standard, where such 
specifications are available. Other grades may be 
used, provided it is first ascertained that the reagent 
is of sufficiently high purity to permit its use without 
lessening the accuracy of the determination. 


A-5.2 Acetone 


WARNING — Extremely flammable. Irritating to skin, 
eyes and mucous membranes. 


A-5.3 Naphtha 


NOTE — Naphtha [Tag closed cup flash point below -6°C] 


WARNING — Extremely flammable. Harmful if 
inhaled. Skin irritant on repeated contact. Aspiration 
hazard. 


A-6 HANDLING OF SAMPLES 


A-6.1 The extreme sensitivity of vapour pressure 
measurements to losses through evaporation and the 
resulting changes in composition is such as to require 
the utmost precaution and the most meticulous care 
in the handling of samples. The provisions of this 
section apply to all samples for vapour pressure 
determinations. 


A-6.2 Sample in accordance with IS 1447 (Part 1), 
except that water displacement must not be used. 


A-6.3 Sample Container Size 


The size of the sample container from which the vapour 
pressure sample is taken as 1 litre. It will be 70 to 
80 percent filled with the sample. 


A-6.4 Precautions 


A-6.4.1 Determine vapour pressure as the first test run 
on a sample. Do not withdraw more than one sample 
from the sample container for this test. 


A-6.4.2 Protect samples from excessive heat prior to 
testing. 


A-6.4.3 Do not test samples in leaky containers. Discard 
them and obtain new samples. 


A-6.4.4 Discard samples that have separated into two 
phases and obtain new samples (see Note 2 under 
A-8.3). 


A-6.5 Sample Handling Temperature 


In all case, cool the sample container and contents 
to 0 to 1°C before the container is opened. To ensure 
sufficient time to reach this temperature, directly 
measure the temperature of a similar liquid in a like 
container placed in the cooling bath at the same time 
as the sample. 


A-7 PREPARATION FOR TEST 


A-7.1 Verification of Sample Container Filling 


With the sample at a temperature of 0 to 1°C, take 
the container from the cooling bath, wipe dry with an 


absorbent material, unseal it, and examine its ullage. 
The sample content, as determined by use of a suitable 
gauge, must be equal to 70 to 80 percent of the container 
capacity. 


A-7.1.1 Discard the sample if its volume is less than 
70 percent of the container capacity. 


A-7.1.2 If the container is more than 80 percent 
full, pour out enough sample to bring the container 
contents within the 70 to 80 percent range. Under no 
circumstances, may any sample poured out, be returned 
to the container. 


A-7.2 Air Saturation of Sample in Sample 
Container 


A-7.2.1 With the sample again at a temperature of 0 to 
1°C take the container from the cooling bath, wipe it 
dry with an absorbent material, unseal it momentarily, 
taking care to prevent water entry, reseal it, and shake 
it vigorously. Return it to the bath for a minimum of 
2 min. 


A-7.2.2 Repeat A-7.2.1 twice more. Return the sample 
to the bath and keep it there until the beginning of the 
procedure (A-8). 


A-7.3 Preparation of Fuel Chamber 


Observe the apparatus preparation procedure of A-8.5, 
then store the stoppered fuel chamber and the sample 
transfer connection in a refrigerator or ice-water bath 
for a sufficient time to allow the chamber and the 
connection to reach a temperature of 0 to 1°C. If and 
ice-water bath is used, keep the chamber upright and 


(A) 
SAMPLE CONTAINER 
PRIOR TO TRANSFER 
OF SAMPLE LIQUID DELIVERY 
TUBE 


IS 17076 : 2019 


not immersed over the top of the coupling threads. 
The transfer connection is inserted over the top of the 
coupling threads. The transfer connection is inserted 
into a plastic bag to keep it completely dry during 
cooling. 


A-7.4 Preparation of Air Chamber 


Observe the apparatus preparation procedure of A-8.5. 
Connect the gauge to the air chamber and close the 
lower opening securely with a dry No.6 rubber stopper. 
Make sure the stopper is inserted far enough to securely 
close the vent hole in the air chamber connection. 
Immerse the air chamber to at least 25 mm above its 
top in the water bath until the fuel chamber has been 
filled with the sample as described in A-8.1. 


A-8 PROCEDURE 


A-8.1 Sample Transfer 


With everything in readings, remove the chilled sample 
container from the bath, dry it with absorbent material, 
uncap it, and dry and insert the chilled transfer apparatus 
(see Fig.1). Quickly place the chilled fuel chamber, in 
an inverted position, over the sample delivery tube of 
the transfer apparatus. Invert the entire system rapidly 
so that the fuel chamber is upright, with the end of the 
delivery tube touching the bottom of the fuel chamber. 
Fill the fuel chamber to the overflowing. Withdraw the 
delivery tube from the fuel chamber while allowing 
the sample to continue flowing up to the moment of 
complete withdrawal. 


A-8.1.1 Caution 


Make provision for suitable collection and disposal of 
the overflowing fuel to avoid fire hazard. 


(C) (D) 
GASOLINE CHAMBER POSITION OF SYSTEM 
PLACED OVER LIQUID FOR SAMPLE TRANSFER 
DELIVERY TUBE 


Fic. 1 SIMPLIFIED SKETCHES OUTLINING MELTHOD OF TRANSFERING SAMPLES 
TO GASOLINE CHAMBER FROM OPEN-TYPE CONTAINERS 


IS 17076 : 2019 


A-8.2 Assembly of Apparatus 


Immediately remove the air chamber from the 
water bath and immediately dry the exterior of the 
chamber with absorbent material giving particular 
care to the connection between the air chamber and 
the fuel chamber. Remove the stopper after drying 
and immediately couple the two chambers. Not more 
than 10 s shall be consumed in coupling the two 
chambers. 

NOTE — When the air chamber is removed from the water 

bath is dried, and the stopper is removed, connect it to the fuel 

chamber without undue movements through the air, which 


could promote exchange of room temperature air with the 
38°C air in the chamber. 


A-8.3 Introduction of Apparatus into Bath 


Turn the assembled vapour pressure apparatus upside 
down to allow the sample in the fuel chamber to run 
into the air chamber. With the apparatus still inverted, 
shake it vigorously eight times in a direction parallel 
to the length of the apparatus. With the gauge end 
up, immerse the assembled apparatus in the bath, 
maintained at 38 + 0.1°C in an inclined position so that 
the connection of the fuel and air chambers is below the 
water level and may be carefully examined for leaks 
25 mm above the top of the air chamber. Observe the 
apparatus for leakage throughout the test. Discard the 
test at any time a leak is detected. 


NOTES: 


1 Liquid leaks are more difficult to detect than vapour leaks, 
and because the coupling between the chambers is normally in 
the liquid section of the apparatus give the coupling particular 
attention. 


2 After the apparatus has been immersed in the bath check 
the remaining sample for phase separation. If the sample is 
contained in a glass container, this observation can be made 
prior to sample transfer (see A-8.1). If the sample is contained 
in a non-transparent container, shake the sample vigorously 
for 5 s and then immediately pour a portion of the remaining 
sample into a clear glass container. Immediately after shaking 
this sample again for 5 s, observe the sample for phase 
separation. If this sample is not clear and bright, and free of a 
second phase, discard the test and the sample. 


A-8.4 Measurement of Vapour Pressure 


After the assembled vapour pressure apparatus has been 
immersed in the bath for at least 5 min, tap the pressure 
gauge lightly and observe the reading. Withdraw the 
apparatus from the bath and repeat A-8.3. 


At intervals of not less than 2 min, perform A-8.3 until 
a total of not less than five shakings and gauge readings 
have been made continue thereafter, if necessary, until 
the last two consecutive gauge readings are constant, 
indicating equilibrium attainment. 


These operations normally require 20 to 30 min. Read 
the final gauge pressure to the nearest 0.25 kPa for 
gauges with intermediate graduations of 0.5 kPa or less 


than to the nearest 0.5 kPa for gauges with graduations of 
1.0 to 2.5 kPa and record the values as the ‘uncorrected 
vapour pressure’ of the sample. Without undue delay 
remove the pressure gauge and, without attempting to 
remove any liquid which may be trapped in the gauge, 
check its reading against that of the manometer while 
both are subjected to a common steady pressure which 
is no more than 1.0 kPa different from the recorded 
‘uncorrected vapour pressure’. If a difference is 
observed between the gauge and manometer readings, 
the difference shall be added to or subtracted from the 
‘uncorrected vapour pressure’ recorded for the sample 
being tested, and the resulting value shall be recorded 
as the vapour pressure of the sample. 


NOTES: 


1 Cooling the assembly prior disconnecting the gauge will 
facilitate disassembly and reduce the amount of hydrocarbon 
vapour released into the room. 

2 Verification of sample integrity — Disconnect the air chamber 
from the fuel chamber. Drain the sample from the air and fuel 
chambers as completely as possible into a dry (8-0z) 240 ml 
clear glass bottle. Seal the bottle and shake it vigorously for 
5 s. If the sample is clear and bright and free of a second phase, 
note this observation and record the test is valid. If the sample 
is not clear and bright and free of second phase. Immerse the 
bottle in the 38°C water bath up to about 25 mm above the top 
of the sample level for 15 min in order to heat the sample to 
the test temperature. Remove the sample from the water bath 
and immediately shake it vigorously for 5 s and observe the 
sample. If the sample is not clear and bright and free of second 
phase, note this observation and record that the test is not valid 
because of phase separation. A fuel that is not clear and bright 
and free of second phase at this point of the test indicates that 
the fuel was contacted with sufficient water to exceed the water 
tolerance of the fuel during the test procedure. Water can most 
likely get into the test chambers during preparation of the fuel 
and air chambers (see A-7.3 and see A-7.4) or assembly of the 
air and fuel chambers (see A-8.2), or both, specially and fuel 
chambers (see A-8.2), or both specially if water baths are used 
for these procedures. 


A-8.5 Preparation of Apparatus for Next Test 


Thoroughly purge the air chamber of residual sample 
by filling it with warm water above 32°C and allowing 
it to drain. Repeat the purging at least five times. After 
disconnecting the pressure gauge from its manifold 
connection with the manometer, remove trapped 
centrifugal thrusts. This may be accomplished in the 
following manner hold the gauge between the palms 
of the hands with the right hand on the face side and 
the threaded connection of the gauge forward. Extend 
the arms forward and upward at an angle of 45 with the 
coupling of the gauge pointing in the same direction. 
Swing the arms downward through an arc of about 135° 
so that the centrifugal force aids gravity in removing 
the trapped liquid. Repeat this operation three times to 
expel all liquid. Purge the pressure gauge by directing 
a small jet of air into its Bourdon tube for at least 
5 min. Rinse both chambers and the sample transfer 
connection several times with petroleum naphtha, 


then several times with acetone, then blow dry using 
dried air. Stopper the fuel chamber and place it in the 
refrigerator or ice-water bath for the next test. 
NOTE — If the purging of the air chamber is done in a bath, be 
sure to avoid small and unnoticeable films of floating sample 
by keeping the bottom and top opening of the chamber closed 
as they pass through the water surface. 


A-9 PRECAUTIONS 


A-9.1 Gross errors can be obtained in vapour pressure 
measurements, if the prescribed procedure is not 
followed carefully. The following list emphasizes the 
importance of strict adherence to the precautions given 
in the procedure. 


A-9.1.1 Checking the Pressure Gauge 


Check all gauges against a manometer after each test 
in order to ensure high precision of results (see A-8.4). 
Read all gauges while the gauges are in a vertical 
position and after tapping them lightly. 


A-9.1.2 Shake the container vigorously to ensure 
equilibrium of the sample with the air in the container 
(see A-7.2). 


A-9.1.3 Checking for Leaks 


Check the apparatus before and during each test for 
both liquid and vapour leaks. 


A-9.1.4 Sampling 


Because initial sampling and the handling of 
samples will greatly affect the final results, employ 
the utmost precaution and the most meticulous care 
to avoid losses through evaporation and even slight 
changes in composition (see A-6.5 and A-8.1). In 
no case shall any part of the apparatus itself be used 
as the sample container prior to actually conducting 
the test. 


A-9.1.5 Purging the Apparatus 


Thoroughly purge the pressure gauge, the fuel 
chamber and the air chamber to be sure they are free 
of residual sample. [This is most conveniently done at 
the end of the previous test (see A-8.5)]. It is important 
to remove all water from the apparatus before cooling 
the gasoline chambers and heating the air chamber. 
In high-humidity conditions be alert for and avoid 


IS 17076 : 2019 


condensation on the transfer connection and interior 
walls of the apparatus. 


A-10 REPORT 


A-10.1 Reporting Results 


Report to the nearest 0.25 kPa or 0.5 kPa the gauge 
result observed in A-8.4, after correcting for any 
difference between the gauge and manometer, as the 
vapour pressure in kilopascals without reference to 
temperature. 


A-11 PRECISION AND BIAS 


A-11.1 Precision 


The following criteria should be used for judging the 
acceptability of results (95 percent confidence). 


A-11.1.1 Repeatability 


The difference between successive test results obtained 
by the same operator with the same apparatus under 
constant operating conditions on identical test material 
would, in the long run, in the normal and correct 
operation of the test method, exceed the following 
value only in one case in twenty. 


Component Repeatability 
Gauge kPaV 
(Range) 

0 to 100 kPa 4.90 


A-11.1.2 Reproducibility 


The difference between two single and independent 
results, obtained by different operators working in 
different laboratories on identical test material would, 
in the long run, in the normal and correct operation of 
the test method, exceed the following value only in one 
case in twenty. 


Component Reproducibility 
Gauge kPa 
(Range) 
0 to 100 kPa 7.790 
A-11.2 Bias 


There being no criteria for measuring bias in these 
test-product combinations, no statement of bias can be 
made. 


IS 17076 : 2019 


ANNEX B 
[ Table 1 SI No. (xiv) ] 


TEST METHOD FOR WATER TOLERANCE (PHASE SEPARATION) 
OF GASOLINE-ALCOHOL BLEND 


B-1 GENERAL 


This test method determines the ability of gasoline- 
oxygenate blends to retain water in solution or in a 
stable suspension at the lowest temperature to which 
they are likely to be exposed in use. 


B-2 SUMMARY OF TEST METHOD 


The sample of fuel is cooled at a controlled rate to its 
expected use temperature and is periodically observed 
for both haze and phase separation. The apparatus as 
given in 4 of IS 1448 [P : 10] or a dry ice-isopropyl 
alcohol bath may be used. A maximum cooling rate 
of 2°C/mm is specified because phase separation in 
gasoline-oxygenate blends has a relatively long but 
unpredictable induction period. 


B-3 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


B-3.1 Some oxygenate-containing fuels, and gasoline- 
alcohol blends in particular have a very limited ability 
to retain water in solution or in stable suspension, and if 
the amount of water in the blend exceeds this limit, the 
fuel will separate into a lower oxygenate-rich aqueous 
phase and an upper oxygenate-lean hydrocarbon phase. 
The most important factor governing the ability of a 
specific fuel to retain water without such separation is 
its temperature. This method is intended to determine 
the maximum temperature at which the fuel will 
separate. The temperatures represent the maximum 
temperatures above which the fuel must not separate 
into two distinct phases. 


B-3.2 Note that in this test, actual separation of 
the sample into two distinct phases is the criterion 
for failure. The following are indications of phase 
separation. 


B-3.2.1 The formation of droplets large enough to 
be detected by the unaided eye. They may be either 
clinging to sides of the container or collect on the 
bottom. 


B-3.2.2 The formation of two layers separated by either 
a common boundary, or a layer of emulsion. Formation 
of haze without one of these indications of separation is 
not cause for rejection. 


10 


B-4 APPARATUS 


B-4.1 Test Container 


Any glass container of about 100 ml capacity may be 
used. This container may be marked at the level of 
40 ml. 


B-4.2 Thermometers 


A thermometer must be provided for each container, 
mounted to pass through the stopper, with the 
requirements as follows: 


a) Range —80 to + 20°C, 
b) Graduations 1°C, and 


c) Immersion 76 mm. 


B-4.3 Viton Rubber Stopper 


To fit sample container bored centrally for the test 
thermometer. 


B-4.4 Cooling Bath 


May be of similar dimensions to those specified in 4 
of IS 1448 [P : 10] and provided with a jacket disk 
and gasket (as specified in the apparatus section) 
filled with an equal-volume mixture of water and 
‘Permanent’ antifreeze and provided with refrigeration 
coils capable of reducing its temperature to —40°C. 
Alternatively, a dry ice-isopropyl alcohol bath may be 
used. 


B-5 SAMPLING AND HANDLING 


B-5.1 Draw samples in accordance with IS 1447 
(Part 1), except water displacement shall not be used. 


B-5.2 Draw the samples in steel cans that have been 
solvent washed. 


B-5.3 Store the samples in refrigerator (2 to 7°C) 
whenever not actually transferring sample. 


B-5.4 Because gasoline-alcohol blends are hygroscopic 
as well as volatile, minimize contact with the atmosphere 
by keeping sample containers tightly closed except 
when transferring sample. 


B-6 PROCEDURE 


B-6.1 Warm the sample to 15°C and shake, to re- 
dissolve any water that may have settled out at the 
refrigerator temperature. 


B-6.2 Cool the test container to 10 to 15°C. Carry out 
steps B-6.3 through B-6.5 as promptly as possible to 
minimize vaporization losses and absorption of water 
from the atmosphere. 


B-6.3 Rinse out the cooled test container with some of 
the sample to be tested. Drain. 


B-6.4 Pour about 40 ml of the sample into the test 
container. The precise amount is not critical, but it 
must be enough to submerge the thermometer bulb 
adequately, without being so much as to require an 
excessive amount of cooling time. If the sample has 
separated, as defined in B-3.2, terminate the test. 


B-6.5 Seal the test container with the rubber stopper. 
Locate the thermometer bulb approximately at the 
centre of the fuel sample. 


B-6.6 Cool the sample by intermittent immersion in 
or circulation of the coolant. The sample is not to be 
swirled or shaken while in the cooling bath. Starting 
at a cooling bath temperature not higher than 10°C 
or 16°C above the test temperature, cool the sample 
at a maximum rate of 2°C/min until phase separation 
occurs, or the test temperature is reached. 


11 


IS 17076 : 2019 


B-6.7 At 2°C intervals, remove the test container 
from the cooling bath and shake vigorously for 5 to 
10s. Wipe the exterior of the sample container with a 
towel moistened with isopropyl alcohol to remove any 
condensation, and observe the condition of the sample 
for no more than 5s against a light coloured illuminated 
background. 


B-6.8 It is likely that the sample will get hazy prior to 
actual phase separation as defined in B-3.2. Record the 
sample temperature at the first indication of haze (when 
cooling); and the temperature when the haze disappears 
(warming). 


B-6.9 Record the temperature of phase separation 
(see B-3.2). Then allow the sample to warm at 
ambient temperature. Shake the sample vigorously 
after a temperature rise of 2°C, and observe. record 
a ‘warming’ phase recombination temperature, and 
the haze disappearance temperature. Average these 
‘cooling’ and ‘warming’ temperatures to determine the 
actual phase separation and haze point temperatures. 
Repeat this process for improved accuracy. 


B-7 REPORT 
B-7.1 Report the following information. 


B-7.1.1 Report the averaged haze point and phase 
separation temperatures found in B-6.9. 


IS 17076 : 2019 


International / 
Other Standards 


ISO 2160 : 1998 
ISO 3405 : 2011 


ISO 12185 : 1996 


ISO 22854 : 2016 


ASTM D 86 - 17 


ASTM D130 - 12 


ASTM D 381 - 17 
ASTM D 525 


ASTM D 1298 - 12b 


ASTM D 1319 - 15 


ASTM D 2622 - 16 


ASTM D 2699 - 16 


ASTM D 2700 - 16 
ASTM D 3120 - 14 


ASTM D 4052 - 16 


ASTM D 4815 - 15 


ASTM D 5059 - 14 
ASTM D5191 - 15 


ASTM D 5453 - 16el 


ASTM D5580 - 15 


ASTM D 6277 - 12 


ASTM D 6304 - 16el 


ASTM D 6730 - 16 


ANNEX C 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES 


Title 


Petroleum products — Corrosiveness to copper — Copper strip test 


Petroleum products — Determination of distillation characteristics at atmospheric 
pressure 


Crude petroleum and petroleum products — Determination of density — 
Oscillating U-tube method 
Liquid petroleum products — Determination of hydrocarbon types and 


oxygenates in automotive-motor gasoline and in ethanol (E85) automotive fuel — 
Multidimensional gas chromatography method 


Standard Test Method for Distillation of Petroleum Products 


Standard Test Method for Corrosiveness to Copper from Petroleum Products by 
Copper Strip Test 


Standard Test Method for Gum Content in Fuels by Jet Evaporation 


Standard Test method for Oxidation Stability of Gasoline (Induction Period 
Method ) 


Standard Test Method for Density, Relative Density, or API Gravity of Crude 
Petroleum and Liquid Petroleum Products by Hydrometer Method 


Standard Test Method for Hydrocarbon Types in Liquid Petroleum Products by 
Fluorescent Indicator Adsorption 


Standard Test Method for Sulfur in Petroleum Products by Wavelength Dispersive 
X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry 


Standard Test Method for Research Octane Number of Spark-Ignition Engine 
Fuel 


Standard Test Method for Motor Octane Number of Spark-[gnition Engine Fuel 


Standard Test Method for Trace Quantities of Sulfur in Light Liquid Petroleum 
Hydrocarbons by Oxidative Microcoulometry 


Standard Test Method for Density, Relative Density, and API Gravity of Liquids 
by Digital Density Meter 


Standard Test Method for Determination of MTBE, ETBE, TAME, DIPE, tertiary- 
Amy] Alcohol and C1 to C4 Alcohols in Gasoline by Gas Chromatography 


Standard Test Methods for Lead in Gasoline by X-Ray Spectroscopy 
Standard Test Method for Vapor Pressure of Petroleum Products (Mini Method) 


Standard Test Method for Determination of Total Sulfur in Light Hydrocarbons, 
Spark Ignition Engine Fuel, Diesel Engine Fuel, and Engine Oil by Ultraviolet 
Fluorescence 


Standard Test Method for Determination of Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, p/m- 
Xylene, o-Xylene, C9 and Heavier Aromatics, and Total Aromatics in Finished 
Gasoline by Gas Chromatography 


Standard Test Method for Determination of Benzene in Spark-Ignition Engine 
Fuels Using Mid Infrared Spectroscopy 


Standard Test Method for Determination of Water in Petroleum Products, 
Lubricating Oils, and Additives by Coulometric Karl Fischer Titration 


Standard Test Method for Determination of Individual Components in Spark 
Ignition Engine Fuels by 100—Metre Capillary (with Precolumn) High-Resolution 
Gas Chromatography 


12 


International / 
Other Standards 
ASTM D 6839 - 17 


ASTM D 7039 - 15a 


ASTM D 7220 - 17 


ASTM E 1064 - 17 


EN 1601 


EN 13016 


EN 13132 


IP 40 


IP 160 : 1999 


IP 224 : 2002 


IP 566 


IMPCA 
SI 90 : 2016 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Title 


Standard Test Method for Hydrocarbon Types, Oxygenated Compounds, and 
Benzene in Spark Ignition Engine Fuels by Gas Chromatography 

Standard Test Method for Sulfur in Gasoline, Diesel Fuel, Jet Fuel, Kerosine, 
Biodiesel, Biodiesel Blends, and Gasoline-Ethanol Blends by Monochromatic 
Wavelength Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry 

Standard Test Method for Sulfur in Automotive, Heating, and Jet Fuels by 
Monochromatic Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry 

Standard Test Method for Water in Organic Liquids by Coulometric Karl Fischer 
Titration 

Methods of test for petroleum and its products. Liquid petroleum products. 
Unleaded petrol. Determination of organic oxygenate compounds and total 
organically bound oxygen content by gas chromatography (O-FID) 

Liquid petroleum products. Vapour pressure. Determination of air saturated 
vapour pressure (ASVP) and calculated dry vapour pressure equivalent (DVPE) 
Methods of test for petroleum and its products. Liquid petroleum products. 
Unleaded petrol. Determination of organic oxygenate compounds and total 
organically bound oxygen content by gas chromatography using column switching 
Petroleum products — Determination of oxidation stability of gasoline — 
Induction period method. 

Crude petroleum and liquid petroleum products — Laboratory determination of 
density — Hydrometer method 

Determination of low lead content of light petroleum distillates by dithizone 
extraction and calorimetric determination 


Liquid petroleum products — Determination of hydrocarbon types and oxygenates 
in automotive-motor gasoline — Multidimensional gas chromatography method 


IMPCA Methanol Reference Specifications 


Israeli Standard of Automotive Gasoline — Methanol-gasoline fuel blend 
composed of 85 percent unleaded gasoline and 15% methanol 


13 


IS 17076 : 2019 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Petroleum and Their Related Products of Synthesis or 
Biological Origin Sectional Committee, PCD 03 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 
Afton Chemicals, Mumbai 


Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 

Association of State Road Transport Undertaking 
(ASRTU), Pune 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Bharat Oman Refineries Lid, Sagar, MP 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Biodiesel Association of India, Mumbai 


Biogas Forum, New Delhi 
Bosch Ltd, Bengaluru 


Centre for Consumer Education, Research, Teaching, 
Training and Testing (CONCERT), Chennai 


Centre for High Technology, New Delhi 
Centre for Science and Environment (CSE), 
New Delhi 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd (CPCL), Chennai 
Central Pollution Control Board, (Ministry of 


Environment & Forests), New Delhi 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organization, 
Nagpur 
Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 


General Motors, Maharashtra 
Gulf Oil Lubricants India Ltd, Mumbai 


Hero Motocorp Ltd, Gurugram 


Representative(s) 
Pror L. M. Das (Chairman) 


SHRI HARSHAD JAMBAULIKAR 

SHRI JEENAL PATEL (Alternate) 
Suri Ravi M. 

SHRI ARUN S. (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND RAO 


SHRI K. RAJAN 
SHRI GIRISH S. KODOLIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND PRATAP RAGHAV 
SHRI B. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 
SHRI DEBASHIS GANGULI 
Suri V. SURESH (Alternate) 
SHRI SANDEEP CHATURVEDI 
SHRI ASHISH KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 
Dr A. R. SHUKLA 
SHRI A. FREDRICK 
Suri D. RAMARAJU (Alternate) 


SHRI R. BALASUBRANIAN 


SHRI BRIJESH KUMAR 
Suri S. N. Suknwat (Alternate) 


Ms ANUMITA ROYCHOWDHURY 

SHRI VIVEK CHATTOPADHYA (Alternate) 
SHRI S. KUMAR 

SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DINABANDHU GOUDA 


Dr S. K. Drxir 
Suri NINAD Gawane (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. Kamaru (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT GUPTA 
SHRI DHARMENDRA SINGHY ADAV (Alternate I) 
Suri RAKESH Kumar (Alternate II) 


Suri SUNIL P. S. 

SHRI RAJENDRAKHILE (Alternate) 
Dr Y. P. Rao 

Ms Inou M. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY GUPTA 
SHRI ASHOK Kataria (Alternate) 


14 


Organization 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Honda Cars, Noida, UP 

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, (R&D Centre), Faridabad 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, (Refineries), New Delhi 
Lubrizol India Ltd, Mumbai 


Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Chennai 
Mangalore Refinery & Petro-Chemical Ltd, 


MarutiUdyog Ltd, Gurgaon 
Ministry of Defence (DRDO), Ahmednagar 


Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, New Delhi 
Ministry of Railways (RDSO), Lucknow 

Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
MNRE, Delhi 


Ministry of Agriculture, Delhi 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


ONGC, Surat 


Reliance Petroleum Limited, Mumbai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, 
New Delhi 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


The Automotive Research Association of India 
(ARAT), Pune 


TVS Motor Company Ltd, Hosur, Tamil Nadu 
VRDE, Ahmed Nagar 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 
Director General, BIS 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. K. JAIN 
SHRI Sunny C. M (Alternate) 


Suri TARUN BHAT 
Suri N. S.TAuB, (Alternate) 


Dr Axan Ray 
Dr T. BHAsKaR (Alternate) 


SHRI REJI MATHAI 
Suri V. Kacpryat (Alternate) 


SHRI. J. AGARWALLA 
Dr. Y. S. JHALA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANDREDKAR 
SHRI SHARADT ARSODE (Alternate) 


Suri R. RAMAPRABHU 


SHRI V. NANDA KUMAR 
Suri M. SALINAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDER SHARMA 
SHRI VIKRAM KHANNA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. MATHIVANAN 
SHRI K. SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI S. K. JAGWANI 
Dr VASANTHA THAKUR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SHYAMA S. Mar 

Sarı DHAvAL Dosut (Alternate) 
Dr J. K. SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SUBIR K. CHATTOPADHYAY 

Suri Ravi V. Desa (Alternate) 
SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 

SHRI ATANU GANGULI (Alternate) 


SHRI T. SETHURAMALINGAM 
Ms P. B. DakHOoLe (Alternate I) 
Suri S. B. GuDEKAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI M. A. BAWASE 
Dr S. S. Turse (Alternate) 


SHRI S. AJITH KUMAR 


SHRI K. MATHIVANAN 
SHRI K. SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr Vyay MALIK 


Suri V. K. DIUNDI, 
Scientist ‘F’ and Heap (PCD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)| 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T. 
Scientist ‘D’, BIS 


15 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Automotive, Aviation and Industrial Fuels Subcommittee, PCD 3:1 


Organization 


Gulf Oil Lubricants India Ltd, Mumbai 
Ashok Leyland Ltd., Chennai 

Bajaj Auto Ltd., Pune 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Central Revenue Control Laboratory, New Delhi 


Centre for Air Military Worthiness, (CEMLIAC), 
Bangalore 


Centre For High Technology, New Delhi 
Centre for Science and Environment (CSE), New Delhi 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd., Chennai 


CIMAC India, Faridabad 
CONCERT, Chennai 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance Petroleum Products, 
Ministry of Defence, DGQA, Kanpur 


Defence Materials and Stores Research & Development 
Establishment, Kanpur 


Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 


Escorts Ltd., Faridabad 
Nayara Energy Limited 


Ford Motors 
Harbinsons Biotech Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon 
Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd., Mumbai 


Indian Additives Ltd., Chennai 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology,(CES), Delhi 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (Marketing Division), Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (R&D Centre), Faridabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (R&P Division), New Delhi 


16 


Representative(s) 
Dr Y. P. Rao, (Convener) 
Suri InDu M. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri Ravi M. 
Suri D. BALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. RAJAN 
SHRI R. RAMAKRISHNA (Alternate) 


Suri AJT K. K. 
SHRI C. SANMUGANATHAN (Alternate) 


Dr Y. K. S. RATHORE 


DR SHRISH S. KALE 
R. SHANMUGAVEL (Alternate) 


SHRI BRIJESH KUMAR 
SHRI SUSHOBHAN SARKAR (Alternate) 


Ms Anumita ROYCHOWDHURY 
SHRI VIVEK CHATTOPADHYA (Alternate) 


Suri S. KUMAR 
Suri H. RAMAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri M. B. BANSAL 


SHRI K. KRISHNAKUMAR 
SHRI M. SOMASUNDARAM (Alternate) 


Suri C. B. PANDEY 
Suri A. K. KANAusIA (Alternate) 


SHRI BAL KRISHNA 
SHRI TANDRA Nanni (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT GUPTA 
SHRI DHARMENDRA SINGH YADAV (Alternate I) 
SHRI RAKESH Kumar (Alternate II) 


Suri G. K. SIVAKUMAR 


SHRI SHYAMA MAJI 
Suri DuavaL Dosui (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri AJIT B. SEAL 


DRA. K. JAIN 
SHRI Sunny C. M. (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri A. K. JAIN 
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR PATHAK (Alternate) 


Pror. R. P. SHARMA 
Pror V. K. VAY 
Suri P. D. DUSANE 


DR A. K. ARORA 
Dr A. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI J. AGARWALLA 
Dr Y. S. Juara (Alternate) 


Organization 


Kochi - BPCL Refineries Ltd., Kochi 


Lubrizol India Ltd., Mumbai 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., Nasik 
Mangalore Refinery & Petro-chemical Ltd., Mangalore 


Maruti Udyog Ltd., Gurgaon 


Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, New Delhi 
Ministry of Railways (RDSO), Lucknow 


Bosch Ltd., Bengaluru 

Numaligarh Refinery Ltd., Assam 

ONGC, Surat 

Petrofed, Delhi 

Reliance Industries Ltd., Mumbai 

Society for Petroleum Laboratory (SFPL)/Fuel Testing 
Laboratory(FTL), Noida 

Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, New Delhi 

Tata Motors Ltd., Pune 

The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Hero Moto Corp., Gurgaon 

BORL, Sagar 

Afton Chemicals, Mumbai 


Honda Cars, Noida 


Emami agrotech Ltd, Haldia 
MNRE, Delhi 


ISMA, Delhi 
Kaleesuwari Refinery and Industry Pvt Ltd (KRIPL) 


17 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Representative(s) 
SHRI PRADEEPKUMAR T. 
Suri R. Rasu (Alternate) 
SHRI SHARAD TARSODE 
Suri R. RAMAPRABHU 


Suri V. NANDA KUMAR 
SHRI SALINA Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDER SHARMA 
SHRI VIKRAM KHANNA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri A. K. SABHARWAL 
Dr K. Konar (Alternate) 


Suri A. FREDRICK 
Suri D. RAMARAJU (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMLESH GUPTA 
Suri PALLAB Das (Alternate) 


SHRI K. S. PANTEY 
Sarı Dines Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI N. K. BANSAL 
Dr Preeti JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBIR K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
SHRI RAVISHANKAR V. Desa! (Alternate) 


DR A. K. GUPTA 
SHRI C. SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI ATANU GANGULI (Alternate) 


SHRI T. SETHURAMALINGAM 
Suri S. B. GUDEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI M. A. BAWASE 
Dr S. S. TmrsE (Alternate) 


Suri T. M. BALARAMAN 
Suri MonıT Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI B. SRIDHAR 
SHRI BHARAT KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI HARSHAD JAMBAULIKAR 
SHRI JEENAL PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI TARUN BHAT 
Sar N. S. TALIB (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. MONDAL 


SHRI S. K. JAGWANI 
Dr VASANTHA THAKUR(A/ternate) 


Suri G. K. THAKUR 


SHRI SHYAM SUNDAR SAI NUDURUPATI 


IS 17076 : 2019 


Panel for Methanol Fuels, PCD 3:1/P-1 


Organization 
In personal capacity 
Afton Chemical, Mumbai 
Ashok Leyland, Chennai 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation, Delhi 
Bureau of Indian Standards 


Hero Motor Corporation, Delhi 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Oil Corporation,(R & D), Faridabad 


Indian Oil Corporation (Mktg) 
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 
Individual Capacity 

Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., Chennai 
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd., Delhi 


Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. 


The Automotive Research Association of India 
(ARAT), Pune 


Thermax Global 
SIAM, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Dr MatHew ABRAHAM (Convener) 
SHRI ANAND KUMAR 
SHRI G. SENTHIL KUMAR 
SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 
SMT NAGAMANI T 


SHRI HARJEET SINGH 
Suri P. Sanur (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. JAIN 
SHRI IRANNAGOGERI (Alternate I) 
Suri M. N. SuyKLa (Alternate II) 


Dr Rest MATHAI 
Dr VIVEKHANANDKAGDIYAL (Alternate 1) 
Dr. A. S. RAMApuAS (Alternate IL) 


Suri P. D. DUSANE 

Pror K. K. PANT 

SHRI PRASHANTH GURU SRINIVAS 
SHRI R. RAMAPRABHU 


SHRI ANoop BHAT 
Suri AJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI VASANT NANDEKAR 
Dr S. S. THIPSE 


Dr Dev Kumar GUPTA 


SHRI Diwit PRAJAPATI 


18 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 03 (12871). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


