IS2122(

Part2)

:1991

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard
POWER TRANSMISSION - BELTS - CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, STORAGE, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF BELTING FOR POWER TRANSMISSION
PART ( 2 V-BELT DRIVES

First Revision )

UDC

621-852-42

0

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December 199 1

Price Group 4

Pulleys and Belts Sectional

Committee,

LM 09

POREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Pulleys and Belts Sectional Committee had been approved by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard was originally published in 1973.

There are various types of drives used for power transmission in the engineering industry. This code relates to belt drives. The purpose of this code is to unify the diverse practices prevalent for the selection, storage, installation and maintenance of belt drives. depends on a number of design factors and Selection of belt drives for power transmission service conditions. It is hoped that the information contained in this code in regard to the selection of drives of the choice of belt would be of assistance to the users of belt drives. Where the provisions prevail. of this standard conflict with the statutory requirements the latter shall techni.

The present first revision of this standard has been brought out in the light of prevalent cal practices followed in the country and following changes have been made:

a) Incorporated lower size limitation of jockey pulley and should not be less than smaller pulley. b) Incorporated additional factors for selection of V-belts. c) Maximum belt speed increased. d) Specific values of forces have been replaced by range of forces to assess satisfactory condition of belt tension. A list of relevant standards pertaining to allied items is given in Annex A.

IS 2122 ( Part 2 >: 1991

Indiafl Standard

POWER TRANSMISSION-BELTS-CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION,STORAGE, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCEOF BELTING FOR POWER TRANSMISSION
PART ( 2 V-BELT DRIVES

First Revision )
4.2 V-Drive 4.2.1 Plain Drive There is an almost infinite range of variations possible in drive layout. The simplest drive is where the centres are horizontal as shown in Fig. 1. This drive could be laid out with the slack side either at the top or below the centres. In V-belt drive this has little effect on the overall efficiency of the drive. 4.2.1.1 Vertical drive Generally vertical drives are not recommended because V-belts will have a tendency to sag under their weight and come off the groove. However, taking special care with regard to tensioning, this difficulty can be minimized and special drives can be designed. 4.2.2 Quarter-Turn
Drive

1 SCOPE This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) provides guidance for selection, storage, installation and maintenance of V-belt drives for power transmission. 2 REFERENCE The Indian Standard IS 2494 : 1974 `V-belt for industrial purposes (first revision )`is necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 SELECTION OF V-DRIVE

3.1 Selection of a belt drive is normally based on factors like the space available, power to be transmitted, speed of the driver and the service conditions and driven shafts, the number of working hours. 3.2 Reference may be made in this connection to IS 2494 : 1974 wherein full details are given on the subject of correct selection of V-drives for industrial purposes. 3.3 When selecting the belt for a drive, it is always desirable to make use of the recommendations of the manufacturer. 4 DRIVE-LAYOUT 4.1 In case of V-belts drive, the maximum ratio between the pulley diameters should not be more than 7:l.
DRIVER

This is a drive in which both the shafts lie in parallel planes but the shafts themselves are not parallel ( see Fig. 2 ). Special deep grooved pulleys need to be used to ensure that the belts transmit the required power and the centre distances have to be extended more than usual for the V-drives to ensure that the belts do not twist excessively. The direction of rotation must be such that the bottom layer of belts is in tension.
DRIVER

TIGHT

SIDE

ON TOP

TIGHT

SIDE

ON

BOTTOM

FIG. 1

HORIZONTALDRIVE 1

IS 2122 ( Part 2 ) : 1991

4.3 V-Flat Drives On some drives with a speed ratio of 3 to 1 or more, and where the centre distance is not greater than the difference in pulley diameters it is possible to utilize a large Aa, faced pulley as the driven pulley. The friction grip provided by the base of the V-belts on the large flat pulley will not be less than the wedge-grip in the smaller, grooved pulley. This drive, however, would not be suitable where excessive loads or shock conditions are obtained. 5 DESIGN
5.1 Pulleys OF V-BELTS DRIVES

The satisfactory working of a V-drive is related to the economic usage of the power capabilities of the belts used. Care should therefore be taken to ensure that V-pulley diameters are above the minimum recommended by the manufacturer of V-belts and that the grooves conform to the design requirements of the V-belts used. Where a large flat pulley is used on a V-flat drive the pulley must be flat, not crowned. FIG. 2 QUARTER-TURN DRIVE 4.2.3 Jockey-Pulley
Drive

5.2 V-Belts The internal friction caused by flexing a V-belt over a small pulley reduces the life of the belt. Care should therefore be taken to see that the correct type of belt is selected to transmit the required power using an appropriate section selection from the manufacturers catalogue which utilize pulley diameters above minimum recommended, bearing in mind that the higher the belt speed the greater the power the same belt can transmit. Maximum belt speeds should not exceed 30 m/s without consulation with the Annex B and C give a guidance manufacturer. regarding correct selection of V-belts. 5.3 Pulley Centres Belt life may be measured in terms of the number of times the belt surface comes into

Where adjustment of centre distance cannot possibly be arranged, it is necessary to use a Jockey pulley tensioning device ( see Fig. 3 ). A grooved tensioning pulley may be used, and this should be placed on the inside of the V-belts, mounted as near as possible to the larger pulley, and preferably on the slack side of the drive. Alternatively, a flat faced jockey pulley may be used on the outside of the belts ( preferably on the slack side of the drive ) and should be positioned within one-third of the centre distance from the driving pulley. Jockey pulley diameters should be at least equal to that of the smaller pulley of the drive, but larger if possible.

SLACK

SIDE

JOCKEY

PULLEY

/ DRIVER

/DRIVEN

3A

38 FIG. 3 JOCKEY-PULLEY DRIVE 2

IS 2122 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 contact with the pulley surface while transmitting the load. Trip rate, being the number of passes of the beIt round the drive in one second, should not be more than 12 but it must be remembered that centre distances are, in general, shorter than conventional flat belt drives and are normally between `D' and `30' where the `D' is the diameter of the larger pulley. Should it be required to find the centre distance when only the belt length is known, the following formula may be used: Centre distance where A = L/4-0.392 B= = C = A + v'An -B 5 ( D+d)
--

6 INSTALLATION OF V-BELT DRIVES 6.1 In assembling a drive, the motor or prime mover should be moved towards the driven unit so that the V-beIts may be placed in their respective grooves by hand. 6.1.1 Under no circumstances should V-belt be forced on to pulleys with crowbars, wedges, screw drivers, or any other type of implement. Such procedure would tend to cause the outside jacket or inside cords, or, both, to rupture. It is possible for the inside load-carrying cords to be broken by forcing over the grooves, without this being evident from the outside appearance of the V-beIt. Such V-belts fail completely during the first few hours of running. 6.1.2 When the V-belts have been placed in the pulley grooves, the motor or prime mover should then be moved away from the driven unit to apply uniform tension to the V-belts. 6.2 It is important to maintain an even spread of the power load over the belts matched for length against that of the other belts in a drive. Accordingly manufacturers code each belt for length after production and care should be taken to select a suitable matched set of belts to avoid uneven distribution of load. 6.3 Alignment Figure 4 shows the various positions of alignment. The alignment of the pulley should be so that flat sides of the pulleys are in accordance with Fig. 4D. Details shown in Fig. 4 can be ensured by placing a string or flat board across the faces of the two pulleys.

JD-d)' 8 L = Pitch length of belt, D = Pitch diameter of larger pulley, and d = Pitch diameter of smaller pulley.

5.3.1 In the case of quarter twist driv.es the centres must be extended to ensure that the belts are not unduly stressed as a result of the twisting and should not be below 5.5 ( P+Q ), where P is the larger pulley pitch diameter and Q is the witdh of the band of belts. 5.3.2 Provisions should also be made for the adjustment of the centre distance to take up slack that will accrue when the belts are put The normal manner is to provide into service. slide rails on the motor. Sufficient movement should be provided to enable a minimum change over the nominal centre distances on the basis of 3 percent stretch.

VIEWIN THE
A ,A SHAFTS PARALLEL ANOTHER ARE TO NOT ONE LB SHAFTS ALIGNMENT, APPEAR SEEN FROM ARE NOT ALTHOUGH PARALLEL ABOVE IN CORRECT THEY WHEN DIRECTION A 4C SHAFTS AND IN PULLEYS ALIGNMENT ARE ARE PARALLEL BUT IN NOT LD CORRECT BOTH PULLEYS AND IN INSTALLATION, SHAFTS ARE AND PARALLEL

ALIGNMENT,

ALIGNMENT

FIG. 4

ALIGNMENT OFV-DRIVE 3

IS 2122 ( Part 2 ) : 1991
6.3.1 In the case of quarter

twist drives details

are as follows: The axis of the vertical shaft should lie in a plane perpendicular to the horizontal shaft and intersecting it at the centre of the face of the pulley of the vertical shaft which should be below the axis of the horizontal shaft by a specified distance `I" (see Fig. 5) which depends on the centre distance as shown below:
Centre Distance Distance Y

6.4.1 Excessive tension leads to rapid wearing out of the belt and overloading of the bearings. Insufficient tension on the other hand is the chief cause of belts failing to transmit power owing to slip. 6.5 Belt dressings V-belt drives. shall not be applied to

6.6 Recommended practice for installation tension in V-belt drives is given in Annex B. 7 SAFETY The belt drives should be suitably guarded or fenced in accordance with safety requirements of the Indian Factories Act. Where guards are necessary it is desirable to use the wire screen type rather than air-tight covers so as to permit free circuIation of air and dissipation of any heat generated. 8 STORAGE OF V-BELT DRIVES

mm 1 500 2 000 2 500 3 000 3 500 4 000 4 500 5 000 5 500 6 000 6 500 7 000 7 500

mm 63 71 80 100 125 160 200 224 250 300 355 400 450

V-belts should be stored in a cool, dry,, closed room. They may be hung or coiled flat m single or triple coiIs so that the belt retains its natural If the shape and does not twist upon itself. belts are hung, then the minimum diameter of the peg should be ten times the belt height. 9 MAI.NTENANCE
It is important

OF V-BELT

DRIVES

6.4 Belts, after correctly tensioning, are liable to stretch up to 3 percent of their length and where a take-up adjustment is to be provided, it should be sufficient to take up the whole of this amount.

9.1 Inspection of V-Drives

to check on the correct running of the drive from time to time to ensure correct tension and true running of the installation.

SHAFT

FIG. 5

QUARTER-TWISTALIGNMENT DRIVE

4

I$2122

( Part 2 ) : 1991

9.2 Faults in V-Belt Drives and their Correction 9.2.1 Abrasion Metal particles, sawdust and grit are the usual causes of abrasion. Stop entry of these foreign materials by covering the top and/or one side of the drive. But where guards are necessary, it is desirable to use' the wire screen type rather than air-tight covers, so as to permit free circulation of air. 9.2.2 Excessive Stretch This is usually due to overloading or internal breaks which are easily caused, but not noticed if V-belts are forced over tops of grooves. Check if extra duty may have been added subsequently to the drive design and installation. 9.2.3 Loss in Driven Speed This is often due to slippage resulting from insufficient tension. Check by tachometer readings against calculated speeds and remedy by adjusting tension. Slippage will result from the use of belt dressing which should never be employed on V-belts. Any application is bound to be unevenly spread with the result that one or more V-belts will tend to carry the full load. 9.2.4 V-Belt Swelling or Softening This is caused by oil, certain cutting fluids or

rubber solvent. Remove cause, use special oil resistant belts. 9.2.5 Mixing of V-Belts

if possible,

or

V-Belts of different brands or types must not be mixed; the slightest difference in cross section and internal design will seriously affect running life. New and used V-belts should not be run together in the same set for similar reasons. When making replacements, always fit all new or all used V-belts in the same set. 9.2.6 Inability to Transmit Rated Load This may be the result of the pulley grooves being cut unevenly, or of incorrect angle. Check each single groove with a template to ensure all V-belts are running on the same pitch diameter. Have the drive design checked over to see that the drive has sufficient capacity for the load. 9.2.7 Whipping During Running This is usually caused by incorrect tensioning principally on long centre drives. Try a slightly higher ( or lower ). 9.2.8 Causes and remedies of V-belt problems are tabulated in Annex D for guideline.

ANNEX

A

( Foreword )
LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS
IS No. 2048 : 1983 Title

PERTATNING TO ALLIED ITEMS
IS No. Title

Parallel keys and ( second revision )

keyways

3090 : 1965

2291 : 1981 2293 : 1974 2294 : 1986 2398 : 1967 2399 : 1988 2494 : 1974

Tangential keys and keyways ( second revision ) Gib-head keys ( first revision ) Woodruff
( second revision )

3142 : 1982 3688 ; 1977

and and

keyways keyways rolling

Code of practice for installation and maintenance of rolling bearings V-grooved pulleys for V-beltsgroove sections A, B, C, D and E Dimensions
revision )

for shaft ends (first

keys

566g . 1g87

Identification bearings

code for

5692 : 1988 Vocabulary
6453 : 1984

General plan of boundary dimensions for radial rolling bearings (first revision ) Tolerances for rolling bearings
(first revision )

Roller bearings (first revision ) V-belts for industrial
(first revision )

purposes

Technical supply conditions for rolling bearings ( first
revision )

5

IS 2122 ( Part 2 ) : 1991

ANNEX

B

( Clauses 5.2 and 6.6 )
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION TENSION IN V-BELT DRIVES

B-l V-belts work satisfactorily over a wide range of belt tensions so that rough and ready methods of deciding on belt tension have not resulted in serious troubles wiih the drive. There are cases when it is desirable to be able to measure tensions, to avoid bearing trouble, belt slip or to meet particularly arduous conditions. The following procedure is sufficiently accurate for drives coming within the normal range for each belt section. B-2 Measure the metres. length of the span in milli-

Table 1. A measured force below the lower value indicates undertensioning, whilst a measured force above the higher value indicates overtensioning. However, when starting up a drive with new belts the drive should be tensioned to the higher value since the tension falls rapidly in the early stages of running in. All belt drives should be watched carefully during the running in period after initial startup. Retensioning should be carried out by the above procedure when necessary. Table 1 Deflection Force Required for Measuring Installation Tension in V-Belt Drives ( Clauses B-2 and B-3 )
V-Belt Section A B C DForced Required to Deflect V-Belt 16 mm per metre of Cen tre Distance Newton (N) 10 to 15 20 to 30 40 to 60 70 to 10.5 120 to 180

At the centre of the span apply force P with a spring scale in direction perpendicular to the span, until the belt is deflected from the normal by an amount equal to 0.016 mm for every millimetre of span length ( see Fig. 6 ). In the case of a single belt drive, both pulleys shall be locked before making the measurement. For example, the deflection for a span of 100 mm would be 1.6 mm. Note the force P and compare it with Table 1. B-3 The belt tension should be such that the measured force falls within the values given in

E

DEFLECTION I A \nlrnhnm

FIG. 6

BELT DEFLECTION MEASUREMENT

IS 2122 ( Part 2 ) : 1991

ANNEX
CALCIJLATION OF LOAD IMPOSED

C
BY V-BELT DRIVE ON SHAFTS where S = belt speed in metres per second Fd = the arc of contact correction factor ( see IS 2494 : 1974 ) kW = the motor or absorbed power of the machine,
NOTE-l Newton (N)&O.l02x kilogram force (kgf).

( Chuse 5.2 )

C-l FORCE DETERMINATION
C-l.1 To `determine

the force imposed on a shaft by V-belt drive in order to calculate bearing load, take the vector sum of three forces: a) Tight-side b) Slack-side
c)

tension

in drive ( T1 ),

tension in drive ( T, ), and 1 OOOxkW. m Newton ( N) s 1 OOOxkW
S

Weight of pulley.

2.5 T1=mX
T,=--x-

2*5-2Fd

in Newton

(N) W = weight of pulley in Newton ( N )

C-2 RESULTANT FORCE C-2.1 This may be solved graphically or analytitally by resolving the following two forces: a) Load due to belt pull ( T,+T, ) and b) Weight of pulley ( W). or Resultant Force (R) = (Tl+T2)2+WL assuming the two forces are at right angle to each other.

ANNEX
CAUSES AND REMEDIES
_~ ~~ Problems Causes

D
OF V-BELT PROBLEMS
Remedies

( Clause 9.2.8 )

Belt breaking

after

fitting

Cuts and splits in the base of the belt

Forcing belt over pulley when damaging cord and fitting, cover Ingress of a foreign body, during running Insufficient belts, or wrong section for drive Drive stalled Outside idler pulley in use

Reduce drive centre distance fit belt Fit an effective guard

to

Pulley diameter

too small too high

Ambient temperature ( above + 70�C ) Abnormal belt slip

Check drive details and fit correct number or section of belts Ascertain cause and set right Replace with inside idler pulley on the slack side of the drive. Increase the size of the existing idler Redesign using recommended minimum pulley pitch diameters Ensure good ventilation and protect the belts from direct heat Check drive design to ensure correct number of belts. Redesign if necessary. Check drive tension,

IS 2122 ( Part 2 ) : 1991
Problems Causes Remedies

Severe belt vibration

Drive has insufficient

belts than

Centre distance longer recommended High shock loading

Belts turn over in pulleys

Too low belt tension Unbalanced pulleys Poor drive alignment Incorrect pulley groove section or excessive wear in grooves Excessive belt flat
*

Check drive design and modify necessary Shorten centres. Use an inside idler in the drive on slack side Use an inside idler pulley in the slack side Correct it Balance pulleys Realign Renew pulleys

Belts cannot be retensioned

Excessive wear on

Excessive noise

Low belt tension Worn out belts Ingress of a foreign body for Insufficient allowance stretch in drive design Excessive stretch caused by insufficient belts or wrong belt section for drive Incorrect belt length Belts from different manufacturers used on same drive Incorrect pulley groove angle Incorrect pulley section in pulley Excessive wear grooves Poor drive alignment Small pulley diameter below recommended minimum Belt catching on protruding parts Poor drive alignment Incorrect belt tension Overloaded drive

Use an inside idler on slack side Retension Renew belts Use a more effective Modifv drive to take-up Recalculate drive modify

in the drive

drive guard allow more design and

Use a shorter belt For use as a matched set, belts must be from one manufacturer Renew or remachine pulleys Renew pulleys Renew or remachine pulleys Realign Redesign using correct pulley diameters Remove protrusions or move drive away Realign Retension Check drive details and redesign if necessary Balance pulleys Protect drive from contaminatio n. Clean pulley grooves with petrol or alcohol before fitting new belts Remachine or renew pulleys Replace with a complete new set of belts Use V-belts of one make only

Belt swelling or softening

Unbalanced pulleys Contamination-by oil or other chemicals

Unusual belt stretch

Worn or badly machined pulley grooves Used belts mixed with new belts on the drive Belts from different manufacturers used on same drive

Standard

Mark

Standards

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureuu qf'lndian Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bareao of Indian Standards established under the Bureou of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to BIS is a statutory institution promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the pr grade designations. lPublications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. LMD 09 ( 4798 )

Amendments lssaed Since Pubiicatioo Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
Man& i

STANDARDS
_' ( -;,

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

_-

Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan,

NEW DELHI

9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 110002

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, : Manakalaya,

311 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

160036 600113 ( East )

MADRAS

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

BANGALORE, BHOPAL, Branches : AHMADABAD, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed at Printwell Printers, Aliparh, India

