1s 3415

: 1998

(Reaffirmed 2003)

Indian Standard GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN MAGNETIC PARTICLE FLAW DETECTION ( Second Revision )

ICS 19.160

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARC

Price

Group

3

Non-Destructive

Testing

Sectional

Committee,

MTD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1966 and was subsequently revised in 1980. In this revision, definitions of a number of new terms have been added and the definitions of a number of terms have been modified in the light of the latest technological developments in the field. It is hoped that this standard would help to remove any ambiguity and confusion arising out of individual interpretations of different terms in this field. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 3415

: 1998

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN MAGNETIC PARTICLE FLAW DETECTION ( Second Revision )
1.. SCOPE This standard defines the terms commonly magnetic particle flaw detection. 2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS Current used in 2.10 Captive Fluid Indicator A device comprising, a quantity of magnetic fluid sealed in a transparent plastic container, the fluid behaving in the same way on a magnetized component as free magnetic fluid. 2.11 Carrier Fluid particles are suspended of the particles.

2.1 Alternating

A current with a periodically varying amplitude of which the mean value is zero. Commonly used in the abbreviated form as a.c. 2.2 Alternating Current Impulse

The fluid in which magnetic to facilitate the application 2.12 Central Conductor

Alternating 2.3

current

of short duration. Current Magnetization current.

A conductor passed through a hollow part and used for producing circular magnetization. 2.13 Circumferential Magnetization

Alternating

Magnetization 2.4 Arc

induced

by an alternating

Title is changed to circular magnetization which causes a flux to have directions parallel to the periphery of a component when current is passed along its longitudinal axis. 2.14 `Clip-on'Ammeter A portable instrument flowing in a conductor 2.15 Coagulation The agglomeration suspension. 2.16 Coercive Force in to of magnetic particles in a for measuring the current without breaking the circuit.

A luminous high temperature discharge produced under an electric potential formed across a gap between electrodes or between an electrode and component surface. 2.5 Background

The area against which a flaw indication is sought, after the application of magnetic particles. 2.6 Background Paint

A paint applied to a surface prior to magnetic particle . . P exammatlon to Increase contrast and thus to racilitate observation of an indication. 2.7 Black Light

A magnetic field strength required to be applied the direction opposite to residual magnetization demagnetize ferromagnetic materials. 2.17 Coil Method

Near ultra violet radiation (wave length 330 to 390 nm) used for exciting fluorescence in magnetic particles. 2.8 Black Light Filter

A method of magnetization in which part or whole of the component is encircled by a current carrying coil. The use of the terms is usually restricted to instances in which the component does not provide a closed magnetic circuit for all the fluxes generated. 2.18 Colour Contrast Particle

A filter capable of transmitting the ultra violet radiation of wave length in the region of 330 to 390 nm while absorbing other wave length. 2.9 Burning

Magnetic particles which are visible due to their colour which distinguish them from the component surface. 2.19 Coloured Magnetic Inks producing an

Local overheating of the component at the contest area arising from the production of an arc or from high resistance. 1

Fluids containing magnetic particles indication other than black.

IS 3415 : 1998 2.20 Compass Test through a component via prods or contact heads the current may be alternating, rectified alternating, or direct. 2.31 Current Induction Machine

A test for demagnetization carried out by placing the magnetic compass needle in specified positions in relation to a component and ascertaining that the consequent deflection does not exceed a specified maximum. 2.21 Contact Head

A magnetic particle flaw detector which is designed for the induced current flow technique. 2.32 Defect

The electrode assembly used to a clamp and support a part/conductor to facilitate passage of electrical current through the part/conductor for circular magnetization. 2.22 Contact Pads

A flaw which is unacceptable. 2.33 Deep Seated Flaws

Flaws which are located at a depth from the surface of the objects being examined. 2.34 Demagnetization The reduction in the intensity of residual magnetism in ferromagnetic materials to an acceptable level. 2.35 Demagnetizing Coil current which is

Replaceable metal pads, usually of copper braid, placed an electrodes to give good electrical contact, thereby preventing damage to the component under test. 2.23 Continuous Method

A method of inspection where the indicating medium is applied to the component while the magnetizing force is present. 2.24 Contrast The difference the background particles. 2.25 Contrast in reflectivity or coloration between and the flaw as shown by the magnetic Aid

A coil of wire carrying alternating used for demagnetization. 2.36 Diffuse Indications Indications indications

that are not clearly defined, of subsurface defects.

for example,

2.37 Direct Current An electric current flowing in one direction from one electrode to another and sensibly free from pulsation. Commonly known in the abbreviated form as d.c. 2.38 Direct Current known defects used as a the efficiency of magnetic processes. Circuit Magnetization induced Magnetization by a direct current.

A coating or film applied to a surface to improve contrast by providing a more suitable background. 2.26 Control Specimens

Specimens containing reference for checking particles flaw detection 2.27 Core

2.39 Discontinuity Lack of continuity in the magnetic the objects being examined. 2.40 Domain A substructure in ferromagnetic material within which all the elementary magnets (electron spins) are held aligned to one direction by inter-atomic forces. 2.41 Dry Out Time The time allowed for carrier fluid to evaporate leaving magnetic particles in a dry conditions. 2.42 Dry Powder Method permeability of

of an Electromagnetic

That part of the magnetic winding. 2.28 Crow Receiver

circuit which is within the

A free-standing graduated measure which is mainly cylindrical but tapered towards the bottom to allow greater accuracy in reading small volumes. 2.29 Curie Point

The temperature at which ferromagnetic materials can no longer be magnetized by outside forces, and at which they lose their residual magnetism. 2.30 Current A method Flow Method by passing a current 2

of magnetization

The method of magnetic particle inspection in which finely divided ferromagnetic particles suitable selected and prepared are used as indicating medium without the use of a carrier liquid.

IS 3415 : 1998 2.43 Effective Magnetic Permeability the result of and only during, the absorption light radiation. 2.55 Fluorescent A fluid containing fluorescent dyes. 2.56 Fluorescent Magnetic 2.45 Electromagnet A soft iron core surrounded by a coil of wire that temporarily becomes a magnet when an electric current flows through the wire. 2.46 Encircling Coil Method 2.57 Flux See Magnetic Flux (2.84). particles Magnetic magnetic Particles coated with fluorescent dye. Fluid particles coated with of black

A factor depending on the magnetic permeability (u) of the component and on demagnetization factor. Its value is less than that of U. 2.44 Electrode A conductor by means of which a current passes into or out of the component under examination.

2.58 Flwr Density See Magnetic Flux Density (2.85).

A method of magnetization in which part or whole of the component is encircled by a current carrying coil. The use of the term is usually restricted to instances in which the component does not provide a closed magnetic circuit for all the fluxes generated. 2.47 Examination The process of observing the magnetic particle pattern. 2.48 False Indications Magnetic particles discontinuities. 2.49 Ferromagnetic A property of material on account of which only a small amount of applied magnetic -force induces in it a large amount of magnetization. 2.50 Flash Magnetization Magnetization by a current flow of very brief duration. indications that are not due to

2.59 Flux Meter See Magnetic Field Meter (2.80).

2.60 Flux Penetration The depth to which a magnetic a component. 2.61 Full Wave Rectified flux is effective in

Current

When the reverse half cycle of an alternating current is turned around to flow in the same direction as the forward half, the result is full wave rectified current. 2.62 Furring Build up of magnetic particles due to excessive magnetization of the component under examination. 2.63 Gauss The old unit of magnetic field strength now replaced by the tesla, T. A magnetic field is said to be unit strength at any point if a unit pole placed there is acted upon with a force of one dyne. The intensity of a magnetic field is represented numerically by the number of lines of force per unit area ( perpendicular to their direction). 2.64 Gauss Equipment intensity. Meter measuring magnetic field strength or

2.51 Flash Point The minimum temperature at which a liquid heated in a celevand cup (open test) or in a Pensky-Martins apparatus (Alosed test) gives off sufficient vapour to flash momentarily on the application of a small flame. 2.52 Flaw A discontinuity, that is, likely to be as a result of imperfections in materials. 2.53 Flaw Indications Accumulation of ferromagnetic particles along the leakage flux areas arising due to discontinuities. 2.54 Fluorescence The emission of visible radiation by a substance as 3

2.65 Half Wave Rectified Current When a single phase alternating current is rectified in the simplest manner, the reverse half of the cycle is blocked out entirely. The result is a pulsating undirectional current with intervals when no current at all is flowing. This is often referred to as `halfwave' or as pulsating direct current and is that type

IS 3415 : 1998 of current most commonly flaw detection. 2.66 Hysteresis Loop employed in magnetic 2.77 Magnetic The distribution 2.78 Magnetic An instrument 2.79 Magnetic Field Distribution of field strength in a magnetic Field Indicator designed to indicate magnetic fields. field.

A curve showing the flux density `B' plotted as a function of magnetizing force `H'. The curve forms a characteristics `S' shaped loop. Intercepts of loop with B-H axes, the points of maximum and minimum magnetizing force and the maximum slope of the loop define important magnetic characteristics of a material. 2.67 Indication Magnetic particle being tested. 2.68 Indirect pattern formed over the surface

Field Leakage

The loss of magnetic field strength due to undesirable discontinuities and changes in section in a magnetic circuit. 2.80 Magnetic An instrument 2.81 Magnetic Field Meter designed to measure (H) the flux density.

Magnetization when no direct

Field Strength

Magnetization induced in a part electrical contact is made. 2.69 Induced Current

The intensity of magnetic field at a point, expressed in A/m (ampere per meter) in SI unit and in Oe (oersted) in cgs system of units. 2.82 Magnetic Flaw Detection Ink of magnetic

Flow Technique

A method of magnetization in which a circulating current is induced in a ring component by making it in effect the secondary of a mains transformer. 2.70 Induction See Magnetic Induction (2.86).

A detecting medium consisting particles in a carrier fluid. 2.83 Magnetic Flow Method

essentially

2.71 Laminated

Pole Pieces

Pole pieces consisting of separately adjustable elements for taking up irregular profiles. 2.72 Leakage See Magnetic 2.73 Leakage Field Field Leakage Flux (2.79).

A method of magnetic particle inspection, in which no current passes into or out of the component under examination but the flux in it is established by using a threading or encircling conductor (for example, bar, cable or coil) carrying an electric current or by using an electromagnet or permanent magnet. 2.84 Magnetic Flux

It is the product of magnetic flux density and cross sectional area through which the flux lines pass. 2.85 Magnetic Flux Density (B)

The magnetic flux that appears on the surface of the object due to the presence of a discontinuity. 2.74 Longitudinal Magnetization

It is the total intensity of magnetization in a magnetized component consisting of the contribution due. to the applied field and the induced intensity of magnetization. 2.86 Magnetic Induction (B)

Magnetization where the flux lines of the field traverse in the component in a direction essentially parallel to its longitudinal axis. 2.75 Magnetic Circuit

It is the total intensity of magnetization in a magnetized component consisting of the contribution due to the applied field and the induced intensity of magnetization. 2.87 Magnetic Leakage Field to a component and in which is detectable by

A combination of interconnecting media, mainly comprising of ferromagnetic materials, forming a closed circuit for magnetic flux lines. 2.76 Magnetic Field

The magnetic field, external proximity to a discontinuity, magnetic particles. 2.88 Magnetic A process 4 Particle

The volume within and the surrounding either a magnetized part or a current carrying conductor wherein magnetic lines of force, are present.

Flaw Detection surface or near surface

for detecting

IS 3415 : 1998 discontinuities in magnetic materials by the generation of a magnetic flux within a component and the application of suitable magnetic particles to its surface to give an indication of the defect. 2.89 Magnetic Particle Flaw Detector 2.100 Paramagnetic Material slightly greater

A material with magnetic permeability than 1. 2.101 Particle Content

Equipment providing essentially current or magnetic flux for the purpose of magnetic particle flaw detection. Usually it also facilitate holding components of varying dimensions and for adjusting and reading the magnetizing current. 2.90 Magnetic Permeability

The apparent volume ratio of magnetic carrier fluid of magnetic ink. 2.102 Peak Current

particles

to

The maximum instantaneous value of the direct or periodic current obtained during examination. 2.103 Permanent Magnet

The ratio of the magnetic induction B to the external magnetic field H, causing the induction. 2.91 Magnetic Poles

Points situated near the ends of the magnet where it may be considered that two magnetic masses are situated, such that their resultant field, at a distant point, is approximately the same as that of the magnet. 2.92 Magnetic Powder

A magnet that retains a high degree of magnetization virtually unchanged for a long period of time (characteristic of materials with high retentivity). 2.104 Permeability Same as Magnetic 2.105 Portable Permeability Indicator (2.90).

Flux

Magnetic particles in dry powder shape and size for flaw detection 2.93 Magnetic Saturation

form of suitable purposes.

A specimen containing known defects used for checking the efficiency of magnetic particle flaw detection processes by placing it in contact with the component under examination. 2.106 Prods Hand held electrodes attached to flexible cables to transmit the magnetizing current from the source to the component under examination. 2.107 Rectified Alternating Current

The stage at which any further increase in the magnetic intensity H field applied to a magnetized component will fail to show any significant increase in the The slope of magnetic flux in that component. B-H curve now becomes equal to the magnetic permeability of free space. 2.94 Magnetic Writing

A form of non-relevant indications sometimes caused when the surface of a magnetized part comes in contact with another piece of ferromagnetic material. 2.95 Magnetizing Force to a

An electric current obtained by rectifying alternating current without the deliberate addition of smoothing. 2.108 Relevant Magnetic particle a material. 2.109 Residual Indication pattern due to a discontinuity in

applied The magnetizing field strength ferromagnetic material to induce magnetism. 2.96 Magnetometer See Magnetic Field Meter (2.80).

Field Method

2.97 Non-Relevant

Indication that are not due to any

A method of inspection where the magnetic particles are .applied to the component after the magnetizing current is cut off. 2.110 Residual Magnetism

Magnetic particles pattern material discontinuities. 2.98 Near Surface See Subsurface 2.99 Oersted Unit of magnetic system of units. Flaws

The magnetic field which persist in a ferromagnetic body after the magnetizing force has been removed. 2.111 Retentivity The ability of a material to retain a portion applied magnetic field after the magnetizing has been removed. of the force

Flaws (2.116).

field strength

or intensity

in cgs

IS 3415 2.112

: 1998 Time 2.119 Test Pieces See Control Specimens Bar (2.26). Method

Settling

The time allowed for settlement of magnetic particles in a sample of magnetic ink or bath prior to the assessment of particle content. 2.113 Sensitivity

2.120 Threading

The degree of capability of a magnetic particle examination technique for indicating surface or near surface discontinuities in ferromagnetic material. 2.114 Skin Effect

A method of magnetization in which a current carrying bar, cable or tube is passed through a bore or aperture in a component under inspection. 2.121 Threading Coil Method

The phenomenon that causes the magnetization produced by alternating current to be contained near the surface of a ferromagnetic part. 2.115 Surface Discontinuity in the material which starts from the

A development of the threading bar method whereby a magnetizing coil rather than a straight run of bar or cable in threaded through a bore or aperture in a component. 2.122 Tongs An accessory consisting of two insulated crossing each other at a common pivot, of the pivot they form the two halves turn magnetizing coil and on the other, whereby the coil is made and broken and to the source of current. 2.123 Ultra Violet Light conductors on one side of a single two handles is connected

A discontinuity surface. 2.116

Subsurface

Flaws

Flaws which are located just below the surface but not open to the surface. 2.117 Surface Field

See Black Light (2.7). 2.124 VisiMe The magnetic field at the surface of the component under examination. 2.118 Sutherland Flask See Colour Particles Particles Method (2.18).

Contrast

2.125 Wet Particle The magnetic ferromagnetic 2.126 Yoke

A graduated tapered glass flask used for measuring the apparent proportion of solids separating under gravity from a known volume of magnetic particle flaw detection ink. The ungraduated upper portion like an inverted pear, is constricted at the top receiver stopper and blended at the bottom into a graduated tube of small uniform sections. Tesla - The SI Unit of magnetic density (1 Tesla = IO4 Gauss). induction of flux

particle inspection method employing particles suspended in a liquid bath.

A magnet that induces a magnetic field in the area or a part that lies between its poles. Yokes may be permanent magnets or either alternating current or direct current electromagnets or half wave direct current.

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indim Statldards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course ol implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BJS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as Lhe need arises on Ihc basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Uscrs of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring lo the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. MTD 21 (3629).
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 32376 17,3233841 337 84 99,337 85 6 1 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 1 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 { 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CYENNAJ 600113

: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMADABAD.

BANG&ORE. BHGPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Rintedat Simco Printing Press, Delhi,
India

