**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13809-1 (1993) : Quality management procedures for 
diagnostic and blood transfusion services - guidelines. 
Part 1: Up to 30-bedded hospitals [MHD 1: Surgical 
Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13609 ( Part 1 K}4903 

Indian Standard 

QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES FOR 

DIAGNOSTIC AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION 

SERVICES — GUIDELINES 

PART 1 UP TO 30-BEDDED HOSPITALS 



UDC 362111 : 61538 



O BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
'nBW DELHI 110002 

July 1993 Price Group 5 



Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee* MSD 8 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Management and Systems Division Council. 

There is a felt need for quality management and quality assurance procedures in hospital services 
so as to make the same more effective, economical and accountable. Once a health and medical 
care facility has been planned and provided with required instruments and equipment, there is a 
need to manage the facility scientifically so that quality service is provided to patients on a 
continued basis. While basic management principles and individual skills are helpful in such 
efforts, optimum results can be achieved only if certain standards and guidelines are available for 
the management and operational systems of health and medical care services. For this purpose, 
it would be necessary, as a first step, to lay down norms and standards and then to provide the 
requisite infrastructure needed for achieving the desired targets. 

Most of the 30-bedded hospitals in the country, particularly in rural areas, lack in the basic 
facilities leading to dissatisfaction to user community. Therefore, there is an imperative need to 
set up some guidelines and standards for upgradation ( both qualitative as well as quantitative ) of 
diagnostic facilities along with the requisite infrastructure in the existing 30-bedded hospitals and 
also for starting the new ones. 

Quality assurance activity of Diagnostic Services Department aims at providing the most accurate, 
precise and timely test results and preventing the occurrence of errors. This activity is not confined 
to one or two individuals, but is the responsibility of everyone in the department. 

A good quality assurance programme for a Diagnostic Services Department has three major 
aspects - Preventive activities; Assessment procedures; and Corrective actions. Preventive activities 
are taken to avoid errors and ensure accuracy and precision. Method selection, careful laboratory 
design, hiring of competent personnel, development of comprehensive procedure manuals and 
effective preventive maintenance programmes are a few examples of preventive activities. 
Assessment procedures monitor the analytical process to determine the type and amount of error 
and the change in accuracy and precision in the process. These activities include the testing of 
quality control material, performing instrument function checks, and participating in proficiency 
testing programmes. Corrective actions are taken to rectify errors after discovery and include useful 
and timely communication with the users of the laboratory's services, review of work, and of 
instrument problems. 

Blood is a biological product of human beings, the correct administration of which is a life saving 
measure in many critical conditions. No general hospital can hope to fulfill all its responsibilities 
and obligations until and unless it has access to safe blood transfusion facilities. The recent trend 
all over the world is to organize and manage blood transfusion service as an integral part of the 
diagnostic services specially in small general hospitals of this size. 

30-bedded hospitals are quite small in size and infrastructure where it is not feasible to create the 
entire set up of a Blood Bank because of the economics of demand and supply. Hence, it is 
proposed to set up a Blood Transfusion Centre with basic facilities in place of blood bank, in a 
30-bedded general hospital. In India, the setting up of a Blood Transfusion Centre shall be 
according to the criteria laid down by Drug and Cosmetic Act, 1948. 
The committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex D. 

The purpose of this standard is to provide the basic guidelines for evolving a well-planned quality 
assurance programme which would result in quality health care to the patients in relation to 
diagnostic and blood transfusion services in a 30-bedded general hospital. 

This standard is mainly for 30-bedded hospitals such as community health centres/sub-district 
hospitals/intermediate hospitals. Other standards in this series which will be published in due 
course are as follows. 

Quality management procedures for: 

OPD and emergency services — Guidelines 

Wards, nursing services and operation theatre — Guidelines 

Hospital support services — Guidelines 

Hospital engineering services — Guidelines 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 NOVEMBER 1994 

TO 

IS 13809 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 QUALITY MANAGEMENT 

PROCEDURES FOR DIAGNOSTIC AND BLOOD 

TRANSFUSION SERVICES — GUIDELINES 

PART 1 UP TO 30-BEDDED HOSPITALS 

( First cover page and all other relevant pages, designation ) — Substitute 
MS 13808 ( Part 2 ) : 1993' for 'IS 13809 (Part 1 ) : 1993'. 

( First cover page^ page 1, title ) — Substitute the following for the existing 
title: 

EQUALITY MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITAL SERVICES 
( UP TO 30*BEDDED HOSPITALS ) — GUIDELINES 

PART 2 DIAGNOSTIC AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICES' 

( Second cover page^ Foreword ) — Add the following para at the end: 

'This series of standards for 30-bedded hospitals covers only a part of quality 
management aspect in hospital services and relates to infrastructure, skills, 
procedures and systems, etc, which is a prescription type provision, adherence to 
which is expected to result in service of desired quality. The second part, 
comprising of identification of attributes of quality and quantifying them, that is, 
performance type of standards for hospital services would be published in due 
course.* 

( Page 2, clause 4.2.2, line 7 ) — Substitute the following for the existing 
equality: 

*= [30-(30%of30)]x7'. 



(MSD8) 



Reprognphy Unit, BIS, New Ddhi, India 



IS 13809 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 



Indian Standard 



QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES FOR 

DIAGNOSTIC AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION 
SERVICES — GUIDELINES 



PART 1 UP TO 30-BEDDED HOSPITALS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard (Part 1) lays down guidelines for quality 
management procedures for diagnostic and blood 
transfusion services offered in 30-bedded general 
hospitals with reference to: 

a) Pathological Services — The system of 
collection of blood, urine, and other body 
fluid samples and their processing. 

b) Imaging Services — The system of imaging 
of patients by X-ray and Ultrasound. 

c) ECG Services 

d) Blood Transfusion Services. 

2 REFERENCE 

The following Indian Standard is a necessary adjunct 
to this standard: 



IS No. 



Title 



12433 (Part 1) : Basic requirements for hospital 
1988 planning : Part 1 Up to 30-beddcd 

hospitals 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions 
shall apply. 

3.1 Blood Transfusion Services 

Facility responsible for safe and effective collection, 
storage, processing and distribution of blood. 

3.2 Diagnostic Services 

The procedure involving the use of technology by 
medical or paramedical personnel to know the nature, 
extent and the cause of disease. 

3.3 Laboratory 

Place of investigations. 

3.3«1 Bioc/iemistry 

Study of chemical or physio-chemical processes and 
values of nonnal and abnormal products of metabolism 
of carbohydrates, fats, proteins, etc. 

3.3.2 Haematology 

Qualitative and quantitative study of blood and blood 
components. 



3.3.3 Patlwlogy 

The science of analysis of diseased tissue or fluids and 
other elements in the body. 

3.3.4 Serology 

Science of study of factors present in serum. These 
factors may include antibodies to bacteria, virus and 
other antigens and blood grouping systems. 

3.3.5 Microbiology 
Study of micro-organisms. 

3.4 Radiology 

The science of imaging by X-ray. 

3.5 Ultrasonography 

Science of imaging by the use of ultrasound 
waves. 

3.6 Electro Cardio Graph (ECG) 

Study of electro-physiological changes in the heart. 

3.7 Restricted Emergency Services 

Emergency services which are rendered as and when 
required by placing staff on call. 

3.8 Medical Audit 

A systematic and critical evaluation of the quality of 
medical care in retrospect, through analysis of clinical 
records. 

NOTES 

1 Clinical records include procedures used for dingnosis and 
treatment, tKe use of resources and the resulting outcome and 
quality of life for the patient. 

2 The purpose of medical audit is to identify opportunities 
and to implement improvement in: 

— quality of medical care, 

— medical training and continuing education, 

— efficient and effective use of resources, and 

— assessment of patient satisfaction. 

4 PLANNING 

4.1 Physical Facilities 



IS13809(Piim):1993 

4.1.1 Location 

There should be a separate wing for Diagnostic Services 
Department attached to the main hospital site such 
that, it is: 

a) easily accessible to both indoor and outdoor 
patients, 

b) easily accessible to the operation theatre 
department, 

c) preferably on the ground floor. 

Blood transfusion centre should be adjacent to the 
diagnostic services department since many of the 
functions will be common. 

4.1.2 Functional and Space Requirements 

For functional and space requirements of diagnostic 
zone, reference shall be made to 7 of IS 12433 
(Part 1) : 1988. 

Functional and space requirements for blood transfusion 
services may be as recommended in Annex A. 

4.2 Expected Workload 

4.2.1 The expected number of laboratory/radiographic 
investigations may depend on number of factors. 
However, a rough criteria is that, 

a minimum of 1/3 of the OPD patients and 
2/3 of the inpatients with 2 to 3 investigations 
per patient require laboratory investigations 
per day 

a minimum of 1/6 of the OPD patients and 
1/3 of the inpatients with atleast one investi- 
gation per patient require radiological inves- 
tigations per day 

Depending upon the number of inpatients and the 
expected number of outpatients in a day, which is 
estimated as ISO- 180 outpatients per day for a 30- 
bedded hospital, the expected number of laboratory 
investigation is estimated as 170-180 investigations 
per day and that of radiological investigations is 
estimated as 35-40 investigations per day. 

4.2.2 The workload of the blood transfusion services 
varies according to the type, size, utilization and 
functional activities of hospital. However, for a 30- 
bedded hospital an estimate according to WHO may 
be as given below: 

(Number of beds - 30%) x 7 
= 30 - (30% of 30) X 7 
=: (30 - 9) X 7 
= 21 X 7 = 147 
s 150 unit per year 

4.3 Stafi; Instruments and Equipment Requirements 

4.3.1 For manpower requirements of the diagnostic 
services, reference may be made to 8 of IS 12433 
( Part 1 ) : 1988. 



4.3.2 For instruments and equipment requirements 
of the diagnostic services, reference may be made to 
9 of IS 12433 (Part 1) : 1988. 

4.3.3 Staff, instruments and equipment requirements 
for blood transfusion services may be as recommended 
in Annex A. 

5 ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE 

With a view to provide an efficient quality management 
system there should be a well organized structure for 
Diagnostic and Blood Transfusion Services. The flow 
of activities under the diagnostic (pathological, imaging 
and ECG) and blood transfusion services have been 
indicated in the diagram given in Annex B. 

The various activities under each of these services 
will be carried out by the respective medical^iamedical 
personnel. The overall functioning of these services 
should be under the control of a designated medical 
officer-in-charge who would be overseeing the day- 
to-day functioning of these services in addition to his 
other duties. 

6 FUNCTIONAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Timings of Diagnostic and Blood Transfusion 
Services 

6.1.1 It is recommended that Diagnostic Services 
Department may work for 7 hours per day (0 900 h- 
1 600 h) for 6 days in a week. Collection of the 
laboratory samples for pathological investigations may 
be done for 3 houis in the morning (0 900 h-1 200 h) 
and requisition for X-rays/ultrasound/ECG may be 
accepted for 4 hours in the morning (0 900 h-1 300 h). 

The department shall run on restricted emergency 
basis also. 

6.1.2 The blood transfusion centre shall run for 

7 hours per day (0 900 h-1 600 h) and it shall run on 
restricted emergency basis also. 

6.2 Functional Activities under Diagnostic Services 

There is a need to enhance the scope of Diagnostic 
Services Department so that the number of patients 
requiring admission can be minimized. Effective and 
efficient functioning of the department will facilitate 
this objective. To achieve this objective, it will be 
necessary that a detailed diagnosis at the clinical 
laboratory and imaginp; section should be undertaken 
and the patients requiring admission alone may be 
admitted to the hospital. 

The main functions of the diagnostic services 
department are to provide facilities for investi^tions 
(pathological, radiological and ECG) for all kinds of 
patient care services including restricted emergency 
services. The doctors from the Out Patient Department 
(OPD) or Wards (IPD) would fill up the requisition 
form for the investigatioii(s) required, which may be 
as given in Annex C, common to all types of 
investigations. Separate requisition forms should be 
filled for different type of investigations. 



A typical flow diagram for various functional activities 
in Diagnostic Services Department may be as given 
in Annex B. 

6.24 Patliological Services 

6*2.1*1 Reception and Registration 

A system for registration of patients should exist for: 

a) Identification of samples, 

b) Recording of type and number of investig9tions, 

c) Recording of personal data for identification. 

The particulars of the patient and investigations 
required should be register^ in the laboratory according 
to the following proforma: 

Date SI No. Name IPD/OPD No. No. and Nature Remarks 

or Tests 

This Serial Number should also be entered both in the 
OPD card as well as the requisition slip. 

6.2.1.2 Collection of samples 

The blood, urine and other tluid samples should be 
collected for processing which may involve: 

a) Receiving urine, stool, etc, other than blood 
samples; 

b) Withdrawal of intravenous/capillary blood in 
specified vials/containcrs using a disposable 
syringe oratleast a disposable needle for each 
patient; 

c) Labelling and numbering of samples; and 

d) Matching the serial number of registration. 

The samples collected should be labelled with the 
patient*s name, registration number, date and time of 
collection (if relevant) and the serial number. 
Alternatively, a codification system, as the one 
recoitmiended below may be followed for labelling 
the samples received in the laboratory: 

'Laboratory code SI No ./Date' 

for example L 1/2609 
L 2/2609 
L 3/2609 

6.2.1.3 Processing and reporting 

A laboratory should be provided for biochemistry; 
clinical pathology and haematology; serology; and 
microbiology. The functioning of the laboratory will 
include: 

a) Processing of collected samples, 

b) Entry of test report in laboratory registers, 

c) Reporting of results in the requisition form 
itself with the proper stamping of the test 
carried out with their nornuil values. 



IS 13809 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

The samples collected shall be processed and test 
results entered in the respective register for reporting 
of test results (for example. Report Register for blood, 
urine, etc, in the required foniiat). The test results 
shall also be entered in the requisition form. 

6.2.1.4 Despatch of Reports 
This involves: 

a) Arrangement for classifying reports of 
respective OPD/Wards, 

b) Entry in despatch registers, 

c) Distribution of reports in person/through 
messengers. 

The requisition form including the test report shall be 
sent to the OPD registration counter for the outpatients 
and to the wards for the inpatients after making 
appropriate entry in the 'Remarks' column of the 
register in 6*r*l«l. 

6.2.2 Imaging Services 

This unit deals with radio-diagnosis and ultrasound. 

6.2.2.1 Reception and Registration 

A system for registration of patients should exist for: 

a) registration of patients for X-rays/ultrasound; 

b) assignment of registration number; and 

c) imparting of special instruction, if any, in 
printed form. 

6.2.2.2 Preparation of patients for imaging 

A separate radiography room may be provided for 
imaging by X-ray and ultrasound and a change room 
may also be provided separately or along with the 
radiography room. 

6.2.2.3 Processing and inferring 

Film developing and dark room shall be provided in 
the department for loading, unloading, developing 
and processing of X-ray films. The room shall be 
completely cut-off from direct light through provision 
of light barrier. For ventilations, exhaust fans shall be 
provided. 

The exposed X-ray film^ and ultrasound outputs shall 
be used for drawing inferences and recording ther 
as reports in the requisition form itself. 

6.2.2.4 Documentation and despatch 

The X-ray and ultrasound reports shall also be 
documented in the registers maintained in the 
radiography room before despatch. 

The records of developed X-ray films and ultrasound 
outputs shall be maintained in a separate record room 
with proper identiHcation system which may be needed 
at subsequent visits of the patients. 



IS13809( Parti): 1993 
6.2.3 ECG Services 

6.2.3.1 Reception and registration 

A system for registration of patients should exist for 

a) registration of patients for ECG 

b) assignment of registration number 

6.2.3.2 Recording of ECG 

A separate room should be provided for recording of 
ECG of the patient. 

6.2.3.3 Despatch of reports 

The particulars of the patient as given in the requisition 
fonn should be recorded in the despatch register 
maintained in the ECG room before handing over the 
ECG tracing to the patient or his representative. The 
report of ECG may also be recorded in the despatch 
register. 

6.3 Functional Activities Under Blood Transfusion 
Services 

Blood transftision service should ensure safe transfusion 
of blood through appropriate process of collection, 
storage, cross-matching and screening of donors' blood 
including the laboratory tests for Hepatitis B (HBS 
Ag), HIV (AIDS), Malaria and VDRL. Blood should 
be accepted from donors on strictly non-remunerative 
and voluntary basis and also from relatives/friends 
donors. On no account should blood be accepted from 
professional blood sellers. 

The source of blood should generally be regional 
blood bank. However, for emergency use, a list of 
voluntary donors whose blood has already been screened 
should be maintained instead of storing the blood in 
a 30-bedded hospital since the shelf life of blood is 
short and also the consumption not being very high 
in a small hospital. Stocks of blood substitutes, like 
plasma, etc, may be maintained instead. Liaison may 
be maintained with other bigger hospitals/blood banks 
in the vicim*ty for situations when blood collected if 
not be used in time, may be transferred to these 
hospitals/blood banks with an understanding that as 
and when this hospital would need blood in an 
emergency, it could be given to them in lieu/on loan. 
Appropriate facilities for the trans-shipment of blood 
should also be made available. 

Adequate provision should be made for clean, soft 
water; electricity; light and ventilation; sruicks and 
tea/coffee for the donors. 

7 PROCEDURE MANUAL 

7.1 A standard manual should be developed and 
followed with regard to each area of diagnostic services 
including various investigations to be carried out and 
other day-to-day work of the department. This may 
include staff development, method of test, nuintenance 
of equipment, storage of materials and disposal of 
diagnostic waste. 

For blood transfusion services, standard technical 
procedures should be followed as laid down by the 
Government of India/State Governments. 



7.1.1 Personnel Development 

The staff (including technical staff) of diagnostic and 
blood transfusion services should be fully qualified, 
well trained and experienced in their respective 
activities. The staff of blood transfusion services should 
be specially trained in blood transfusion technology 
including HIV testing. 

To keep an employee abreast of the current state of 
technology and to keep skills refreshed, there should 
be an active continuing education programme. 

On the job checklist may be given to the technicians 
to guide them with regard to the various activities 
performed by them for monitoring their own 
performance. 

7.1.2 Method of Test 

Each test performed in the laboratory should have a 
separate procedure containing pertinent information 
written in a uniform style which nuiy include special 
directions for patient preparation, directions for the 
preparation of reagents and other material required, 
complete instruction for performing the test 
procedures, reporting of test results, etc. The Standing 
Operating Procedures (SOP) for the same shall be 
prepared and followed for the respective diagnostic 
services. 

7.1.3 Maintenance of Equipment and Materials 
Management 

7.1.3.1 Maintenance of equipment 

A separate history sheet should be maintained for 
each equipment giving details of name of equipment, 
date of purchase, cost of equipment, source or supplier, 
life of equipment, mainteiuince schedule (including 
calibration, if required), breakdowns, repairs and cost 
of repairs, etc. llie equipment may be recommended 
for condemnation if it breaks down repeatedly incurring 
heavy expenditure and becomes beyond economical 
repair or obsolete model. Efforts should be made to 
keep a good liaison with larger hospitals and other 
technical people for maintenance of equipment as and 
when required. 

7.1.3.2 Storage and liandling of materials 

Laid down procedures regarding procurement, storage 
and disposal of reagents; chemicals; X-ray paper and 
ECG paper, and kits; etc, should be strictly adhered 
to and records should be maintained indicating their 
consumption, expiry date, required level of inventory 
and present position of stock. \ 

As regards to blood transfusion services, adequate 
buffer stores of consummables like antisera, and 
disposables may be kept keeping in view the possibilities 
of erratic supplies. 

8 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

A suitable mechanism should be available with requisite 
infrastructural facilities for evaluating the performance 



of diagnostic and blood transfusion services offered. 
For example, a fixed number of cases in a month at 
random shall have an audit by a Medical Audit 
Committee. Every functioiuil area of Diagnostic and 
Blood Transfusion Services should be evaluated by 



IS 13809 ( IVirt 1 ) : 1993 

this Conmiittee to assess the efficacy of the system. 
The feedback arising out of such evaluation should be 
recorded and made use of in improving the quality 
related activities of diagnostic and blood transfusion 
services in future. 



ANNEX A 

(Clauses 4.1.2 and 433) 

BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICES 



IN A 30.BEDDED GENERAL HOSPITAL 



A-1 FUNCTIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS 



AND SPACE 



One room of size Sm x 6.Sm should be kept for blood 
transfusion services. This room may be divided into 
various cubicles for the following facilities: 



Examination Records 
and Store Area 


Mini Lab 

Storage of Blood 

and 

Staff Working Area 


Bleeding Area 



A-2 STAFF, INSTRUMENTS AND 
EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS 

A-2.1 Manpower Requirements 

It is recommended that the staff of the diagnostic 
services department may be trained in the science of 
blood transfusion. However, in addition, the following 
staff may be required for blood transfusion services: 



Technologist - Blood 
Tra nsfusion/Haematology 
Technical Aid 



Min 
1 



1 (to be shared with the 
paramedical staff of the 
hospital) 



A-2.2 Instruments and Equipment Requirements 

The following instruments and equipments are 
recommended for blood transfusion services: 



Blood Bank Refrigerator 



Microscope 



Min 

1 Special Features: 

— Low temperature up 
toO^C 

— Cabinet fan cooled 

— Temperature 
recording device 

— Power supply backup 
generator 

1 Binocular 



Facility for screening the 1 
blood samples from 
HIV (AIDS) and HBS Ag 
(Elisa Reader). 

Elisa Reagents and kits 

Blood bags 

Water bath 1 

Pasteur pipettes 

Serology tubes racks 

Grease pencil and glass marking pens 

Microscope slides 



IS13809(IVirtl):1993 

ANNEX B 

(Clauses 5 and 6.2) 

nx>w OF AcnvrriEs for diagnostic and blood transfusion services 





DIAGNOSTIC AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICES 




































PATHOLOGICAL 
SERVICES 




IMAGING 
SERVICES 




EC6 
SERVICES 




BLOOD TRANSFUSION 
SERVICES 



























RECEPTION & 
REGISTRATION 



RECEPTION & 
REGISTRATION 



RECEPTION & 
REGISTRATION 



SELECTION 
OF DONORS 



COLLECTION 
OF SAMPLES 



PREPARATION OF 

PATIENTS AND 

IMAGING 



ECG 
RECORDING 



CaLECTION,GR0UPING 
TESTING AND 
CROSSMATCHING 



PROCESSING 81 
REPORTING 



PROCESSING & 
INFERRING 



REPORTING 



STORAGE 



DESPATCH OF 
REPORTS 



DOCUMENTATION 
& DESPATCH 



DESPATCH 



ISSUE 



IS 13809 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.2) 

REQUISITION SUP 



Name : OPD/IPD No. . 

Age : Sex : Date 

Investigations Required : 



Brief Clinical Notes 



Results 



IS138a9(Partl):1993 

ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee, MSD 8 



Chairman 
Mai Gbn M. L. Sapra 

Members 
Dr a. K. Aoarwal 
Lt Col R. K. Bhaskar 

Dr Narendra Bihari 

Dr S. K. Chaudhuri 

Dr R. N. Baishya {AUernate) 

Director 

Head of The Department of 

ANAES-IHESlOLOaY {AUernaU 1) 

Head of The Department of 
Radiodiaonosis (Alternate 2) 
Dr p. N. Ghei 

Dr S. D. Vohra {AUernate) 
Dr N. K. Grover 

Dr Y. p. MUNJAL(A/rermif0) 
Dr Shyam Joshi 
Dr S. R Karnik 
Dr G. B. Mahapatra 
Shri G. K. Maiumoar 

Shri Anil Grover (Alternate) 
Lt Col S. K. Mathur 

Dr J. N. MOHANTY 

Dr AnilNarang 
Shri S. S. Pillai 
Dr (Smt) Ira Ray 
Dr p. S. Rugmini 
Dr Subhash R. Salunkb 

Dr Ram S. Bharuka (Alternate) 
Dr T. Samrai 
Dr V. N. Sbhoal 

Dr SaroI Sharma (Alternate) 
Dr Satyendra Singh 

Dr Sunil Sharma (Alternate) 
Prof R. P. Sinha 

Dr R. K. Sarma (Alternate) 
Dr p. Siva Reddy 

Dr (Mrs.) B. K. Maini (Alternate) 
Dr a. K. Srivastava 

Dr Hem Chandra (Alternate) 
Dr M. p. Vaidya 
Lt Col R C. Vishwakarama 

Dr A. K. Nagpal 
Shri S. Krbhnamurihy, 
Dinctor (MSD) 



Hqfresenting 
Institute of Nuclear Medidne and Allied Sciences* Delhi. 

Nationil Institute of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Medical Services (Army), Ministry of Defence, 

New Delhi 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfaie, New Delhi 
Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narain Hospital, New Delhi 

Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, 
Pondicherry 



Indian Hospital Association, New Delhi 

Indian Medical Association, New Delhi 

Institute of Public Health and Hygiene, New Delhi 
Jaslok Hospital and Research Centre, Bombay 
Tata Engineering Sl Locomotive Company Limited, Pune 
Hospital Services Consultancy Corpn (India) Ltd, New Dehli 

Institute of Nuclear Medidne and Allied Sdences, I>elhi 
Directorate of Health Services, Delhi Administration, New Delhi 
Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 
General Insurance Corporation of India, New Delhi 
National Institute of Biologicals, New Delhi 
Medical Coundl of India. New Delhi 
Directorate of Health Services, Bombay 

Christian Medical College, Vellore 

Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New I>elhi 

Department of Hospital Administration, All India Institute of Medical 

Sdences, New Delhi 
National Academy of Medical Sciences (India), New Delhi 

Sanjay Gandhi Post*Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow 

Batra Hospital and Medical Research Centre, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services, Ministry of 

Defence, New Delhi 
Chairman, Hospital Planning Sectional Committee, MHD 18 
Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 



Member Secretary 

SmtBinduMehta 

Assistant Diitctor (MSD), BIS 



IS13809(Partl):1993 

Panel for 'Management Procedures for Diagnostic Services' (MSD 8/P.2) 

Convener Representing 

Dr S. K. Chaudhuri Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narain Hospital, New Delhi 

Members 

Dr A. K. Agarwal National Institute of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 

Dr p. N. Ghbi Indian Hospital Association, New Delhi 

Maj L. Saiua Institute of Nuclear Medidne and Allied Sciences, Delhi 

Dr V. H. Taub Safdaijung Hospital, New Delhi 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau o//ffi/ian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This docs not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no 
changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of 
Indian Standards should ascertain that they arc in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this 
Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc: No. MSD8 (29) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75 



Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

(331 01 31 
|331 13 75 

{37 84 99. 37 85 61 
137 86 26, 37 86 62 



i 



53 38 43, 53 16 40 
53 23 84 



1235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1235 15 19. 235 23 15 

J632 92 95, 632 78 58 

1632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



