•••*****•*•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10062 (1991) : Proforma for analysis of unit rate of 
quarrying rock by mechanical means [WRD 23: Measurement and 
Cost Analysis of Works For River Valley Projects] 



<bVJJIi^j>^^^Vfl/ll^^^ag^Ts^^lITFS3egS 



[SS^ V I l>5ft>!>5^>«SV: 



^^\\X^L 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10062 : 1991 
WRWt*f IfRWi ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

( <T^pT7 ^T^STW j 

/fld/tffl Standard 

PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE OF 
QUARRYING ROCK BY MECHANICAL MEANS 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 69-003-12 : 622-271'2 



^jJG) BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 
July 1991 Price Group 1 



Cost Analysis and Cost Estimates Sectional Committee, RVD 19 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Cost Analysis and Cost Estimates Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the River Valley Division Council. 

Excavation of foundations in rock for various structures, such as dams and power houses, will have 
to be done generally by mechanical means. Similarly rubble and aggregate are used in building 
industry, construction of dams and other structures Building of roads and many other purposes have 
to be quarried by mechanised methods. The mode of excavation and quarrying depends on site 
conditions, type and use of machinery and equipment. 

The cost of quarrying rock, therefore, varies from project to project. The unit rate of quarrying 
rock is made up of several components, such as cost of labour, drilling, explosives, mucking, other 
ancillary items, transport and stacking. The costs of some of the above components in turn depend 
on the machinery and equipment used on the job. A uniform proforma for the analysis of unit rate 
for quarrying rock will be useful in comparing the rates. 

This standard was first published in 1981. The revision of this standard has been taken up in the 
light of the experience gained during the last nine years in the use of this standard. This standard 
has been revised and additional items required have been added. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



IS 10062 : 1991 

Indian Standard 

PROFORM A FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE OF 
QUARRYING ROCK BY MECHANICAL MEANS 

( First Revision ) 

1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down proforma for analysis of unit rate of quarrying rock by mechanical 
means. 

2 PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE OF QUARRYING ROCK BY 
MECHANICAL MEANS 

2.1 The proforma recommended for use in analysis of unit rate of quarrying rock by mechanical means 
is as given in Table 1 . 

Table 1 Proforma for Analysis of Unit Rate of Quarrying Rock by Mechanical Means 



SI No Item Unit 


Quantity 


Rate 


Amount 


Remarks 


(1 ) (2) (3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


i) Royalty fees for quarrying 











ii) Removal of overburden, rejected or 
unuseable material 

iii) Drilling 

a) Machinery and equipment 
excluding air 

b) Compressed air 

c) Drill bits and drilling accessories 

d) Other material 

e) Labour 

iv) Blasting 

a) Machinery and equipment 

b) Material 

c) Labour 

v) Transport to stackyard and stacking 

a) Machinery and equipment 

b) Material 

c) Labour 
vi) Quarry roads 

vii) Dewatering arrangement 

viii) Ancillaries and incidental 

a) Provision ( excluding operation and 
maintenance ) of the following: 

1) Transportation of labour 

2) Labour and staff quarters 



IS 10062 : 1991 



Table 1 (Concluded) 



SI No. Item Unit 

(1) (2) (3) 

3) Service and haul roads 

4) Electric power system 

5) Water supply system 

6) Sanitary system 

7) Surface drainage 

8) Safety measures including fire 
fighting arrangements 

9) Other amenities 

b) Maintenance/operation of items 
mentioned above 

c) Supervisory works establishment 

ix) Contingencies 

x) Quality control, including laboratory 
charges 

xi) Overhead ( excluding profit ). This shall 
include establishment, office stationery, 
general tools ^nd plant, staff cars and 
their running and maintenance, insurance, 
workman's compensations, telephones 
and telecommunication facilities, security 
arrangements, interest liabilities on 
borrowings from the owner and bank 
guarantee charges, etc 

Total — all in rate 

NOTES 

1 The above items may be expressed on pro-rata 
basis. 

2 All items mentioned above shall include 
depreciation, erection, operation repairs and 
maintenance and dismantling of machinery where 
used. All items of labour mentioned above shall 
include indirect statutory and other benefits 
payable to the labour. 



Quantity 

(4) 



Rate 

(5) 



Amount 

(6) 



Remarks 

(7) 



Manuara iviarK 

Tlie use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BJS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), 
BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving 
the following reference: 

Doc : No. RVD 19 ( 35 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110C02 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg < 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 I 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 2 35 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 

HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Progressive Printers, Shahdara, Delhi, India 



