( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 12233 ( Part 1 /Set 5 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE CHARACTERISTICS OF OVERHEAD POWER LINES AND HIGH VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT
PART 1 DESCRIPTIO-N Section 5 Special OF PHENOMENA dc Effects

Electromagnetic
Chairman

Compatibility

Sectional Committee,
Representing

LTDC 22

DR M.

K. RAO
Members

Wireless Planning and Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry of Communication ), New Delhi

SHRI VENKAT SUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate to Dr M. K. Rao ) DR V. K. AGhRwAL NatioFe;h%ysical

Laboratory

( CSIR ), New

SEIRI V. K. RUST~GI ( Alternate > Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI M. A. BAQUI SHRI V. V. SURYANARAYANA ( Alternate ) DR T. A. R. BHAT Indian Institute of Technology, Madras Overseas Communications Services, Bombay SHRI DALJIT SINGH National Airport Authority, New Delhi SHRI J. B. DANWAR SHR~ K. C. GOSWAMY ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence (R&D) (LRDE) L-r-COL ( DR ) G. K. DEB Bangalore SHRI K. M. SAHEBU (Alternate ) Indian Radiological Association, New Delhi SHRI U. C. DIMRI Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( PROTECTION & INSTRUMENTATION ) DIRECTOR ( SUB-STATION) ( Alternate ) Electrical Manufacturers' Appliances SHRI A. K. DUBEY Association, Delhi SHRI Y. P. SURI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI K. L. GARG New Delhi SHRI R. V. NARAYANAN( Alternate ) Piece Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Pune SHRI J. GUPTA SHRI K. RAJENDRAN ( Alternate )
( Continued @ Copyright 1988 on page 2 )

BUREAU OF This publication is protected under reproduction in whole or in part by publisher shall be deemed to be an

INDIAN STANDARDS the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and any means except with written permission of the infringement of copyright under the said Act.

PS : 12233 ( Part l/Set 5 ) - 1987
( Continued from page 1 ) Members JOINTDIRECTOR Representing
ReseaFu:ku3e;igo & Standards Organization,

JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS( S & T )/ TE ( INV ) ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) COL KRISHAN LAL SHRI N. CHANDERPAL ( AIternate j Directorate of Technical Development and SHRI PRATAP KUMAR Production ( Air ), New Delhi SHRI C. M. KRISHNAMURTHY ( Alternate ) Institution of Electronics and TelecommuniPROF S. N. MITRA cation Engineers ( IETE ), New Delhi COL J. C. ANAND ( RETED ) ( Alternate ) Department of-Telecommunication, New Delhi SHRI S. MUTHUSWAMY SHRI ASHOK GOLAS ( Alternate ) Directorate General of All India Radio, SHRI W. V. B. RAMALIN~AM New Delhi SHRI T. C. RAMDORAI ( AIternate ) DR N. RAMESH NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI ROY ABRAHAM ( Alternate ) Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ), SHRI K. J. MOHAN RAO New Delhi SHRI R. P. MATHUR ( Alternate 1 SHRI M. L. SHARMA Ihdian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI N. KRISHNAKUTT~ ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR B. K. SINHA SHRI R. K. ARORA ( Alternate ) Automotive Research Association of India, SHRI T. N. SKIVASTAVA Pune SHRI A. B. KOMAWAR Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Jalahalli, Bangalore SHRI K. R. SUR~SH SHRI VIRENDRA VDAY Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi SHRI C. D. BANERJI ( Afternate ) DIRECTOR ( ELECTRONICS ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member )

Secretary
Deputy SHRI D. K. NAYYAR Director ( Electronics ), BIS

IS : 12233 ( Part l/Set

5 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
ELECTROMAGNETI-C INTERFERENCE CHARACTERISTICS OF OVERHEAD POWER LINES AND HIGH VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT
PART 1 DESCRIPTION 5 SPECIAL OF PHENOMENA dc EFFECTS

SECTION

0.
0.1 This Indian Standard

FOREWORD

( Part l/Sex 5 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 30 August 1987, after the draft finalized by the Electromagnetic Compatibility Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The purpose of the series of Part 1 of this standard is to discuss the physical phenomena involved in the generation of electromagnetic noise fields. This also includes the main properties of such fields and their numerical values. 0.3 The technical data given in these standards will be useful aid to overhead line designers and also to any one concerned with checking the electromagnetic noise performance of a line to ensure satisfactory protection of wanted electromagnetic signals. 0.3.1 The technical data should facilitate use of the recommendations which will be given in Parts 2 and 3. These parts comprising oi diflerent sections are proposed to be issued as given below: Part 2 Methods of measurement and procedure of determining limits Part 3 Code of practice for minimizing the generation of-radio noise 0.4 This standard ( Part I > series is proposed to be issued in the following sections, which would clarify only one aspect over the electromagnetic interference due to overhead power lines and high voltage equipment: Section 1 Radio noise from power lines Section 2 Effect of corona from conductors Section 3 Radio noise levels due to insulators, fittings and substation equiymcnt (excluding bad contacts)

IS : 12233 ( Part l/ Set 5 ) - 1987 Section 4 Sparking due to bad contacts Section 5 Special dc effects 0.5 This standard has been largely based on CISPR Publication 18-1 ( First Edition - 1982) `Radio interference characteristics of overhead power lines and high voltage equipment, Part I - Description of phenomena', issued by the International Special Committee on Radio Interference of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2 - 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this. standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This Standard (Part l/Set 5) deals with radio noise generated high voltage dc transmission systems which may cause interference radio/TV reception. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 1885, ( Part 36 )-1972" shall apply. 3. GENERAL ASPECT OF SPECIAL dc EFFECTS by to

3.1 High voltage dc transmission systems can generate radio noise in, two quite different ways: firstly, by normal operation of main convertor valves which may be of the mercury arc type of thyristors and, secondly, by corona discharge and associated phenomena on the high voltage equipment, busbars and overhead lines. It is, therefore, necessary to take into consideration: a) The effect of dc corona, and b) The effect of value firing. 3.2 Compared with high voltage ac transmission systems, the problem of radio noise from high voltage dc systems is not so important, as only relatively few are in operation throughout the world. Consequently, experience of radio interference problems associated with high voltage
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). tElectrotechnica1 vocabulary: Part 36 Radio interference.

4

IS : 12233 ( Part l/Set

5 ) - 1987

dc systems is less than that with high voltage ac systems. Most of the information on high voltage dc interference has been obtained from test lines and cages, and the remainder from existing systems. High voltage dc transmission systems are at present operating at voltages up to A5500 kV and, in the near future, even higher voltages will be used. 4. EFFECTS
41 OF CORONA FROM CONDUCTORS

Although the causes of radio noise from high voltage dc systems, due to corona discharges on line conductors, insulators and fittings, are the same as for ac, there are some noticeable differences in the effects. The physical aspects of ac corona were discussed but the corona mechanism with dc is different because: a) a stationary ionization sheath is created around each conductor, and b) a space charge is built up in the remaining space between the conductors and ground, and between the conductors themselves. The ionization acts partly as a shie!d which modifies the electric field close to the conductor and, due to the space charge, the actual electric field differs markedly from the theoretical static field. 4.2 For an ac line, no stationary space charge exists and the ionization effects around the conductor act in a different manner. Corona discharges are always initiated by collisions of free electrons with stable atoms. These electrons exist in the atmosphere under normal conditions and move from the negative conductor and towards the positive conductor. This leads to a significant difference between Negative corona discharges occur the two resulting forms of corona. at a high repetition frequency and moderate amplitude, whilst those near the positive conductor are less frequent and have a much larger amplitude. 4.3 The radio noise characteristics : level, frequency spectrum and lateral profile of a high voltage dc line are determined by: a) Design parameters, ) Line voltage, or conductor and c) Weather conditions. surface voltage gradient and polarity;

The subjective effects of a dc noise field are less than those from the field, of identical strength, from an ac line because of different character of noise.
5

IS : 12233 ( Part l/Set

5 ) - 1987

4.4 DesignParameters - Unlike ac lines, a dc line is normally neither monopolar, with earth or sea/earth return, or bipolar, with single or bundle conductors. The insulator length and the pole spacing can be relatively small because the internal overvoltages are significantly lower than with ac, due to rapid fault clearance by valve blocking and usually the insulator length is determined more by pollution than by overvoltages.

4.5 Line Voltages or Conductor Surface Voltage Gradient and PolarityIn the case of dc lines, the choice of the line voltage is influenced not only by economic reasons but also by the layout of the convertor stations and valves. Although there is no standardization of this voltage, dc lines at present in service usually operate between 3~200 kV and 3~450 kV. However, in the near future, the voltage level will be raised considerably. The voltage of any high voltage line has a most important influence on the generation of radio noise. This influence depends on the surface str?ss, or gradient, of the conductors. If, for an ac line, a gradient of E kV/cm rms is used, the comparable gradient for a dc line would then b.: 2/2 b kV/cm. The dc line will, however, produce a lower noise level than the ac line. 4.5.1 Disregarding the effects of ionization and space charge, the theoretical gradient can be calculated as for ac lines and this value is also used for radio noise calculation. The influence of this gradient on radio noise level was investigated on several test lines and the resillts show that over the range 20 to 27 kV/cm, the radio noise level increases at approximately 1'6 dB for each I kV/cm incretnen:, and above about 27 kV/cm, the noise level increases at a lower rate. 4.5.2 The lateral profi!e of a bipolar dc line, with corona-free earth wires, is n:arly symmetrical about the positive conductor. This behaviour can be explained by the fact that the negative conductor produces a lower level of radio noise than the positive conductor because of different ionization mechanisms indicated in this sub-clause. With the the difference in their radio noise same gradient for both conductors, level contributions is at least 6 dB. Hence the contribution from the negative conductor to the aggregate radio noise level of a bipolar line may be considered to bz negligible. For a negative monopolar line, the noise 1eveI may be even 20 dB lower than that for the same line with positive polarity. 4.6 Weather Conditions - It is well known that th3 radio noise level from ac lines is significantly influenced by weather conditions. Between fine weather and heavy rainfall, this level may increase by up to 25 dB but in the case of dc lines, the noise Ievel actually redllces in rain, 6

IS : 12233 ( Part l/Set

5 ) - 1987

Tbus, the highest radio noise level of a dc line normally occurs under conditions of fair weather. At the beginning of rainfall and for dry snow precipitation, this level may rise for a short time but when the conductors are fuliy wet, it will decrease by up to 10 dB and in some cases, even more. The level may also be influenced by the line configuration and the voltage gradient, and the above remarks apply to bipolar and to positive monopolar lines. However, the 80 percent/SO percent criteria are still valid. 4.6.1 As an explanation of this difference in behaviour when compared with ac lines, various hypotheses could be given but they are still to be proven and further investigations are necessary. Another area where the performance of dc lines differs from ac lines is the influence of wind. Some investigations have indicated that for a wind direction from the the radio noise level increases with negative to the positive conductor, wind speeds abo.de 3 m/s from 0'3 to 0'5 dB for each 1 m/s increment. For a wind direction from the positive to the negative conductor, this effect is significantly lower. 4.6.2 Furthermore, the long-term radio noise level of a dc line is influenced by seasonal effects; in summer, the level is normally higher than in winter by approximately 5 dB. This may be caused by insects and airborne particles on the conductor surface, or by the absolute humidity of the air. 4.7 Frequency Spectrum. - In the case of ac lines, the radio noise spectrum is one of the main characteristics of a high voltage line. The frequency spectrum for dc lioes seems to show a similar shape over the long and medium wavt broadcast bands but further investigation should be made. 4.8 Subjective Effects - Investigations have shown that for dc lines, a lower signal to noise may be acc.:ptable than for ac lines. For a particular reading on a neter, the slrbjeciive annoyance of a dc line could be lest than for an ac line by ah much as 1U dB. 4.9 Calculation of the Radio Noise Level Due to Conductor Corona The radio noise level of ac lines, due to conductor corona, can be calculated by using analytical methods of experimental formulae. Both are based on the results of may measured value derived from test line, test cages and operational lines. In the case of dc lines, experience is relatively scanty, the data coming alomost entirely from test facilities. The analytical methods that can be applied to dc lines are similar in principle to those for ac lines. Obviously, in this case, use shall be made of the excitation function results, measurements on dc test lines or cages, and account should be taken of the propagation characteristics of dc lines. 7

IS : 12233 ( Part l/Set

5 ) I 1987

4.9.1 As for ac lines different emperical formulae for calculation of radio noise level for dc lines have been evolved. Based on extensive measurements on lines with various configurations, the following formula is suggested for a bipolar line: E=38 + 1'6 (g,,,24) +~IEf+33 t 46 log r+5 log n

log 2; +LEw

in dB (pV/m)

where E=radio noise field, gmax=maximum surface gradient of the line in kV/cm, r=radius of conductor or subconductor in cm, n=number of subconductors. D=distance between aerial and nearest conductior ip m, Ew=different weather condition in dB, and Er=different measurement frequency ( see below ). The value g max is calculated as for ac lines. The first line of the formula gives the level for the reference frequency of 0'5 MHz for the reference distance of 20m from the nearest conductor in fair weather ,when AEP, log s
DEW are all zero.

4.9.2 The above formula is basically intended to be used for bipolar lines. It can be used for positive monopolar lines if the correct conFor the same applied pole voltage, ductor voitage gradient is applied. the noise will be lower than that on the bipolar line by 3 to 6 dB, Regarding bipolar transmission lines, built as two separate monopolar lines, the monopolar character will dominate if the pole distance is have shown that the rate of greater than about 20 m. Measurements lateral attenuation for dc lines is similar to that for ac lines. Over the 300 frequeney range 0'4 to 1'6 MHZ and for a distance of aroundm
27rf '

where f is in megahertz, the following approximate satisfactorv results: n1 1'65 E2
d

formula

will give

-ig-=

where Ez and K are the noise levels at the distance Dz and D1, respectively and where El and D1 are the reference values. For the reference distance of 20 m from the nearest conductor, this formula may be written as:
E,=E1-/-33

( )
Dz

log $

2

8

IS : 12233 ( Part l/Set 5 ) - 1987

The distance expression give a low correction this distance.

33 log z

is an approximation

which

tends to beyond

up to about

100 m and high correction

4.9.3 A considerable variation in the measured results of the frequency spectrum at different locations has so far been obtained, particulary at low frequencies. However, the frequency spectrum, which is valid for ac lines, seems also to constitute a good average relationship for dc lines and it is, therefore, suggested that this spectrum be used until more The correction according to this spectrum reliable material IS available. can be written: AEf=5 [l-2 (log lOf)"] wheref = measurement frequency, in megahertz. This expression can be used from 0'15 MHz up to about 3 MHz. For a negative monopolar line, the radio noise level from the pole conductor itself is normally low but if an earth wire is used, the earth wire will act as a positive conductor and the noise level can be calculated as above. 5. RADIO NOISE DUE TO INSULATORS, FITTINGS AND SUBSTATION EQUIPMENT 5.1 There is a lack of information concerning the radio noise level fittings and substation equipment. Available produced by insulators, experience indicates, however, that there will be no significant difference from the equivalent level of ac lines given in section 4 of this standard. 5.2 Under dry weather conditions, the radio noise level produced by conductor corona may dominate for the higher voltage gradients. However, the radio noise level of a dc line conductor decreases when the conductor is wetted, and this is in contrast to the level produced by the line insulators, as the leakage current on these insulators is determined by the ohmic resistance of the pollution. From service experience, it is known that even in districts with a relatively low level of industrial pollution, the surface of dc insulators becomes polluted in a relatively short time. When this polluted surface becomes wet, partial discharges occur which may cause a relatively high increase in the radio noise level. Hence it is possible that the difference found in the reduction of noise level from dc lines, under some conditions ( see 4.6 ), may be influenced by the behaviour of the polluted insulators. For confirmation of this assumption, more information is necessary.

9

IS : 12233 ( Part l/Set 5 ) - 1987 6. VALVE FIRING EFFECTS

6.1 As well as overhead lines, underground cables and substations, high voltage dc transmission systems include convertor stations with their valve equipment. These valves can generate radio noise by their special operational performance as they are acting as very fast switches. A convertor group normally comprises six valves fired cyclically at the power frequency and a complete convertor installation may be made up of several such convertors. Each time a valve is fired, the voltage across it collapses and a wide spectrum of radio noise is generated extending from very low frequencies to a few megahertz depending on the physical dimensions of the connections. Because of lumped and distributed capacitances and inductances in the associated connections and equipment, local loops may resonate and this will produce peaks at certain frequencies. This radio noise may be emitted directly from the valves and associated equipment comprising, in this instance, mainly the feeders and busbars of the convertor station. These busbars will often be of considerable length and well able to act as efficient radiators. The convertor will, of course, be connected to incoming and outgoing ac and dc circuits and these may both be of overhead line construction. The radio noise will be guided and emitted from such overhead lines. Without any suppression measures, the radio nr_$e level could be intolerable and it is, therefore, necessary to reduce this level to an acceptable value. This can be achieved by different methods which depend on valve type and the technical installation of the substation. 6.2 In most of the earlier operational high voltage dc schemes, mercury valves were used. The technical layout of this valve type requires a hall which protects the valves against environmental iofluences and makes it possible to keep temperature limits within a specified range. By electromagnetic screening of these hall 5, the radio noise level outside can be reduced considerably. Using solid metal sheets or wire mesh, an attenuation value of 40 to 50 dB for frequencies between 0'15 and 5 MHz is possible. To reduce the noise passing through the valve hall bushings, filters should be installed in all outgoing lines and the filtering of the dc lines must be specially effective. The convertor transformers between the valve group and the ac lines, and the filter circuits on the ac side, may reduce the possible conduction of radio noise from the convertor station to these ac lines. In the case of thyristor valves, the radio noise problem may be somewhat less severe. Thyristor valves, when fired, may have a voltage collapse time of up to 25 PS, compared with 1 PS for mercury-arc valve. One reason for this is the use of the damping circuits with in the thyristor valve. With such a long voltage collapse time, it may not be necessary 10

IS : 12233 ( Part l/Set 5 ) F 1987 to screen the valve, hall, and radio noise filters may be similar or even unnecessary. 6.3 A possible solution for reducing direct radiation from a valve is the installation of the thyristor valve within a steel tank which acts as an effective screen. Care should be taken that the tank does not radiate as a dipole or resonator. The further development of high voltage dc convertor stations will tend towards more compact layouts with shorter connections between valve groups, convertor transformers and substations. This will have a favourable influence on the reduction of radio noise from convertor stations. Generally, it is possible to reduce the radio noise produced by convertor valves and their auxiliaries to an acceptable level. The cost ~of such a reduction largely depends on the valve type and the convertor station design.

11

INTERNATIONAL Base Units QWZ?Ztity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity

SYSTEM OF UNITS @I UNITS )

Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Symbol m kg
S

A 1; ed mol

Amount of substance Supplementary Units Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Deri'ved Units Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density ~Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

Unit radian steradian

Symbol rad sr

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

Symbol N J W Wb T HZ S V Pa

Definition 1N 1J 1w
1T

= 1 kg.m/G = 1 N.m = 1 J/s = 1 Wb/mz

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s(s-`1 1s 1V I Pa = 1 A/V = 1 W/A = 1 N/m2

