NAT Hab IS 8133 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


FH Care AR AA Ur STATT 
aan & ears AR Waters 
& fer feeder 


(AT PRETT ) 


Guidelines for Actuating Forces, 
Location and Operation of Operator 
Controls on Agricultural Tractors 
and Self-propelled Machinery 


( Second Revision ) 


65.060.10 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2021 Price Group 7 


Agricultural Machinery and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 11 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Standards after the draft finalized by the 
‘Agricultural Machinery and Equipment Sectional Committee’ had been approved by the ‘Food and Agriculture 
Division Council’. 


It was first published in 1976 and revised in 1983. A need was felt to revise this standard to align it with the 
corresponding ISO standard. The actuating forces required to operate various controls, which were earlier in the 
standard IS 10703 : 1983 is also included in this revision and this standard after publication will super supersede 
IS 10703. 


In this revision the following modifications have been done: 
a) Technical data has been elaborated in operator of controls on pedestrian operated machines. 


b) Informative addition for further detailed of maximum control actuating forces, direction of motion 
and control location. 


c) Normative addition of association of operator controls associated with virtual terminals. 
d) Informative identification of hand controls by colour coding. 
In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following standards: 
ISO 15077 Tractors and self-propelled machinery for agriculture — Operator controls — Actuating 
forces, displacement, location and method of operation. 


ISO/TS 15079 Powered lawn, garden and horticultural equipment — Operator controls — Guidance 
on actuating forces, displacement, location and methods of operation. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8133 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR ACTUATING FORCES, 
LOCATION AND OPERATION OF OPERATOR 
CONTROLS ON AGRICULTURAL 
TRACTORS AND SELF-PROPELLED MACHINERY 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the preferred method of 
operation and requirements related to operator 
controls actuated by hand, feet, or fingers, installed 
in agricultural tractors and self-propelled agricultural 
machinery, and used by a seated operator as intended 
and under the conditions foreseen by the manufacturer. 
It also gives recommendations for the maximum control 
actuating forces, direction of motion and location of 
these controls. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below. In case the standards are to be referred in 
this clause they are to be listed as follows: 


IS No. Title 


6283 (Part 1) : 2006/ 
ISO 3767-1 


Tractors and machinery for 
agriculture and forestry, 
powered lawn and garden 
equipment — Symbols for 
operator controls and other 
displays: Part 1 Common 
symbols (second revision) 


6283 (Part 2) : 2007/ 
ISO 3767-2 


Tractors and machinery for 
agriculture and forestry, 
powered lawn and garden 
equipment — Symbols for 
operator controls and other 
displays: Part 2 Symbols 
for agricultural tractors and 
machinery (second revision) 


IS No. Title 


ISO 11783-6 : 2018 Tractors and machinery for 


agriculture and forestry — 


Serial control and 
communications data 
network — Part 6: Virtual 
terminal 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


3.1 Control — Device actuated by an operator to affect 
a response from the machine, its attachments or its 
implements. 


3.2 Control Actuating Force — Force exerted at the 
centre of the control contact surface and in the direction 
of its movement to affect a control function. 


3.3 Forward — Direction the operator faces while 
seated in the operator’s seat with the machine and the 
operator’s seat in the position for forward travel as 
defined by the manufacturer. 


3.4 Minimum Control Strength — Ability of a control 
system to withstand a single excessive application 
of effort by the operator without being destroyed or 
having its primary function impeded. 


3.5 Accelerator Pedal — Control used on certain 
machines which, when actuated, increases the engine 
speed. 


3.6 Decelerator Pedal — Control used on certain 
machines which, when actuated, reduces the engine 
speed. 


3.7 Foot-operated Control — Control manipulated by 
the operator’s foot. 


IS 8133 : 2021 


3.8 Hand-operated Control — Control manipulated by 
the operator’s hand. 


3.8.1 Hand-operated Control with Finger/Wrist 
Activation — Hand control manipulated by the 
movement of one or more fingers or the wrist, with little 
or no shoulder/elbow motion. 


3.8.2 Hand-operated Control with Arm 
Activation — Hand control gripped by the hand and 
moved primarily by shoulder/elbow movement. 


3.9 Auxiliary Input Unit — Electronic control unit 
(ECU) containing one or more VT operator controls for 
common use and facilitating the machine operation. 


3.10 Non-critical Function — Machine function which, 
when actuated, presents a minimal risk to the machine 
operator or bystanders. 


3.11 Critical Function — Machine function which, when 
actuated, can cause an action that could be hazardous to 
the machine operator or bystanders. 


3.12 Virtual terminal operator control 


3.12.1 VT Operator Control — Element of an auxiliary 
input unit or of a remote key pad, or virtual terminal 
soft key or touch screen control or reconfigurable 
proprietary control meeting the requirements of 
ISO 11783-6 and those specified in Annex B. 


3.12.2 Non-critical VT Operator Control VT — Operator 
control that is suitable only for the control of non-critical 
functions. 


3.12.3 Critical VT Operator Control VT — Operator 
control input suitable for the control of critical functions. 


3.13 Pointing Unit Control — Means of activating and 
releasing of a function displayed by virtual terminal 
operator control. 


3.14 Hybrid Power Source — Use of two or more 
distinct types of power, such as an internal combustion 
engine to drive an electric generator that powers an 
electric traction drive motor. 


3.15 Steering Control Effort — Force applied to the 
steering control in order to steer the tractor. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 General 


4.1.1 Controls shall be so arranged that their layout, travel 
and resistance to operation are compatible with the action 
to be performed, taking account of ergonomic principles. 


4.1.2 The unintentional actuation of controls shall be 
avoided, for example, by suitable design or position. 


4.1.3 The incorrect actuation of controls shall be avoided, 
for example, by suitable design, arrangement, marking or 
lighting. 


4.1.4 Controls to be actuated for work or traveling shall 
be accessible from the seated operator. 


4.2 Identification 


4.2.1 Control functions and movements shall 
be identified by symbols conforming to IS 6283 
Part 1 and Part 2 so that the operator can determine the 
proper control function and movement. In cases where 
these standard does not include a suitable symbol that 
addresses a machine’s function (for example, as a result 
of new technology), it is acceptable for the manufacturer 
to develop and use an appropriate symbol. In such 
cases the meaning of the symbol shall be explained in 
the operator manual. Identification is not required for 
controls that have universal recognition by virtue of 
their shape, colour, location, arrangements or method of 
actuation, such as a steering wheel, foot-operated clutch 
pedal, service brake or accelerator pedal. 


4.2.2 When a control device is designed and constructed 
to perform several different actions, the action to be 
performed shall be clearly identified or displayed and 
subject to confirmation, when necessary. 


4.2.3 For identification of manual controls by colour 
coding, see Annex C. 


4.3 Foot-operated Controls 


Foot-operated controls shall be designed to minimize the 
risk of the foot slipping off the pedal. 


4.4 Maximum Control Actuating Force, Direction of 
Motion, and Location 


Guidelines for maximum control actuating forces and 
generic direction of motion for controls are given in 
Annex A. Minimum control actuating forces shall be 
sufficient to avoid inadvertent actuation by the force of 
a hand or foot resting on the control during anticipated 
operating conditions. 
NOTE — Maximum actuating forces not to be exceeded to 
meet the braking and steering performance requirements 
specified by those documents. Actuating forces to be applied 
for normal operation referred to in this document are usually 
lower. 


4.5 Control Operation 


The operation of controls specifically described in 
Table 1 shall be in accordance with Table 1 if provided 
on the machine. 


NOTE — The control motion indicated in Table 1 represents 
the motion of several control types such as levers, rocker 
switches, pairs of push buttons, or sliders. For example, if a 
pair of buttons or a rocker switch are used to raise and lower 
the three-point hitch, the interpretation of Table 1, 8.1, would 
be to use the button in the upper or rearward position to raise 
the hitch and the button in the lower or forward position to 
lower the hitch. 


4.6 The location and operation of controls for 
agricultural tractors and self-propelled machines shall 
be in accordance with Table 1. 


IS 8133 : 2021 


Table 1 Location and Operation of Controls on Agricultural Tractors and Self-Propelled Machines 
( Clauses 4.5 and 4.6 ) 


SINo. Control Location | Control Operation and Requirements 
1 Engine 
1.1 Starting/stopping engine Provisions shall be made to prevent the engine starter from 
engaging unless 
a) the traction transmissions are in neutral or parked position 
or the traction clutch is disengaged, 
b) the master implement clutch and, if separate, the PTO 
clutch are disengaged, 
c) Hybrid power sources are excluded from the above 
requirements. 
1.1.1 Starting engine Should be easily accessible | The control shall be rotated clockwise to operate engine starter. 
(rotational switch) from the operator’s position 
1.12 | Engine pre-heater circuit | Should be easily accessible | Ifan engine pre-heater circuit is provided, this control shall occur 
(rotational switch) from the operator’s position before or at the starting position. It may be activated by rotating 
the control clockwise, anticlockwise (counter-clockwise) or 
pushing inwards on the control. 
1.1.3 Stopping engine Should be easily accessible | The control shall be rotated anticlockwise (counter-clockwise) 


(rotational switch) 


from the operator’s position 


to the stop position. 


1.1.4 | Stopping engine Should be easily accessible | When the stop control is actuated, controls shall automatically 
(mechanical control) from the operator’s position remain in the stop position without the application of sustained 
manual effort. Direction of motion shall be pull to stop. The 
control shall be located within 150 mm of the engine start 
control. If the stop control is combined with the speed control, 
it shall be in the direction of and beyond the low idle position. 
1.1.5 Starting/stopping engine | Should be easily accessible | The button shall be actuated to start or stop the engine. 
(finger operated push | from the operator’s position 
button switch) 
1.1.6 | Remote engine starting Provision shall be made to prevent remote engine starting unless: 
a) The traction transmissions are in the neutral or parked 
position or the traction clutch is disengaged, 
b) The master implement clutch and, if separate, the PTO 
clutch are disengaged. 
c) Hazards associated with engine motion are mitigated. 
1.1.7 | Ignition switch (if separate | Easily accessible from the | Move control to ‘on’ position 
from starter switch) operator’s seat 
1.2 Engine speed 
1.2.1 Foot-operated The control shall be readily | The pedal shall be pushed forward, downward, or both forward 
accessible to the operator’s | and downward to increase engine speed. 
right foot. 
1.2.2 | Hand-operated variable | The control shall be positioned | Direction of motion shall be in a plane generally parallel to the 
speed in front of, or to the right of | longitudinal axis ofthe vehicle. The control shall be moved away 
the operator. from the operator (generally forward) to increase engine speed. 
123 Hand-operated discrete | The control shall be positioned | The actuation of the part of the control which is generally away 
settings in front of, or to the right of, | from the operator shall select higher speed settings. 
the operator. 
1.2.4 | Decelerator pedal If provided, the control shall | The direction of motion shall be forward, downward, or both 


be positioned in front of, or to 
the right of, the operator and 
be readily accessible to the 
operator’s right foot. 


forward and downward to decrease engine speed. A foot-operated 
engine speed control as described in 1.2.1 shall not be provided. 


2 Steering (when travelling in a forward direction) 
2.1 Steering wheel Should be forward of | When a steering wheel control is provided, a clockwise rotation 
the operator and aligned | shall affect a right turn, and an anticlockwise (counter-clockwise) 
approximately with the | rotation shall affect a left turn. 


centreline of the operator seat 


IS 8133 : 2021 


Table 1 ( Continued) 


2,2 Two levers Should be forward or to the | When two levers are provided for steering: 
sides of the operator. If to he — A right turn shall be affected by moving the right-hand 
sides of the operator, one lever lever rearward, the left-hand lever forward, or both; 
should be on the left and one 
lever should be on the right. — A left turn shall be affected by moving the left-hand lever 
rearward, the right-hand lever forward, or both. 
2,3 One lever Should be forward or to the | When one lever is provided for steering, a lateral motion of the 
side of the operator lever to the right shall affect a right turn and a lateral motion to 
the left shall affect a left turn. 
3 Brakes 
3.1 Service brake 
3.11 Foot-operated Pedals shall be readily | The direction of motion for engagement shall be forward, 
accessible to the operator’s | downward, or both. 
right foot except as noted in | Where separate brake pedals are provided for the independent 
3.1.2. right hand and left-hand brake control, it shall be possible to 
obtain combined control with one foot. 

3.1.2 | Foot operated brake used | Should be convenient to the | Separate brake pedals for the right-hand and left-hand brake 
in combination with 4.2.1 | operator control may be installed to be activated by the left-hand foot 
and 4.2.2 in case that a sustained activation of the right-hand pedal(s) 

is required to keep the vehicle in motion (for example, with 
hydrostat transmission with one pedal for forward and one for 
reverse (4.2.2) or a toe and heel pedal for respectively forward 
and reverse motion (4.2.1). 

3.2 Park brake 

3.2.1 Hand-operated with | Should be convenient to the | The park brake shall remain applied without manual effort. 
finger/wrist activation (for | operator Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional release. 
example, electrical switch 
or button 

3.2.2 | Hand-operated with arm | Should be convenient to the | The control shall be pulled to apply the brake. A device shall be 
activation operator provided to retain the brake control in the applied position. 

Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional release. 
3.2.3 Foot-operated Should be convenient to the | The direction of motion shall be forward, downward, or both 
operator for engagement. A device shall be provided to retain the brake 
control in the applied position. Provision shall be made to 
prevent unintentional release. 

3.2.4 | Combination parking and | Should be convenient to the | Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional disengagement. 
transmission control operator 

3.3 Secondary braking system 

3.3.1 | Hand-operated with | Should be convenient to the | The control shall be actuated as instructed by the manufacturer. 
finger/wrist activation (for | operator The actuation can include being moved forward or moved away. 
example, electrical switch) 

3.3.2 | Hand-operated with arm | Should be convenient to the | The control shall be pulled to apply the brake. 
activation operator 

3.3.3 Foot-operated Should be convenient to the | The direction of motion shall be forward, downward, or both to 

operator apply the brake. 
4 Transmission 
4.1 Clutch (includes combined transmission and PT O) 
4.1.1 Foot-operated The control shall be readily | The pedal shall be pushed forward, downward, or both for 
accessible to operator’s left | disengagement. 
foot 
4.1.2 | Hand-operated with arm | Should be convenient to the | The control shall be moved rearward or towards the operator for 


activation 


operator 


disengagement. Positive means shall be provided for holding the 
clutch control in the disengaged position so that it is incapable 
of being reengaged unless manually operated. It is recommended 
that the clutch be operable only from the operator’s seat. 


IS 8133 : 2021 


Table 1 ( Continued) 


4.2 Combination ground | Should be convenient to the | Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional movement of 
speed and forward/reverse | operator the control from 
direction (continuously a) neutral to forward or reverse, 
variable combined control) 
b) forward to reverse, 
c) reverse to forward or alternatively. 
The machine motion due to unintentional movement of this 
control shall be prevented. 
The neutral position shall be clearly identified and easy to select. 
4.2.1 | Foot-operated-one pedal, or | The control shall be readily | Forward motion and increasing forward speed shall be caused 
two pedals longitudinally | accessible to the operator’s | by moving the front of the pedal forward, downward, or both. 
related to simulate one |right foot. Rearward motion and increasing rearward speed shall be caused 
pedal by moving the rear of the pedal downward. 
The requirement of 3.1.1 does not apply in this case. 
4.2.2 | Foot-operated-two pedals | The control shall be readily | Rearward motion and increasing rearward speed shall be caused 
(side by side) accessible to the operator’s | by moving the outer pedal forward, downward, or both. Forward 
right foot. motion and increasing forward speed shall be caused by moving 
the inner pedal forward, downward, or both. 
The requirement of 3.1.1 does not apply in this case. 
4.2.3 | Hand-operated Should be convenient to the | Forward motion and increasing forward speed shall be caused by 
operator moving the control from the neutral position forward, upward, or 
both. Rearward motion and increasing rearward speed shall be 
caused by moving the control from the neutral position rearward, 
downward, or both. 
4.3 Speed selection 
4.3.1 | Hand operated Should be convenient to the | Speed selection pattern shall be clearly marked. 
operator 
4.3.2 | Foot-operated Should be convenient to the | The control shall be pushed forward or down for higher speed. 
operator 
4.3.3 | Finger operated memory | Should be convenient to the | A push button control shall be pressed to select a set speed. 
setting (e.g. push button ) | operator 
4.4 Direction control (forward- | Should be convenient to the | Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional movement of 
reverse non-variable speed) | operator the control from 
a) neutral to forward or reverse, 
b) forward to reverse, 
c) reverse to forward or alternatively: 
The machine motion due to unintentional movement of this 
control shall be prevented. 
The neutral position shall be clearly identified and easy to select. 
4.4.1 | Hand or finger operated Should be convenient to the | The control shall be moved forward, upward, or both to effect 
Operator forward motion. The control shall be moved rearward, downward, 
or both to effect rearward motion. 
4.4.2 | Forward-Reverse Should be convenient to the | Finger operated push button - The push button shall be pressed 
momentary switch operator momentarily to change the current direction. 
Neutral position shall be obtained by other transmission controls. 
5 Master implement control, header or gathering unit clutch 
5.1 Hand-operated Should be convenient to the | The control shall be moved rearward or downward for 
operator disengagement. Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional 
engagement of the clutch. The control shall be operable only 
from the operator’s seat. 
5.2 Finger-operated Should be convenient to the | Finger operated push button - The push button shall be pressed 
operator momentarily to engage and disengage. 
Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional engagement. 
6 Differential lock 
6.1 Foot or hand-operated Preferably convenient to the | The control shall be moved forward or downward for 


hand. 


operator’s right foot or right 


engagement. If the differential lock remains on after release of 
the actuation mechanism, a means to indicate the differential 
lock engagement status to the operator shall be provided. 


IS 8133 : 2021 


Table 1 ( Concluded) 


6.2 Finger-operated 


Should be convenient to the 
operator 


Finger operated push button-The push button shall be pressed 
momentarily to engage and disengage differential lock. 


Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional engagement of 
the differential lock or to limit the speed when the differential 
lock can be engaged. 


7 PTO (power take-off) 


7A Clutch 


PAA Foot-operated 


The control shall be readily 
accessible to the operator’s 
left foot. 


The pedal shall be pushed forward, downward, or both for 
disengagement. In the case of a combined traction-drive/PTO 
clutch, the PTO disengagement shall be the second stage. 


7.1.2 Hand-operated 


Should be convenient to the 
operator 


The control shall be moved upward, forward, or both to engage. 
The control shall be moved downward or rearward to disengage. 
Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional engagement of 
the PTO clutch. 


74.3 Finger-operated 


8 Implements and auxiliaries 


Should be convenient to the 
operator 


8.1 Lift mechanism (three-point hitch) 


Finger operated push button - The push button shall be pressed 
momentarily to engage and disengage PTO clutch. 


Provision shall be made to prevent unintentional engagement of 
the PTO clutch. 


8.1.1 Hand-operated 


The control shall be readily 
accessible to the operator’s 
right hand 


The control shall be moved upward, rearward or both to raise and 
downward, forward or both to lower. It shall be possible to lock 
the control levers or mechanism in the upper position. 


8.2 Front loader 


8.2.1 Two levers-lift arm, 
bucket/attachment 


The bucket/attachment control 
shall be located to the right of 
the lift arm control. 


The direction of control motion shall be forward, downward, or 
away from the operator to lower the lift arm, and in opposite 
directions to raise the lift arm. The direction of control motion 
shall be forward, downward, or away from the operator to dump 
the bucket/attachment, and in opposite directions to roll back the 
bucket/attachment. 


8.2.2 One lever-lift arm, 


The direction of control motion shall be forward, downward, or 


bucket/attachment away from the operator to lower the lift arm, and in opposite 
directions to raise the lift arm. Movement of the control to the 
right shall dump the bucket/attachment and movement of the 
control to the left shall roll back the bucket/attachment. 

8.3 Remote hydraulic function The direction of control motion for a remote hydraulic function 
shall be forward, downward, or away from the operator to lower 
or move forward the function; and rearward, upward, or toward 
the operator to raise or move rearward the function. 

Additional remote hydraulic functions shall be defined in the 
corresponding implement’s operator’s manual. 

8.4 Tool attachment controls activated from operator’s position 

8.4.1 | Lift 

8.4.1.1 | Foot-operated Should be convenient to the | The direction of motion should be downward to lift and upward 
non-powered (foot and leg) | operator. to lower. 

8.4.1.2 | Foot-operated Should be convenient to the | The direction of the forward part of control should be downward 
powered (heel and toe) operator. to lower and upward to raise. 

8.4.1.3 | Foot-operated Should be convenient to the | Pushing the right pedal should lower the attachment. Pushing the 
powered (two pedals) operator. left pedal should raise the attachment. 

8.4.1.4 | Hand-operated powered or | Should be convenient to the | The direction of motion should be generally forward or downward 


non-powered 


operator. 


to lower, and rearward or upward to raise the attachment. 


9 VT Operator controls 


VT operator controls shall comply with the requirements of 
Annex B. 


“Applies only to raising the complete attachment 


IS 8133 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Informative ) 


MAXIMUM CONTROL ACTUATING FORCE, 
DIRECTION OF MOTION AND CONTROL LOCATION 


A-1 MAXIMUM CONTROL ACTUATING 
FORCE 


The maximum forces given in Table 2 and 3 should not 
be exceeded for normal operation. However, emergency 
situations may require higher forces. 


Table 2 Maximum Control Actuating Force 
( Clause A-1 ) 


Type of Control Maximum Force (N) 


Lever (fore/aft) 230 
Lever (lateral) 100 
Lever (vertical upwards) 400 
Pedal (leg/foot operation) 450 
Pedal (ankle rotation) 90 
Finger/wrist operation 20 


Table 3 Maximum Permitted Effort 
( Clause A-1 ) 


Type of Control Maximum Force (N) 


Steering wheel 
Service brake (as per IS 12061) 


250 N for 8 s steering time 
600 N 


Minimum control forces are dependent on the control 
system, and as such are not stated. Minimum control 
strength should be sufficient to withstand at least five 
times its typical actuation force. 


A-2 CONTROL ARRANGEMENT 


A-2.1 Panels 


For the purposes of this document, panels are shown 
in Fig. 1. 


Key 

Panel A horizontal transverse centre 
Panel B horizontal transverse left 
Panel C horizontal transverse right 
PanelD horizontal top centre 
Panel E vertical upper front 

Panel F vertical transverse left 
Panel G vertical transverse right 
Panel H vertical transverse front 
Panel J horizontal lower centre 
PanelK vertical upper left 

Panel L vertical upper right 


FIG. 1 PANELS 


IS 8133 : 2021 


H/E 


w 
oO 
= 
Q 
> 
NE 


FIG. 2 RECOMMENDED MAXIMUM ANGLES FOR PANELS 


A-2.2 Panels Orientation Allowance 


A-2.2.1 The recommended maximum angles for panels 
are given in Fig. 2. 


A-2.2.2 Overhead panel D should be horizontal or up to 
30° above horizontal. 


A-2.2.3 High panel E should be angled 45° or less from 
vertical. 


A-2.2.4 Vertical panels F and G should be angled less 
than 30°. 


A-2.2.5 Horizontal control panels A, B, and C may be 
tilted up to 30°. 


A-2.3 Control Location/Layout 


A-2.3.1 If controls are designed with operator rotation 
in mind, panels B and C should be identical to panel A. 


A-2.3.2 If the operator can turn to face side panels F 
and G, all controls should be similar to H. 


A-2.3.3 It is recommended that a control should not 
be located on a surface which causes ambiguity in the 
relationship between control movement and function 
movement. 


For example, a lever control for a raise-lower function 
should not be located on a 30° to 60° upward sloping 
surface, since the recommended direction ofthe motion 
changes when it is moved from a vertical to a horizontal 
plane. 


A-2.3.4 When a sequence of controls is repeated on 
another panel, the sequence of controls should be the 
same for each panel. 


A-2.3.5 Control design and spacing should allow 
unobstructed operation without unintentional actuation 
of other controls. Overlapping of controls is permissible 
to provide independent or simultaneous control 
application. 


A-3 DIRECTION OF MOTION 


A-3.1 Preferred Direction of Movement 


A-3.1.1 The preferred direction of movement of controls 
and the anticipated response for the various control 
locations are shown in Fig. 3. The alternative responses 
linked to the control movements are described in 
Table 4. 


FIG. 3 TYPICAL ALTERNATIVE CONTROL MOVEMENTS 


IS 8133 : 2021 


Table 4 Alternative Responses 
( Clause A-3.1.1 ) 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Increase Increase Increase Increase Increase Increase Increase On Increase 
On On On On On On On 
Start Start Start Start Start Start Start 
Forward Forward Forward Backward Clockwise  Anti-clockwise Clockwise 
Clockwise Down Up Clockwise Right Down Down 
Lower Raise Lower Left Lower Right 


Key 
——> Control movement for the response listed 


— Opposite response for the black-headed arrows 


Sequential order for related controls: if a normal or natural order exists for related controls, the order on different panels should be in the 


sequence shown. 


FIG. A-3 TYPICAL ALTERNATIVE CONTROL MOVEMENTS 


A-3.2 Controls — General 


A-3.2.1 Manual liquid valves rotate clockwise to shut 
off flow. 


A-3.2.2 Push-pull controls should pull for “ON” and 
push for “OFF”. Rotary controls may have their on-off 
functions activated by the same push-pull principle. 


A-3.2.3 Lever motion indicated in the figure represents 
the motion of several control types such as levers, 
rocker switches, sliders and pairs of push buttons. 


A-3.3 Controls — 
Recommendations 


Location and Movement 


A-3.3.1 In panels B and C, right-left actuated control 
usage can lead to control ambiguity and should be 
avoided. 


If a rotary control on panel G is related to, or operated 
simultaneously with, a rotary control on panel F, the 
control motion should be opposite to that shown on G 
for backward, increase, on, and start. 


Levers on panels B and C may be oriented at an angle 
to provide movement away from, and towards, the 
operator provided the general principles of operation 
are met. 


ANNEX B 
( Normative ) 


OPERATOR CONTROLS ASSOCIATED WITH VIRTUAL TERMINALS 


B-1 GENERAL 


Operator controls associated with virtual terminals 
include, but are not limited to, auxiliary input units 
as defined in ISO 11783-6, proprietary control units, 
soft keys and data masks (for example, buttons). These 
controls also include the interface elements of the 
virtual terminal that activate the soft keys and data mask 
objects such as bezel buttons, touch screens or remote 
keypads. Critical functions shall only be controlled by 
critical VT operator controls. 


B-2 MARKING AND LABELLING OF 
CONTROLS 


B-2.1 Markings 


B-2.1.1 Each VT operator control shall be permanently 
marked. VT operator controls that have more than one 
actuation position or direction (for example, joysticks, 
multi-position switches, etc.) shall be marked for each 
actuation position or direction. Each VT operator 
control designator displayed on the virtual terminal 
shall display the corresponding markings. 


IS 8133 : 2021 


NOTE — Soft keys physically located relative to the VT 
operator control designator displayed on the screen such that 
the relationship is clear need not be provided with additional 
markings. 


B-2.1.2 Auxiliary input units and other input units 
intended to be installed by the operator shall be marked 
to show the intended mounting orientation. 


B-2.2 Labels 


Auxiliary input units shall be designed in such a way 
as to allow 20 mm square or larger labels to be applied 
either on or clear relation to the VT operator control. 
Other data mask objects that can control critical 
functions (for example, touch screen button objects) 
shall be provided with labels which are clearly visible. 
Appropriate labels shall be provided by the function 
owner (for example, implement). Symbols, when used, 
shall conform to IS 6283 (Part 1) or IS 6283 (Part 2). 


NOTE — The label area for virtual terminal soft keys is 
provided in the soft key designator specified in ISO 11783-6. 


B-3 INSTALLATION 


Manufacturers of input units intended to be installed by 
others (for example, auxiliary input units) shall publish 
and provide installation instructions to ensure the input 
unit is mounted in the correct orientation and in such a 
way as not to interfere with other controls and reduce 
the likelihood of inadvertent actuation of VT operator 
controls. Wired input units intended to be used within 
the operator station shall be equipped with connection 
cables of appropriate length to allow proper mounting, 
but not so long as to allow the unit to be operated 
outside of the operator station. 


B-4 PROTECTION AGAINST INADVERTENT 
ACTUATION 


Each critical VT operator control shall be provided with 
a means of protecting against inadvertent actuation. 
Such means may include more than one motion to 
activate the control, shielding around the control, or 
other methods that fulfil the intent of this requirement. 


B-5 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
POINTING UNITS INCLUDING TOUCH 
SCREEN CONTROLS 


Pointing unit controls need requirements for use in 
addition to the requirements given in this document. 


a) Activation of a function may occur on either 
depression/touch or upon depression/touch and 
valid release. Activation upon depression/touch 
should be avoided except in special circumstances 
(for example, a control which serves as an 


10 


emergency stop, a press-and-hold button used for 
setting a changeable value). 


b 


wm 


A valid release shall only be achieved if the release 
occurs in the object on the screen that was touched 
(for example, if the operator touches a touch 
screen button object and slides his finger off the 
button object, a valid release has not occurred). 


B-6 OPERATOR’S MANUAL 


Information shall be provided with each unit containing 
VT operator controls, addressing at a minimum the 
following items: 


a) mounting instructions, including selection of 
appropriate locations and preferred mounting 
orientation; 


b) warnings about the hazards associated with 
operating the input unit in inappropriate locations; 


c) instructions as required to properly identify the 
markings on the VT operator controls and to 
allow the user to properly assign the control to 
appropriate critical and non-critical functions; 


d) instructions on how to apply appropriate labels to 
the VT operator controls; 


e) an appropriate warning about the hazards of 
operating VT operator controls without appropriate 
labels; 


information about the number of each type of 
VT operator control provided and the types of 
functions supported by each type of control; 


instructions for reading and reviewing the virtual 
terminal manual to determine its procedure 
for setting and reviewing VT operator control 
assignments; 


g) 


h) information that this operator’s manual only 
covers the VT operator control unit and that 
the user should not attempt to use or assign the 
VT operator controls prior to reading and 
reviewing the operator’s manuals of all other 
connected components (for example, tractor, 


implement, virtual terminal); 


= 


an appropriate warning that the person who makes 
the assignments is responsible for ensuring that 
the correct labels for all VT operator controls 
are installed prior to operating the VT operator 
control unit and that these labels shall be replaced 
as necessary when assignments are changed; and 


J 


k 


=— 


an appropriate warning that the person who makes 
or changes the assignments of the VT operator 
control unit shall inform all operators of the 
VT operator control unit of the new or changed 
assignments. 


IS 8133 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Informative ) 
IDENTIFICATION OF HAND CONTROLS BY COLOR CODING 


C-1 GENERAL 


C-1.1 For the purpose of this annex, hand controls 
include, but are not limited to, levers, switches, knobs, 
handles and buttons that the operator manipulates to 
activate or control machine functions 


C-1.2 When new types of hand control are adopted 
or combination controls are used, the color shall be 
selected in accordance with primary function. 


C-1.3 If it is not practical to colour code the control, it 
is sufficient to color code either the area surrounding 


the control or the identification of that control rather 
than the control. 


C-1.4 Colour coding does not replace the need for 
identification by symbols. Controls for function that 
are not obvious shall be identified in accordance with 
IS 6283 (Part 1) and IS 6283 (Part 2). 


C-2 COLOUR CODING 


The colour coding shall be in accordance with Table 5. 


Controls 


Where key switches, ignition switches or hand throttles are used to stop the engines, the “off” position 


Engine speed controls, transmission control, parking, brake, park-locks, independent emergency 


a) Where the engine speed and engine stop controls are combined, the controls may be red; and 


b) Steering wheels or steering controls may be black or any color other than red and yellow. 


Function controls which involve the engagement of mechanism only. 


Example PTO, separators, cutter heads, feed rolls, picking units, elevators, unloading augers. 


Component lift or position, such as implement hitch, header height, blade shift 


Control for uploading components, such as spout cap, uploading auger swing 


Setting and adjustment mechanisms, such as chokes, cylinder speed, concave 


lock, lift stops, rockshaft stops, reel speed, and flow dividers. 


Machine lights, such as headlights, work lights or floodlight, taillight, flashers, 


Table 5 Colour Coding 
( Clause C-2 ) 
Colour 
C.2.1 Red Single-function engine stop controls. 
shall be indicated with red lettering and/or symbols. 
C.2.2 Orange Machine ground motion controls only. 
EXAMPLE 
brake. 
Exception: 
C.2.3 Yellow 
C.2.4 Black or any other colour All controls not covered by C-2.1, C-2.2 or C-2.3. 
except red, orange or E e 
11 xample 1 — 
scald and reel lift. 
Example2 — 
and bin dump. 
Example 3 — 
Example 4 — 
and turn signals. 
Example 5 — 


wipers. 


11 


Cabin comfort, such as pressurize, cooling, heating and windshield and 


IS 8133 : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agricultural Machinery and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 11 


Organization 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Agriculture Machinery Manufacturer’s Association 
(AMMA), Pune 


Aspee Agro Equipment Private Limited, Mumbai 


Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural 
University, Hisar 


CLAAS (India) Private Limited, Chandigarh 
CNH Industrial India Private Limited, Pune 


Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing 
Institute, Budni 


Captain Tractors Pvt Ltd, Rajkot 
Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


ICAR-Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR-AI India Coordinated Research Project on 
Ergonomics and Safety in Agriculture, Bhopal 


ICAR-AII India Coordinated Research Project on 
Farm Implements and Machinery, Bhopal 


ICAR - All India Coordinated Research Project on 
Utilization of Animal Energy, Bhopal 


John Deere India Private Limited, Pune 


Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation Ltd, (KAMCO), 
Athani 


Maharana Pratap University of Agricultural and 
Technology, Udaipur 


Ministry/Department of Agriculture, New Delhi 


National Innovation Foundation, New Delhi 


National Institute of Plant Health Management, 
Hyderabad 


North Eastern Region Farm Machinery Training & 
Testing Institute, Biswanath Chariali, Assam 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Hisar 


Power Tillers Manufacturers Association, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


Dr KANCHAN K. SINGH 


SHRI S. V. RAJU 
DR SURENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI JATIN S. PATEL 
SHRI GANGADHAR M. VARPE (Alternate) 


Dr VIJAYA RANI 


SHRI K. P. SINGH 


SHRI SANTOSH RAO 
SHRI SUJIT HINGE (Alternate) 


Suri J. J. R. NARWARE 
Suri C. V. CHIMOTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILASH MOVALIYA 
DR SITARAMAN DIXIT 


Dr C. R. MEHTA 
Dr U. R. BADEGAONKAR (Alternate I) 
Dr Dire Jar (Alternate II) 


Dr K. N. AGRAWAL 
Dr C. R. MEHTA 
Dr M. Din 


SHRI ANAND RAJ 
SHRI CHANDRASHEKHAR DESHMUKH (Alternate) 


SHRI P. C. SAJIMAN 
Dr A. K. MEHTA 


Suri V. N. KALE 
SHRI ARVIND. N. MESHRAM (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH PATEL 


Dr VIDHU KAMPURATH P. 
SHRIMATI M. Upaya BHANU (Alternate) 


SHRIK. K. NAGLE 
SHRI S. G. PAWAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI KHAGENDRA Bora (Alternate II) 


SHRI P. K. PANDEY 


SHRI B. SATHYAMURTHY 


12 


IS 8133 : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Dr MANJEET SINGH 
Dr RAJESH GOYAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI APOORV PRAKASH (Alternate II) 


Southern Region Farm Machinery Training and SHRI P. P. RAO 
Testing Institute, Tractor Nagar, Anantapur 
Tractor and Mechanization Association, New Delhi SHRI R. P. VASUDEVAN 
SHRI T. R. KESHWAN (Alternate) 
Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer SHRI B. K. MUKOPADHYAY 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 
BIS Directorate General SHRI P. RAJESH, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘C’, BIS 


Panel for revisión of IS 8133 


Organization Representative(s) 


Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal Dr C. R. Menta (Convener) 
Central Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institute, SHRI J. J. R. NARWARE 


Budni 

Southern Region Farm Machinery Training and SHRI P. P. RAO 

Testing Institute, Garladinne 

Agricultural Machinery Manufacturer Association, DR SURENDRA SINGH 

Pune 

John Deere India Private Limited, Pune SHRI CHANDRASHEKHAR DESHMUKH 
CLAAS India Private Limited, Faridabad SHRI K. P. SINGH 

Tractor and Mechanization Association, New Delhi SHRI MOHIT KUMAR 

Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi SHRI PAWAN KUMAR 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 11 (14133). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


