( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 7667- 1979

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE AIRFIELD
Petroleum
Chairman
DR M. G. KRISHNA

FOR HANDLING STATIONS
CDC 22

AND

STORAGE

OF AVIATION FUELLING

FUELS AT

Products Sectional

Committee,

Representing
Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR), Dehra Dun

M~dWS _ -_ . DR I. B. GULATI (Alkmate to Dr M. G. Krishna) National `Test House, Calcutta DR A. S. B~XADURI Smu S. K. BOSE (Altern&) Ministry of Defence DR K. S. BHATTACHARYA SHRI S. K. GANOULY (Altemate) Lubrizol India Ltd, Bombay DR J. P. DALAL SHRI R. A. RAO (Alternate) DIRECTOROF MARINE ENGINEERINGNaval Headquarters Directorate of Technical Development & DR N. D'SOUZA Production (Air) (Ministry of Defence) (Alternate) FLT LT D. Srv-AXI Indian Airlines, New Delhi SHRI M. S. EKBOTE SHRI G. K. AGARWAL (Alternatel `Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI K. B. GAN~AN Cochin Refineries Ltd, Cochin SHRI C. T. GEORGE Assam Oil Co Ltd, Digboi SHRI G. C. GOSWAMI SHRI I. CHANDRA (Alternate) Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) JOINT DIRECTOR (M & C), RDSO, LLICKNOW CHEMIST & METALLURGIST, NORTHERN R A I L w A Y, LUCKNOW(Alternate) Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Refineries & DR H. K. Josrn Pipelines Division), New Delhi Ministry of Petroleum & Chemicals, New Delhi SHRI M. KURIEN SHRI J. M. GIJI~A (Alternate) Directorate of Aeronautics (Ministry of Defence) WC ~DR S. S. MARWAHA SHRI Kor~ HARINAR~YANA (Allernate) Directorate of Supplies & Transport (Ministry of COL B. D. MISRA Defence) LT-COL J. K. CIIAUDHRY (Alternate)

(Continued on page 2)

L

BUREAU

OF

@I Copyright 197.5
INDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV `of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7667 - 1975 (Confinued frompage1)
Representing Central Fuel Research Institute (CSIR), Dhanbad Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI I. N. MURTV SHRI K. S. SWRAMANYAM (Alternate) SHRI D. N. NACWEKAR Hindustan Petroleum Corporation I.td, Bombay SHRI C. V. RAMASWAMY(Alternate) Wo CDR P1 PAPPU Air Headquarters SQN LDR A. I. WA~IIINCTON(Alternate) Burmah-Shell Oil StoIagc & Distributing Co of SHRI P. D. PURI India Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. H. SAHEBA (Alternate) SHRI G. RAGHAVENDRAN Madras Refincrics Ltd, Madras SHRI T. V. VARCHESE (Alternate) DR V. S. RAMANATHAN Ministry of Finance (Department of Insurance & Revenu~sl ---. -------, SHRI. P. P. MA'rHEw (Altarnate) Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Research and DR G. JAYARAMA RAO Development Centre), Faridabad DR R. K. GUPTA IAEternate`, ' SHRI G. H. SANI ' Caltex (India) Ltd, Bombay DR I. SUBRAHMANYAM (Alternate) SHRI K. SITHARAMARAO Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Rlarketizlg Division), Bombay SHRI R. V. GANAPATIIY (Alternate) ' DR R. D. SRIVASTAVA hkinistryof Defencc SHRI N. N. BIIATTACHARYA(Alternate) DR G. M. SAXENA, Director General, BlS (Lir-o&o ,I1eember) Director (Chem) Members
SHRI DILIP KUMAR MUKHERJEE

SHRI M. A. U. KIIAN Assistant Director (Chem), BIS hviatioll C'onuener
SXRI K. B. GANESAN

Fuels Subconin~ittce,

CDC

22 : 3

Directorate General of Civil .\viation, New Delhi

DR

Members G. K. AGARWAL SHRI ANAND KUMAR iHR1 M. A. ANANTH

Indian ,lirlines, New Delhi

(.lltemate)

SHRI K. S. C. NAIK $4lternate) Cochin Refiner& Ltd, C&bin ;HRI C. T. GEORGE Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR), D&a Dun )R I. B. GULATI SHRI H. K. MULCHANDANI (Altemute) Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Rciineries & HRI K. C. JAIN Pipelines Division), New Delhi SHRI A. K. ARORA (Alternate) Naval Headquarters APT JOGINDER SINGH CDR 0. P. VERMA (Alternate) (Continued on page 15)

Indian Oil Corporation Bombay

Ltd (Marketing Division),

2

IS : 7667 - 1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE AIRFIELD 0. FOR HANDLING STATIONS AND STORAGE OF AVIATION FUELIJNG FOREWORD FUELS AT

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 21 February 1975, after the draft finalized by the Petroleum Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 This code has been prepared with a view to recommending basic safety requirements for safe handling and storage of aviation fuel and to ensure that clean, dry, on-specification product of right grade is delivered to the This code prescribes a system to maintain quality control checks aircraft. and counter-checks at every stage of operation and preserve records of such checks for any future reference if need arises. Normally these practices and procedures are governed by the ,aircraft and engine manufacturer requirements. The procedures outlined here are the minimum requirements in order to ensure quality control and connected aspects of aviation products. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of test or analysis,' shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 9-1960*. value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1: SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the code of practice for handling and storage of aviation fuels at airfield fuelling stations in order to ensure basic safety requirements and quality control of aviation products delivered for aircraft use. 2. RECEIPT OF FUEL 2.1 General 2.1.1 The storage tanks should be gauged to ensure that there is sufficient ullage to receive the quantity of fuel being delivered and should also be checked for water and other contaminants visually.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised).

3

Is : 7667- 1975 2.1.2 It is recommended that fuel should be allowed to settle for the maximum possible period as permitted by the storage capacity and should be used on a first-in-first-out basis.

'

2.1.3 It is recommended that appropriate facilities`may be made available to check delivery meters on fuelling equipments. 2.2 Receiving
Lines

2.2.1 A separate decanting hose should be used for decanting each proThese hoses should form permanent part duct from its respective vehicle. of the receiving facilities, should be hung on supports with rain shields and should be adequately capped when not in use as protection against entrance of dirt and water. Each hose should be tagged and colour-coded for the product handled.

2.2.2 Pipeline and pump manifold should provide positive grade segregation in order to obviate accidental contamination. 2.2.3 A lo-micron filter of approved specification with facilities to measure the differential pressure should be installed at the inlet of the receiving tank. It is advisable that a line strainer be provided before the filter to ensure long filter life. 2.2.4 In case of multiple storage tanks of the same product interlocking isolation valves should be locked and sealed in desired position in order to prevent discharge of product into working tank wherever possible. 2.3 Receiving
Fuel By Tank Truck

2.3.1 It is preferable

to have the tank truck internally

epicoated. point

2.3.2 A suitable method for bonding the truck to the decanting should be provided and bonding done prior to unloading.

2.3.3 The quality control release certificate should be checked to ensure that the fuel is of the correct grade. Any doubt about the grade of the fuel should be immediately brought to the attention of the supervisor before unloading. 2.3.4 The vehicle should be allowed to settle for a minimum of 10 minutes. 2.3.5 All compartments should be checked for quantity of fuel which should tally with the quantity recorded on the stock transferchallan. The seals on the tanks, barrels or other containers shall be intact and the markings on the containers shall be distinctly clear. 2.3.6 A bottom sample should be drawn from all the compartments individually and checked for appearance, water/sediment, density and temperature. Observations should be recorded in the Quality Control Reiease Certificate and receiving point density at 15�C should be within _10.002 of the recorded density at despatching point. Any water and/or sediments found should be drained till clear samples are obtained. 4

IS : 7667 - 1975 2.3.7 A sample should be drawn appearance, sediments and water.
from receiving tanks and checked for

2.3.8 A sample from the inlet filter should be checked before and after Filter sump should be drained comdecantation for water and sediments. pletely to remove all water/sediments found. 2.3.9 Unloading hoses when not in use should be kept properly closed and sealed at both ends. They should be inspected for protective cover If hose is found and absence of contaminants prior to making connection. to contain excessive contaminants, fuel should not be unloaded until after the hose is thoroughly cleaned or replaced with one which is acceptable. 2.3.10 Before discharge of stock, electrical continuity of the bonding wires and clips used to earth the wagon or vehicle should be ensured. 2.3.11 Whenever a tank truck is changed from one grade service to another, the necessary quality control procedure as approved by the competent authority shall be followed. 3. AIRPORT

STORAGE

FACILITY

3.1 Tanks 3.1.1 Tt is desirable to have at least two tanks for each grade ofavi.ation fttcl. A minimum settling time. as approved by a competent authority should be allowed before the product is withdrawn.
3.1.2 Water checks on storage tanks should be conducted chemical devices as Mlows : a) Daily morning, b) After heavy rain, c) Before product receipt, and d) Before p'roduct delivery. If water is found it should be immediately removed. with suitable

3.1.3 As far as possible each tank should be maintained exclusively for one grade of.service. However, when the tanks are changed from one grade to another they should be completely emptied and cleaned prior to the change. 3.1.4 A tank cleaning report should be prepared for each tank. Each tank should be cleaned at a frequency which a study of the contaminant level noticed indicates to be necessary. However; the period between such cleanings should, in any case, not exceed two years. 3.1.5 floating factory a water All ATF tanks should be internally epicoated and provided with a suction. Floating suction should be checked regularly for satisoperation. Underground tank should be provided with a slope and draw-off arrangement from the lowest point.

3.1.6 All pipelines, valves, fittings, etc, shall becolour-codedinaccordance with the colour code given in Appendix A for positive grade segregation. 5

IS : 7667 - 1975 3.1.7 When bulk production installations are not in use, a11 manhole covers, dip holes, inlet and outlet points are to bc looked and sealed and the keys should be kept in safe custody. 3.2 Deli&-y System 3.2.1 Bottom loading connections fitted with selective couplings should be provided .at all new facilities for fueller/bridger filling. They are also mandatory at loading racks where more than one grade is bottom loaded. Top filling through open manholes is not recommended. Where top filling under seal.is employed and more than one grade is handled some form of selectivity should be adopted. 3.2.2 A suitable5-micron filter water separator should be provided on the farthest enddf the delivery system for each grade of product. It should be provided with a sump, drain connections and a pressure differential Samples should be checked for water/sediments before delivery of gauge. the product. Pressure differential should be recorded daily and proper records maintained. 3.2.3 Filter elements should be changed if the pressure differential across the inlet and outlet exceeds prescribed limits or if there is a sudden drop in pressure differential indicating rupture of elements. An yearly inrpcction should also be carried out to ensure satisfactory operation. . 4. FUELiERS AND HYDRiNT DISPENSERS 4.1 All aviation refueller tanks, if of mild steel, should be internally epiA sump should be provided at the lowest point and provisidn should coated. be made for draining and sampling. Samples should be drawn daily and checked for cIarity, water/sediments and other external impurities (sea Appendix B for white bucket test). 4.2 All refuehers and dispensers should be provided with 5-micron filter/ Provision for a sump and drain conseparators of approved specification. nection should be made. Pressure different&l gauges should be provided FiIter elements should be changed if the and adequate records maintained. pressure differential exceeds the prescribed limits or if there is sudden drop in nressure difference. An vearlv inspection should also be carried out to
z .
_.__ _.._^

c11suI`c

__&I.

sallsli*cL"ry

r__L-.___

L-_-_r:_OpcmL'"".

d:1,__ r`ILLIz;L

I

^..__^ aLuqJs

-L,.,1A 311"UlU

1.m
UC

ra,,:s,A
uLa`IIcxL

ually

A-,:1.,

c:11
Llll

sample free from water/sediments. is pbtained. 4.3 Quantity meters fitted on the refueilers should be periodically checked and sealed as required by the appropriate statutory authorities. 4.4 A 60-mesh gauze should be provided at the hose and it should be checked periodically for damage or rupture. 4.5 RefuellersJdispensers should ,be fitted with adequate safety devices. 4.6 Provision should be made for proper grounding arrangements and bonding with the aircraft [see Indian Standarc 1 code _ of practice for the, __-*_.., -r.._-l..":_,L,_ ,+,,:,. _,,_&.:_:c.. f...,,J".. hrnJ.

IS : 7667 - 1975 5. HYDRANT 5.1 Hydrant SYSTEM
according to the standards laid

systems should be designed down by API/IP Standards.

5.2 Newly installed hydrant system should be adequately flushed prior to commissioning to ensure absence of rust/contaminants in the pipeline. Lowest point of the hydrant should be checked for presence of water every day. Similarly hydrant pits should be checked for water daily. It is advisable to have a strainer at the inlet of the system. 5.3 All hydrant outlets should be equipped with selective ground `connections keyed to international selective positions gradewise. Each hydrant pit should be numbered and colour-coded for positive grade segregation. `5.4 Prior to making any connection, all couplings, valves, etc, should be thoroughly cleaned with a clean cloth to prevent entrance of contaminants into the system. CJeaning material should be non-fibrous type. 6. TESTING

OF AVIATION

PRODUCTS

6.1 In addition

to the daiiy quality control checks conducted on the stocks held in the storage tanks and the refuellers, the following tests should also be carried out. 6.1.1 A nozzle sample should be checked for.water/sediments prior to every refuelling. An approved chemical water detector shall be used for this purpose. Suspended water content should not exceed 30 ppm. 6.1.2 A bottom sample should be drawn every fortnight from the storage tanks and tested for silver strip corrosion test (for aviation turbine fuel only).

.

6.1.3 If no fresh stocks are received for three months in the tank a sample should be tested for the following characteristics by the relevant P: method as prescribed under IS : 1448* : Appearance,
CXour,

Density, Copper strip corrosion, Silver strip corrosion (for aviation turbine fuel only), Existent gum, Flash point (for aviation turbine fuel only), Freezing point (for aviation turbine fuel only), Distillation, Water reaction, .and Reid vapour pressure (for aviation gasoline only).

6.1.4 A sample should be tested for the 11 tests
after a fresh batch is received after tank cleaning. *Methods of test for petroleum and its products.

as indicated

in 6.1.3

7

IS : 7667 - 1975
6.i.5 A millipore test for particulate matter should be conducted on each refuelling equipment at least once in three months (by gravimetric Particulate method) in accordance with the method given in Appendix C. matter should not exceed 0.5 mg/litre. 6.1.6 All relevant records for checks listed in 6.1.1 to 6.1.5 should be maintained. 7. SAFETY

PRECAUTIONS Fuels - These fuels are highly flammable and prevention of fire is an important aspect of aviation fuel handling ancl

7.1 Aviation
and control storage.

7.2 Fuel spills represent the greatest fire hazard and every effort should be made to minimize spillage. Since it is not posciblc to prevent spills altogether, proper steps should be taken to remove the spilled fuel at the earliest. Every spill should be treated as a potential fire source and no matter how small, it should be investigated as to its cau~ so that remedial action may be taken. 7.3 Transfer of During transfer during aircraft and bonded to regular intervals code of practice
pYepaYation)].

fuel at high speeds constitutes a potential ignition source. operations all fuelling equipments should, be earthed and the aircraft should also be earthed refuelling operations, the refuelling equipment. Checks should be carried out at to ensure continuity of bonding wires [see Indian Standard for the control of undesirable static electricity (under

7.4 Operation of aircraft engines or heaters or operation of automotive or other internal combustion engine servicing equipment in the vicinity of flammable fuel/air mixture are also potential ignition sources and it should be ensured that no other servicing vehicles are brought in close proximity Open flames, .arcing of electrical circuits and of the fuel servicing vehicle. energy from high frequency radar equipment are some other ignition Radar beam should not be directed -towards any flammable fuel sources. vapoiu-/air mixture and care should be taken that when such operations are c0nductcd.a safe distance is kept from the radar antennas. 7.5 Flame .traps should be provided SMOKING' by painting for refuellers to ensure safety. displayed to prevent 7.6 `NO accidents, sign should be prominently them on the fuelling vehicles.

7.7 Adequate number of fire fighting equipment should be provided and regular checks should be carried out to ensure that they are in working order whenever the need arises. 7.8 All personnel handling aviation fuels should be thoroughly trained in Simulated fire all aspects of fire fighting and other safety precautions. drills should be conducted at regular intervals and contingency plans should be prepared. 8

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 7667 - 1975

APPENDIX (Clam?4.1)
WHITE BUCKET

B
TEST

B-l. White bucket test is conducted to detect the presence of solid contaminants and/or water in aviation fuels. B-2. For the purpose of this test a suitable, clean, dry container such as a 15-litre white enamel bucket should be used. B-3. Sufhcient qu.antities of fuel should be drained into the container as required to get a representative sample from the sump that is IIcing tested. B-4. The white bucket should then be placed on a level surface and its bottom inspected for water droplets, solid contaminants and/or hazy, cloudy or discoloured fuel. B-5. The product should be drained contaminant and water is obtained. till a clear sample free from solid

APPENDIX
(Clause 6.1.5)

C
MATTER

DETERMINATION OF PARTICULATE IN AVIATION FUELS C-l. SCOPE

C-l.1 The method covers a procedure for taking samples of aviation fuels from fuel handling system (refuellers, dispensers, etc), through field monitors for determination of particulate contaminants by grnvimetric method. C-2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD

C-2.1 A 5-litre fuel sample is passed through the field monitor containing a pre-weighed 0.8 p filter membrane. After filtration the field monitor is returned to the laboratory for analysis. C-3, APPARATUS C-3.1 Sampling Apparatus -as folowing components. illustrated in Fig. 1 and consisting of

G3.2 Sampling Valve Connection - designed to meet the following requirements : It shall provide a suitable wall-tapping point, not protruding into the It shall be completely resistant to fuel and be fuel line to be sampled. 11

IS : 7667 - 1975 leak-proof up to the maximum working pressures to be encouiltered. .n .. . . . .. It shall inc&porate a se&sealmg qmck-actlon coupling designed to mate with a suitable connection `leading to the selector valve of the sampling assembly. It shall have minimum of internal recesses which could cause the hold-up of the contaminants. It shall be provided with dust cap.

FIG. 1

FIELD SAMPLING APPARATUS

Is : 7667-1975 C-3.3 Selector Valve designed to meet the following ,requirements:

It shall have an inlet port and two alternativeoutlet ports. It may also have an `off) position. It should be `so designed that it is free from internal pockets in which contaminant may be stored and subseguently released. It may also incorporate a point to which a syringe may be fixed. C-3.4 Field Monitor Casting designed to the following requirements: It shall be so constructed that perfect seal is made between its upper part and the top of the field monitor and also between its lower part and the bottom of the field monitor. No fuel bypassing shall be permitted. hlgs and `each conG3.5 Field Monitors -complete with protective taining a 37-mm pre-weighed 0.8 p membrane filter ! acked by a support pad. C-3.6 Graduated Receiver -capable sample. C-4. PROCEDURE C-4.1 Select a suitable sampling point. Fix the sampling connection to the selected sampling point ensuring that its dust cap at the exposed end is in place. G4.2 Unscrew the field monitor casing. plug from the monitor and keep it in C-4.3 Remove the first prottctive a clean safe place. C-4.4 of receiving at least a Slitre fuel

Locate the monitor properly in the easing.

C-4.5 Remove the second selective plug from the monitor and place it in a clean safe place. C-4.6 Reassemble the monitor casing. C-4.7 Ensure that the ,sampling line is connected to the bottom of the monitor casing and lead the free end to the graduated sample receiver. C-4.9 `Remove the dust caps from the sampling connection and the flexible pressure hose connector and connect the sampling apparatus to the sampling connection with the selector valve in the `off position. C-4.9 when the desired firelling flow and pressure conditions are established, operate the selector valve to the `flush' position. CAltI When at least two litres of fuel is collected, operate the selector valve to the `sample' position. CA.11 After taking a 5-litre sample operate the selector valve to the `off' position. 13

IS : 7667- 1975 C-4.12 If it is necessary to remove fuel from the monitor, carry this- out at an appropriate time using a syringe provided with the sampling kit. C-4.13 Disconnect the sampling unit from the sampling connection replace the dust caps. and

C-4.14 Remove the field monitor from its casing and replace the protective plugs. Handle carefully. Do not open the field monitors under any circumstances before returning them to the laboratory. If they are opened discard the filters. C-4.15 Place the field monitor in a suitable container and record the following condition3 on a report form: Volume of sample, b) Monitor serial number, Sample location and date, and Equipment type and number. 4

a> c>

C.4.16 Drain and dismantle the apparatus and return it to the case provided. c-4.17 Forward the monitor to the laboratory for analysis as soon as possible. C-4.18 The difference in the final and initial mass of the-filter membrane (in mg) divided by the volume of sample (in litres) collected will give the mass in mg of solid contaminant present per litre of the fuel. C-5. GENERAL PRECAUTIONS

C-5.1 Sampling equipment should always bc handled with care and it should bc ensured that it is maintained in a scrupulously clean condition. C-5.2 To avoid extraneous contamination, field monitor protective should be removed only for sampling and replaced immediately. monitor should be opened only in a laboratory. C-5.3 Thread stances.
plugs The

sealing compounds should not bc used under any circum-

C-5.4 All metal parts of the sampling apparatus shall be electrically bonded together and grounded.

14

IS t 7667- 1975
(Ct.ntinued from page 2) Representing Caltex (India) Ltd, Bombay DR i. SUBRAHMANYAM (Alternate) Directorate of Aeronautics (Ministry of Defence) WC CDR S. S. ~~RWAHA SHRI KOTA HAIUNARAYANA(Alternate) Air Headquarters . WC CDR P. PAPPU SQN LDR A. I. WASHINOTON (Alternate) Directorate of Technical Development & ProducSHRI P. R. RAJANARAYANA tion (Air) (Ministry of Defence) SHRI V. CHANDRA~EKHARAN (Alternate) Ministry of Defence REPRESENTATIVE Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Bombay SIZRI K. SUNDARAM SHRI C. V. RAMASWAMY(Alternate) Air India, Bombay SHRI K. V. THAKUR Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI T. V. VAREED SHRI P. A. PAUL (Alternnte) Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co of SHRI P. L. VERMA India Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. H. SAHEBA (Altern&) Me7llbcrS
SHRI V. H. KHAKHAR

'

Ad hoc Panel for Code of Practice for Handling and Storage of Aviation Fuels, CDC 22 : 3 : 1
Indian Oil Corporation Bombay Ltd (Marketing Division),

Corwener SHRI K. S. C. NAIR

Members Indian Airlines, New Delhi DR G. K. AGARWAL SHRI ANAND KU~~AR (Alternate) Bombay Fire Brigade, Bombay SHRI S. FREDILIS SHRI V. B. NIKAM (Ahnate) Caltex (India) Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. H. KHAKHAR SHRI D. H. P. RATNWWAMI iAlterna&) Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR), Dehra Dun SRRI H. K. MULCHANDANI SHRI R. P. TRIPATHI (Alternate) Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co of SHRI P. L. VERMA India Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. S. RAMANATHAN(Altirnatc)

15

