**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12353 (1988) : Stencil Templates for Geometrical Figures 
[PGD 22: Educational Instruments and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 681-938 IS ; 12353 - 1988 



, , ( Reaffirmed 1998) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
STENCIL TEMPLATES FOR GEOMETRICAL FIGURES 



1. Scope — Covers the requirements of mechanical type cut through templates required for drawing 
geometrical shapes. 

2. Types 

2.1 The following two types of templates are recommended: 

Type A — Templates suitable for drawing with pencils, and 
Type B — Templates suitable for drawing with ink-pens. 

3. Materials 

3.1 Templates shall be made of coloured plastics such as butrate or polymethyl methacrylate ( acrylics ) 
or regid polyvinyl chloride or polyvinyl chloride copolymer. 

3.2 The material shall be transparent bright and clean, and shall be reasonably free from porosity, 
bubbles, blisters, spots, scratches and similar other defects. 

4. General Requirements 

4.1 The templates shall be generally rectangular in shape having moulded or machined edges, 

4.2 The templates shall be capable for drawing different geometrical shapes, such as circles, arcs, 
ellipses, squares, rectangles, hexagons, side view of hexagonal bolts and hexagonal nuts, surface 
finish marks, channels, l-sections and angles for civil engineering drawings and many other shapes 
which need to be drawn by the draftsman. 

4.3 There may be separate templates for different types of shapes. 

4.3.1 The sizes of each type of shapes shall be selected from preferred number series given in 
IS : 1076 - 1985 ' Preferred numbers '. However, combination of sizes in each template shall be decided 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

4.4 Type B templates shall have a stepped groove parallel to the shape to be drawn to prevent smudging 
of ink and the boundry of this groove shall be at least 0'5 nim away from the shape to be drawn. 

4.5 Minimum thickness of Type A templates shall be 07 nnm. 

4.6 Minimum thickness of Type B templates shall be 1'5 mm and minimum depth of the stepped groove 
to prevent smudging of ink shall be 0'7 mm. 

4.7 Minimum distance from either edge of the template to the groove shall be 8 mm, 

4.8 Minimum distance between two shapes on a template shall be 5 mm. 

4.9 The grooves in the templates shall be such that the mean of the reproduced line shall not fall 
beyond ±0'4 mm from the standard size. 

4.10 The size of the template shall be selected such as to facilitate convenient working on the 
drawing. 

4.11 Specification/size of the geometrical shape shall be marked conveniently near the shape along 
with the small lines for the two axis to conveniently align the shape on the drawing paper and 
preferably the axis will be parallel to the sides of templates. 

4.12 The templates shall be marked with the pattern of template and the size of pencil or pen to be 
used. 



Adopted 8 April 1988 



® October 1988, BIS 



Gr 1 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS:n3¥3-1988 

5. Workmanship and Finish 

5.1 The geometrical shape shall be neatly and uniformly grooved or moulded. The workmanship and 
finish shall of the best grade and to the entire satisfaction of purchaser. 

6. Tests 

6.1 The templates shall be tested to conform to the requirement given under 3, 4 and 5. 

7. Marking 

7.1 The templates shall be marked with the manufacturer's name or trade-mark and the year of 
manufacture. 

7.2 The template may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

7.2.1 Standard Mark — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards, 

8. Packing 

8.1 Each template shall be individually packed in polythene bag or in a suitable container. A full set of 
templates shall be packed in a suitable packing case for transit and storage. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards relating to drawing instruments. Stencil 
templates for geometrical figures is a drawing instrument used by draftsmen and engineers to draw 
different types of geometrical shapes on engineering drawings. 

Taking into consideration the views of producers and consumers, the Sectional Committee 
responsible for the preparation of this standard felt that it should be related to the manufacturing 
practices followed in the country in this field. ♦ 

Metric system has been adopted in India and all the values in this standard have been given in 
this system, 

2 

i^rlnted at Arcee Prase, New Delhf, india 



