**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1118 (1992) : gear lubricants, multipurpose (extreme 
pressure gear oil) [PCD 3: Petroleum, Lubricants and their 
Related Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1118:1992 

REAFFIRMED 



( srfcr ^r frrq-T #*r) - foftrfa: 

( qpn tntf am ) 

Indian Standard 

GEAR LUBRICANTS, MULTIPURPOSE 
( EXTREME PRESSURE GEAR OIL ) — 
SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 

First Reprint OCTOBER 1994 
UDC 621892093 : 621833 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI U0002 

September 1992 Price Group 6 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2007 

TO 

IS 1118 : 1992 GEAR LUBRICANTS, MULTIPURPOSE 

(EXTREME PRESSURE GEAR OIL) — 

SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 

(Page 3, clause 4.3.1.1) — Substitute fc Amsler\/or fc Ansler\ 

(Page 6, Annex A, clause A-3.3) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 

'Container — Flat bottom, approximately 90 mm ID * 110 mm high, with 
25 mm (minimum) legs, and with cover to support thermometer in centre 
and steel strip at side of container (see Fig. 1 V 

(Page 6, Annex A, clause A-3.5, line 3) — Substitute '30 mm' for '30 cm\ 

[Page 6, Annex A. clause A-4.1(a), line 1] — Substitute c 13 mm" for 4 13 cm'. 

(Page 12, Fig. 1) — Substitute 4 25 mm (MM)' for l 2.5 cm (MIN)\ 



(PCD 3) 



Reprography Unit, BIS. New Delhi, India 



Lubricants and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 4 



FOREWORD 

This Tndian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau oflndian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Lubricants and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by 
Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

This standard was originally published in 1957 covering Gear Lubricants based on the prevailing 
U. S. Military Specification M1L-L-2I05 and the U. K. Military of Supply Specification CS 2758. 
In the last three decades considerable changes have taken place in the consumer demand with respect 
to the lubricant performance levels. The present revision is based on a review of these 
developments. 

The oils under this specification are classified as extreme pressure ( EP ) oils under the following 
two different types, each of which approximately corresponds in performance to the respective 
overseas military and/or industry specifiation as indicated below: 

Type Equivalant Performance 

EP Type GL-4 MIL-L-2105B/API-GL-4/CS : 3000 A 

EP Type GL-5 MIL-L-2105D/API-GL-5/CS : 3000 B 

Performance test facilities for qualifying EP type GL-4 and EP type GL-5 oils are not presently 
available in India. For the purpose of qualifying oils against EP type GL-5, facilities available in 
the approved overseas laboratories are expected to be utilized till such time these or equivelent 
tests arc established in the country. But in the case of EP type GL-4 oils, testing facilities are not 
available even In overseas. For qualifying these oils indigenous performance tests have been 
included, the test facilities for which have been made available with Indian Institute of Petrolium 
Dehra Dun; Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( R & D Centre ), ' Faridabad and Lubri/ol ( India ) Ltd. 
(R&D Centre ), Thane respectively ( see 4.3.1 ). However, for guaranteeing the quality, only 
oils with at least half the dosage of the GL-5 approved additive package has been allowed. Further, 
for the evaluation of shock loading tendency of EP-type GL-4 gear oils Amsler test as developed by 
Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun ( VAV-382/IIP Method ) has been included as an alternate 
performance test to LFW ring test. The committee also felt it to include at a later date the 
recommendation made based on the review of the data generated on Amsler rig test. [ Details of 
these test methods namely VAV-382/NP Method and the LFW-1 rig test have, however, not been 
included in the standard; the test facilities are available with Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun and 
(R&D) Centre, Faridabad respectively. I Indian Standard for the approved performance test 
•Shell Four Ball EP Test 1 of EP type GL-4 gear oil is yet to be formulated. Till such time, the test 
shall be carried out in accordance with 1P-239/85 published by Institute of Petroleum, London 
( 5?? 4.3.1.1 ). Indian Standards for the laboratory performance tests for EP type GL-5 gear oils 
have not yet been formulated. Till such time the standards are formulated the test methods 
ASTM STP 512 AL-33, L-37, L-42 and L-60 published by American Society for Testing and 
Materials ( USA ) shall be followed ( see 4.3.2 ). These oils arc to be tested for ASTM STP 512 A 
L-33, L-37, L-42 and L-60 performance tests in any of the approved laboratories after abtaining 
guidance from the Qualifying Panel. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



IS 1118: 1992 



Indian Standard 
GEAR LUBRICANTS, MULTIPURPOSE 
( EXTREME PRESSURE GEAR OIL ) - 

SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and 
methods of sampling and test for the various types of 
multipurpose automotive gear lubricating oils [extreme 
pressure (EP) type]. 

1.2 The lubricant is primarily intended for use in 
automotive hypoid gear units, manual transmissions, 
final drives, steering gears and fluid lubricated 
universal joints of automotive equipment. 

1.3 This standard may involve hazardous materials, 
operations and equipments. This standard does not 
purport to address all of the safety problems associated 
with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
standard to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine the applicability of regulatory 
limitations prior to use. 

2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
the standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standards are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 

IS No. Title 

1447 : 1966 Methods of sampling of petroleum 

and its products 

1448 Methods of tests for petroleum and 
its products 

3 CLASSIFICATION 

3.1 Types 

The oils qualifying this standard shall be classified as 
Extreme Pressure (EP) oils under one of the following 
two types: 

i) EPtypeGL-4 
ii) EPtypcGL-5 

3.2 Viscosity Grade 

The oils shall conform to one of the following six 
mono-viscosity grades as distinguished by the 



prescribed viscosity limits given in Table 1: 



9 


SAE 


75 


W 


«) 


SAE 


80 


w 


iii) 


SAE 


85 


w 


iv) 


SAE 


90 




v) 


SAE 


140 




vi) 


SAE 


250 





3.3 The oils may also be multi grade combination of 
a ' W grade with another monograde component, for 
example, 75 W-90, 80 W-90, 85 W-140, etc. In such a 
case oil shall comply with the requirements of the ' W 
grade component in full as also the viscosity at 100°C 
of other component grade. 

3.4 Approved Performance Tests 

The tests for performance evaluation of oils are 
summarized below: 

Type of Oil Approved Performance Tests 

EPtypeGL-4 i) Shell four ball rig test 

ii) LFW-1 rig test/AmsIer rig test 

EPtypeGL-5 i) L-33 test 

ii) L-60test 

iii) L-37test 

iv) L-42tcst 

4 REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 General 

The gear lubricating oils shall be homogeneous 
and shall be formulated using mineral lubricating 
oil bate stock (virgin or re-refined or combination 
thereof), a synthetically prepared product, or a 
combination of the two types of products 
compounded with such functional additive materials 
like viscosity index improvers, pour point depressants, 
oxidation and corrosion inhibitors, extreme pressure 
agents, antiwear additives, antifoamants, etc, as are 
necessary to meet the specified requirements of this 
standard. 

4.2 Physico-Chemical Requirements 

4.2.1 Requirements for Finished Oil 

The oil shall be free from suspended matter, grit, water 
or any other impurities. The oil shall also comply with 
physico-chemical requirements prescribed in Table 1 
and 4.2.2 and 4.2.3. 



IS 1118 : 1992 



e 
a 

'C 

© § 
B V 

so 

•si 

?^ 

a* 



4 

IK 



* © 







1 


o 


■3 


fc 


C-l 


C. 


r*S 


■ 




1 


r<* 


9 


C) 


r 


N»^ 


ee 



o.S- 

.sts 

ft. 









81 
si 



3 

CO 



3 

C/) 



a 









I I 



B 



it 
e 

a 
s 



o 
•8 S 

f I 
■§» i 



I 

! 

II 

fi 






o 



- © 



O 
00 



8 I 



a. ■ 



5 II 



o .5 <N 

3 < • 






~ rJ * 



*'* 



oo 2 



00 15 



» 2 



I* 

dm m 






e e 

ii 



o 



I 



r 
11 



4» 



8 (I I 1 
8 11 I li i 



c «* 



£ 



? 



• i 
: t 

! i 




8 ^ a 



r ar ? s s a s 
|2a I a s a a 



4.2.2 Stability and Compatibility of Finished 
Lubricating Oils 

4.2.2.1 The finished blended oil shall have the 
additive elements uniformly distributed throughout 
the oil and shall show no evidence of instability at 
temperature specified in the homogeneity and 
miscibility test described in Annex B. 

4.2.2.2 The oil shall be compatible with all other oils 
previously qualified under this standard as 
demonstrated by the compatibility test described in 
Annex C. The compatibility is determined by 
subjecting separate mixtures of the oil with six 
selected reference oils designated by Qualifying 
Authority. 

4.2.3 Storage Stability 

The oil shall satisfactorily pass the storage stability test 
as described in Annex D. 

4.2.4 Requirements of the Base-Stock 

4.2.4.1 The maximum viscosity-index of the base- 
stock used in formulating the gear oil shall be not less 
than 85. 

4.2.4.2 Each base-stock component used in 
formulating the finished oil shall be accompanied 
by the following property data: 

Properties to be reported: 

i) Kinematic viscosity at 40°C and 100°C in Cst; 

ii) Viscosity index; 

iii) Flash point, °C; 

iv) Conradson carbon residue, percent by mass; 

v) Sulphated ash, percent by mass; 

vi) Water content, percent by volume; 

vii) Total acid number; 

viii) Pour point, °C; 

ix) Sulphur content, percent by mass; and 

x) Colour. 

4.3 Performance Test Requirements 

4.3.1 EP Type GL-4 Oils 

This type of oil shall be formulated only with an 
additive system on which an approval of API GL-5 
level already exists. To guarantee the quality in the 
absence of approved axle tests, half of the GL-5 dosage 
has been kept minimum as additive concentration and 
shall meet the limits of Amsler rig test, LFW-1 rig test 
and shell four-ball tests as specified in 4.3.1.1, 4.3.1.2 
and 4.3.1:3. 

4.34.1 Ansler rig test (VAV-382/IIP Method ) 

A sample of lubricant is fed through the rotating steel 
disc dipped in the lubricant bath thermostatically 
controlled into the contact zone of EN-31 Steel-Steel 



IS 1118: 1992 

disc combination rotatingeachotherindoublesliding 
mode under prescribed loading-unloading cycle. 
The loading at which the scuffing occurs form the 
criteria for examining the shock loading 
characteristics of the oils. This test is done on Amsler 
Type A 135 disc machine. The test pieces are two 
discs made of EN-31 steel which rotate in the same 
direction. The low disc dips in the test oil bath. 

The gear oils of EP type GL-4 shall be qualified if 
scuffing load lies within 60 ± 10 kg. 

4.3.1.2 LFW-1 rig test 

Lubricant, Friction and Wear (LFW- 1 ) is Fa lex-Block- 
on-Ring test machine. Antiscore properties of auto- 
motive gear oils can be screened on this test rig. 
The gpar oils of EP type GL-4 shall be qualified if wear 
scar depth and width is within ±10 percent of the 
reference oil AGO-1 when tested under the following 
conditions: 



Load 

Speed 

Oil temperature 

Test duration 

Gear oil grade 



136 kg at the specimen 
800 rpm 
130 ± 1°C 
10 minutes 
SAEW 



Details of reference fluid AGO I are described in 
Table 2. 

Table 2 Physlco-Chemical Characteristics of 
Reference Oil AGO-1 



SI No, 


Characteristics 


Results 





Kinematic viscosity, Cst 

a) at40°C 

b) atl00°C 


190 

17 


ii) 


Viscosity index 


95 


iii) 


Pour point, °C 


-O 


iv) 


Flash point (COC), °C 


200 


v) 


Phosphorus, percent by mass 0.05 


vi) 


Channelling at - 18°C 


Non-channelling 



4.3.1.3 Shell four ball EP test 

This is a very commonly used test rig in oil 
development programme. It consists of three 12.7 nun 
balls of EN-31 steel clamped in contact as in an 
equilateral triangle. The fourth ball is held in rotating 
chuck and touches each of the stationary balls. Load 
is applied through a lever system which pushes the 
three stationary balls upward against the rotating ball. 
The test lubricant covers the stationary balls. Tests 
are run at various loads for a specified period of time. 

Gear oils of EP type GL-4 shall be qualified, if the weld 
load obtained is 280 kg. 

4.3.2 EP Type GL-5 Oils 

4.3.2.1 L-33 test ( moisture corrosion ) 

This test method is used for evaluating the rust and 



IS 1118 : 1992 

corrosion inhibiting properties of a gear lubricant 
when subjected to water contamination and elevated 
temperature in a bench-mounted hypoid differential 
housing (carrier) assembly. It simulates a type of 
severe field service in which corrosion-promoting 
moisture in the form of condensed water vapour has 
accumulated in the axle assembly. This may happen as 
a result of volume expansion and contraction of the 
axle lubricant and the accompanied "breathing in" of 
moisture laden air through the axle vent. The 
customary test is a seven-day test; and abbreviated 
test of one day may also be run. At the end of the 
test the differential assembly is disassembled and 
rated for rust and corrosion, sludge and other 
deposits. 

The oil shall prevent or minimize corrosion to gear unit 
components in the presence of moisture. Satisfactory 
performance shall be demonstrated when the oil 
exhibits test results of one percent or less on the test 
cover plate and no rust on gear teeth, bearings and 
functional components. 

4.3.2.2 L-60 test (thermal oxidation stability) 

This method is used for determining the deterioration 
of gear lubricant when subjected to severe thermal 
oxidation conditions. A sample of gear lubricant is 
placed in a heated gear box in which two spur gears 
and a test bearing are operating at a predetermined 
load in the presence of a copper catalyst. The tem- 
perature of the lubricant is maintained at 163°C while 
bubbling 1.1 1/h of oil through oil in the gear box for a 
test duration of SO h of continuous operations. At the 
end of the test percent viscosity increase, n-pentane 
and toluene insolublcs, etc, of the test lubricant are 
noted. 

The oil shall resist thermal and chemical oxidation. 
Satisfactory performance shall be demonstrated when 
the oil exhibits test results of not more than 100 percent 
increase in lubricant viscosity, /t-pentane insolublcs 
not more than 3 percent by mass and toluene insolubles 
not more than 2 percent by mass. 

4.3.2.3 L-42 test (gear scoring) 

This method is used for determining the antiscoring 
properties of gear lubricants under high speed and 
shock conditions. The test unit consists of a spicer rear 
axle, ring pinion ratio 45:11, uncoated gears. The test 
unit with the test lubricant is operated under high 
speed conditions and under shock (peak torque) 
conditioas. 

At the completion of the test the pinion and ring gear 
are removed from the unit and rated on both drive 
and coast sides for percent of the contact area 
exhibiting scoring. The percent scoring for the test oil 
is compared to the percent scoring for the two 
reference oils. 

Satisfactory performance shall be demonstrated 
when the oil tested in duplicate exhibits scoring less 
than or equal to reference oil RGO 110-90 under 
conditions of high-speed and shock loading. 



4.3.2.4 L-37 test (gear distress and deposits) 

This method is used for evaluating the load-carrying, 
wear and extreme pressure properties of a gear 
lubricant in an axle under conditions of high speed, 
low-torque and of low-speed, high-torque operation. It 
simulates a type of severe field service in terms of 
hypoid gear tooth loading and sliding velocities. It 
uses a hypoid differential housing (carrier) assembly, 
5.86 ratio, standard differential with uncoated drive 
gear and drive pinion (ring and pinion); coated 
(manganese phosphate coating) drive gear and drive 
pinion may also be used. At the completion of the test 
under conditions of high speed low-torque operation 
(100 min at 440 wheel rpm and 535 N.m torque per 
wheel) and low-speed high torque operations (24 h 
at 80 wheel rpm and 2.35 kN.m torque per wheel) the 
ring and pinion are removed and rated for various 
forms of gear distress. 

Satisfactory performance shall be demonstrated 
when the oil tested using untreated and phosphate- 
treated gear assemblies prevents gear tooth ridging, 
rippling, pitting, welding and excessive wear or other 
surface distress and objectionable deposits and does 
not produce excessive wear pitting or corrosion of 
bearing rollers, races or thrust washers under 
conditions of high-speed low-torque and low-speed 
high torque. 

5 QUALIFICATION APPROVAL 

The oil shall be subjected to qualification approval in 
accordance with the details given in Annex E. 

6 PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION 

To ensure acceptance of only qualified products and 
for the purpose of product identifying, tests may be 
carried out by the purchaser or his agency on the 
characteristics of the oil and the test results shall be 
compared with the corresponding figures given in 
the product identification report. Permissible 
tolerances of test results are indicated against each of 
the characteristics (see Table 3 ). 

7 PACKING AND MARKING 

7.1 Packing 

The material shall be packed in metal containers or in 
any other suitable containers as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 

7.2 Marking 

The containers shall be securely closed and marked 
with the following information: 

a) Indication of the source of manufacture, 
recognized trade-mark, if any; 

b) Name, type and grade of the material; 

c) Net mass of the material; and 

d) Identification in code or batch number or 
otherwise to enable the lot of consignment or 
manufacture to be traced back from records. 













IS 1118: 1992 




Table 3 Permissible Tolerances for Qualification 










( Clause 6) 








SI No. 


Characteristic 


Tolerance 


Methods of Test, R*r to 










^0+^_ 






Annex 




IS UAH 





Relative density 


To be reported 


— 




P: K> 


il) 


Flash point, °C 
(COC) 


Minimum as specified 


— 




P : 60 


iii) 


Channel point, °C 


Maximum as specified 


A 




— 


lv) 


Temperature for 
Brookfield viscosity 
of 150000cp,°C 


-do- 






P:* 


v) 


Kinematic viscosity, 
est at 10CPC 


Within the range 
specified 


— 




P:25 


vi) 


Viscosity index 


Minimum as specified 


— 




P:56 


vii) 


Sulphur, percent by 
mass 


t 20 percent 


— 




P: 33 


Viil) 


Phosphorus, percent by 
mass 


-do- 


— 




P:54 



ix) Chlorine, percent by mass -do- 

x) Zinc, percent by mass -do- 

♦ Under preparation. Titi such time ASTM D 2983-87 snail be followed. 



P:50 
P:77 



7.2.1 All markings including batch number or lot of 
manufacture shall be made on one flat end when the 
material is packed in barrels. 

7.2.2 The containers may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 

8 SAMPLING 

8.1 Representative samples of the material shall be 
drawn as prescribed in IS 1447 : 1966. 



8.2 Number of Tests 

Tests for all the characteristics given in Tables 1 
and 5 of the specification shall be conducted on the 
composite sample. 

8.3 Criteria for Conformity 

The lot shall be declared as conforming to the require- 
ments of the specification if all the test results on the 
composite sample satisfy the relevant specification 
requirements. 



IS 1118: 1992 



ANNEX A 
[Table \ 9 Item (v\)] 

DETERMINATION OF CHANNELING CHARACTERISTICS OF LUBRICANTS 



A-l SUMMARY 

The test consists of storing the sample for 18 hours at 
the temperature required by the specification, cutting 
a channel in the lubricants with a metal strip, and 
determining whether the lubricant Hows together to 
cover the bottom of the container within 10 seconds. 

A-2 SAMPLE SIZE 

Approximately 650 ml of lubricant to be tested. 

A-3 APPARATUS 

A-3.1 Steel Strip — square end (channeling tool), 
approximately 3 mm x 20 mm x 230 mm. 



A-3.2 Thermometer 

22360 or equivalent) 



(H.B. Instrument Co., No. 



A-3.3 Container — flat bottom, approximately 90cm 
ID by 1 10 cm high, with 25 cm (minimum) legs, and 
with cover to support thermometer in centre and steel 
strip at side of container (see Fig. 1). 

A-3.4 Heating Bath — 46° to 48°C. 

A-3.5 Cooling Bath (non-liquid) — capable of 
maintaining the specified temperature within 1°C, size 
sufficient to accommodate container within 30 cm 
(minimum) clearance on all sides. 

A-4 PROCEDURE 

A-4.1 Prepare test set up as follows: 

a) Fill container to within 13 cm of top with 
specimen, place in heating bath, and allow 
sample to reach 46°C (If a liquid bath is used, 
adjust bath level to height of sample.) 



b) When sample reaches 46°C, cover container 
and remove from bath, allow the samples to 
cool to 22 ± 1°C. 

c) Position the thermometer so that the bulb is 
just below the surface. lasert the steel strip 
into the slit in the cover so that it is in a vertical 
position in contact with the wall of the con- 
tainer, with the end resting on the bottom of 
the container. Immediately place the sample 
in the cooling bath. 

A-4.2 Store container in cooling bath without inter- 
ruption for 18 ± 2 hours. Begin timing the storage 
period immediately after placing the sample in the 
cooling bath. 

A-4.3 At the end of storage period, remove container 
from cooling bath, and within 30 seconds cut a 
sample as follows: 

a) Check sample temperature and make sure 
that it is within ± 1°C of specified storage 
temperature. 

b) Without moving steel strip, remove cover and 
thermometer from container. 

c) Note time to nearest second, and within 5 
seconds scrape the vertically held steel strip 
all the way across bottom of container. 

A-4.4 Within 10 seconds after cutting the channel 
(see A-4.3), check to determine whether sample has 
flowed back and completely covered bottom of 
container. If it has, note it as non-channeling; if not, 
note it as channeling. 

A-4.5 Reporting 

Report the result as channeling of non-channeling. 



IS 1118: 1992 



ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.2.2.1) 

HOMOGENEITY AND MISCIB1UTY TEST 



B-l GENERAL 

This test determines whether an oil is and will 
remain homogenous and whether it is misciblc and be 
stable when blended with certain standard oils after 
being submitted to a prescribed cycle of temperature 
changes. 

B-2 SAMPLE 

B-2.1 Test Sample — Approximately 300 ml. 

B-2.2 Standard Reference Oils — As approved by 
the qualifying authority. 

B-3 APPARATUS 

B-3,1 Test Jar — of clear glass, cylindrical form, flat 
bottom, approximately 30 to 35 mm in inside diameter 
and 115 to 125 mm in height. 

B-3.2 Thermometer 50°C to +50°C range, 

conforming to ASTM E t -67 or equivalent. 

B-3.3 Cork — to fit the test jar, bored centrally to take 
the test thermometer. 

B-3.4 Jacket — Glass or metal, water-tight, of cylin- 
drical form, flat bottom, about 115 mm in depth, with 
inside diameter 9.5 to 12.5 mm greater than the outside 
diameter of the jar. 

B-3 3 Disk — Cork or felt, 6 mm in thickness of the 
same diameter as the inside diameter of the jacket. 

B-3.6 Gasket — A ring gasket, about 5 mm in thick- 
ness, to fit snugly around the outside of the test jar and 
loosely inside the jacket. The purpose of the ring 
gasket is to prevent the test jar from touching the 
jacket. 

B-3.7 Bath — A cooling bath of a type suitable for 
obtaining the required temperature. 

B-4 PROCEDURE 

B-4.1 Shake oil sample well and pour into six sample 
jars to the 37.5 mm mark and one sample jar to the 75 
mm. Add a reference oil to each of the sample jars to 
the 75 mm mark. Mix the oil thoroughly and heat to 
46°C in a water bath. After the oils reach room 
temperature, observe and record the colour and 
evidence of separation. Determine and record the pour 
point of each oil. 

B-4.2 Maintain the temperature of the cooling bath at 
-1°C to + 2°C. Support the jacket, containing the test 
jar, firmly in a vertical position in the cooling bath so 



that not more than 25 mm of the jacket projects out of 
the cooling medium. 

B-4.3 Beginning at a temperature 12°C before the 
expected pour point, at each test thermometer read- 
ing that is a multiple of 3°C, remove the test jar from 
the jacket carefully and tilt it just enough to ascer- 
tain whether there is a movement of the oil in the test 
jar. The completed operation of removal and replace- 
ment shall require not more than 3 seconds. If the 
oil has not ceased to flow when its temperature has 
reached 10°C, place the test jar in the jacket in a 
second bath maintained at a temperature of -18°C to 
-15°C. If the oil has not ceased to flow when its 
temperature has reached -7°C, place the test jar in 
the jacket in a third bath maintained at a temperature 
of -34.5°C. For determinations of very low pour 
point, additional baths should be maintained with 
successively lower temperature differentials of about 
17°C. In each case transfer the test jar when the 
temperature of the oil reaches a point of 28°C, above 
the temperature of the new bath. At no time place 
the cold test jar directly in the cooling medium. As 
soon as the oil in the test jar does not flow when the jar 
is tilted, hold the test jar in a horizontal position for 
exactly 5 seconds, as noted by a stop-watch or other 
accurate timing device, and observe carefully. If the 
oil shows any movement under these conditioas, 
place the test jar immediately in the jacket and repeat 
a test for flow at the next temperature 3°C lower. 

B-4.4 Continue the test in this manner until a point is 
reached at which the oil in the test jar shows no 
movement when the test jar is held in a horizontal 
position for exactly 5 seconds. Certain lubricating oils 
tend to move as a whole and should be very 
closely observed. Record the reading of the test 
thermometer at this temperature, corrected for error, if 
necessary. Allow the samples to thaw; and when the 
cloudiness has barely disappeared, observe and 
record the colour and evidence of separation. When 
the samples reach room temperature, place them in an 
oil-bath after removing the thermometers. Heat the 
bath at 230°C and immediately remove the sample 
jars. Cork the samples and store them at their respective 
pour points for 18 to 24 hours. Remove the jars and 
allow the sample to thaw. 

When cloudiness has barely disappeared, observe 
and record the colour and evidence of separation. 
Repeat the last operation when the samples reach 
room temperature. 

B-5 REPORTING 

B-5.1 Report evidence of separation in the following 
four successive stages: 

a) Initial sample; 



IS 1118: 1992 



b) Wanned to just above clout' int after having 
once reached pour point; 

c) After a cycle of heating to 230°C cooling to 
pour point, storing it for 24 hours at this tem- 
perature and warming to just above pour point; 
and 

d) Warmed to room temperature. 

B-5.2 Evidence of separation is to be reported as: 

a) Condition 
i) Definite 
ii) None or doubtful 



b) Location 

i) Near top 
ii) Near bottom 
iii) Filament 
iv) Uniformly distributed 

c) Particle Size 

i) Small, as in cloud or haze 
ii) Specks or larger particles 

d) Colour 

i) White or very light 
ii) Yellow 
iii) Black 



ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.2.2.2) 

COMPATIBILITY TEST 



C-l GENERAL 

This method is used for determining the compatibility 
of universal gear lubricant when blended with a 
reference gear lubricant by observing for precipitation 
of additive material after storage. 

C-2 APPARATUS 

C-2.1 100 ml cone-shaped centrifuge tubes. 

C-2.2 Centrifuge with a diameter of swing (tip-to-tip 
of whirling tubes) 375 mm to 425 mm and shall be 
capable of being controlled at a speed of 1 500 ± 25 
rpm. 

NOTK — If the available centrifuge does not conform 
dimcnsionally to the preferred form, the speed of rotation of the 
available centrifuge must be adjusted to given the same 
centrifugal force at the tips of the tubes as that obtained with 
the prescribed instrument when operated at 1 300 ± 25 rpm. 
The speed to operate the available centrifuge shall be calculated 
from the formula: 



rpm 



■^ 



xl500 



where, d * Ihc diameter of the swing (tip-to-tip of 
whirling tubes) of the available 
centrifuge. 

C-2.3 Balance capable of weighing to 1 mg. 

C-2.4 Constant temperature bath capable of being 
controlled at 121° ± 1°C (250° ± 2°F). 

C-2.5 Stirring apparatus capable of stirring the 
contents of a 400 ml tall form beaker at approximately 
200 rpm. 



C2.6 Beaker, 400 
resistant glass. 



ml capacity, tall form, heat 



C-2.7 Forced circulation oven capable of being 
controlled at 104.4 ± 2°C (220 r r ~°F). 



C-2.8 Desiccator, capable 
centrifuge tubes. 



o! 



holding several 



C-2.9 Graduated cylinders, 100-nil capacity. 

C-3 MATERIALS 

C-3.1 Naptha 

C-3.2 Cleaning solution, consisting of concentrated 
sulphuric acid saturated with potassium dichromate. 

C-3.3 Distilled Water 

C-3.4 Denatured Ethyl Alcohol 

C-3.5 Reference Oils — As approved by the 
qualifying authority. 

C-4 PROCEDURE 

C-4.1 Make two compatibility tests with each 
reference oils. 

r-4.2 Determine the residue in each of the reference 
oils and the sample oil by subjecting each of the 
reference oils alone (not mixed with any other oil) to 
the procedures described in C-4.7 through C-4.16. 
This data will be used in calculations of compatibility 
(C-4.17.1). 

C-4.3 Preparation of Centrifuge Tubes 

Prepare two centrifuge tubes for test with each 
reference oil. 

C-4.4 Support the centrifuge tubes in an inverted 
position in an oven maintained at 104.4 ± 1°C 
(220° ± 2°F) for at least one-half hour. 



C-4.5 Remove the tubes from the oven, place them in 
a desiccator, and permit them to cool to room 
temperature. 

C-4.6 Number each tube, weigh to the nearest milli- 
gram, and replace tubes in the desiccator until they are 
to be used. 

C-4.7 Thoroughly shake sample and reference oils 
prior to sampling. 

0-4.8 Use 110 ml of reference and test oils. 

C-4.9 Heat the beakers containing the reference and 
test oils in an oven at 121.1 ± 1°C for 20 minutes. 
Remove the beakers from the oven and stir (with a 
mechanical stirrer) the contents while still hoi for 5 
minutes. 

C-4.10 Transfer 100 ml of the contents of each beaker 
to weighed centrifuge tubes. Save the remainder of 
the oil mixture. 

0-4.11 Cork the centrifuge tube and store it in an 
upright position in a darkene a such as a drawer 
or cupboard at room tempt* *u re for a period of 
30 ± 1 days. 

C-4.12 At the conclusion of the storage peri< 
remove the centrifuge tube from the storage area, 
place it in the centrifuge, and operate the centrifuge 
at 1 500 ± 25 rpm for a period of 30 ± 1 minutes. 

NOTE — In transferring the centrifuge tube from the storage 
area to the centrifuge, care must be taken not to disturb any 
material which may have separated from the oil. 

0-4.13 Remove the centrifuge tube from the 
centrifuge and decant and discard the supernatant 
oil. Permit the centrifuge tube to drain in an inverted 
position at room temperature for a period of two 
hours. Discard the drainings. If the residue is a solid, 
wash it with naphtha sufficient number of times to 
ensure that it is free of oil. 

NOTE — If the separated material is not sufficiently compacted 
by the centrifuging to permit decanting the supernatant oils, 
continue the centrifuging for 15 minutes intervals until decant- 
ing is possible. If the material is a liquid at the conclusion of 30 
minutes centrifuging period, or if it can not be compacted, 
stopper the centrifuge tube and replace it in storage for an 
additional 30 days. At the end of the second storage pei-od, 
proceed as directed in C-4J2. 

C-4.14 Place the centrifuge tube in an upright posi- 
tion in an oven controlled at 104.4° ± 1°C (220 ± 2°F) 
for approximately 2 hours. 



IS 1118: 1992 

0-4.15 Remove the centrif ,ube from the oven and 
place it in a desiccator to cool to room temperature. 
Weigh the tube and contents to the nearest milligram. 
Substract the weight of the empty centrifuge tube to 
determine the weight of the separated material. 

NOTE — If the residue remains a liquid at the end of the second 
30 days storage period, centrifuge the lube as specified 
in C-4.12. Remove the tul>e from the centrifuge and nnu? the 
volume of the separated liquid to the nearest 0.05 ml. 

C-4.16 Pour the remainder of the oil remaining in the 
400 ml beaker (approximately 100 ml, see 0-4.9) into 
a second 400 ml beaker and examine the beaker in 
which the oils were mixed forsludgcoi -other evidence 
of incompatibility. 

0-4.17 Report 

Calculate the percent incompatibility for each refer- 
ence oil as an average of the values obtained for each 
reference oil using the following formula: 

Theoretical zero incompatibility = R + T 

Evidence of incompatibility = X - ( R + T) 

X-(R + T) 



Percent incompatibility : 



where 



0.9 ( 50 r + 50 / ) 



x 100 



R = weight of separated material in reference oil 
(g/50 ml of oil). See 0-4.2. 

T = weight of separated material in sample oil 
(g/50mlofoil).5c^O-4.2. 

X = weight of separated material found in com- 
patibility test. See 0-4.16. 

r s weight percent of additive in reference oil 
(to be supplied by the supplier of the 
refrence oil). 

/ * weight percent additive in sample oil (to 
be supplied by the manufacturer of the 
sample oil). 

0.9 « assumed specific gravity of both reference 
oil and sample. 

NOTE — It may be of interest to make a chemical analysis of the 
residue found in the incompatible oil mixture. 



IS 1118 : 1992 



ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.2.3) 

DETERMINATION OF STORAGE STABILITY 



D-l GENERAL 

This method is used for determining the storage 
solubility characteristics of universal gear lubricants. 

D-2 APPARATUS 

D-2.1 100 ml cone-shaped centrifuge tubes. 

D-2.2 Centrifuge with a diameter of swing (tip-to-tip 
whirling tubes) 375 to 425 mm and shall be capable of 
being controlled at a speed of 1 500 ± 25 rpm. 

NOTE — If the available centrifuge does not conform 
dimensionally to the preferred form, the speed of rotation of the 
available centrifuge must be adjusted to give the same 
centrifugal force at the tips of the tubes as that obtained with the 
prescribed instrument when operated ai 1 500 ± 25 rpm. The 
speed to operate the available centrifuge shall be calculated 
from the formula: 



rpm ; 



PF 



X1500 



where, d * the diameter of the swing (tip-to-tip 
whirling tubes) of the available 
centrifuge. 

D-2.3 Balance capable of weighing to 1 mg. 

D-2.4 Constant temperature bath capable of being 
controlled at 121° ± 1°C (250° ± 2°F). 

D-2.5 Forced circulation oven capable of being 
controlled at 104.4° ± 1°C (220° ± 2 b F). 

D-2.6 Desiccator, capable of holding several 
centrifuge tubes. 

D-3 MATERIALS 

D-3.1 Naphtha 

0-3.2 Cleaning solution, consisting of concentrated 
sulphuric acid saturated with potassium dichromate. 

D-3.3 Distilled Water 

D-3.4 Denatured Ethyl alcohol 

D-4 PROCEDURE 

D-4.1 Preparation of Centrlftige Tubes — Prepare 
three centrifuge tubes. 

D-4.2 Support the centrifuge tubes in an upside 
down position in an oven maintained at 104.4° 1 1°C 
(220° ± 2°F) for at least half an hour. 

D-4.3 Remove the tubes from the oven, place them in 



a desiccator, and permit them to cool to room 
temperature. 

D-4.4 Number each tube and weigh it to the nearest 
milligram. 

D-4.5 Place 320 ml of the sample into a 400 ml beaker 
and heat in an oven at 121° ± 1° (250° ± 2°F) for 20 
minutes. 

D-4.6 Remove the beaker from the oven and allow it 
to cool to 25° ± 3°C. Place 100 ml of oil from the 
beaker in each centrifuge tube and cork the tube. 
Place the tubes in an upright position, still corked, in a 
darkened area such as a drawer or cupboard at room 
temperature for a period of 30 ± 1 days. 

D-4.7 Remove the tubes from the storage area, place 
them in a centrifuge at 1 500 ± 25 rpm for a period of 
30 ± 1 minute. If the residue is a solid, wash it several 
times with naphtha, a sufficient number of times to 
assure that it is free of oil. 

NOTE — In transferring the centrifuge tubes from the storage 
area to the centrifuge, care must be taken not to disturb any 
material which may have separated from the oil. 

D-4 .8 Remove the centrifuge tubes from the centrifuge 
and decant and discard the supernatant oil. Permit the 
centrifuge tube to drain in an upside down position at 
room temperature for a period of two hours. 

NOTE — If the separated material is not sufficiently compacted 
by the centrifuging to permit decanting the supernatant oil, 
continue the centrifuging for 15 minute intervals until decanting 
is possible. If the material is a liquid at the conclusion of the 
centrifuging period, or if it cannot be compacted, cork the 
centrifuge tube and replace it in storage for an additional 30 
days. At the end of the second storage period, proceed as in D- 
4.7. 

D-4.9 Place the centrifuge tubes in an upright 
position in an oven controlled at 104.4° ± 1°C 
(220° ± 2°F) for approximately two hours. 

D-4.10 Remove the centrifuge tubes from the oven 
and place them in a desiccator to cool to room 
temperature. Weigh the tubes and contents to the 
nearest milligrams. Subtract the weight of the empty 
centrifuge tubes to determine the weight of the 
separated material. 

D-4. 11 If the residue remains a liquid at the end of the 
second 30 days storage period, centrifuge the tubes 
as specified in D-4.7. Remove the tubes from the 
centrifuge and note the volume of the separated 
liquids to the nearest 0.05 ml. 

D-4.12 Calculation 

D-4. 12.1 Calculate the average amount of separated 
residue (solid/liquid) on the basis of three test samples. 



10 



D-4.12,2 Calculate the percent insoluble residue in 
the sample from the formula: 



Percent insoluble 
residue 



Average amount of 
separated residue, g 

0.9 x Weight percent 
of additive in sample 



x 100 



IS 1118: 1992 



where 



0.9 = assumed specific gravity of the sample. 

NOTE — The weight percent of additive in the sample to be 
obtained from the manufacturer of the sample. 



ANNEX E 
(Clause 5) 

PROCEDURE FOR QUALIFICATION APPROVAL 



E-1 PROCEDURE 

E-l.l The oil shall be qualified in accordance with the 
provisions of this standard. The authority for recom- 
mending a qualification approval vests in the 'Panel 
for Engine and Gear Oil Qualification Approval' 
PCD 4 : P2. 

E-1.2 The Panel for Engine and Gear Oil 
Qualification Approval has the following functions: 

a) Approval of engine/performance test 
facilities of laboratories for the purpose of 
recognizing them to carry out engine/ 
performance test evaluation as required by 
this standard. 

b) Approval of blending and quality control 
facilities of lubricant manufacturers for the 
purpose of ensuring their ability to 
manufacture qualified lubricants within the 
tolerance limits stipulated by this standard. 

c) Scrutiny of laboratory test data including 
evaluation of test components for the purpose 
of assessing whether the candidate lubricant 
formulation meet the requirements of the 
standard and accordingly recommend for or 
against qualifying the products. 

E-l .3 Candidate oil companies desirous of obtaining 
the qualification approvals of their products against 
this standard, shall apply to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards in prescribed form which requires 
disclosures of full particulars of the formulation in 
terms of both base stocks and additive components. 
Such applications should be addressed as confidential 
documents to the designated official of the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. The information contained therein 
shall be treated in strict confidence and not disclosed 
to any person or organizations, unless so authorized 
in writing by the candidate oil company. 

E-1.4 On receipt of the application for qualification 
approval, the Bureau of Indian Standards will 
communicate to the oil company the quantities and 
mode of despatch of the candidate oil and its 
components. Finished lubricant blends in requisite 



quantities under suitable code will be sent to approved 
testing laboratories for performance evaluation with 
their prior concurrence of the laboratory. 

E-l .5 The testing laboratory < 'all present the results 
of all the performance tests aiiooiher related data in the 
prescribed form together with specified components 
or their photographs at a scheduled meeting of the 
Panel for engine and gear oil qualification approval. 

E-l. 6 The Panel based on an overall review of the test 
data and the condition of the components, shall 
decide by consensus whether the candidate oil 
formulation meets the requirements of this standard 
and accordingly communicate its decision to Bureau 
of Indian Standards. 

E-l. 7 In the event of the panel recommending 
qualification approval, the following documents shall 
be issued by BIS for extending coverage under BIS 
Certification Marks Scheme: 

a) Qualification Certificate — Testifying to the 
quality of the product and giving it a 
qualification number. The qualification 
certificate shall consists of particulars of various 
components used in lubricant formulation 
and details of its compliance to relevant 
physico-chemical performance and other tests. 

b) Product Identification Report — In which the 
composition of the product is declared and 
certain tests data (see 16) are given whereby it 
is possible to identify the product. 

E-l .8 At any time if there is a change in the base stock 
or base stock sources (as identified by the broad 
geographical classification such as Indian, Middle- 
East, Mid -Continent, South-East, Gulf, etc) refining 
treatment or additives used in the formulation, 
requalification will be required. Where the proposed 
changes are minor, the panel may at its discretion 
recommend waiving complete requalification or may 
require only partial requalification of the proposed 
changes. 

E-1.9 If a candidate oil company submits a series of 
viscosity grades for qualification, the performance test 
will be carried out only on SAE 90 or SAE 80W-90 



11 



IS 1118: 1992 

grades provided the type and dosage of additive in the 
other grades are identical. The oil company shall file 
an affidavit to this effect, and the panel will qualify the 
complete series of oils provided the performance tests 
are met by the SAE 90 or 80W-90 grade. 

E-l.lOIn the event the candidate lubricant formula- 
tion is found to be marginally failing in some perform- 
ance tests, the candidate oil company may disclose its 
formulation particulars to the panel and request it to 
consider the possibility of a modified formulation 
meeting the requirements of this standard. In such 



event, the panel may at its discretion, suggest limited 
re-evaluation of the modified formulation. On the 
basis of such re -evaluation the panel may consider 
recommending qualification approval to the modified 
rmulation. 

E-l.ll The oil once approved against this standard 
will be qualified for a period not exceeding 5 years 
from the date of the original qualification. When the 
qualification period has expired each product shall 
be requalified if the manufacturer wishes to maintain 
the formulation as a current product meeting this 
standard. 



THERMOMETER 

ONE HOLE STOPPER 
LOOSE COVER 



>n 




STEEL STRIP 
(CHANNELING TOOL) 



2.5cm(MIN) 



Fig. 1 1Y:sT Setup 



12 



Bureau or Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
1 and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook* and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 4 ( 515 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11(XX)2 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. IT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34- A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 



{ 



331 01 31 
33113 75 



f 37 
\ 37 



84 99, 37 85 61 
86 26,37 8662 



{ 



60 3843 
602025 



/ 235 02 16, 235 04 42 
\ 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

{63292 95,632 7858 
632 7891,632 7892 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FAR1DABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Stmco Printing Press, Delhi 



