( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 10905( Part 3 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR BASIC REQUIREMENTS OF GENERAL HOSPITAL BUILDINGS
PART 3 ENGINEERING SERVICES BUILDINGS in Buildings
Chairman SHRI G. C. MATHVR National Buildings Organization ` G ' Wing, Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi-l 1001 I Members SHRI AJAYA BHARADWAJ SHRI S. SHARYA ( Altcrnute ) CHIEB AROHITEOT Representing Indian Institute of Architects, Department, Public Works Tamil Nadu, Madras Bombay Government of

DEPARTMENT

Functional

Requirements

Sectional

Committee,

BDC 12

SENIOR ARCHITECT ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways ( Research, Design DIREOTOR, AROHITECTVHE and Standards Organization, Lucknow ) JOINT DIREOTOR ( ARCHITECTURE ) ( Alternate ) Director General of Health Services ( Ministry of SERI P. C. JAITLY Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi Enginer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SHRI B. D. KEHIRSA~AR New Delhi SHRI L. R. LALLA ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI H. R. LAROYA SHRI R. K. A~QARWAL ( Alternate ) University of Roorkee, Roorkee PROF G. M. MANDALIA The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta LT-Gm T. B. NANDA Corporation of Calcutta, Calcutta SHRI BIMAL KRISHNA ROY Institute of Town Planners, New Delhi SHRI SAYED S. S~AFI SHRI C. S. SAINI ( Alternate ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI M. R. SHARMA Roorkee National Buildings Oreanization. New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI M. M. MISTRY ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1985 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984
( COnlinuedfroln page 1 Members SKitI S. SUnl,A IiAo SIrRI A. V. R.4o ( Altern& ) SXI<I R. L. SURI

)
Representing All India Institute ( Directorate Calcutta Suri & Suri New Delhi General, of Hygiene and Public Health General of Health Services ), Acoustical Engineers,

ConsuIting

SHRI GAUTZIAV S~-I~I ( Alter&e ) Director S*lnr G. RAGMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

IS1 ( Ex-o@cicioMelnber )

Assistant

Srr~tr A. K. SAINl Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Panel

for Basic

Requirements Buildings,

of Hospitals BDC 12 : Pl

and Other

Health

Members Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services, New Delhi CHUEF ENGINEER ( !&,l*x:TRIC.4L-I ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Voluntary Health Association of India, New Delhi SHRI ANTONY T. D'SO~~ZA Suri and Suri Consulting Acoustical Engineers, SHRI GAUTHAM SURI New Delhi Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of DR P. N. GHXI Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi Central Designs Bureau for Medical and Health SHRI P. C. JAITLY Buildings ( Directorate General of Health Services ), New Delhi SHRI B. C. MISTRY ( Alternate ) Directorate of Health Services, Government of DR V. V. KAYAHKAR Maharashtra, Bombay Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SHRI B.D. KSHIRSAG~R New Delhi SHRI L. R. LALLA ( Alternate ) Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and SI~RI J. C. MEHTA Research, Chandigarh Directorate of Health Services, Government of DR C. R. ROY West Bengal, Calcutta All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi DR A. N. SAFAY.~ Dn R. P. SINHA ( Alternate ) Cent~~or~~Zding Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI R. D. SRIVAS~AVA MAJ-GEN I'. K. B.ts~r ROY
DR M. G. TALWAR DIE P. N. GHEI ( Alternate )

SHRI V. J. NENE

( Alternate )

Indian Hospital

Association,

New Delhi

( Continuedon page 17 )

2

IS 2 10905( Part 3 ) - 1984

Ihdian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR BASIC REQUIREMENTS OF GENERAL HOSPITAL BUILDINGS
PART 3 ENGINEERING SERVICES DEPARTMENT BUILDINGS

0.
0.1 This
Standards Functional approved

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Indian Institution on 30 March 1982, after the draft finalized by the Requirements in Uuildings Sectional Committee had been by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Construction of large number of hospitals having different bed strengths is being planned in the country in public as well as in the private sector. These hospitals must provide certain basic needs to the patients and create a good working conditions for the doctors, nurses Optimum utilization of the national resources also and technicians. demands that these hospitals should be planned and constructed in such a manner that wastage towards space and circulation area can be brought down to a minimum but at the same time they function in the intended manner. With this object in view, this standard has been prepared to lay down rational norms and requirements for efficient planning and construction of general hospital buildings in the country. 0.3 The purpose of this standard is not to offer design solutions for a medical care facility, but to lay down optimum requirements for both spatial and environmental needs of the various sections of a hospital building. 0.4 The considerations in planning a hospital building should, no doubt, ensure the design of each section for its individual efficiency. Nevertheless, the hospital building as a whole, would function efficiently and economically only if all the sections are coordinated by arranging them in appropriate places based on their functional relationships. 1 his could be achieved by compact and efficient planning, functionally correct and operationally efficient economical relationship and disposition of various components, functionally logical internal detailing of departments to save on time, money and efforts. This standard, it is hoped, will be of help to architects, engineers and authorities concerned in fulfilling the dual objectives of economy and optimum utilization of space. 3

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 0.5 The aim of any hospital planning is undoubtedly to offer the best medicate to the patients and best working conditions for the staff. While planning a hospital one ought to create, appropriate spaces and environmental conditions for the treatment of patients, efficient working conditions for the doctors and nurses who treat, for the technicians who maintain and operate certain machines and for the staff who handle the various hospital as well as a engineering services.
0.6 To facilitate planning and framing of the structural grid, a usable space planning module of 14 me based on basic space unit of 3.5 rnz has been stipulated in order to rationalize the requirements for various facilities in the hospital. This space planning module is derived by assuming planning grid of 1% m. Six such grid units, that is 3'2 x 4.8 m, will lead to a carpet area of about 14 m2 after deducting the space taken by walls. All floor space requirements recommended for various facilities in respective table of the various sections of general hospital are based on above basic space unit. Fractional variation in floor spaces in actual planning may be ignored. 0.7 This Part 3 of the standard covers basic requirements of engineering services department buildings. The other parts of the standard namely Part 1 and Part 2 cover basic requirements of administrative and hospital services department buildings, and medical services department buildings respectively.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) covers spatial, functional and environmental requirements of engineering services department buildings. 1.1.1 This standard does not cover requirements of dispensaries and health centres and also does not cover the requirements for specialized hospitals such as teaching, tuberculosis and cancer. 2. GROUPING OF GENERAL HOSPITALS
the hospitals have been divided

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, into the following five categories: Category Category Category Category Category A 13 C D E 25 to 50 beds 51 to 100 beds 101 to 300 beds 301 to 500 beds 501 to 750 beds 4

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 3. SECTIONS BUILDING 3.1 Various
3.1.1

OF AN ENGINEERING

SERVICES

DEPARTMENT
should

departments which an engineering services building have for comfort and well being of patients, shall be as follows. Civil Engineering Dcfiartmcnt

a) Building c) Water 3.1.2

maintenance, supply and pluml~ing, and

b) Horticulture, d) Drainage Mechahcal and sanitation. Engineering and Defxwtment Dcl)artment

a) Air-conditioning, b) Refrigeration. 3.1.3 Electrical

Engineering and

a) Illumination, b) Ventilation. 3.1.4 Miscellaneous

GSeri,ices Def)artment and communication, and

a) Gas supply, b) Transport d) Waste 4. TOTAL c) Fire protection, disposal.

AREA

4.1 The total area to be provided for a hospital complex shall depend However for guidance an area of one on the availability of land. hectare for every 25 beds is recommended.
5. SITE

PLANNING

5.1 Hospital sites with high degree of sensitivity to outside noise should be avoided but may be compatible with other considerations such as The buildings should be so accessibility and availability of services. planned that sensitive areas like wards, consulting and treatment rooms and operation theatres are placed away from the outdoor sources of noise. While planning the hospital buildings the importance of horticulture, to increase the landscape elements such as open areas, comfort conditions inside the buildings and also in the surrounding
5

IS : 10905 ( Part

3 ) - 1984 building shall in IS : 7662

environment should be kept in view. Orientation of conform to provisions and recommendations contained ( Part 1 )-1974*. 6. ENGINEERING SERVICE DEPARTMENTS

should mainly comprise of civil, 6.1 The hospital engineering service mechanical, electrical, gas supply, transport and communication, fireServices which are required to be fighting and waste disposal systetn. provided under these departments shall be as follows: a) Civil Engineering i) Building maintenance;

ii) Horticulture; iii) Water supply water; and Normal water, hot water, filtered and soft

iv) Drainage

and sanitation.

b) Mechanical Engineering i) Air conditioning ii) Refrigeration c) Electrical Engineering
i) Lighting

-

Air cooling

and heating;

and deep freezers, etc.

Cold storage,

water coolers,

-

emergency etc; and ii) Ventilation d) Other Services
i) Gas supply

Gene ral, individual and night lighting, call bells, lighting, voltage stabilizers, stand by generators, Ceiling fans, table fans, exhaust fans, etc.

-

Medical,

cooking

and laboratory Ramp,

gas; lift, telephone,

ii) Transport intercoms,

and public

communication address, etc;

iii) Fire protections - Safety against fire, first-aid fire alarm and fire detection system; and iv) Waste disposal system Incinerators. 6.2 Space Requirements - The provision above services are given in Table 1.

fire equipments,

of areas to be provided

for

6.2.1 Building Maintenance - An office-cum-store should be provided to handle day to day maintenance works of the hospital building.
*Recommendations for orientation of buildings: Part 1 Non industrial buildings.

6

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984
TABLE 1 PROVISION FOR VARIOUS FLOOR AREAS SERVICE DEPARTMENT ( Clause 6.2 1 SIJ No. FA~ILI~IY CATE~OKIIB OF HOSPITALS -h--..------_,__,~ r-----------Category A Category B Category C Category D Category E r-_h_--~ r_.h___~ r--.h-.T r_._h__~ r-_ h_. Room Area Room Area Room Area Room Area Room Are? (3) No. i) Civil building maintenance ii) Horticulture iii) Pump house ivj Air conditioning plant V) Stand by generator vi) Electrical substation office vii) Medicinal gas supply: -I 21 1 1 28 14 1 1 42 21 1 1 56 28 a) Manifold room with toilet b) Compressor room for suction gas viii) Communication a) Telephone change c) Public system cl) Central system 1 1 1 1 2 (4) ma 10.5 lo.5 10.5 21 10'5 IN ENGINEERING

(1)

(2)

(5)
No.
1 1 1 1 1 2

64
m" 17.5 17.5 17'5 28 17.5 14

(7) NO. 1 1 1 1 1 2

(8) ms 21 21 21 35 21.0 17.5

(9)
NO.
1 I 1 1 1 2

(10)
rn: 28 28 28 42 28 21

(11) (12)
No.
1 1 1 1 1 2

ma
35 35 35 70 35 28

system: ex1 1 17.5 14 1 1 21 14 1 1 1 1 28 14 14 14 1 1 1 1 35 28 21 21

b) Paging system address music

NOTE 1 - Air handling unit room for air-conditioning of necessary spaces and switch room to house vertical bus-bar for electric feeder services should be provided at appropriate places depending upon the layout of the building. NOTE 2 - Feeder services, that is, cable and pipes to infrastructure in the building Provision of service should be planned to run so as to afford repairs/fault detection. floor or servme gallery for the purpose may also be considered.

7

IS : 10905 ( Part

3 ) - 1984 , T o maintain
the hospital landscaping, seeds, etc, should be provided. a room to

6.2.2 IIortiGdture store garden

imple:nents,

6.2.3

I'Vater Sup/rly A'ormal water Arrangement shall be made to supply the potable water per bed per day to meet all laundry ), except fire-fighting, in all categories Category of Ilospital A and E C 11 and E

6.2.3.1

following quantities of requirements ( including of hospital: Repiremeilt of

Water

350 litres 400 litres 450 litres

Storage capacity fbr 2 days requirement should be made on the of above consumptions. Round the clock water supply shall be made available to all wards and departments of the hospital. overhead tank shall be provided for Separate reserve emergency operation theatre. Necessary water storage overhead tanks with pumping/ The laying and distribution of boosting arrangement shall be made. tile water supply system shall be according to the provisions of IS : 2065Cold and hot water supply piping should be run in concealed 1972*. form embedded into wall with full precautions to avoid any seepage.
basis

6.2.3.2 Hot water - Hot water supply to wards and departments of the general hospital shall be provided by means of electric storage type water heaters or centralized hot water system of capacity depending upon the need of hot water consumption. 6.2.3.3 Filtered and soft water - Filtered and soft required in pathology laboratories and shall be supplied water supply as required. is

6.2.3.4 Cold water - Cold water supply is needed for processing tanks in film developing room and shall be supplied as required. 6.2.4 Drainage aird Sanitation - The design, construction and maintenance of drains for waste water, surface water, subsoil water and sewerage shall be in accordance with IS : 1742-19727. The requirements for the fitments for drainage and sanitation in general hospitals shall be in accordance with Tables 2 and 3.
"Code of practice for watt-r supply in building (first reuision ). TCode of practice for buil:li:~g drainage (first re~~ision ). 8

TABLE SL No.

2

REQUIREMENTS FITXEN'CS

FOR

SANITARY

FI'I'MENTS

IN HOSPITALS

FOR

PATIENTS

( Chzuse 6.2.4 ) REQUIREMENTS In Patient Il'ards or Nursing 9 ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii) CD viii) Units ( male ) ( female ) tap with draining arrangements

\\`atcr-closets
l\blution taps

1 for cvcry 1 for every

8 beds or part thereof 6 beds or part thereof

1 for each water-closet plus one water in the vicinity of water-closets 1 for every 1 for every 1 bath for 12 beds or part thereof 12 beds or part thereof for every in dirty 1 j

Urinals Wash basins baths Bed pan washing sinks Cleaner's sinks and sink/slab cleaning mackintosh Kitchen sinks and d&washers

( males

only ) thereof room

with shower

12 beds or part utility and sluice

1 for each ward 1 for each ward 1 for each ward

in ward

pantry

Outdoor Patient atad Other Departments ( Lavatory Block ) *_-_--__--~ r--------For Males For Females Water ii) Ablution closets taps 1 for every thereof 40 persons or part 2 for every thereof 50 persons or part

iii) iv)

Urinals Wash basins NOTE 1 NOTE 2 Some of the water-closets and special may fitments

1 in each water-closet 1 in each water-closet Plus 1 water tap with draining arrangements shall be provided vicinity of water-closet and urinals per lavatory block 1 fto;e;eeyoe;y 25 persons or part 1 for every thereof be of European for specific 50 persons style, or part if desired. may be provided. 1 Fereery 50 persons or

in

the

part

Additional

needs of hospitals

TABLE 3 REQUIREMBNTs FOR SANITARY FITkIENlg W ri0SPXTAI.S ( ADMlNISTRATIVE AND HOSPITAL SERVICE BUILDINGS, MEDICAL STAFF AND NURSBS' HOMES ) ( Clause 6.2.4 )
FITI.XENTS El. FOR ADXINISTRATIVE AND HOSPITAL SERVICESBUILDINGS r-_----h-_ --7 For Male For Female Personnel Personnel (3) 1 for every 25 persons or part thereof 1 in each watercloset (4) 1 for every 15 peFsons part thereofOr 1 in each watercloset FOR MEDICAL STAFF L~vrsa ( HOSTEL TYF-E ) h_--_--_-T r----For Female For Male Staff Staff (5) 1 for 4 persons (6) 1 for 4 persons Fon NURSES' HO-S ( HOSTEL TYPE )

(1) i)

(2) Water-closets*

(7) 1 for 4 persons

ii)

,\blution taps

1 in each watercloset

1 ic;zsyth water-

1 FIo;;tch block -

waterin the

Plus 1 water tap with draining arrangements vicinity of water-closets and urinals iii) IJrinals 1 for 25 persons or part thereof but nil up to 10 persons 1 for every 25 persons or part thereof -

shall be provided per lavatory -

iv)

Wash basins

1 for every 25 persons or part thereof -

1 for every 8 persons part thereoF 1 for 4 persons or part thereof

1 for every 8 persons or part thereof 1 for 4 persons or part thereof

1 for every 8 persons or part thereof 1 for every 4 persons or part thereof

v)

Baths ( with shower )

vi) vii)

Drinking tains Cleaner's

water founsinks

1 per 50 persons or part thereof with a minimum t---__---_-----Minimum style, if desired. 1

of 1 on each floor

per floor--- ---_

_--

_- - --

+

*Some of the water closets may be of European

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 6.2.4.1 The selection, installation and maintenance of sanitary appliances shall be in accordance with IS : 2064-1973*. The design and installation of soil, waste and ventilating pipes shall be as given in IS : 5329-1969t. 6.2.5 Air-conditioning - Air-conditioning and environmental control in hospitals is essential to ensure the comfort of patients, sterile theatres, maintenance of and comfortable conditions in operation essential sophisticated instruments and equipment and to help in the Whereas it is speedy recovery and treatment of seriously ill patients. advisable that the entire hospital be air-conditioned, this may not be possible due to economic considerations. The following department/ wards are considered essential and recommended for air-conditioning: a) Blood laboratory in blood bank of out-patient complex in emergency department; and casualty

b) Operation theatre department; c) Certain laboratories d) Radiography

in pathology department;
department;

and radio therapy rooms in radiology

e) Fracture-cum-casualty theatre, recovery, frozen section of clear zone and all rooms in sterile zone of operation theatre department; f) Certain number of beds in ward units of particular suite; specialities;

g) Al1 rooms in sterile zone of delivery h) Intensive j) Autopsy care unit; and

room in mortuary.

6.2.5.1 The air-conditioning may also be achieved with room air conditioners ( see IS : 1391-1971~ ), desert coolers ( see IS : 3315-1974s ), packaged air-conditioners ( see IS : 8148-197611 ). 6.2.6 Refrigeration - Hospitals shall be provided with water cooler and referigerators ( see IS : 1474-19597 ) in wards and departments, ) in pathology, and cold storage plants for freezers ( IS : 7872-1975** pathology, mortuary, medical stores and dietary department. All these, power consuming units shall be provided with voltage stabilizers. *Code of practice for selection, installation, and maintenance of sanitary appliances

(

jirst rcoision ).

+Cocle of practice for sanitary pipe work above ground for buildings. SSpeciIication for room air-conditioners (jrd recision ). SSpecification for evaporative air coolers, desert coolers (Jrst re0ision). /Specification for packaged air-conditioners. BSpecification for commercial refrigerators. **Specification for freezers.

11

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 6.2.7 Illumination
and method of daylighting in 6.2.7.1 General - For requirements The level hospital buildings reference may be made to IS : 2440-1975*. of illumination for various visual tasks shall be provided in accordance with IS : 4347-1967t. General lighting of all hospital areas except In other areas it is stores and lavatory block shall be fluorescent. Electrical installation except recommended to be of incandescent lamps. for artificial illumination, shall be in accordance with IS : 732-1963$, IS : 2032 ( Part 11 )-1969s and IS : 2274-1963)j. light (mountable type) shall be 6.2.7.2 Shadowless light - Shadowless provided in operation theatres and operating delivery rooms whereas in other areas, where operations of minor nature are carried out shadowless lamps ( portable type ) shall be provided. 6.2.7.3 Call bells - Call bells ( see IS : 226%196611 ) switches should be provided for all beds in all types of tvards with indicator lights and location indicator situated in the nurses duty room of the wards. portable light units should 6.2.7.4 Emergency lighting - Emergency also be provided in the wards and departments to serve as alternative source of light in case of power failure. 6.2.7.5 Standby generators - Standby generators should be provided to generate electric and power supply to water supply, air-conditioning units, and plants, cold stnrage units, and radiography units. 6.2.7.6 Lighting protection - The lighting protective system hospital buildings shall be in accordance with IS : 2309- 1'369**. of

6.2.8 Ventilation - Ventilation of h'ospital buildings may be achieved by either natural supply and natural exhaust of air, or natural supply and mechanical exhaust of air, or mechanical supply and natural exhaust of air, or mechanical supply and mechanical exhaust of air. The following standards of general ventilation are recommended for various
*Guide for daylighting of buildings ( second reaision ). tCode of practice for hospital lighting. $Code of practice for electrical wiring installations ( sys:em voltage not exceeding 650 volts ) ( raised ) . SGraphical symbols used in electrotechnology: Part 11 Electrical installations in buildings. IlCode of practice for electrical wiring installations ( system voltage exceeding 650 volts ). 1lSpecification for clcctric call bells and buvers for indoor use ( rcoisad ). **Code of practice for the protection of buildings and allied structures against lighting (first r&ion ).

12

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 area of the hospital building based on maintenance of required oxygen, carbon dioxide and other air quality levels and for the control of body odours when no products of combustion or other contaminants are present in the air or anaesthesia gases which are highly explosive are present:
Space to be Ventilated Air Changes per Hour

Bathrooms/toilets Wards Kitchens Operation theatres spaces Other air-conditioned

6-12 8-12 6-9 15-20 8-10

The general principles of natural ventilation shall be in accordance Where adequate air changes cannot be obtained with IS : 3362-1977*. by natural ventilation, mechanical ventilation either by exhaust of air or by positive ventilation ( like fans and other equipment ) or combination of two shall be provided. Fans and other equipments for mechanical ventilation may be located in convenient positions having regard to the intake of fresh air, accessibility for maintenance and noise control. Exhaust fans shall be provided in walls on one side or in the attic or roof. The exhausted air shall not find entry back into hospital. 6.2.9 Gas Supply 6.2.9.1 Medical gas - Medical gases comprise of oxygen and nitrous oxide. Necessary pipe line network should be laid in departments and wards to connect them to the manifold room ( where gas cylinder of bulk supply will be mounted on wall ). A compressor should also be provided in separate room adjoining to the manifold room to provide suction along with medical gas supply pipe. All these three pipes should be of different colour conforming to a laid down standard and mounted on wall or ceiling surface. 6.2.9.2 Cooking gas - For better hygienic conditions use of cooking gas LPG ( liquefied petroleum gas ) is recommended. These should also be kept in a room from where necessary pipe line with gas outlets as required may be provided to hospital kitchen and ward pantries. 6.2.9.3 Laboratory gas - Pipe line network should be laid in pathology laboratories of sub-speciality clinics where laboratories and other extensive laboratory benches are provided. This network should be connected to gas plant room or gas storage room wherein either LPG ( liquefied petroleum gas ) cylinders are stored or gas plant is instaIIed to manufacture lab-gas from kerosene oil medium.
*Code of practice for natural ventilation of residential buildings ($Ys~ r&~ion ).

13

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 6.2.10 Transport
and Communication

operated automatic control lifts ( see 6.2.10.1 Lifts - Electrically IS : 4666-1980* ) shall be provided in all category of hospitals having more than one storey. The installation, operation and maintenance of lifts shall be as given in IS : 1860-19807. The outline dimensions of machine room, pit depth and total headroom, shall be in accordance The recommended car speed for hospital bed with IS : 3534-1976:. lifts are given below: Occupancy a) Short travel lifts lifts Number of Storeys 2 or 3 4 or 5 6 and above Car Speed, M/S 0.25 0.50 1.00

b) Medium c) Long

travel lifts

travel

The passenger lifts should be so arranged that they are easily accessible from all entrances of the hospital. It is convenient to place the lifts near the staircases. Hospital lifts should be situated conveniently near the ward and operation theatre department entrances. There shall be sufficient space near the landing door for easy movement of stetcherl trolly. Service lifts ( see IS : 6383-19759 ) should be situated so as to secure convenient and easy access at each floor and shall be installed in accordance with IS : 6620-1972/l. Escalators, if provided, shall be in accordance with IS : 4591-19687. floor of hospital 6.2.10.2 Ramp - A ramp 1eadin.g to the topmost of two or more storeys may be provided in addition to the stairs needed at places. 6.2.10.3 `Telephone and intercom - Wiring in conduits shall be give telephone outlet points in rooms, wards and provided to departments as desired by the authority. An intercom system may also be provided in addition to the telephones. The communication system should be adequately designed in hospitals for alerting all persons charged with duties for patient care and all employees of the hospital who are within the buildmg in the event of emergency. The alerting system shall be capable of being operated from the telephone switch boards and the administrative office.
*Specification for electric passenger and goods lifts ( /Trst recision ), tCode of practice for installation, operation and maintenance of electric passenger and goods lifts ( second revision ). SOutline dimensions for electric lifts. �Specification for electric service lifts. IICode of practice for installation, operation and maintenance of electric service lifts. ICode of practice for installation and maintenance of escalators.

IS : 10905 ( Par* 3 ) - 1984 6.2.10.4 Pubiic address system - The public address system shall be provided in hospitals of category C, D and E to facilitate calling nurses/ doctors in emergency and to play music for entertainment of patients. Wiring for the system shall be in conduits and shall be installed in accordance with IS : 1882-1961*. The amplifiers shall conform to IS : 1819-196lt. The public address system shall also have control in telephone exchange room. 6.2.11 Fire Protection firewith

6.2.11.1 First-aid jre-jighting equipment - Adequate first-aid, fighting equipment shall be provided and installed in accordance IS : 2217-1982f, and IS : 2190-1979s.

6.2.11.2 Fire alarm - Manually-operated fire alarm facilities shall be provided in hospital buildings which sound an audible alarm in administrative department, engmeering service, offices, fire office and such other locations where gongs, sirens, whistles or bells do not disturb the patients. Distinctive visual or audible alarm shall be installed at each nurses duty room, duty station and used for fire alarm purpose only. Hospitals may also be equipped with automatic fire alarm system conforming to IS : 2189-19761; in hospital of category D and E. An approved type of automatic explosive venting device providing the required amount of venting area may also be provided in hospitals of category D and E, specially in rooms where medical gases, compressed air and electrical equipments are stored and used. 6.2.11.3 Fire detection - In hospitals of category D automatic fire detection system will be an added advantage. 6.2.12 Waste Disposal System provided with one incinerator chimney. Hospitals of category electrically operated incinerator refuge. 7. CONSTRUCTIONAL and E, an

All hospitals up to category C shall be consisting of a burning chamber and D and E should, in addition have an of capacity to burn 1 kg/bed/day of

REQUIREMENTS

areas such as corridors, entrance 7.1 Circulation Areas - Circulation etc, in the hospital buildings should not be less than halls, staircases, 30 percent of the total floor area of the building.
*Code of practice for outdoor installation of public address systems. *Recommendations for general requirements of public address amplifiers. $Recommendations for providing first-aid fire-fighting arrangements in public buildings ( .$rst revision ). $Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of portable first-aid fire extinguishers ( second rcoision). for installation of automatic fire alarm system using heat j\Code of practice sensitive type fire detectors (Jirst reuision ).

15

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 7.2 Floor Height - The height of all the rooms in the hospital should not be less than 3.00 m and not more than 3.65 m, measured at any point from the surface of the floor to the lowest point of the ceiling. The minimum head-room such as under the bottom of beams, fans and lights shall be 2.5 m measured vertical under such beam, fan or light. 7.2.1 The height of the operation theatres may if viewing galleries are provided. be suitably increased

7.3 Room shall have for the admission of light and air, one or more apertures, such as windows and fan lights, opening directly to the external air or into an open verandah. The minimum aggregate areas ( see Note ) of such opening, excluding doors but inclusive of frames, shall be not less than 20 percent of the floor area in case such apertures are located in one wall and not less than 15 percent of the floor area in case such apertures are located in two opposite walls at the same sill level.
NOTE - If a window is partly fixed, the openable area shall be counted.

7.4 The architectural finishes in hospitals shall be of high quality in view of maintenance of better hygienic conditions specially in sanitary blocks. Flooring in sanitary blocks should be done with marble or polished stone; and dado or glazed/ceramic tile finish given on wall. 7.5 The design of building shall ensure control of noise due to walking, movement of trollies and banging of doors, etc. Expansion joint should have a non-metallic beading finish.

16

IS : 10905 ( Part 3 ) - 1984
( Continuedfrom page 2 )

Ad-hoc
Convener DR P. N. GHEI Members
SHRI

Panel for Hospital

Buildings,

BDC 12 : Pl : 1
of

Rcprcscnting Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi

P. C. JA~TLY R. LALLA

SHRI
SHRI

L.

J. C. MEETA R. K. RAKSHIT

LT-COL

DR R. P. SIHHA

Central Designs Bureau for Medical and Health Buildings ( Directorate General of Health Services ), New Delhi Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services, New Delhi All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi

17

INTERNATH3N.AL
Base
Units QUANTITY

SYSTEM OF UNITS
UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole A K cd mot
SYMl3OL m kg

( SI UNITS )

Length Mass Time Electric currrnt Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intqsity Amount of substance Supplementary
QUANTITY

Units UNIT radian steradian
SylaBOL

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QJJ ANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

rad sr

UNIT

SYMBOL

DEFINITION 1 N = 1 kg.m/s* J = 1 N.m 1

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal
J"

W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 W = 1 J/s 1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 1 1 T= 1 Wb/ms 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l) S = 1 A/V V =i 1 W/A

1 Pa = 1 N/m*

