SNA Alte IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Waal & Taare cht sraeet— 
antag teeta 
ANT 1 AHATA 
( TECH JAGET ) 


Maintenance Management of 
Buildings — Guidelines 
Part 1 General 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.040.01 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2018 Price Group 10 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Maintenance management in building industry is the art of preserving over a long period what has been constructed. 
It is as important as construction management or even more. Whereas construction stage lasts for a short period of 
2 to 5 years, maintenance continues for at least 20 to 30 times the construction phase. Bad practice of maintenance 
adversely affects the environment in which people work, thus affecting the overall output. 


Even though the adverse effects of deterioration of a building are known, yet the process of maintenance of the 
building is given a very low priority and most of maintenance decisions are taken by the management on the basis 
of expediency, and in most of the cases are unrelated compromises between the physical needs and availability 
of finance. 


Though the buildings may be designed to be very durable, they need maintenance to keep them in good condition. 
Everyone concerned with buildings whether as owners, engineers, designers, constructors or users should take a 
serious interest in building maintenance. In the post-construction stage, the day-to-day maintenance or upkeep of 
the building shall certainly delay the decay of the building structure. 


The Indian Standard IS 15183 was envisaged to address the important aspect of maintenance management of 
buildings. This standard is published in three parts. The others parts in the series are: 


Part 2 Finance 
Part 3 Labour 


This standard (Part 1) was first published in 2002 and was intended to cover the general aspects related to 
maintenance management of building fabric including the electrical and mechanical services. This standard keeps 
in view the practices in the field of building maintenance management in the country. 


The first revision of the standard is aimed at bringing the provisions at par with the provisions of the 
SP 7 (Part 12) : 2016 ‘National building code of India 2016: Part 12 Asset and facility management’. Also, other 
necessary changes have been incorporated. 


In this revision the following major changes have been made: 


a) New provisions on maintenance methods covering planned and unplanned maintenance have been included 
in detail; 
b) Factors affecting building maintenance have been elaborated in detail; 
c) Provisions on influence of design on building maintenance have been elaborated in detail; 
d) Maintenance policy has been detailed with emphasis on size and type of building; 
e) Provisions on performance management and information management have been included; and 
f) Terminologies have been updated. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT OF 
BUILDINGS — GUIDELINES 
PART 1 GENERAL 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) provides general guidelines for 

maintenance management of building fabric including 

building services (electrical and mechanical). 
NOTE — For detailed provisions on management of building 
assets and associated facilities; and maintenance of fixed assets 
and building services facilities, a reference may be made to the 
SP 7 (Part 12) : 2016 ‘National building code of India 2016: 
Part 12 Asset and facility management’. Also, the sustainability 
aspects related to maintenance given in 13.3 of SP 7 (Part 11) 
may be referred. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subjected 
to revision, and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
15183 


Title 


Guidelines for maintenance 
management of buildings 


(Part 2) : 2018 
(Part 3) : 2018 


Finance ( first revision) 


Labour ( first revision) 


15883 Guidelines for construction 
(Part 1): 2009 project management: Part 1 
General 
SP 7 : 2016 National building code of India 
2016 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Access — Approach, entry, internal circulation or 
exit, including in cases of emergency. 


3.2 Ageing — Getting old, specifically beyond the 
design life of the asset. 


3.3 As-built Information — Expression of the 
design, its working detail, construction works and/or 


installations, functions, operations and maintenance 
needs of a facility in a form suitable for use in managing 
that facility. 


3.4 Asset — A useful or valuable thing or an item of 
property owned by a person or organization, regarded as 
having value and life of more than one year, available to 
meet debts, commitments, or legacies and performing 
predetermined functions to facilitate the users. 


3.5 Asset Life — Period from asset creation to end of 
its functional life. 


3.6 Asset Register — A central database of information 
about asset/facility in terms of their manufacturer, 
vendor, make, model, specifications, date of acquisition, 
initial cost, maintenance costs and requirements, 
additions/alterations over period, accumulated 
depreciation and written down value. 


3.7 Asset Type — Grouping of assets having common 
characteristics that distinguish those assets as a group or 
class, for example, physical assets, information assets, 
intangible assets, critical assets, enabling assets, linear 
assets, information and communications technology 
(ICT) assets and infrastructure assets. 


3.8 Asset/Facility Management — Integration of 
processes within an organization to maintain and 
develop the agreed services which support and improve 
the effectiveness of its primary activities. 


3.9 Benchmarking — Comparing performance, often 
between companies in similar sectors. 


3.10 Biodegradable Waste — Any organic material 
that can be degraded by microorganisms into simpler 
stable compounds. 


3.11 Briefing — Briefing is the process of 
communicating the objectives and needs of an owner, 
or prospective owner, of a facility to a designer in 
order to prepare a design for that facility. This process 
includes not only clarification and confirmation 
of the owner’s intentions and documenting the 
consequent provisions for the facility to enable 
informed decision making primarily in design, 
but also in construction work and/or installation, 
testing and commissioning, handover and start-up 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


of operations. A number of stages are envisaged for 
preparing and applying the brief during design and 
in later phases. 


3.12 Buffer Zone — A zone of no development which 
shall be maintained around landfills, processing and 
disposal facilities of solid waste. 


3.13 Building Fabric — Elements and components ofa 
building other than furniture and services installations. 


3.14 Building Information Model (BIM)— Shared digital 
representation of physical and functional characteristics of 
any built object (including buildings, bridges, roads, etc) 
which forms a reliable basis for decisions. 
NOTE — A building information model may embody, for 
example, building geometry, spatial relationships, geographic 
information and the quantities and properties of building 
components. 


3.15 Building Maintenance — Work undertaken to 
maintain or restore the performance of the building 
fabric and its services to provide an efficient, safe and 
acceptable operating environment to its users. 


3.16 Building Management System (BMS) — 
Computer aided control systems, including hardware 
and software, to collect and monitor parameters and 
performance data of plant, equipment, systems and 
elements either at source or remotely and to enable 
corrective action to be initiated. 


3.17 Building Manual — Guidance to assist in making 
the best use of the design features, services and systems 
of a building or other facility. 


3.18 Business Continuity Management (BCM) — 
Holistic management process that identifies potential 
threats to an organization and the impacts to business 
operations that those threats, if realized, may cause, 
and which provides a framework for building 
organizational resilience with the capability for an 
effective response that safeguards the interests of its 
key stakeholders, reputation, brand and value creating 
activities. 


3.19 Carbon Emissions — Polluting carbon substances 
released into the atmosphere. 


3.20 Carbon Footprint — Totality of greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions caused directly and indirectly by an 
individual, organization, event or product. 


3.21 Cleaning — Locating, identifying and properly 
disposing of undesirable substances from surfaces or 
material. 


3.22 Cleaning Services — Services undertaken to 
ensure the cleanliness, maintenance and aesthetic 
upkeep of the building/property. 


3.23 Competent Person — Person, suitably trained 
and qualified by knowledge and practical experience. 


3.24 Computer Aided Facilities Management 
(CAFM) — Systems, applications and tools that 
automate functions needed to support the core business 
in its efficient and effective use of facilities. 


3.25 Computer Aided Maintenance Management 
System (CMMS) — System specifically designed 
to enable planning, organizing, directing and 
controlling maintenance programmes and to collect 
and collate historical data on the performance 
of assets so that the most effective maintenance 
method is selected under actual performance and 
environmental conditions. 


3.26 Condition Monitoring — Act of measuring and 
recording data from operating parameters, using either 
human senses or instrumentation, to verify plant and 
equipment condition and trends. It is also the act of 
assessing an asset to understand how it is likely to 
perform in future. 


3.27 Confined Space — Space which may be 
inadequately ventilated for any reason and may result 
in a deficiency of oxygen, or a build-up of toxic gases, 
for example, closed tanks, sewers, ducts, closed and 
unventilated rooms, and tanks particularly where 
heavier than air gases or vapours may be present. 


3.28 Corrective Maintenance — Maintenance carried 
out after fault recognition and intended to put an item 
into a state in which it can perform a required function. 


3.29 Crime Prevention Through Environmental 
Design (CPTED) — A multi-disciplinary approach to 
deterring criminal behaviour through environmental 
design. CPTED strategies rely upon the ability to 
influence offender decisions that precede criminal acts. 
CPTED principles of design affect elements of the built 
environment ranging from the small-scale (such as the 
strategic use of shrubbery and other vegetation) to the 
overarching, including building form of an entire urban 
neighbourhood and the amount of opportunity for 
“eyes on the street”. 


3.30 Critical Activities — Activities which have to 
be performed in order to deliver the key products and 
services which enable an organization to meet its most 
important and time sensitive objectives. 


3.31 Critical Asset — Asset having potential to 
significantly impact on the achievement of the 
organization’s objectives. 


3.32 De-construction — A planned selective 
demolition in which salvage, re-use and recycling of 
the demolished structure is maximized. 


3.33 Deliverable — Product or service as an outcome 
of a process. 


3.34 Design Development — Transitional phase 
where the basis of the design progresses towards the 
production of detailed design information. 


3.35 Design Life (DL) — Intended/expected service 
life by the designer or as stated by the designer to the 
client to support specification decisions. 


3.36 Documented Information — Information 
required to be controlled and maintained by an 
organization and the medium on which it is contained. 


3.37 Domestic Hazardous Waste — Waste 
contaminated with hazardous chemicals or infectious 
waste such as discarded paint drums, pesticide cans, 
CFL bulbs, tube lights, expired medicines, broken 
mercury thermometers, used batteries, used needles, 
gauge and syringes, etc, generated at the household 
level. 


3.38 Dry Waste — Waste, other than food waste, inert 
and including recyclable waste, non recyclable waste, 
combustible waste and sanitary waste. 


3.39 Dump Sites — A land utilized by urban local 
body for unscientific disposal of solid waste without 
following the principles of sanitary land filling. 


3.40 Durability — Ability of a building and its parts to 
perform its required function over a period of time and 
under the influence of agents. 


3.41 Duress Alarms — Duress alarms are installed 
to protect personnel who may be placed in danger of 
physical assault during interactions with other persons. 
Duress alarms are normally placed in locations where 
a resident/employee may be alone with a potentially 
threatening person. 


3.42 End-user — Recipient of facility-related services. 


NOTE — Recipients include occupants and other users of a 
facility. 


3.43 Estimated Service Life (ESL) — Service life that a 
building or parts of a building should be expected to have 
in a set of specific in use conditions, determined from the 
reference service life data after taking into account any 
differences from the reference in-use conditions. 


3.44 Exterior Property — The open space on the 
premises under the control of owners or operators of 
such premises. 


3.45 External Envelope — Roof and façade including 
openings. 


3.46 Facilities Maintenance — Work needed to 
maintain the performance of the building structure, 
fabric and components, and engineering installations. 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


3.47 Facility — Tangible asset that supports/serves an 
organization. 


3.48 Facility Asset Performance — Requirements 
in terms of measurable outcomes for meeting 
organizational goals. 


3.49 Hazardous Waste — Waste that possesses 
the properties of a hazardous material (for 
example ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or 
toxicity), or other physical, chemical, or biological 
characteristics that may pose a potential risk to 
human health or the environment, if improperly 
managed. Wastes may also be defined as 
‘hazardous’ by local regulations or international 
conventions, based on the origin of the waste and 
its inclusion on hazardous waste lists, or based on 
its characteristics. Sludge from a waste treatment 
plant, water supply treatment also can form a part 
of hazardous waste. 


3.50 House Keeping — The routine recurring work 
which is required to keep a structure in good condition 
so that it can be utilized at its original capacity and 
efficiency along with proper protection of capital 
investment, throughout its economic life. 


3.51 Information Management — Processing and 
storage of information in a controlled manner. 


3.52 Intrusion Detection Systems — An intrusion 
detection system (IDS) is a device or software 
application that monitors the activities for malicious 
activities or policy violations and produces reports to a 
management station. Intrusion detection and prevention 
systems (IDPS) are primarily focused on identifying 
possible incidents, logging information about them, 
and reporting attempts. 


3.53 Life Cycle — The stages of an asset from 
acquisition through commissioning and operation to 
disposal. 


3.54 Maintenance — An intervention on an asset to 
improve its operation or ensure its continued good 
operation (It is also the combination of all technical and 
associated administrative actions during the service life 
to retain a building, or its parts, in a state in which it can 
perform its required functions.). 


3.55 Maintenance Management — Process 
of ensuring that the most effective and efficient 
maintenance programme is formulated and delivered 
to ensure that assets/facilities continue to perform their 
intended function. The organization of maintenance 
has to be within an agreed policy. Maintenance can be 
seen as a form of ‘steady state’ activity. 


3.56 Maintenance Manual — Technical instructions 
intended to preserve an asset/facility in, or, restore it 
to a state in which it can perform a required function. 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


3.57 Maintenance Plan — Structured and documented 
set of tasks that include the activities, procedures, 
resources and the time scale required to carry out 
maintenance. 


3.58 Maintenance Policy — Scope and course of 
action taken to achieve an organization’s objectives. 


3.59 Maintenance Programme — Arrangement of 
maintenance tasks in terms of their sequence, durations 
and resource requirements. 


3.60 Maintenance Strategy — Statement of 
organizational approach to maintenance management. 


3.61 Management System — Set of interrelated or 
interacting elements of an organization to establish 
policies and objectives and processes to achieve those 
objectives. 


3.62 Mantrap — A small room with two doors. 
The first door is locked; a person is identified and 
authenticated. Once the person is authenticated and 
access is authorized, the first door opens and allows 
the person into the mantrap. The person has to be 
authenticated again in order to open the second door 
and access a critical area. The mantrap area can have a 
weight sensing floor as an additional control to prevent 
literal piggybacking. 


3.63 Occupants — Users who spend a significant 
proportion of their time in or about a facility. 


3.64 Operational Plan — Organization’s statement of 
actions intended to achieve a specific business goal(s). 


3.65 Operational Strategy — Overall approach to 
manage production or use of a facility. 


3.66 Owner — Person or body having a legal interest 
in a building. This includes free holders, lease holders 
or those holding a sub-lease which both bestows a legal 
right to occupation and gives rise to liabilities in respect 
of safety or building condition. In case of lease or sub- 
lease holders, as far as ownership with respect to the 
structure is concerned, the structure of a flat or structure 
on a plot belongs to the allotee/lessee till the allotment/ 
lease subsists. 


3.67 Perimeter Intrusion Detection and Assessment 
System (PIDAS) — A type of fencing that has sensors 
on the wire mesh and base of the fence. A passive cable 
vibration sensor sets offan alarm ifan intrusion is detected. 


3.68 Perimeter Security — Control and observation 
of areas of ingress and egress to a building and parking 
structure, including main lobby doors, rear plaza doors, 
truck docks, fire exits, and other points of access. 


3.69 Physical Asset — A tangible, manmade object 
that has a specific function, normally within a broader 
system. 


3.70 Planned Preventive Maintenance — 
Maintenance organized and carried out with 
forethought, control and the use of records to a plan 
based on the results of condition surveys. 


3.71 Predicted Service Life — Service life predicted 
from performance recorded over time in accordance 
with standard laid down procedure. 


3.72 Predictive Action — Action to monitor the 
condition of an asset and predict the need for preventive 
action or corrective action. 


3.73 Preventive Maintenance — An intervention on 
an asset taken in advance of a failure to reduce the 
chances of failure. 


3.74 Preventive Action — Action to eliminate the 
cause of a potential non-conformity or other undesirable 
potential situation (for asset/facility management). 


3.75 Primary Collection — Collecting, lifting and 
removal of segregated solid waste from source of its 
generation including households, shops, offices and any 
other non-residential premises or from any collection 
points or any other location specified by the urban local 
body. 


3.76 RASCI Chart — Responsible, accountable, 
supported, consulted and informed (RASCI) chart that 
is used to summarize the roles and functions performed 
in the procurement process and the activities within it. 


3.77 Reliability Centered Maintenance (RCM) — 
An approach which targets intervention on assets based 
on the known historic performance of that or similar 
assets. 


3.78 Repair, Renovate, Refurbish — An intervention 
which improves the performance and condition of an 
asset to upgrade or retain desired performance. 


3.79 Residual Waste — Includes the waste and rejects 
from the solid waste processing facilities which are not 
suitable for recycling or further processing. 


3.80 Root Cause Analysis — A thorough assessment 
of all of the factors influencing the occurrence of a fault 
or failure. 


3.81 Sanitary Land Filling — The final and safe 
disposal of residual solid waste and inert wastes on 
land in a facility designed with protective measures 
against pollution of ground water, surface water and 
fugitive air dust, wind-blown litter, bad odour, fire 
hazard, animal menace, bird menace, pests or rodents, 
greenhouse gas emissions, persistent organic pollutants, 
slope instability and erosion. 


3.82 Sanitary Waste — Wastes comprising of used 
diapers, sanitary towels or napkins, tampons, condoms, 
incontinence sheets and any other similar waste. 


3.83 Scope Creep — Uncontrolled changes to the 
agreed scope of the facility related service being 
provided. 


3.84 Secondary Collection — Collection of solid 
waste deposited at secondary waste storage depots 
or bins for onward transportation of the waste to the 
processing or disposal facility. 


3.85 Secondary Storage — The temporary containment 
of solid waste at a public place in a covered bin or 
container in a manner so as to prevent littering, vectors, 
stray animals and odour. 


3.86 Service Life — Period of time after installation 
during which a building or its parts meets or exceeds 
the performance requirements. 


3.87 Shutdown/Outage — A period, either planned or 
otherwise, during which asset interventions occur and 
is not available for its use. 


3.88 Stabilizing — The biological decomposition of 
biodegradable wastes to a stable state where it generates 
no leachate or offensive odours and is fit for application 
to farm land, soil erosion control and soil remediation. 


3.89 Stakeholder — Individual, organization or group 
with an interest in an organization, facility or project. It 
also applies to the person or entity with an interest in or 
concern about a facility. 


3.90 Surveillance — Surveillance is the monitoring 
of the behaviour, activities, or other changing 
information, usually of people for the purpose of 
influencing, managing, directing, or protecting them. 
This can include observation from a distance by means 
of electronic equipment (such as, CCTV cameras). 
Surveillance is used for intelligence gathering, the 
prevention of crime, the protection of a process, person, 
group or object, or for the investigation of crime. 
Surveillance is often a violation of privacy, and is 
opposed by various civil liberties groups and activists. 


3.91 Surveillance Devices — Surveillance device can 
be defined as any instrument, apparatus or equipment 
used either alone, or in conjunction with other 
equipment, which is being used to conduct surveillance. 


3.92 Whole Life Costing — An understanding of the 
full economic impact of owning an asset, covering all 
stages of its life cycle. 


4 BUILDING MAINTENANCE — METHODS 
AND MANAGEMENT 


4.1 General 


Any building (including its services) when built has 
certain objectives and during its total economic life, 
it has to be maintained in proper condition to meet 
those objectives. Maintenance is a continuous process 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


requiring a close watch and taking immediate remedial 
action if some of its units are found under performing. 
It is interwoven with good quality of housekeeping. It is 
largely governed by the quality of original construction. 
The owners, engineers, constructors, occupants and 
the maintenance agency are all deeply involved in this 
process and share a responsibility. Situation in which 
all these agencies merge into one is ideal and most 
satisfactory. 


There are two processes envisaged, that is, the work 
carried out in anticipation of failure and the work 
carried out after failure. The former is usually referred 
to as preventive maintenance and the latter as corrective 
maintenance. The prime objective of maintenance is to 
maintain the performance of the building fabric and its 
services to provide an efficient and acceptable operating 
environment to its users. 


Maintaining a building is expensive; it costs many 
times more to run a building over its lifetime than to 
build it, yet maintenance is often not accorded the 
priority it warrants. A poorly maintained building 
will be a drain on resources and will impair building 
use, whereas a well maintained building will function 
smoothly and represent an appreciating asset to its 
owners. A professional approach is therefore required 
to building maintenance. 


Though the building may be designed to be very 
durable it needs maintenance to keep it in good 
condition. Whereas construction stage lasts for a short 
period, maintenance continues for comparatively very 
large period during the functional life of building. 
Inadequate or improper maintenance adversely 
affects the environment in which people work, thus 
affecting the overall output. In the post construction 
stage, the day to day maintenance or upkeep of the 
building shall certainly delay the decay of the building 
structure. Maintenance management of building is 
the art of preserving over a long period what has 
been constructed. A reference may also be made to 
the provisions on construction project management 
including maintenance as given in IS 15883 (Part 1). 


4.1.1 The objectives of maintenance are: 


a) To preserve building and its services, machinery 
in good operating condition; 


b) To restore it back to its original standards; and 


c) To improve the facilities depending upon the 
development that is taking place in building and 
services engineering. 


4.1.2 Maintenance, in general term, can be identified in 
the following broad categories: 


a) Cleaning and servicing — This is largely of 
preventive type, such as checking the efficacy of 
rain water gutters and servicing the mechanical 
and electrical installations. This covers the house 
keeping also. 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


b) Rectification and repairs — This is also called 
periodical maintenance work undertaken by, 
say, annual contracts and including external 
replastering, internal finishing, etc. 


c) Replacements — This covers major repair or 
restoration such as retrofitting or re-building 
defective building parts. 


4.2 Maintenance Methods 


An organization should determine which method or 
combination of methods best satisfies its operational 
needs in maintenance in accordance with its facilities 
maintenance strategy and policy. Each method should 
be assessed in terms of the extent to which it satisfies 
(or does not satisfy) the criteria defined as part of 
the facilities maintenance strategy. When taking into 
account asset criticality and monitoring capacity within 
the facility, the benefit of combining methods should 
be evaluated. 


There are a number of methods of maintenance; these 
can be grouped into following two broad categories 
(see Fig. 1): 


a) Planned maintenance, which includes planned 
preventive maintenance and shutdown 
maintenance. Preventive maintenance further 
includes condition-based maintenance, reliability 
centered maintenance (RCM) and total productive 
maintenance (TPM); and 


b) Unplanned maintenance, which includes 
corrective maintenance, breakdown maintenance 
and emergency maintenance. 


4.2.1 Planned Maintenance 


4.2.1.1 Planned preventive maintenance or scheduled 
maintenance 


PLANNED 
MAINTENANCE 


PREVENTIVE 
MAINTENANCE 


SHUTDOWN 
MAINTENANCE 


CONDITION 
BASED 
MAINTENANCE 


RELIABILITY 
CENTRED 
MAINTENANCE 


TOTAL 
PRODUCTIVE 
MAINTENANCE 


MAINTENANCE 


This method allows maintenance activities to be 
organized and carried out with forethought, control and 
records to a predetermined plan, based on the results 
of condition surveys. This method aims to avoid or to 
mitigate the ‘consequences of failure’ and to minimize 
maintenance-induced failures and their associated costs. 
It is based on the criticality of failure to the organization 
and is also known as scheduled maintenance. 


Planned preventive maintenance is further classified 
into following categories: 


a) Condition-based maintenance — This method of 
maintenance is based on the results of condition 
monitoring of building, plant, equipment, systems 
and elements to avoid loss of function or failure. 
Condition-based maintenance is performed by 
selecting and monitoring a parameter which, 
for example, indicates plant condition. Data are 
collected and analyzed and required maintenance 
is determined from the findings. This work can 
be carried out continuously, periodically or on 
demand in real time and is often used for remotely 
monitoring plant condition. 


b) Reliability centred maintenance — Reliability 
centred maintenance is a systems-based method 
used to determine maintenance tasks needed to 
ensure that a facility, asset or system continues to 
function in order to fulfil its purpose as designed 
in its present operating condition. The method 
can involve the implementation of asset condition 
monitoring, based on the advance provision of an 
asset register. 


c) Total productive maintenance — Total productive 
maintenance is a systematic approach to improving 
maintenance effectiveness, which operates at 
the tactical level and normally builds on the 
successful implementation of strategic methods. 


UNPLANNED 
MAINTENANCE 


BREAKDOWN 
MAINTENANCE 


EMERGENCY 
MAINTENANCE 


CORRECTIVE 
MAINTENANCE 


Fic. 1 MAINTENANCE METHODS 


The method also involves the implementation of 
asset condition monitoring, based on the advance 
provision of an asset register. 


4.2.1.2 Planned shutdown maintenance 


This method is normally used for continuous process 
production and manufacturing facilities, where a 
detailed plan is prepared for all assets for work to be 
carried out during a total shutdown. 


4.2.2 Unplanned Maintenance 


4.2.2.1 Corrective maintenance 


Maintenance initiated as a result of the observed or 
measured condition of plant, equipment, systems, 
elements, before or after a functional failure, can 
be used to resolve the problem and ensure correct 
functional performance. This work can be planned or 
unplanned. 


4.2.2.2 Breakdown maintenance 


Breakdown maintenance relates to the task of restoring 
an asset so that it can fulfill its original function after 
failure. This method may result in high replacement 
costs over the lifetime of the asset, but has a low initial 
maintenance resource requirement. It is sometimes 
used for simple facilities that have few operatives and 
no critical environment to support. 


4.2.2.3 Emergency maintenance 


This maintenance method results from a sudden, 
unforeseen occurrence requiring immediate corrective 
work to be carried out to restore to function and to 
avoid potentially serious consequences. 


4.3 Aspects Influencing Building Maintenance 


4.3.1 Maintenance of the buildings is influenced by the 
following factors: 


a) Technical factors — These include age of building, 
nature of design, material specifications, past 
standard of maintenance and cost of postponing 
maintenance. 


b) Maintenance policy — A maintenance policy 
ensures that value for money expended is obtained 
in addition to protecting both the asset value and 
the resource value of the buildings concerned and 
owners. 


A maintenance policy should be developed to 
support the preparation of operational plans in 
accordance with the maintenance strategy. The 
policy should outline the scope and course(s) 
of action that should be taken to achieve an 
organization’s goals. The maintenance policy 
should embody the principle of best value for 
money to protect both the asset value and the 
resource value of the facility. The policy should 
cover: 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


1) The organizations anticipated future 
requirements for the facility, taking into 
account the facility’s physical performance 
and functional suitability, for example: 


i) the use of the facility, that is, anticipating 
likely upgrades and the effect on the life 
cycles of existing materials, components 
and engineering installations; 


ii) a change of use for the facility and the 
effect of any conversion work on the life 
cycles of existing materials, components 
and engineering installations; and 


iii) the anticipated date of conversion, 
renovation or refurbishment work. 


2) Any cycles of maintenance determined in 
accordance with (1); 


3) The method of maintenance, taking account 
of cycles of maintenance together with the 
requirements of the organization with respect 
to the use of the facility and any special 
requirement to which this may give rise; 


4) Holding spare parts and other items to replace 
those that are beyond repair or which have 
exceeded their useful life; and 


5) The means for reporting on performance 


achieved. 
c) Financial and economic factors — See 4 of 
IS 15183 (Part 2). 
d) User — The maintenance requirements of 


buildings and their various parts are directly 
related to the type and intensity of use they receive 
and the people who use these facilities especially 
those with disabilities, elderly and children in 
particular. 


4.3.2 Other Factors Affecting Maintenance 
4.3.2.1 Health and safety 
4.3.2.1.1 General 


The management of occupational health and safety 
has to be viewed as an integral component of facilities 
maintenance management and not as a separate function 
or as an add-on. 


An organization should assess risks and other hazards 
at all stages in a facility’s life cycle. Identified risks 
should be monitored and, wherever possible, their 
potential impacts should be mitigated. An organization 
should implement a formal system of risk management, 
including establishing and maintaining a risk register. 
Periodic reassessment of risks should be undertaken to 
update the risk register and associated risk mitigation. 


4.3.2.1.2 Initial review 


An initial review should be undertaken to provide 
information on the appropriateness, efficiency and 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


effectiveness of existing health and safety management 
systems. Where no formal, or a minimal, health and 
safety management system exists (such as when an 
organization is newly established or when carrying out 
new activities) the initial review should be used as a 
base from which to develop a new system. 


4.3.2.1.3 Risk control and corrective actions 


An organization should implement risk control, as an 
integral part of its risk management, to ensure that 
control measures remain in place and that they remain 
efficient and effective. The risk management system 
should allow, as a minimum, for the following: 


a) Identification of health and safety hazards arising 
from maintenance and other work determined by 
workplace inspections, behavioural observations, 
tours, and formal and informal discussions with 
the workforce; 


b) Identification of people who may be at risk from 
maintenance, for example, maintenance personnel, 
occupants, visitors, passers-by, trespassers, 
persons with disabilities, elderly people and 
children; 


c) Evaluation of the risks to which individuals and/or 
an organization may be exposed; 


d) Devising ways to eliminate, reduce and/or control 
risks, for example guarding and fencing, method 
statements, safe systems of work, standard 
operating practices (SOPs), permit-to-work, 
training and supervision; 

e) Monitoring and recording the effectiveness of 
risk control measures and systems, for example 
inspections, observations, safety tours and 
checklists; 


f) Taking coordinated corrective action; 


g) Providing feedback to the workforce and other 
stakeholders; 


h) Training, together with health and safety checks, 
of operatives; and 


j) Auditing and reviewing the system and, therefore, 
health and safety performance. 


The use of access equipment should be assessed to 
maximize the benefits of use and to optimize the overall 
cost of maintenance; which should take into account 
future requirements for access that might arise on 
multi-year programmes of maintenance. The longer 
term implications of providing access, particularly 
the equipment required for this purpose, should be 
evaluated and permanent means of access should be 
used where possible. 


4.3.2.2 Environmental factors 


4.3.2.2.1 External 


An organization should assess the extent to which 
external environmental factors can influence the 


condition of the structure, fabric, engineering 
installations, fixtures and external finishes, and take 
such factors into account when drawing up maintenance 
plans. This should also include control of moisture. For 
example, swimming pool structures are vulnerable to 
the effects of chlorine used in water. 


4.3.2.2.2 Internal 


Humidity, temperature and pollution are factors that can 
adversely affect the condition of the structure, fabric, 
engineering installations, fixtures and internal finishes. 
The effects of intermittent heating and condensation 
can be considered as an extra ordinary condition. 


An organization should assess the extent to which 
internal environmental factors, as well as the level of 
maintenance, influences the condition of the structure, 
fabric, engineering installations, fixtures and internal 
finishes. These factors should be taken into account 
when maintenance plans are drawn up. Factors that have 
a damaging effect on physical conditions, for example 
control of moisture, static electricity, as well as any 
unintended consequences for maintenance personnel, 
occupants and other users of the facility, should also be 
taken into account. 


4.3.2.3 Materials and components 


When drawing up maintenance programmes and plans, 
including inspection schedules, the likely maintenance 
cycle of each element/sub-element (in accordance with 
the known quality of the materials and components 
employed and their manufacturers’ recommendations 
where available) should be incorporated. The following 
need special attention: 


a) Potentially hazardous materials and components 
such as: 


1) those containing asbestos; 


2) lead, which may be present in some paint or be 
used for pipes carrying potable water; 


3) materials that are either highly combustible or 
give off large quantities of smoke and fumes 
when involved in an established fire or in 
confined spaces (for example electrical risers); 
and 


4) areas that should operate under a permit-to- 
work system. 


b) Types or methods of construction that, under 
certain circumstances, may become dangerous. 


c) Finishes and decorations, including their 


protection and treatment, where required. 
4.4 Influence of Design 


4.4.1 The physical characteristics, the life span and 
the aesthetic qualities of any building depend on the 
considerations given at the design stage. All buildings, 
however well designed and carefully built, will 
require repair and renewal as they get older. For better 


performance of the building envelope, the following 
ways help to minimize troubles at later stage: 


a) Due attention be paid to maintenance requirements 
of the facility from the planning stage. The agency 
which is likely to be entrusted with the work of 
subsequent maintenance and upkeep of the facility 
should be involved from the design stage itself. 
Their inputs will be very valuable in ensuring 
economical maintenance during the lifetime of the 
facility. This aspect needs greater attention as the 
defects occurring at planning stage are difficult to 
be addressed at subsequent stages. 


b) Detail and choose materials during construction 
so that the job of maintenance is less difficult. 


c) Specifications adopted should be practical and 
based on local practices. Durability considerations 
and maintenance of various areas should be kept 
in view. 

d) In addition to initial costs and life, type of finish 
achieved and fire and life safety requirements 
should be built in at the time of design. 


e) Detailing of components should be done to ensure 
that they are conducive to effective operation and 
maintenance. 


f) Accessibility for maintenance purposes of areas 
and services requiring maintenance is taken care 
of. It is necessary that service personnel are able 
to reach the service easily, safely, have adequate 
working space, safe working conditions and 
adequate lighting provisions. Cleaning of façade 
and replacement of glass panes needs to be kept in 
view while finalizing exteriors. 


g) In addition to designing a building for structural 
adequacy, consideration should also be given to 
protect against adverse environmental factors 
such as moisture, natural weathering, corrosion 
and chemical action, wear and tear, pollution, 
flooding, subsidence, earthquake, cyclone, etc. 


h) Design phase should cover such items as the 
owner’s anticipated future requirement for the 
building taking account of the building’s physical 
performance and its functional suitability. This 
may lead to decisions regarding: 


1) A change of use for the building and the effect 
of any conversion work on the life cycle of 
existing components or engineering services; 
and 


2) Availability of replacements. 


j) The present use of the building anticipating any 
likely upgrading and their effect on the life cycles 
of existing components or engineering services. 


k) Due attention when altering the occupancy/ 
functionality of a building, for example from 
residential to business or institutional or otherwise. 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


4.4.2 During construction stage it should be ensured 
that suitable construction techniques are adopted, 
adequate quality control measures are taken, special 
attention is paid to services and testing of lines, 
effective supervision throughout and sound remedying 
of defects is ensured. 


Need of good workmanship needs no emphasis. Proper 
detailing of elements and various fittings and fixtures 
will ensure good workmanship and quality work which 
in turn will not only give longer life to the facility but 
will ensure their long term functional service. 


4.4.3 A list of common causes for maintenance 
problems is given in Annex A for guidance. However, 
no such list is likely to be entirely comprehensive. 


4.5 Maintenance Planning 


4.5.1 General 


Maintenance plans should be driven by and support the 
intended outcomes stated in the facilities maintenance 
policy and strategy and should be fully aligned with 
them. Maintenance plans should be prepared in 
consultation with stakeholders, taking account of the 
following as a minimum: 


a) Organization’s requirements for production and 
operational demands and constraints; 


b) Organization’s financial circumstances; and 


c) Feedback data on maintenance outcomes, 
including associated costs. Multi-year programmes 
of maintenance should be put in place where 
appropriate, that is, for long-term planning, 
finance or other expediency. Programmes should 
state a review date for assessing progress and 
performance. 


When formulating maintenance plans, alternate 
maintenance methods should be evaluated. The 
links between the selected maintenance method(s), 
maintenance performance, facility asset performance 
and service delivery should be established through 
metrics, such as, key performance indicators (KPIs), 
based on a practical and effective maintenance process. 


4.5.2 Assessment of Maintenance Planning 


An organization should assess the benefits of 
maintenance planning, basing the assessment on the 
following: 


a) Contribution to the organization’s goals; 
b) Satisfaction of stakeholder interests; 


c) Effectiveness of the facility in supporting the 
organization’s operational plans; 


d) Availability and reliability of the facility at 
minimal cost; 


e) Capital planning; 
f) Asset/facility management strategy; 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


g) Protection of the value of facility assets; 
h) Provision of data on facility asset performance; 
j) Provision of data for maintenance benchmarking; 


k) Provision of data 
improvement; 


for continual process 


m) Provision of data on environmental performance; 
n) Basis for service life planning; 
p) Contribution to energy management; 
q) Contribution to business continuity management; 
r) Basis for service level agreements; 
s) Transparency and sound governance in financial 
reporting; 
t) Identified security risks; 
u) Awareness towards environmental sustainability; 
v) Improvement of outsourcing and collaboration 
agreements; 
w) Contribution to the facilities management strategy; 
y) Contribution to total quality management; and 


z) Contribution to procurement and supply chain 
management. 


4.5.3 Maintenance Planning Process 


While taking up maintenance planning, following 
should be considered: 


a) Facility assets required to support the core business 
and the delivery of services should be defined; 


b) Required level of facility asset performance, 
including performance indicators, should be 
agreed; 

c) Condition and sufficiency of facility assets for 
their intended purpose should be audited; 


d) Scope of the maintenance required should be 
identified through gap analysis; 

e) An appropriate maintenance method from those 
available should be selected; 


f) Resources required for the chosen maintenance 
method should be assessed; 


g) Maintenance plans and budgets should be prepared 
to cover the required scope of services over the 
short, medium and long term; 

h) A tactical plan for delivery of maintenance should 
be formulated; 

j) Resources to deliver the scope of maintenance 
should be provided; 

k) Maintenance plans and programmes of work are 
implementable; and 

m) Performance monitoring, review and control 
of maintenance plans and programmes of work 
should be carried out. 

Information and data gathered from this process should 
be used to re-inform the organization’s need for, and use 


10 


of, facility assets during this and any future iterations, 
of this process. 


4.5.4 Financial Management 


The provisions given in 5 of IS 15183 (Part 2) shall be 
applicable. 


4.6 Maintenance Work Programmes 


The programming of maintenance work can affect an 
owner or his activities. Following aspects needs to be 
considered: 


a) Maintenance work should be carried out at such 
times as are likely to minimize any adverse effect 
on output or function. 

b) Programme should be planned to obviate as far 

as possible any abortive work. This may arise, if 

upgrading or conversion work is carried out after 
maintenance work has been completed or if work 
such as rewiring is carried out after redecoration. 


Cc 


ma 


Any delay in rectifying a defect should be kept to 
a minimum only if such delay is likely to affect 
output or function. The cost of maintenance 
increases with shortening response times. 

d) Maintenance work, completed or being carried out 
should comply with all statutory and other legal 
requirements. 


4.6.1 Maintenance Guides 


An owner responsible for a large number of buildings 
may have established procedures for maintenance. 
When an owner is responsible for the maintenance of 
only one building or a small number of buildings, the 
preparation of a guide tailored to suit each particular 
building, can offer significant advantages. Such a guide 
should take into account the following: 


a) Type of construction and residual life of the 
building, and 


b) Environment and intensity of use. 


The guide may form part of a wider manual covering 
operational matters. 


4.6.2 Feedback 


4.6.2.1 Feedback is normally regarded as an important 
tool for providing information about the behaviour of 
materials and detailing for the benefit of the architect/ 
engineer designing new buildings, which will result in 
lessening maintenance costs. It is an equally valuable 
source of information for the persons responsible for 
maintenance. Every maintenance organization should 
develop a sample way of communicating its know- 
how, firstly for benefit of others in the organization 
and secondly for the benefit of the building industry as 
a whole. There should be frank and recorded dialogue 
on an on-going basis between those who occupy and 
care for buildings and those who design and construct 
them. 


4.6.2.2 Feedback should aim at the following: 


a) User satisfaction, particularly from diversity of 
users, such as, women, elders and persons with 
disabilities; 

b) Continuous improvement; and 


c) Participation by all. 


4.6.2.3 Source of information 


The information on feedback can be obtained from the 
following: 


a) Occupants, 

b) Inspections, 
c) Records, and 
d) Discussions. 


4.7 Means of Effecting Maintenance 


4.7.1 Responsibility 


Some maintenance work will be carried out by the 
occupier ofa building or by the occupier’s representative. 
In the case of leasehold or similar occupation not all 
maintenance may be the responsibility of occupier. 
Responsibility of common areas, as needed to be 
clearly defined (see 5.6). 


4.7.2 The owner/occupant is primarily responsible 
for ensuring meeting minimum requirements 
of maintenance and upkeep as specified in 5.5. 
Maintenance work sub-divided into major repair, 
restoration, periodical and routine or day-to-day 
operations may be undertaken by one of the following: 


a) Directly employed labour, 
b) Contractors, and 


c) Specialist contractors under service agreement or 
otherwise. 


4.7.3 The merits of each category for typical 
maintenance work shall be considered because optimum 
use of resources appropriate to tasks in a given situation 
is an important element of policy. 


4.7.4 The success of contracting out depends on the 
nature of the services, conditions in which contracting 
is undertaken (the tendering process), how the contract 
is formulated and subsequent monitoring of service 
quality. The important consideration in the decision to 
contract out is whether a contractor can ensure a socially 
desirable quantity and quality of service provision at, a 
reasonable cost to the consumers. 


4.8 Access for Maintenance 


4.8.1 General 


All maintenance activities including any preliminary 
survey and inspection work require safe access and in 
some situations this will have to be specially designed. 
Maintenance policy, and maintenance costs, will 


11 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


be much influenced by ready or difficult access to 
the building fabric and to building services. Special 
precautions and access provisions may also need to be 
taken for roof work or for entry into confined spaces 
such as ducts or voids. 


4.8.2 Access Facilities 


Permanent accessibility measures should be provided 
at the design stage only for all the areas for safe and 
proper maintenance. It is a matter on which those 
experienced in the case of the building can make an 
important contribution at design stage in the interest of 
acceptable maintenance costs. 


A wide variety of temporary access equipment may 
appropriately be provided for maintenance work, 
ranging from ladders to scaffoldings or powered lift 
platforms. 


Wherever possible, it is better to provide permanent 
access facilities, such as fixed barriers, ladders, and 
stairways. When such permanent access facilities are 
provided, necessary arrangement may be included 
in maintenance plans for their regular inspection, 
maintenance and testing. 


All personnel employed for carrying out maintenance 
should be provided with the necessary protective 
clothing and equipment and instructed in its use. 


When physical access is not possible in situations 
such as wall cavities, drains, etc, inspections may be 
made with the aid of closed circuit television or optical 
devices such as endoscopes. 


4.8.3 Access to Confined Spaces 


Following should be ensured for facilitating 
maintenance in confined spaces: 
a) Ventilation — Special precautions need to be 


taken when entering a confined space. Such 
confined spaces should be adequately ventilated, 
particularly before being entered, to ensure that 
they are free from harmful concentrations of 
gases, vapours, other airborne substances and that 
the air is not deficient in oxygen. 


b) Lighting — Good lighting is necessary in order that 
maintenance work can be carried out satisfactorily. 
This is particularly important in confined spaces. 
When the normal lighting is inadequate, it should 
be supplemented by temporary installations. These 
should provide general and spot illumination as 
appropriate. 


5 PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 


5.1 General 


Performance management involves monitoring, 
controlling and improving the efficiency and 
effectiveness of maintenance management and applies 
to both internal and outsourced arrangements. Various 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


models, methods and tools are available to assist in the 
measurement of performance and in indicating where 
improvement is required; examples include, but are not 
limited to, value management. 


Performance management can be used as a means to 
foster efficient and effective working relationships 
between the parties of a contract or agreement 
relating to maintenance and/or its management, 
with the aim of achieving continual improvement 
in performance. It is not intended to be used as the 
basis for penalizing contractors or service providers, 
but instead to encourage better performance. 
Requirements for performance management should 
be formulated as part of the maintenance strategy 
and policy and communicated to all affected 
stakeholders. 


An organization should establish a performance 
management system based upon service level 
agreements. Where a quality management system exists, 
the relationship between that and the performance 
management system should be made clear. In such 
cases, information and data should be capable of 
being entered once into either system and should be 
accessible from both. 


5.2 Quality Control 


Quality of construction has to be ensured during 
planning stage and construction stage of the facility 
as already emphasized by making suitable provisions 
for use of durable materials, proper specifications, 
adequate detailing with emphasis on works required 
to be done after construction for maintenance and 
upkeep. All maintenance should ideally be inspected 
while it is being undertaken and immediately 
after completion to ensure that it complies with 
requirements. Records and accounts rendered for 
maintenance work carried out should be checked for 
completeness and accuracy. 


5.3 Inspections 


Maintenance is intended to ensure that the facility 
remains fit for purpose in terms of satisfying 
organizational goals. This requirement is met, in part, 
through an effective inspection regime and forward- 
looking maintenance reporting. 


5.3.1 The facility should be inspected to determine the 
quality of the internal environment and the condition 
and performance of the structure, fabric, engineering 
installations, fixtures and finishes. Inspection intervals 
should take into account the properties and anticipated 
service life of elements/sub-elements. 


Regular inspections are actual part of the procedures 
for the maintenance of buildings. They are needed 
for a variety of purposes and each purpose requires a 
different approach, if it is to be handled with maximum 
economy and efficiency. A more detailed inspection 


covering all parts of a building is needed to determine 
what work should be included in cyclic and planned 
maintenance programme. 


Inspections should be carried out carefully as 
unrecorded dangers may exist. If any area or task is 
suspected of being hazardous, suitable precautions 
should be taken. 


5.3.2 Frequency of Inspection 


Inspection should be carried out at the following 
frequencies: 


a) Routine — Continuous regular observations 
should be undertaken by the building user as 
part of the occupancy of building. Feedback 
resulting from this type of observation should 
be encouraged. Consultation with occupants 
and other users of the facility to determine the 
existence of any maintenance matters that may 
require action and, where such work has been 
undertaken, measurement of users’ satisfaction 
with the outcomes. 


b) General — Visual inspections of main elements 
should be made annually under the supervision 
of suitably qualified personnel at appropriate 
times. That informs an organization’s budgets for 
maintenance programmes and other maintenance. 


c) Detailed — The frequency of full inspection of 
the building fabric by suitably qualified personnel 
should not normally exceed a 5 year period. 
An inspection should be carried out by using 
a checklist made up of facility elements/sub- 
elements and arranged in a way that supports safe 
working. 


5.3.3 Inspection Schedule 


The preparation of a specific schedule should be 
encouraged. Once prepared, it can be used for 
subsequent inspections. 


5.3.4 Inspection of Engineering Services 


Engineering services generally have a shorter life 
expectancy than building fabric and because of their 
dynamic function; they should be subjected to more 
frequent inspections and maintenance. 


Inspection of services should be carried out for three 
purposes as follows: 


a) To check, if maintenance work is required; 
b) To check, if maintenance work is being adequately 
carried out; and 
c) For safety reasons to comply with statutory 
requirements and if required, with 
recommendations of other relevant organizations. 
The frequency of inspections for purpose (a) will 


depend upon types of plant and system manufacturer’s 
recommendations and subjective judgment. 


Freguencies for purpose (b) should be carried out on 
an annual basis. 


5.3.5 Method of Inspection 


The limited life of building services means it is important 
to record their residual life so that their replacement 
can be budgeted for, and inspection methods should be 
arranged accordingly. 


A checklist of items of plant to be inspected should 
be considered. Detailed procedure of how inspections 
should be carried out is necessary because a simple 
visual inspection is unlikely to show whether plant is 
operating correctly and efficiently. 


Inspections frequently necessitate the use of appropriate 
instruments by competent persons. An example of this 
is the inspections carried out to check compliance with 
statutory requirements. 


When instruments are used, it is important that 
adequate training is provided in the use of instruments 
and interpretation of the results. 


5.3.6 Records of all inspections should be maintained. 
Inspection report for buildings may be prepared in the 
format as given in Annex B. 


5.3.7 Reporting 


A maintenance report should be prepared. Information 
gained from inspections should be collated into two 
groups: 
a) The degree of urgency needed to carry out repairs; 
and 


b) A comparison of maintenance plans, including 
work of a planned preventive nature. 


Attention should be paid to the requirements defined in 
the maintenance policy. Each item should be carefully 
assessed when postponing apparently non-urgent work 
so that it does not result in a major defect or failure over 
the longer term. The anticipated life of the facility, or 
any element of it, should be taken into account. 


Anticipated failures and defects expected to lead to 
failure should be highlighted in reports. The resulting 
information should be arranged in three categories: 
those matters requiring immediate attention; those that 
can be placed into a maintenance programme; and those 
which can be postponed but which should continue to 
be monitored and reviewed. 


The maintenance report should address all maintenance 
requirements not covered by planned preventive 
maintenance for a period of five to ten years. Where 
contracts run over longer periods, maintenance plans 
may extend beyond this limit. The following points 
should be included, as a minimum, in the maintenance 
report: 


a) Location; 


b) Name of element (for example, roof); 


13 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


c) Name of sub-element (for example, roof 
covering — tiling); 
d) Existing condition (for example, excellent, 


satisfactory, adequate, poor or unsafe); 


e) Prioritization of the element (for example, the 
redecoration of a customer-facing reception area 
will have a higher ranking than a storage room); 


f) Anticipated phasing of maintenance; and 
g) Cost of maintenance. 


5.4 Standard Norms for Maintenance Management 


5.4.1 Labour Management 


Shall be as per the provisions given in IS 15183 
(Part 3). 


5.4.2 Recommendatory Expenditures for Maintenance 


Shall be as per the provisions given in IS 15183 
(Part 2). 


5.5 Responsibility of Occupants for Maintenance of 
Facilities 

The responsibility of occupants with respect to 
maintenance of facilities shall cover the following: 


a) Exterior property areas (including vacant land/ 
structure, sanitation, sidewalk, weeds, exhaust 
vents, accessory structures). 


b) Exterior and interior structures (protective 
treatment, interior surfaces, structural members, 
roofs and their drainage). 


c) Rubbish and garbage (relating to accumulation 
and disposal of rubbish or garbage; containers). 


d) Pest elimination (infestation, responsibility — 
single owner or multiple occupancy). 


For more details regarding responsibility, the provisions 
given in 9.12 of SP 7 (Part 12) : 2016 ‘National 
Building Code of India 2016: Part 12 Asset and facility 
Management’ shall be referred. 


5.6 Common Area Maintenance 


Maintenance of common areas in any building, group 
of buildings, should be the responsibility of all those 
who share and use the common areas. 


5.6.1 Common Areas and Equipment 


The common area of a building or project includes 
all space contained in building premises that are not 
exclusive to any specific occupant(s) and which 
benefits, or is intended to benefit, all users/occupiers of 
the building, in common and without distinction. 


Common area of a multiple building campus/project is 
proportionately loaded on to the individual segments 
within the overall campus. Common area of such 
campuses will include driveways, ramps, walkways, 
pavements, corridors, entrances, vestibules, stairways, 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


atriums, refuge area, terraces (with or without common 
rights of access) landscapes, common toilets, loading 
and unloading docks, dedicated property management 
office, parking areas, external peripheries, fagade and 
elevation elements and utility areas such as DG room, 
plant room, etc. 


Common equipment will include all types of pumps 
for water supply, firefighting, etc; lifts and escalators; 
firefighting system; heating, ventilation, and air 
conditioning (HVAC) plant and equipment; E and M 
equipment like electric panels, DG sets, transformers, 
lightning protection system, earthing system, etc. 


5.6.2 Maintenance of Common Areas 


One way to arrange for funds to carry out this function 
is to levy a common area maintenance (CAM) charge 
on all the users. The value of CAM to be charged can be 
decided by the owner or it can be collectively decided 
by the users. Normally, CAM is charged on pro-rate 
basis, that is, on the ratio of area in actual occupation 
of each user vis-a-vis the total area. While computing 
the CAM charges it is normal practice to include 
expense incurred towards providing common facilities 
to all occupiers of a building/facility like cost of 
housekeeping services; energy consumption of fixtures 
and equipment provided for the common areas; annual 
maintenance contracts, if any of equipment, spares and 
consumables; and charges for property management 
services, all expenses towards maintaining regulatory 
and statutory compliance as applicable to the building 
or the project; insurance of building and equipment; 
sinking fund and expenditure incurred on annual 
maintenance of common areas, etc. 


5.7 Maintenance from Accessibility Consideration 


All maintenance and refurbishment in public buildings 
and built environment shall take into account improving 
accessibility for persons with disabilities and care taken 
that accessible design features are properly maintained 
during maintenance activities [see B-25 of SP 7 
(Part 3): 2016 ‘National building code of India 2016: 
Part 3 Development control rules and general building 
requirements’ for more details]. Periodic access audits 
shall be carried out at least once in three years to ensure 
that the requisite accessible features as per SP 7 (Part 3), 
are provided in the building and its built environment 
and maintained in good condition on an ongoing basis. 


6 BUILDING FABRIC MAINTENANCE 


6.1 This constitutes maintenance of elements and 
components of a building other than furniture and 
services installations. 


6.2 Prevention of Cracks, Repairs, Retrofitting and 
Seismic Strengthening of Buildings 


Cracks in buildings are of common occurrence. 
A building component develops cracks whenever 


14 


stress in the component exceeds its strength. Stress 
in a building component can be caused by externally 
applied forces, such as dead, imposed, wind or 
seismic loads, or foundation settlement or it can 
be induced internally due to thermal movements, 
moisture, chemical action, etc. The buildings affected 
by earthquake may suffer both non-structural and 
structural damages. Non-structural repairs may 
cover the damages to civil and electrical items 
including the services in the building. Repairs to 
non-structural components need to be taken up after 
the structural repairs are carried out. Care should be 
taken about the connection details of architectural 
components to the main structural components 
to ensure their stability. The main purpose of the 
seismic strengthening is to upgrade the seismic 
resistance of a damaged building while repairing 
so that it becomes safer under future earthquake 
occurrences. 


6.2.1 Prevention of cracks, repair work, seismic 
strengthening and retrofitting of an existing building 
shall be done in accordance with SP 7 (Part 7) : 
2016 ‘National building code of India 2016: Part 7 
Construction management, practices and safety’. 


6.3 While demolishing a damaged building or existing 
unsafe building, safety precautions as given in 
SP 7 (Part 7) : 2016 ‘National building code of India 
2016: Part 7 Construction management, practices and 
safety’ shall be observed. 


6.4 Depending on the size and complexity of a building 
premise or a structure, maintenance of the following 
related systems and installations may be required, as 
applicable: 

a) Maintenance of plumbing and drainage systems; 


b) Maintenance of heating, ventilation and air 
conditioning (HVAC) system; 


c) Maintenance of electrical installations; 


d) Operation and maintenance of lifts and escalators; 


e) Maintenance of firefighting systems; 
f) Roads and pathways management and upkeep; 
g) Health and safety requirements; 
h) Maintenance of landscaping and horticulture 
works; 
j) Housekeeping; 
k) Pest and rodent control; 
m) Security services for building occupants and 
assets; and 
n) Solid waste management; 
For detailed provisions related to maintenance 
aspects of the above, the provisions in 11 to 22 of 
SP 7 (Part 12) : 2016 ‘National building code of India 
2016: Part 12 Asset and facility management’ may be 
referred. 


7 INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 


7.1 General 


Records and documents relating to the maintenance of 
the facility should be organized, kept up-to-date and 
stored in a secure environment. 


The following general information should be recorded: 


a) Classification — The facility and its sub-divisions 
(that is, rooms and other spaces) should be 
assigned codes according to type or use to support 
the management of information and data; 


b) Obligations under conditions of lease or occupancy 
(for example, frequency of repainting); 


c) Statutory and insurance inspections; 


d) Estate terrier (records of property holdings with 
legal status); 


e) Ownership of and/or maintenance obligations of 
parties, separating and boundary walls; 


f) Rights of way, easements and way-leaves 
(particularly with respect to buried utilities); and 


g) Requirements and restrictions laid down by 
planning, building regulation control and fire 
authorities including, in the case of the latter, fire 
risk assessments. 


Elements/sub-elements of the facility should be 
labelled or marked, as far as is practicable, so that the 
materials, components, systems, plant, equipment and 
parts can be easily identified. Where information is 
limited or lacking, records should be compiled during 
maintenance. Alternative (or additional) surveys 
or investigations should be initiated to accelerate 
the gathering of information for record purposes; 
photographic records can be of assistance in this 
respect. 


All personnel involved in the maintenance of the 
asset/facility should be made aware of the existence 
of records containing information about it. Hazardous 
areas should be explicitly marked on the records as well 
as marked in their physical location/site and should be 
made known to personnel, together with any system of 
work adopted for use in these areas. 


7.2 Documentation 


Good records can save owners and users/occupiers 
from much unnecessary expense and reduce potential 
hazards in exploration work, when faults arise. 
Records are of value only if they are kept up-to-date 
and arrangements for this should be included in any 
provision that may be made for records. 


Records may be broadly classified as follows: 


a) ‘As built’ information, which should have been 
prepared before the handover of the facility, such 
as construction details, floor plans, perspectives 
and as-built drawings showing the location of 


15 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


engineering installations, utility services, and 
structural details; and 


b) ‘As subsequently altered’, which need to be kept 
during the operational life of the facility, such as 
details of defects, maintenance, alterations and 
redecoration work. 


A record should be kept of all reported defects and the 
measures taken to rectify them. Details of maintenance 
should also be recorded and cross-referenced to the 
reported defect. 


Periodic reviews of records should be made and where 
there are recurrences of the same defect, the causes 
should be investigated. 


7.2.1 Facility Handbook 


A facility handbook should be prepared as a compilation 
of records of the asset/ facility, which can be stored and 
retrieved electronically, as well as being reproduced on 
paper, wherever necessary. The form of the handbook 
should be such that content can be easily updated and 
future versions of it to be controlled. The handbook 
should include the records relating to the maintenance 
of the facility and the documents to support the wider 
needs of the organization in regard to its facilities 
management. 


Following should be typical contents of the facility 
handbook: 


a) A brief history of property, names and addresses 
of consultants and contractors. 


b) Short specifications, constructional processes, 
components, material finishes, hidden features, 
special features, etc. 


c) ‘As built’ plans and as subsequently altered with 
sections, elevations and other detailed drawings. 


d) Foundation and structural plans/sections such as 
concrete reinforcement drawings. 


e) Detailed specification ofall materials incorporated, 
for example, concrete mix, species and grades of 
timber, etc. Potentially hazardous materials and 
types or methods of construction that under some 
circumstances may become hazardous may be 
identified. 


Information on housekeeping and routine 
maintenance with details of internal and external 
surfaces and decorations, schedule of cleaning, 
inspection and maintenance. 


wa 


Information on accessibility features of the 
building that makes it friendly to users with 
disabilities and elders. 


8 


h) Means of operating mechanical, electrical and 
plumbing installations. 


j) Description ofrenovations, extensions, adaptations 
and repair to each element. 


k) All plant, machinery and proprietary articles 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


including manufacturers trade literature and 
instructions for installation, use and maintenance. 


m) Methods of work used in construction such as 
assembly of prefabricated units. 


n) All information related to fire such as: 


1) location and service arrangements of all fire 
alarm and call points; 


2) 


location and service arrangements of all 
extinguishers, hose reels and other firefighting 
installations; 


3 


wa 


location of all fire compartment walls, doors, 
floors and screens; 


4 
5 


wa 


location of all areas of exceptional fire hazard; 


wm 


fire escape routes and assembly points in case 
of fire; 

details of application of any fire protection 
treatment; and 


6 


wm 


7 


w 


location details and description of any 
installation for smoke control or protection of 
escape routes. 


ma 


There should be a wall chart showing at a 
glance the various operations which have to be 
undertaken. Line drawings of buildings are always 
useful. 


P 


q) Records of security measures should be known to 
authorized personnel only. 

r) Where no records exist, information should be 
slowly built up as it becomes available during the 
course of maintenance work. 

s) Use of computers for storing information is 
preferred. 


7.2.1.1 Drawings 


The records of the facility should include as-built and 
as subsequently altered drawings [see 7.2.1 (c)] and 
contain, as a minimum, the following: 
a) A neighbourhood plan, showing the position of 
the facility and the site upon which it is located in 
relation to its surroundings; 


b 


wm 


The site plan, showing the facility and other 
structures forming the facility and external 
engineering installations, for example drainage 
runs and incoming public utilities; 

c) General arrangement plans of each floor and the 
roof to a scale not normally greater than 1 : 50; 


d) Elevations and sections; 


e) Foundation plans and details, together with 
available soil investigation reports; 

f) Structural plans and sections, including 
information relating to design parameters, such as 
permissible superimposed loadings on floors; 


g) Structural details such as structural steel 
connections, concrete reinforcement drawings 


16 


and bending schedules. These are particularly 
important when pre-stressed or post tensioned 
forms of structure are used; 


h) Details of the construction of external wall 
elements and roofs, including insulation materials 


and vapour barriers; 


wm 


j) Materials that may be injurious to health and 
safety; 


k) Location of public health (that is, waste) systems; 


m) Location of essential intake and shut-off of 
public utilities (water, electricity, gas and 
telecommunications); and 

n) All drawings, including those used in design 
and construction, should be verified against the 
as-built facility. Where a discrepancy is found, 
full details should be recorded and, wherever 
practicable, the affected drawing(s) should be 
labelled as subsequently altered. 


7.2.1.2 Specifications and schedules 


The records of the facility should include detailed 
specifications of, 


a) all materials incorporated, for example name 
of facing brick, mix of concrete, diameter and 
spacing of reinforcement bars, species and grade 
of timber; 


b) materials with properties that can prove injurious 
to health and safety; 


c) all plant and machinery, including manufacturers’ 
trade literature, manuals and instructions for 
installation, operation and maintenance; and 


d) methods of work used during construction, which 
are unusual or atypical, such as assembly of 
purpose-made manufactured units. 


All specifications and schedules, including those used 
during construction work, should be verified against 
the as-built facility. Where a discrepancy is found, full 
details should be recorded and, wherever practicable, 
the affected specification(s) and/or schedule(s) should 
be labelled as subsequently altered. 


7.2.2 Asset Register 


Asset register is an important document and shall be 
maintained for each asset and kept updated. Many 
organizations maintain this as building register for 
keeping records of their assets and any modifications/ 
alterations done during life time of the asset/facility. 
An organization should include other information and 
data as may be necessary in the form of a register of its 
assets/facility, for example: 


1) Identification number or unique reference for 
the asset; 


2) Location of asset; 
3) Initial cost; 


4) Completion cost (component /unit wise, if 


so required); 
5) Make and/or model; 
6) Manufacturer for machineries and equipment; 
7) Vendor, if different to manufacturer; 


8) Date of manufacture or year of construction 
for buildings; 

9) Date of acquisition, installation or completion of 
construction; 


10) Details of asset such as area statements, type of 
structure; 


11) Whether or not the asset is subject to a permit-to- 
work requirement; 


12) Predicted lifetime; 

13) Specifications including design considerations; 
14) Replacement cycle; 

15) Cost breakdown; 


16) Servicing requirements, 
frequency of service; 


including type and 


17) Other maintenance required; 

18) Maintenance costs; 

19) Accumulated depreciation; 

20) Written-down value; 

21) Source of components and spare parts, where 
applicable; 

22) Energy consumption and, where applicable, 
energy efficiency rating; and 

23) Identification of hazardous or other risks to people 
or property. 


7.2.2.1 Engineering installations 


Information describing the facility’s engineering 
installations should be recorded. Details should include 
points of entry, or termination, of public utilities. 


An organization should stipulate the maintenance 
requirements for its mechanical and electrical 
installations and fire protection systems; the tasks to 
be carried out and their frequency should be included. 
The following attributes of major components should 
be taken into account: 

a) Current condition; 

b) Current utilization or output; 

c) Maintenance tasks to be performed; 

d) Frequency of maintenance; and 


e) Estimated cost of maintenance. 
7.2.2.1.1 Warranties, repairs and spare parts 


Details of warranties relating to plant, equipment, 
components and systems should be recorded and 
cross-referenced to those operational and maintenance 
requirements that affect them. Details of repairs should 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


be recorded against the respective item. A list of spare 
parts should be kept up-to-date. Details should include 
the following as a minimum: 


a) Description of part; 

b) Identification number or unique reference for 
the part; 

c) Original manufacturer of part; 


d) Contact details of current manufacturer and/or 
distributor; 


e) Predicted lifetime of part; 
f) Operational parameters affecting lifetime of part; 


g) Minimum number of parts to be held in stock 
(within or near to the facility); 


h) Where permissible, details of any alternative part 
and its source; 


j) Availability and minimum delivery period; 
k) Warranty period; 
m) Estimated cost of part; 

n) Transportation and logistical considerations; 


p) Details of other parts potentially affected by 
failure and/or replacement; 


q) Specialist equipment or tools required; 
r) Specific competence required; and 


s) Details of special conditions or arrangements 
when installing. 


The details given in (a) to (s) are, in effect, an inventory 
that should be kept up-to-date if the organization is to 
minimize disruption and/or loss of business continuity 
in the event of a breakdown or failure. An organization 
should determine its policy on the holding of spare parts. 


7.2.2.1.2 Documentation of mechanical records 
Documentation should record the following as installed: 


a) Location, including level if buried, of all public 
service connections (for example, fuel gas and 
cold water supplies) together with the points of 
origin and termination, size and materials of pipes, 
line pressure and other relevant information; 


b) Layout, location and extent of all piped services 
showing pipe sizes, together with all valves 
for regulation, isolation and other purposes as 
well as the results of all balancing, testing and 
commissioning data; 


c) Location, identity, size and details of all apparatus 
and all control equipment served by, or associated 
with, each of the various services together with 
copies of any test certificates for such apparatus 
where appropriate. The information with respect to 
size and details may be presented in the schedule 
form; 


d) Layout, location and extent of all air ducts showing 
dampers and other equipment, acoustic silencers, 


17 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


grilles, diffusers or other terminal components. 
Each duct and each terminal component should be 
marked with its size, the air quantity flowing and 
other balancing data; and 


e) Location and identity of each room or space 
housing plant, machinery or apparatus. 


7.2.2.1.3 Drawings for mechanical installations 
Drawings should record the following as installed: 


a) Detailed general arrangements of boiler houses, 
machinery spaces, air handling plant, tank rooms 
and other plant or apparatus, including the location, 
identity, size and rating of each apparatus. The 
information with respect to the size and rating can 
be presented in scheduled form; 


b 


ma 


Isometric or diagrammatic views of boiler houses, 
plant rooms, tank rooms and similar machinery, 
including valve identification charts. It is useful to 
frame and mount a copy of such drawings on the 
wall of the appropriate room; and 


c 


wa 


Comprehensive diagrams that show power wiring 
and control wiring and/or pneumatic or other 
control piping including size, type or conductor or 
piping used and identifying the terminal points of 
each. 


7.2.2.1.4 Electrical installations 
Records should be kept of the following as installed: 


a) Main and sub-main cables, showing origin, route, 
termination, size and type of each cable. Cables 
providing supplies to specialist equipment, 
for example data centre equipment, should be 
identified separately including their individual 
tagging, if available; 

b 


wm 


Lighting conduits and final sub-circuit cables, 
showing origin, route, termination and size 
of each, together with the number and size of 
cables within each conduit. The drawings should 
indicate, for each conduit or cable, whether it is 
run on the surface or concealed, for example in a 
wall chase, in a floor screed, cast in-situ or above a 
false ceiling. These drawings should also indicate 
the locations of lighting fittings, distribution 
boards, switches, draw-in-boxes and point boxes, 
and should indicate circuitry; 


c 


wa 


Details of secondary power sources for inclusion 
in a safe systems of work regime; 

d) Location and purpose of each emergency lighting 
fitting, including an indication of the circuit to 
which it is connected; 


e 


<~ 


Single and three-phase power conduits and final 
sub-circuit cables showing locations of power 
distribution boards, motors, isolators, starters, 
remote control units, socket outlets and other 
associated equipment; 


18 


f) Other miscellaneous equipment, conduits and 
cables; 

g) Lightning conductor air terminals, conductors, 
earth electrodes and test clamps; 

h) Location of earth tapes, earth electrodes and test 
points; and 

j) Cables providing earth circuits for specialist 
equipment should be identified separately. 

Records should also include, where applicable: 

1) Distribution diagrams or schedules to show size, 
type and length (to within 1 m) of each main and 
sub-main cable, together with the measured earth 
continuity resistance of each; 

2 


Schedule of lighting fittings installed stating 
location, manufacturer and type or catalogue 
number together with the type or manufacturer’s 
reference, voltage and wattage of the lamp installed; 


3 


a 


Schedule of escape and emergency lighting fittings 
installed stating location, manufacturer, type 
or catalogue number together with the type or 
manufacturer’s reference, voltage and wattage of 
the lamp installed. For battery systems, the position 
of the battery, its ampere-hour rating and battery 
system rated endurance, in h, should be stated; 


4 


NS 


Records of smoke detectors, sprinklers and 
fire precautions generally, as well as security 
precautions; 


5 


wm 


Incoming supply details including the type of 
system, voltage, phases, frequency, rated current 
and short circuit level, with the details of the supply 
protection and time of operation as appropriate; 

6) Main switchgear details which, for purpose-made 
equipment, should include a set of manufacturers’ 
drawings and the site layout; 


7) Transformer, capacitor and power plant details. 
For example in the case of transformers, the volt- 
ampere rating, voltages and type of cooling; and 


8) Completion certificate including test reports by 
competent authority like electrical inspector. 


All records and drawings, including those used during 
construction work, should be verified against the as- 
built facility. Where a discrepancy is found, full details 
should be recorded and, wherever practicable, the 
affected record(s) and/or drawing(s) should be labelled 
as subsequently altered. 


7.2.3 Operating and Maintenance Manuals 


7.2.3.1 The engineering services within buildings 
frequently are dynamic, involving complex systems 
of integrated plant items. Operation of such plant can 
require detailed knowledge and direction. Maintenance 
can also require extensive information to be available. 
It is, therefore, important to have suitable operating 
and maintenance manuals to provide the necessary 


guidance. These should be included as part of the 
contractual reguirements for new installations and 
should ideally be prepared as reference documents for 
existing installations where no such information exists. 


7.2.3.2 Information and data on the operation and 
maintenance of the facility, including measures to 
conserve fuel and power, should be incorporated into 
the operation and maintenance (O and M) manual. The 
organization should ensure that provisions made in the 
facility handbook are satisfied. 


Preparation of an O and M manual tailored to suit each 
facility can offer significant advantages in terms of 
providing a clear statement of intentions and required 
actions. Depending upon whether one is responsible for the 
maintenance of a number of facilities or a single facility, 
the maintenance manual will be designed and prepared. 


An organization’s procedures for undertaking 
maintenance should be formalized in a maintenance 
manual or manuals. The manual may form part of 
wider documentation covering operational plans and 
arrangements. In the event ofa change of organization or 
maintenance advisor, an up-to-date manual and facility 
handbook should ensure continuity of maintenance. 
Copies of maintenance manuals should be held by the 
organization and any maintenance advisor, if appointed. 


7.2.3.3 Structure of operation and maintenance manual 


The maintenance manual should be prepared in two 
parts: 


a) The first part should be addressed to the 
organization; and 


b) The second part should be addressed to those 
responsible for inspecting the facility and reporting 
to and advising the organization. 


The first part of the manual should, 
1) Recommend intervals between: 
i) routine, general and detailed inspections; 


ii) inspection and maintenance of each 
engineering installation and items of 
special equipment; 

maintenance of items which, as 
recommended by their manufacturers, 
require regular attention to preserve 
satisfactory performance, for example the 
lubrication and adjustment of moving parts 
in component assemblies and systems; and 


iii) 


other periodic work as experience in 
use shows to be necessary, for example 
humidity ingress in vertical direction 
from floors above, the clearing of gutters, 
downpipes or surface water gullies. 


2) Draw attention to the need to ensure that a 
facility’s provisions for means of escape in the 
event of fire, that is, fire resisting self-closing 


19 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


doors and exit hatches, are in satisfactory 
working order at all times, including those 
periods during which any maintenance is 
being undertaken. 
3) Draw attention to critical environments, 
including special arrangements for gaining 
access for the purpose of inspections or when 
undertaking maintenance; 
4) Specify proprietary maintenance materials, 
for example floor sealers and polishes likely 
to offer acceptable service and slip resistance; 
sanitary fittings, door/window sections, etc. 
5) Set out the names, addresses and other contact 
details of firms responsible for the following: 
i) inspecting, reporting and advising on the 
condition of the building fabric; 
ii) emergency repairs to the building fabric; 
and 
iii) servicing and emergency repairs for each 
engineering installation and items of 


special equipment. 
The second part of the manual should: 


a) consist mainly of selected, concise information, 
abstracted from the facility handbook, and likely 
to be needed during inspections; this information 
should be ordered in the sequence in which 
examination is likely to be carried out. 

b) schedule those materials and components that 

experience shows to be prone to failure and/or to 

require special attention. 


7.2.3.4 Updating of O and M manual 


The maintenance manual should be reviewed annually 
and updated where necessary, to reflect changes 
in legislation as well as current circumstances and 
arrangements. When changes occur to facilities, or 
where new information becomes available, all copies of 
the maintenance manual should be revised accordingly, 
irrespective of whether it is self-standing or forms an 
integral part of the facility handbook. 


7.3 Storage and Security of Records 
7.3.1 General 


An organization should keep records in a safe and 
secure location and arrange them in such a way as 
to enable their rapid retrieval. Records of personnel 
permitted to access the records and any requirements 
or conditions attaching there to should be defined. 


7.3.2 Storage 


The place for storage of records should take into 
account the form of the records, the media used and the 
conditions necessary to keep them from damage of any 
kind; they should also be readily accessible. Backup or 
duplicate records (electronic and paper-based) should 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


be kept in a secure place in a location other than the 
facility to which they relate. Both sets should be kept 
up-to-date. 


7.3.3 Security 


Measures taken to ensure security should be recorded 
and a copy should be held in a secure location away 
from the facility to which they relate. The following 
records should be readily accessible to authorized 
personnel when required, which may be at short notice 
and outside normal working hours: 


a) Names, home addresses and telephone numbers of 
key holders; 


b) Details of master key system; and 


c) Details of intruder alarms and other security 
systems. 


7.4 Computerization of Information Management 


An organization should review its requirements for 
data systems, basic information and communication 
technology (ICT) facilities and extended services 
necessary to support its maintenance management. 
The use of a Computer-Aided Facilities Management 
(CAFM) or a Computerized Maintenance Management 
System (CMMS) as means for managing facility 
related maintenance information should be evaluated. 
The following features are likely to provide a suitable 
basis: 


1) Budgetary and other financial controls; 
2) Cost accounting; 
3) Asset register; 


20 


4) Condition-based monitoring of assets; 

5) Early detection of problems and rapid fault 
reporting; 

6) Operational plans, including frequency of 
functions or activities performed; 

7) Risk and hazard assessment; 

8) Permits-to-work; 

issued and 


9) Personal equipment 


returned; 


protective 


10) Planned preventive maintenance; 
11) Reactive maintenance; 
12) Change management; 


13) Job orders and other requisitions for goods and 
services; 


14) Job logging, prioritization and tracking, including 
details of backlogs; 


15) Energy use and carbon dioxide (CO,) equivalent 
emitted per annum; 


16) Resource consumption and productivity measures; 

17) Analysis of work undertaken to identify trends; 

18) Space planning and space utilization; 

19) Workstation 
management; 


location and furniture 


20) Performance indicators for the delivery of 


services; 
21) End-user experiences of services delivered; 
22) Audit trail of system transactions; and 
23) Exception reporting for management purposes. 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX A 


( Clause 4.4.3 ) 
COMMON CAUSES FOR MAINTENANCE PROBLEMS 


A-1 The major causes for maintenance problems 
in different elements of a building are discussed in 
A-1.1 to A-1.5. 


A-1.1 Floors 
a) Poor quality of construction which includes 
quality of construction material and workmanship. 


b) Improper slopes, mainly in kitchen, bathrooms/ 
toilets, etc. 


c) Lack of rounding at junctions of walls with floors. 


d) Lack of damp-proof course treatment in walls and 
particularly in sunken floors. 


e) Poor design of building. 
f) Improper waterproofing. 


A-1.2 Roofs 


a) Inadequate roof slopes. 
b) Inferior quality of construction. 
c) Cracks on roof surfaces. 
d) Inadequate provision of rain water spouts. 
e) Blockages in gratings/rain water pipes. 
f) Worn out felts/membranes. 
g) Bubbling up of bitumen felt and separation of 
joints. 
h) Improper water proofing or wrong selection of 
water proofing technique. 
j) Leakage from the openings provided on the roof. 
k) Improper treatment of expansion/construction 
joints. 
m) Non-providing of Gola (rounding) at junction of 
parapet and wall and roof. 
n) Improper execution of Khurra. 


p) Lack of pre-monsoon inspections. 
q) Illegal installations over roof slab. 


A-1.3 Plumbing 


a) Inadequate slopes in soil/waste pipes. 

b) Improper joints in pipes. 

c) Joints in walls and floors. 

d) Improper junctions of stacks. 

e) Inadequate cleaning eyes at junctions. 

f) Throwing of solid wastes in WCs. 

g) Lack of periodical checking and cleaning. 


j) Lack of motivation/education to users for proper 
use. 


k) Overflow from service tanks. 
m) Inferior quality of fittings and fixtures. 
n) Inadequate design. 


A-1.4 Drainage 
a) Improper surface dressing around buildings and 
improper upkeep of surroundings. 
b) Growth of wild grass and vegetation. 
c) Inadequate drainage system around the building. 
d) Inadequate slope of the drains or drainage pipes. 
e) Inadequate number of inspection chambers. 
f) Theft of manhole covers, etc. 
g) Throwing of solid waste in the open surface rains. 


A-1.5 Electrical 


a) Loose connections. 

b) Improper earthing and earth connections. 

c) Damages to wires, cables and other installations. 
d) Under rated cables/wires and other installations. 


21 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.3.6 ) 


FORMAT FOR INSPECTION REPORT 


Bull din Bla 


(A) INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS (CIVIL) 


(a) House No. and Type: 


(b) Location: 


(c) Date of Last Inspection: 


(d) Date of Present Inspection: 


SI Item No. Needs Repair Needs Replacement Priority 

No. Action | Quantity | Cost | Quantity Cost Immediate | Annual Routine 
Repairs 

1. Walls 

1.1 | Cracks 


1.2 | Repair to plaster 


1.3. | Repair to brick work 


1.4 | Dampness 


2. Floors 
2.1 | Cracks 
2.2 | Settlement 
2.3 | Slopes 


2.4 | Skirting cracks 


2.5 | Dados cracks 


2.6 | Rising dampness 


3: Doors, Windows, Ventilators 
and Cupboards 


3.1 | Glass panes cracked or broken 


3.2 | Panels in shutters cracked or 


broken 


3.3 | Panels fit improperly 


3.4 | Improper/missing fittings 


3.4.1 Hinges 

3.4.2 Handles 

3.4.3 Tower bolts 
3.4.4 Aldrops 

3.4.5 Floor door stopper 
3.4.6 Knobs 

3.4.7 Cleats 

3.4.8 Hooks and eyes 
3.4.9 Curtain rods 
3.4.10 | Stays 

3.4.11 | Pelmets 

3.4.12 | Floor springs 
3.4.13 | Door closures 


22 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


(A) INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS (CIVIL) 


(a) House No. and Type: (b) Location: 
(c) Date of Last Inspection: (d) Date of Present Inspection: 
SI Item No. Needs Repair Needs Replacement Priority 
No. Action | Quantity | Cost | Quantity Cost Immediate | Annual Routine 
Repairs 
4. Roofs 


4.1 | Leakages/damp patches 


4.2. | Water proofing treatment 


4.33. | Gola (rounding) 


4.4 | Khurra (mouth/ inlet of 


rainwater pipe on the roof) 


4.5 | Brick drip course 


4.6 | Rain water pipe 
4.7 | Regrading 


4.8 | Top layer of tiles 


4.9 | Parapet, coping 


5. Water Supply and Sanitary 
Fittings 


5.1 | Leakages in pipe joints 


5.2 | Functioning of washers 


5.3 | Functioning of traps in fittings 


5.4 | Functioning of floor traps 


5.5 | Functioning of overhead/ low 
level cistern 


5.6 | Air locking 


5.7 | Leakages in pipe joints 


5.8 | Condition of overhead tank 


5.9 | Cleaning of overhead tank 


5.10 | Fittings 


5.10.1 Washbasin 
5.10.2 Soap container 
5.10.3 Mirror 

5.10.4 Glass shelf 
5.10.5 Towel rail 
5.10.6 Hangers 
5.10.7 Sinks 

5.10.8 Taps 

5.10.9 Pillar cocks 


5.10.10 Showers 


5.16.11 Cisterns 


5.10.12 Ball valves 
5.10.13 Seat cover 


5.10.14 Steps 


5.10.15 European WC 


23 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


(A) INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS (CIVIL) 


(a) House No. and Type: 


(b) Location: 


(c) Date of Last Inspection: 


(d) Date of Present Inspection: 


SI Item No. Needs Repair Needs Replacement Priority 
No. Action | Quantity | Cost | Quantity Cost Immediate | Annual Routine 
Repairs 
6. External Services 
6.1 | Manhole covers 
6.2. | Covers to gully traps 
6.3. | Cleaning of manholes 
6.4 | Plinth protection 
6.5 | Cleaning of storm water drain 
6.6 | Approach roads 
6.7 | Service lanes 
7. Finishing 
7.1 | White washing/colour washing/ 
distemper 
(a) | When was it done last? 
(b) | When is it due? 
(c) | Existing condition 
7.2. | Painting 
(a) | When was it done last? 
(b) | Existing conditions 
(c) | When is it due? 
8. Common Areas 
8.1 | Railing to staircase 
8.2 | Staircase steps 
8.3 | Staircase nosing 
8.4 | Shafts 


24 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


(B) INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS (ELECTRICAL) 


(a) House No. and Type: (b) Location: 
(c) Date of Last Inspection: (d) Date of Present Inspection: 
SI Item No. Needs Repair Needs Replacement Priority 
No. Action | Quantity | Cost | Quantity Cost Immediate | Annual Routine 


Repairs 


1. Switch Boards 


1.1 | Regulator 


1.2. | Switches 


1.3 | Fixing of tiles 


2. Fans 


2.1 | Canopy fixing 


2.2. | Speed and noise 


3. Socket outlet points and 
connection 

3.1 | Tile 

3.2. | Switch 


3.3 | Outlet connection, if any 


4. Fittings 


4.1 Reflector 


4.2 | Louvres/Perspex cover 


4.3 | Suspension rod 


5. Exhaust Fans 


5.1 | Speed and noise 


5.2 Louvres 


5.3 | Connecting wires including 


ceiling rose 


6. Call Bells 


6.1 | Bell push 


6.2 | Connecting wire 


6.3 | Ball Buzzer 


Te Sub Distribution Boards/ 
BDB/Main Board 


7A Switch covers 


7.2. | Fuse kit kats 


7.3 | Earth connection 


74 | Fuse rating 


7.5 | Inter connection 


7.6 | Boards 


25 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


(C) INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS/GARDENS 


(a) House No. and Type: 


(b) Location: 


(c) Date of Last Inspection: 


(d) Date of Present Inspection: 


SI Item No. Needs Repair Needs Replacement Priority 
No. Action | Quantity | Cost | Quantity Cost Immediate | Annual Routine 
Repairs 

1. Lawn 

1.1 | Weeding 

1.2 | Patch repair 

1.3 | Renovation 

1.4 | Regrassing 

2. Hedge: 

2.1 | Gap filling 

2.2. | Replacement 

3. Pruning and Training 

3.1 | Naturally required pruning 

3.2 | Pruning required for security 
purpose of building as well as 
occupant 

4. Planting Beds 

4.1 | Needs Replacement 

4.2. | Gap filling 

5. Ultrafiltration Water Supply 

5.1 | Matter to be reported to 
Ultrafiltration water division 
after inspection 

6. Rockeries 

6.1 | Gap filling of dead one 

6.2. | Replacement of damaged, weak 
elements 

6.3 | Replacement of stones 

6.4 | Thinning, trimming 

6.5 | Redesigning of paths, 
maintenance of paths 

7. Kitchen Garden 

7.1 | Change in site 

7.2. | Plan for planting of vegetables 

8. Road Side Plantation 

8.1 | Gap filling Nos. 

8.2 | Trimming, pruning 

8.3. | Tree guards not required and to 
be removed/ repair/painting, etc. 

8.4 | Proposal for new plantation, 
digging of holes, etc. 

8.5 | Miscellaneous 

8.6 | MOU- Detailed report 


(Performance and financial 


achievements) 


26 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 2061, Engineers 
Apartments, Plot 11, Sector - 18A, Dwarka, 
New Delhi 110078) 


Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


Central Insecticides Board, Faridabad 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products and Services, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, 
Jorhat 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 
Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi 
Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training 


Institute, Bengaluru 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. S. SACHDEV (Chairman) 


SHRI SHOBHIT UPPAL 
SHRI PRADEEP Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI A. N. PRAKASH 
SHRI SATISH V. SALPEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVAS 
SHRI H. E. IYER (Alternate) 


SHRI SUROJIT SAMANTA 
SHRI RAM Avtar (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDI NATH JHA 


ADDITIONAL PPA cum Secretary (CIB & RC) 
Joint Director (ENTOMOLOGY) (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (TAS) (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
Suri SHASHI Kant (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NEGI 
Dr Asay Chourasia (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DIRECTOR 
DR P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (SZ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) -1 (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAVINDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr KIsHAN Kumar V. S 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI S. C. BHATIA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


VICE PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAVA SIL 
SHRI ANAND NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN VENKATESWARAN 
Suri V. SUKUMAR HEBBAR (Alternate) 


27 


IS 15183 (Part 1) : 2018 


Organization 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 


Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Limited, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Pest Control (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Govt of Gujarat, Gujarat 


Public Works Department, Govt of NCT of Delhi, 
New Delhi 


Research, Designs and Standards Organization, 
Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 


School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 

The All India Glass Manufacturers’ Federation, 
New Delhi 

The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 

The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 

The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 

In personal capacity, (Pratap Nursery Lane 


Near Gurudwara, Panditwari, Dehradun) 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Jt DG (ARCHITECTURE) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (ENGG) 
GENERAL MANAGER (ENGG) (Alternate) 


Suri R. L. DAs 
SHRI ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR M. GHUGE 
Suet Nitin B. JactaP (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER, DESIGN (R & D) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DIRECTOR (Works) 
ADE (Works) (Alternate) 


PROF ANIL DEWAN 

Pror Jaya Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 

SHRI RUPINDER SHELLY (Alternate) 
SHRI SANJAY SETH 

Ms Mecha Bena (Alternate) 
SHRI VIJAY GARG 

SHRI SHAMIT MANCHANDA (Alternate) 
SHRI P. K. ADLAKHA 

SHRI DEVENDRA GILL (Alternate) 


SHRI K. S. PRUTHI 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


28 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 13 (12401). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


