UDC

621.867'

: 614.8 : 006'76
Indian Standard

IS : 7155 ( Part.2

) - 1986

(Reaffirmed 1999)

-.CODE
PART

OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE CONVEYOR SAFETY
2 GENERAL ( First SAFETY
Revision)

FOR

REQUIREMENTS

relating to continuous mechanical handling 1. Scope - Sets out general safety requirements equipment, including its construction, installation, utilization and maintenance, to ensure its uses to the optimum advantage, and to prevent, as far as possible, any accidents or mishaps that could arise from misuse.
1

.l These safety requirements IS : 7155 (Part `I )-I986 `Code information'.
These safety

shall of

requirements/information be in addition to the recommended practice for conveyor safety: Part

given in 1 General

2. Application

requirements

apply

in the normal

working

conditions

defined

in

2.3

of IS : 7155 ( Part 1 )-198ti. 2.1 These safety requirements apply to continuous mechanical handling equipment proper, excluding the structures ( building frameworks, planks, etc) to which such equipment is affixed or on which it is placed and for which the user is responsible, except when such structures have been designed, supplied and erected along with the conveying device.
2.2 The main object of IS : 7155 ( Part 1 )-1986. these requirements is the safety of the personnel defined in 2.4 of

2.3 Skilled personnel, such as fitters, maintenance time at the request of the person responsible particularly those set out in 3.3.17 to 3.3.21.

and repair personnel, for the plant, shall

who only work observe special

from time to requirements,

2.4 Persons
under

whose consideration

duties do not demand their presence on the plant or in the vicinity shall observe orders forbidding access to certain areas.

of the equipment

3. General Requirements - The construction and operation equipment for loose bulk materials and unit loads shall requirements relating to safety in general; the principles laid requirements. 3.1 In the Construction Stage

of all continuous mechanical meet the statutory, specific down in 1 and the following

handling and other general

( Design

and Manufacture

) of for and

3.1.1 Design and construction of platform, walkways, stairways and ladders - The design platforms, walkways, stairways and ladders shall be such that adequate clearance is provided normal operation; servicing and maintenance, giving sufficien? room for freedom of movement access for carrying out such duties. 3.1.2 Tne stability and strength of the equipment (static or mobile ) shall be ensured under normal working conditions, including climatic conditions as agreed to by the interested parties. 3.1.3 The whole conveyor path and especially the loading, unloading and transfer points, designed so as to avoid as much as possible all spillage of products or conveyed material. 3.1.4 slipping The slopes and the characteristics of the conveying element shall be designed and/or unintentional dropping of the conveyed products under normal working trays, shall

all

be

so as to conditions. etc) shall

avoid

3.1.4.1 The support element of the material or load (belt, buckets, swing sufficient size to be suitable for the transport of the specified product or load.

have

3.1.5 To prevent over-running or running backwards of the conveying device, all inclined or vertical appliances shall include a safety device which operates whenever the motive power is cut off or fails and where the load conveyed possesses kinetic or potential energy. Nevertheless, a safety device. for this purpose is not compulsory for those special cases as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer.

Adopted

10 December

1986

0 December I
BUREAU
MANAK

1987,

BIS

Or 3

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:7155

(Part

2)

-1986

3.1.6 Certain fixed or mobile appliances may include an articulated or mobile part in a vertical plane, actuated by a motor or manually; in which case, there shall be a compulsory safety device for immobilizing such an articulated part in the event of voluntary or accidental stoppage of the motive power even if the later is manual. 3.1.6.1 The lowering and raising system shall be fitted with a safety device to prevent lowering or lifting of the boom, and to prevent kickback of any manually operated crank. 3.1.6.2 The device for lowering and raising the movable part shall be so located that necessity for the operator to be under the conveyor for operating the device. 3.1.6.3 The movement the stress due to the load. shall be limited at the extreme positions, by stops capable of accidental

there

is no

supporting

3.1.7 In cases of manual loading and/or unloading, speed, etc ) shall be suitable for the working stations. 3.1.7.1 Mechanical a) the loading b) the loading c) the unloading devices shall be installed for:

the characteristics

of the

unit

( height,

width,

and unloading

of unit loads exceeding

50 kg,

of unit loads when the vertical

speed exceeds 0'5 m/s, and speed exceeds 0'25 m/s. device (belts, chains, belt pulleys, etc ) shall be protected.

of unit loads when the vertical

3.1.8 The in-running nips and pinch points of the conveying etc ) and the movable parts (chain sprockets, spur gears, couplings,

3.1.9 When shearing and squeezing points or zones exist on the path of the conveying element (for example at a change of direction, or the close approach to fixed parts, etc ), guards shall be provided. 3.1 .lO All movable parts giving access through mechanical handling equipment shall be designed so that they cannot be opened whilst the apparatus is working and so that the appliance cannot be used or started while they are `open'. 3.1.I1 The loading and unloading openings of the enclosed units ( in casing or in housing 1 shall be made in such a way that they prevent access to the moving components; otherwise suitable protection shall be provided. which give access to moving parts, shall be guarded by 3.1 .I2 Openings in enclosed appliances, covers which require a hand tool for removal or are locked or are interlocked with the drive to the equipment. Cover which it is necessary to open while the appliance is in operation shall expose a suitable fixed grating, which shall prevent access. 3.1 .13 Access to inspection 3.1 .I4 All the lubrication remove the guards. 3.1.I5 It is recommended holes shall be easy. shall be accessible without it being necessary to

points used frequently

that equipment

be so designed

that cleaning

is facilitated.

3.1.16 Equipment mounted on a moving frame, or any other additional equipment, such as the loading chute, feeders, etc, whether they are self-propelled or hand-operated, shall be provided with a device enabling them to be immobilized. 3.1.16.1 Safety devices shall be provided of travelling to personnel to limit the travel of such equipment. equipment shall be

3.1.17 Wheels or rollers guarded at points accessible

conveyors and of additional travelling under normal working conditions.

3.1.18 Whenever an operator remains on the travelling be so designed as to prevent any accidental contact with installation. 3.1 .I9 When mobile appliances devices shall be provided. or equipment travel

equipment, a platform shall be provided and mobile components or any part of the fixed

alongside

an unprotected

gangway,

warning

2

IS : 7155 ( Part 2 ) - 1986
3.1.26 3.1.21 Sharp edges and corners parts shall be avoided. equipment shall be as small as possible.

The projecting

of moving

3.1.22 Overhead gentry portion of road and rail crossings, walkways, gallaries, work places under the overhead conveyors used by the personnel, shall be protected by means of suitable covering such as plates/steel sheet covers to prevent falling of the material/objects over such areas/personnel. 3.2 During the Installation Stage ( Layout, Erection and Entry into shall Service carry ) the following indications

3.2.1 All permanently

powered appliances or complete installations and legibly marked in a clearly visible place: of the manufacturer or the supplier, number. and

a) Name

b) Year of manufacture

and serial

platforms shall be provided from which all parts of the 3.2.2 Access to Conveyors - Permanent plant which need to be reached for the purpose of operation, regular servicing and maintenance are A clear access platform or floor space of at least 0'50 m width shall regularly and safely accessible. All service platforms of appliances and be provided for the maintenance of every driving mechanism. cabins on which operating personnel may be required to be stationed should remain horizontal. steps or platforms provided shall offer a minimum passageway of 3.2.3 All gangways, staircases, 0'50 m. They shall be protected on the .open side by guard-rails composed of a hand-rail normally `l m above the walkway, a knee-rail and a toe-guard, or by an equivalent plain sheeting. In the case non-slip surface to avoid slippage/skiding shall be of gangways inclined more than 5". a suitable provided with uninterrupted vertical sheeting on the side remote from the moving appliance. A handTo avoid the risk of trapping by a moving device, the height of the rail shall be provided on this side. hand-rail can be modified to not less than 0'80 m above the walkway so as to ensure a minimum clearance of 0'50 m between the appliance and the hand-rail. 3.2.3.1 Access between obstacles, shall be prevented 3.2.3.2 Access prevented by guards 3.2.4 There shall 1'50 m above ground movable by guards parts of static appliances, or the load that when the free space is less than 0'50 m. and fixed they carry and fixed

between the preset path of mobile appliances when the free space is less than 0'50 m. be fixed level. access to platforms, floors, or similar

obstacles

shall

be

constructions

located

more

than

3.2.4.1 Platforms at different levels shall be adequately and conveniently connected by stairways or where stairways are not practicable, by fixed ladders. It is recommended that ladders be avoided as a means of access and access shall preferably be by a sloping ramp with slats, or by a staircase. The angle of staircases in relation to the horizontal shall not exceed 60". 3.2.4.2 If a ladder has to be used, access side, the free space between the this free space may be reduced to side, tha free space between the ladder is put vertically or at an angle equal to than 5 m, a protection (crinoline, guard starting level. 3.2.4.3 Suitable between the purchaser the width between the uprights shall be 0'35 m minimum; on the ladder and any continuous obstacle shall be 0'60 m minimum; 0'40 m near a localized obstacle of small width; on the opposite and any obstacle shall be 0'20 m minimum. When the ladder or greater than 70" and its vertical height is equal to or greater or other device) shall be provided commencing 2 m from the

landings or resting and the manufacturer.

places,

where

practicable,

shall

be provided

if agreed

to

3.2.4.4 Access to plant for purposes of operation shall be from floors and platforms and not from stairways or fixed ladders. Portable ladders shall not be used as places from which operation or regular servicing may be carried out. However, their use may be permitted for occasional maintenance in situations not exceeding 3'5 m in height. Where the height exceeds 3'5 m up to a maximum of 6 m, other suitable means such as an approved mobile work platform or a tower ladder may be used provided adequate access is available for their use and to enable placement with ease. 3.2.4.5 Where walkways to either side of the conveyor are provided on both sides of a conveyor and where convenient access may be required by employees, who regularly work in the area, crossovers 3

IS:7155(Part2)-1986
shall other be provided at appropriate intervals and at the head and tail ends of the conveyors crossing is available. Safe means of access shall be provided at crossovers. be where. no

3.2.5 All flooring of platforms or gangways and treads of staircases and stops shall suit individual installations and working conditions, and shall have a non-slip surface. 3.2.6 It is recommended that sharp edges and corners to personnel between the floor and a height of 2 m. 3.2.6.1 This recommendation need not be followed be avoided in the areas

selected

to

normally

accessible

if such edges

and corners

are protected. 1'90 m,

3.2.7 In case it is recommended 3.2.8

where the clearance beneath the appliances, that access be by means of a gangway running passageways, protected if necessary, shall

at a passageway, is less than over the appliance. be indicated through in a clear floors manner.

All authorized

3.2.9 In cases where appliances which the latter shall be protected by guard-rails 3.2.10 provided Where against appliances accidental

penetrate into a pit or extend and toe-guards.

leave

openings,

pass above work stations or dropping of conveyed materials.

passageways,

suitable

protection

shall

be

3.2.11 Conveyer control - Except where the conveyor is under the control of an operator, electrical and/or mechanical devices shall be provided on all conveyor systems to automatically stop a conveyor or the load when the conveyor, bin, or hopper to which it feeds, has been stopped or has been blocked with load so that it cannot receive additional load or material. This requirement may also be applicable to chutes for special applications and if agreed to by the manufacturer and the user at the time of enquiry or order. 3.2.11.1 Sequence supply another appliance interlocks shall be which is inoperative provided so that no mechanical or has reached its full capacity. indicated `General handling appliance can

3.2.12 All starting and stopping devices shall be clearly in accordance with the requirements of IS : 4237-1982 controlgear for voltage not exceeding 1 000 V'.

and easily accessible and shall be requirements for switchgear and

3.2.12.1 Instantaneously operating manual stop-lock devices shall be nuously or at selected points along the installation. Resetting of these devices authorized personnel and only after the fault has been rectified.

provided either shall be carried

contiout by

3.2.12.2 Pull cords-The conveyor system shall be provided with stay-put type pull cord switches at suitable intervals along the conveyor so that any particular conveyor may be stopped from any position and in case any sequential operation is intended, the conveyor in sequence may also be stopped automatically. In case of sequential interlock system, zero speed switch and belt sway switch shall also be provided. 3.2.13 When an appliance visual signals shall be provided 3.2.14 All recommended 3.2.15 extends to warn out of sight personnel that of the control station operator, audible the starting of the appliance is imminent. indicated and easily accessible. and/or

starting and stopping devices shall be clearly that they be painted to a specified pattern. that all lubrication staircases, points be painted

It is

It is recommended

to a specified be erected

pattern. before the installation

3.2.16 Gangways, is put into service.

hand-rails,

ladders,

guards,

etc shall

3.2.17 The feeding and discharge controls, either manually or mechanically easily accessible. They shall, where necessary be placed so as to permit supervision 3.2.18 accessible chutes. The openings to personnel. of feeding or transfer It is recommended that hoppers inspection and chutes shall doors be provided

operated, shall of the flow.

be

be guarded on large

if normally hoppers and

3.2.19 Counterweight tension devices shall be guarded at points normally Guards shall prevent access to the space directly below the counter-weight; guards, sustaining devices shall be provided, giving a clearance of at least other operating level. 4

accessible to personnel. in the absence of these 2'5 m above ground or

IS : 7155 ( Part 2 ) - 1986
3.2.20 All loading, unloading and transfer points shall be designed so as to prevent, as far as possible, the product or objects being conveyed from escaping, at these points or any other points along the conveyor route. Also, for personnel employed at a loading, unloading work station transfer of passage point adequate safeguards in the form of guard rails fences or close fitting guards shall be installed to prevent injury to personnel. 3.2.21 Principles of guarding - Guards shall be designed provided at every dangerous part of a conveyor. 3.2.21 .I Guards shall be planned neither be added as an after thought removed for normal cleaning, lubrication to prevent injury to persons and shall be

into the design of the conveyor or conveyor system and shall nor themselves provide a hazard. Guards shall not have to be or belt and chain tension adjustments. and in falling

3.2.21.2 At points along a conveyor where material is likely to become dislodged become a hazard to persons, suitable guards or nonreturn flaps shall be provided. 3.3 During
the Utilization Stage

( Operation

and Maintenance

)

3.3.1 No continuous mechanical handling equipment shall be used for duties other than those for which it is designed nor under conditions other than those stated in the contract of the concerned parties and in the installation and maintenance booklets.

3.3.2 The user shall be careful to ensure a regular feed, avoiding over-loading. In particular, the user shall not change the feeding points, particularly not their position, or increase the flow, without previously consulting the manufacturer/constructor. 3.3.2.1 Clear operating instructions concerning the loading of the appliances shall be prominently displayed adjacent to the loading positions : they shall include the permissible unit load, its positioning and its.limiting dimensions. 3.3.3 It shall be strictly forbidden to use continuous mechanical handling equipment for conveying people, unless it has been specifically designed for that purpose and meets the special requirements laid down in connection with the conveyance of people. 3.3.4 Continuous mechanical handling equipment, particularly its conveying elements, shall be kept in proper working condition as recommended by the manufacturer and shall be well maintained at all times. 3.3.4.1 All loading and working stations and the passageways shall be kept clear and clean.

3.3.5 The inspection, adjustment, idlers, chains, sprockets, etc ) and manufacturer's instructions.

maintenance and cleaning Of moving parts (belts, pulleys and of cleaning devices shall be carried out regularly according to the

3.3.5.1 The frequency of these operations shall depend on the nature of the conveyed materials. With the exception of automatic cleaning, or in the case of special devices designed to allow cleaning while the equipment is in operation, these operations shall only be undertaken when the equipment is at rest, and after rendering the starting devices inoperative. 3.3.6 No inspection with rule 3.1 .ll. hole shall be opened while the appliance is in operation unless
it complies

3.3.7 No one, except those so authorized, shall operate or interfere with the normal working of the plant; in particular, all starting operations shall be carried out by qualified and competent personnel only. 3.3.8 Normal and emergency stopping devices shall be made known to all personnel and be easily accessible; all areas giving access to them shall be kept clear of obstacles. Their proper working shall be periodically checked. 3.3.9 All restarting operations on an appliance which has been inoperative or accidental stoppage shall be preceded by an inspection aiming at: a) determining the cause of the emergency b) repairing the fault. 3.3.10 It shall be strictly provided for the purpose. forbidden or accidental stoppage, and because of an emergency

to cross over or under an appliance 5

except at the points

specially

IS : 7155 ( Part 2) - 1966
shall 3.3.11 All adjustments, whether mechanical or electrical, authorized persons, particularly in the case of safety devices. 3.3.12 Repairs and removal of protective enclosures stopping the equipment, and after starting devices have person appointed for that purpose. be carried out by competent and

or panels, shall only be carried out after been rendered inoperative, by a competent devices have been replaced except permit shall

3.3.12.1 Recommissioning shall be carried out only after the protective and an order received from the authorised responsible person.

3.3.13 It shall be forbidden to carry out any lubrication while an appliance is in operation, in cases where the parts to be lubricated are so located or there are special devices which will their lubrication without danger. 3.3.13.1 If, for lubrication purposes, it is necessary to remove or to open guards, only be carried out with the equipment rendered inoperative as stated in 3.3.12. 3.3.14 A log-book shall be kept for each appliance and/or for each installation. lubrication

3.3.15 Suitable training (with particular reference to the operating and maintenance booklets) shall be given to a continuous mechanical handling equipment personnel, both operating and carrying out maintenance, as in the long run this may serve as the best form of accident prevention. 3.3.16 The user shall not make alternations which affect the design, construction, installation or handling requirements of the appliances without the consent of the manufacturer constructor and/or the contractor, as some alterations may give rise to detrimental consequences. 3.3.17 Inspection and adjustment of continuous mechanical handling equipment, in motion or in use, shall only be carried out with guards in position unless it is impracticable for the said operations If the guards are removed, such removal shall to be carried out other than with the guards removed. be restricted, to the immediate area involved, taking all necessary precautions and especially forbidding any approach to nip points. 3.3.18 If the area where guards are removed is situated in a working area or where personnel walk, such an area shall be fenced off to prevent personnel approaching it when the appliance is in motion. 3.3.19 When guards are not in position, and the appliance is in motion, work shall only If a ladder is required, it shall be secured in position or firmly from a stable standing place. another person(s). be done held by

3.3.20 When guards have been removed from continuous mechanical handling equipment in motion, work shall only be undertaken by personnel authorized and well acquainted with the risks associated with machinery in motion. Such personnel shall wear close-fitting overall with no loose ends, preferably made in one piece. 3.3.21 If work has to be carried out on unfenced machinery in motion, another person(s), well acquainted with the actions to be taken in case of emergency shall keep watch on the person at work, and hold himself close to and ready to operate a stop device.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE
published in 1974. Standards as also Based on the the availability practice

IS : 7155 as code of practice for conveyor safety was experience gained in the field and revision of related International of some other related ISOs, this revision has been taken up.

This part 2 of the standard is one of the series of Indian Standard code of for conveyor safety. The other parts of the standard are: Part 1 General information, Part 3 Belt conveyors Part 1 of the standard and to other parts of this standard. and feeders. is a necessary adjunct

recommended

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: IS0 1819-1977 `Continuous mechanical handling equipment - Safety code - General rules' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO); IS0 7149-1982 `Continuous handling equipment - Safety code - Special rules' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO); and AS CZ 15-1971 `SAA Conveyor safety code' issued by the Standards Association of Australia. 6 Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India

