**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  14530  (1998) :  Manipulating  industrial  robots  -  Safety 
[PGD  18:  Industrial  and  Production  Automation  Systems  and 
Robotics] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


18  14530 :  1998 
ISO  10218 :  1992 

Indian  Standard 

MANIPULATING  INDUSTRIAL  ROBOTS  — 

SAFETY 


ICS  25.040.30 


OBIS  1998 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR     MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

May  1998  Price  Group    5 


Robotics  Sectional  Committee,  PE  18 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  with  ISO  10218 :  1992  'Manipulating  industrial  robots  -  Safety 
issued  by  the  Intemational  Organization  for  Standardization  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Robots  Sectional  Committee  and  approval  of  the  Production 
Engineering  Division  Council. 

The  text  of  the  ISO  standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard  without 
deviation.  Certain  conventions  are,  however,  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian  Standards.  Attention 
is  particularly  drawn  to  the  following  : 

a)  Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should 
read  as  'Indian  Standard'. 

b)  Comma  (,)  has  been  used  as  a  decimal  marker  in  the  International  Standard  while  in  Indian 
Standards,  the  current  practice  is  to  use  a  point  (.)  as  the  decinrtal  marker. 

In  this  adopted  standard,  reference  appears  to  certain  Intemational  Standards  for  whteh  Indian 
Standards  also  exist.  The  corresponding  Indian  Standards  which  are  to  be  substituted  in  their  place 
are  listed  below  along  with  their  degree  of  equivalence  for  the  editions  indicated  : 

Intemational  Standards  Corresponding  Degree  of 

Indian  Standards  Equivalence 


ISO  8373  :  1994  (B)  Manipulating  in- 
dustrial robots  —  Vocabulary 

ISO  9946  :  1991  Manipulating  in- 
dustrial robots  —  Presentation  t)f 
characteristics 


IS  13700  Manipulating  industrial  robots  Identical 

—  Vocabulary 

IS  14531  :  1998  Manipulating  industrial         Equivalent 
robots  —  Presentation  of  characteristics 


The  technical  committee  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  this  standard  will  review  the  provisions  of 
the  following  lEC/ISO  standards  and  will  decide  about  their  acceptance  for  use  in  conjunction  with  this 
standard : 


International  Standards 


lEC  204-1  Electrical  equipment  of  in- 
dustrial machines — Part  1  :  General 
requirements 

ISO  6385: 1981  Ergonomic  principles 
of  the  design  of  work  systems 


Corresponding 
Indian  Standards 

Nil 


Nil 


Degree  of 
Equivalence 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1    MAY  2002 

TO 

IS  14530  :  1998/ISO  10218-1992    MANIPULATING 

INDUSTRIAL  ROBOTS  —  SAFETY 

(  Cover  page  2,  National  Foreword,  para  3,  under  the  head  'Corresponding 
Indian  Standards'  )  —  Substitute  'IS  14662 :  1999*>br  'IS  13700*. 


(PE18) 


Repragnpliy  Unit.  BIS.  New  DdU.  lufia 


Indian  Standard 


IS  14530:1098 
ISO  10218:1002 


MANIPULATING  INDUSTRIAL  ROBOTS  — 

SAFETY 


1  Scope 

This  International  Standard  providas  guidance  on  the  safety 
considerations  for  the  design,  construction,  programming, 
operation,  use,  repair,  and  maintenance  of  manipulating  In- 
dustrial rotx)ts  and  robot  systems  as  defined  in  clause  ^.  It 
does  not  apply  to  other  types  of  roltx>ts  although  the  safety 
principles  estat>lished  in  this  International  Standard  may  be 
utilized  for  these  other  types. 

NOTE:  For  the  purpose  of  this  International  Standard,  the  term 
*robof  means  manipulating  industrial  robot. 

For  systems  comprising  multiple  robots  and/or  associated 
material  handling  equipment  or  mobile  robots,  this 
International  Standard  may  t>e  used  for  the  robot  system 
portion  of  the  equipment. 


2  Normative   references 

The  following  standards  contain  provisions  which,  through 
reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of  this 
International  Standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the 
editions  indicated  were  valid.  Ait  standards  are  subject  to  re- 
vision, and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this  International 
Standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the  possibility  of 
applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the  standards  listed  be- 
low. Members  of  lEC  and  ISO  maintain  registers  of  currently 
valid  International  Standards. 

lEC  204-1 :  — ^ ),  Electrical  equipment  of  industrial  machines 
-  Pan  1:  General  requirements, 

ISO  6385: 1981,  Ergonomic  principles  of  the  design  of  work 
systems. 

ISO/TR  8373: 1988,  Manipulating  industrial  robots  - 
Vocabulary. 

ISO  9946: 1991.  Manipulating  industrial  robots  - 
Presentation  of  characteristics. 


3  Definitions 

For  the  purposes  of  this  Internationat  Standard,  the  following 
definitions  apply. 

3.1  General    terms 

3.1.1  person:  Any  individual. 

3.1.2  personnel:  Persons  specifically  employed  and 
trained  in  the  use  and  care  of  a  foboX  system. 

3.2  Specific   terms 

NOTE  :  The  lenns  which  are  referenced  to  ISO/TR  8373  are  those 
which  have  been  duplicated  from  that  document. 

3.2.1    arm  (primary  axes]:  An  interconnected  set  of 
links  and  powered  joints  comprising  members  of  the 


longitudinal  shape  which  supports,  positions,  and  orientates 
a  wrist  and/or  end  effector. 
[ISO/TR  8373:1988,  3.2) 

3.2.2  automatic  mode:  The  operating  mode  In  which 
the  robot  control  system  can  operate  In  accordance  with  the 
task  program. 

[ISO/TR  8373:1988,  5.3.8.1] 

3.2.3  enabling  device:  A  manually  ooerated  devke 
intended  to  alk>w  robot  motion  only  while  the  device  is  hekJ  in 
a  predetermined  position. 

3.2.4  guard:  A  machine  component  specif k^alty  used  to 
provkle  protection  by  means  of  a  physk:al  barrier.  Depending 
on  its  construction,  a  guard  may  be  called  casting,  cover 
screen,  fence,  door,  encbsing  guard,  barrier,  etc. 

3.2.5  hazard:  A  situation  that  may  give  rise  to  an  injury 
or  damage  to  health. 

3.2.6  hazardous  condition/motion:  Any  condition/ 
motion  of  the  robot  or  robot  system  that  can  cause  injury  to 
persons. 

3.2.7  hold-to-run  control:  A  control  which  allows 
movements  exclusively  during  the  manual  actuation  of  that 
control  and  that  causes  these  movements  to  stop  as  soon  as 
it  is  released. 

3.2.8  Interlock  (for  safeguarding):  An  arrangement 
that  interconnects  guard(s)  or  devk:e(s)  with  the  robot  control 
and/or  power  system  of  the  robot  and  its  associated  equip- 
ment. 

3.2.9  local  control:  A  state  of  the  robot  in  which  it  is 
operated  from  the  control  panel  at  the  robot  system 
installation  or  teach  pendant. 

3.2.10  lockout/tagout:  The  placement  of  a  lock  and/or 
tag  on  the  energy  isolating  device  (e.g.  disconnecting 
means)  In  the  'OFF*  or  'OPEN*  positk)n  indicating  that  the 
energy  isolating  device  or  the  equipment  being  controlled 
shall  not  be' operated  until  the  removal  of  the  kx:kAag. 

3.2.11  manipulating  Industrial  robot:  An  automati- 
cally controlled,  reprogrammable,  multi-purpose,  manipulat- 
ive machine  with  several  degrees  of  freedom.  whk:h  may  be 
either  fixed  in  place  or  mobile  for  use  in  industrial  automaton 
applications. 

NOTE:  The  following  is  an  explanation  of  terms  used  in  the  above 
definition: 
^  reprogrammable:    whose  programmed  motions  or  auxiliary 

functions  may  be  changed  ttithfiUK  physical  alterations; 
^  multi-purpose:  can  be  adapted  to  different  applications  with 

physical  alterations; 
—  physical  alteration  means  alteration  of  the  mechanical 
structure  or  control  system  except  k>r  changing  programming 
cassettes.  ROMs,  etc. 
(ISO/TR  8373:1988,  2.3] 


1)  To  be  published.  (Revision  of  lEC  204-1:1981.) 


IS  14530 :  1998 
ISO  10218 :  1992 

3.2.12  manual  moda:  The  operating  mode  in  which  the 
robot  can  be  operated  by.  for  example,  pushbutton  or  joy- 
siKk  and  that  excludes  automatic  operation. 

3.2.13  maximum  space:  The  space  which  can  be 
swept  by  the  moving  parts  of  the  robot  as  defined  by  the 
manufacturer  plus  the  space  which  can  be  swept  by  the  end 
effector  and  the  workplece  (see  figure  1). 

3.2.14  (teach)  pendant:  A  hand  held  unit  linked  to  the 
control  system  with  which  the  robot  can  be  programmed  (or 
moved). 

[ISO/TR  8373:1988.  5.8) 

3.2.15  presence  sensing  device:  A  device  that  has 
a  sensing  field  or  space  which  will  detect  any  intrusion  into 
that  field  or  space. 

NOTE:  Presence  sensing  devices  include  but  are  not  limited  to  Hght 
screens,  electromagnetic  fields,  pressure  sensitive  devices. 
uHrasonic  and  infrared  devices,  and  image  processing  systems. 

3.2.16  programmer:  A  competent  person  designated 
to  prepare  the  task  program. 

(ISO/TR  8373:1988.  2.9J 

3.2.17  reduced  speed:  A  single  selectable  velocity 
provided  by  the  robot  supplier  which  automatically  restricts 
the  robot  vek)city  to  one  intended  to  altow  suffk^ient  time  for 
persons  either  to  withdraw  from  hazardous  motk>ns  or  to  stop 
the  robot. 

3.2.18  restricted  space:  The  portion  of  the  maximum 
space  that  is  restricted  by  limiting  devices  that  establish 
limits  that  will  not  be  exceeded  in  the  event  of  any 
foreseeable  failure  of  the  robot  system  (see  figure  1). 

NOTE:  The  maximum  distance  that  the  robot  can  travel  alter  the 
limiting  device  is  actuated  Is  consklered  the  basis  for  defining  the 
restricted  space. 
[ISO/TR  8373:1988.  4.5.3] 

3.2.19  risk:  A  combination  of  the  probability  of  injury 
occurring  and  the  degree  of  the  injury. 

3.2.20  robot  system:  A  robot  system  includes: 

—  the  robot  (hardware  and  software)  consisting  of  the 
manipulator  whether  mobile  or  not,  power  supply,  and 
control  system; 

—  the  end  effector(s); 

—  any  Equipment,  devices,  or  sensors  required  for  the 
robot  to  perform  its  tasks; 

—  any  communk:atk)n  interface  that  is  operating  and 
monitoring  the  robot,  equipment,  or  sensors,  as  far  as 
these  peripheral  devices  are  supervised  by  the  robot 
control  system. 

(ISO/TR  8373:1988.  2.6] 

3.2.21  safe  working  procedure:  A  specified 
procedure  intended  to  reduce  the  possibility  of  injury  while 
performing  an  assigned  task.*/ 

3.2.22  safeguard:  A  guard  or  device  designated  to 
protect  persons  from  a  hazardous  point  or  area. 

3.2.23  safeguarded  space:  The  space  determined 
by  the  safeguards  (see  figure  1). 

NOTE:  The  safeguarded  space  includes  the  restricted  space. 


Safeguard 


rri  Restricted 
"^  space 


I  Maximum  rjTji 
■space        *^^ 


"I  Safeguarded 
-■  space 


Figure  1  -  Example  of  rsstrlctsd  space  and 
safeguarded    space 

3.2.24  ssfegusrdlng:  Methods  for  protection  of 
person(s)  using  guards,  devices,  and  safe  working 
procedures. 

3.2.25  trouble  shooting  [fault  finding]:  The  act  of 

methodically  determining  the  reason  that  a  robot  system  has 
failed  to  perform  the  task  or  function  as  Intended. 


4.1 


General  considerations 


General 


It  Is  recognized  that  the  operatk>nal  characteristk:s  of  robots 
can  be  significantly  different  from  those  of  other  machines 
and  equipment.  Robots  are  capable  of  high  energy 
movements  through  a  large  volume  beyond  the  base  of 
robots.  The  pattern  and  initiatk>n  of  movement  of  the  robot 
arm  are  diffk:ult  to  predict  and  can  vary  because  of  variables 
in  product  and  environmental  conditk)n8. 

Some  maintenance  and  programming  personnel  are  at  times 
required  to  be  within  the  restricted  space  while  power  Is 
available  to  the  machine  actuators.  The  restricted  space  of 
the  robot  can  overlap  a  portion  of  the  restricted  space  of 
other  robots  or  work  zones  of  other  Industrial  machines  and 
related  equipment.  This  can  give  rise^o  hazards  of  knpact, 
trapping,  or  flying  objects  released  by  the  gripper. 

The  type  of  robot,  Its  applk:atbn.  and  its  relationship  to  other 
Industrial  machines  and  related  equipment  will  influence  the 
design  and  the  selection  of  the  safeguarding  methods. 
These  need  to  be  suitable  for  the  work  being  done  and  permit, 
where  necessary,  teach  programming,  setting,  maintenance, 
program  verifk:ation,  and  trouble  shooting  operations  to  be 
carried  out  safely.  Many  installatbna  will  require  ctose 
approach  for  such  work. 

The  chosen  methods  should  be  appropriate  for  the  hazards 
associated  with  the  robot  installation.  Before  designing  or 
selecting  appropriate  safeguarding  methods,  It  wlH  be 
necessary  to  Identify  the  hazards  and  to  assess  the 
associated  risks. 

Technteal  measures  for  the  prevention  of  accidents  are 
based  upon  two  fundamental  principles: 


IS  14530:1908 
180  10218 :  1002 


—  XhQ  ttte^nct  of  persons  In  the  taf^ouard^d  tpaca 
during  automatic  oparation; 

^  tha  alimlnation  of  hazards  or  at  laatt  thak*  raduction 
during  intarvantiont  (a.g.  taaching,  program 
varification)  in  tita  safaguardad  tpaca. 

IDa  obtarvanca  of  thasa  principias  involvaa  tavaral  actions: 

—  tha  craation  of  a  safaguardad  spaca  and  a  rastrictad 
spaca; 

—  a  dasign  of  tha  rolxit  systam  such  as  to  allow  tha  maxi- 
mum numbar  of  tasl(s  to  ba  parformad  from  outsida  tha 
safaguardad  spaca; 

—  provision  of  oompansatory  maans  of  safaty  in  casa  of 
Intan^antions  within  tha  safaguardad  spaca. 

4.2       Safaty   analyala 

To  carry  out  a  safaty  analysis,  it  is  nacassary  to 

—  dafina  tha  required  tasks  for  tha  foreseeable  appli- 
cations including  an  evaluation  of  tha  need  for  access 
or  close  approach, 

—  Identify  the  sources  of  hazards  Including  the  fault  and 
failure  modes  associated  with  each  task  (see  4.2.1), 

>-    evaluate  and  assess  the  risks  (see  4.2.2), 

—  conskJer  safety  strategies  which  minimize  the  risks  to 
an  acceptable  level  (see  4.2.3), 

—  select  the  safeguarding  methods  consistent  with  the 
required  task  and  the  acceptable  level  of  risks  (see 
7.3,  7.4,  and  7,5),  and 

—  assess  the  achieved  levels  of  safety  Integrity  for  the 
safety  and  ensure  that  these  levels  are  acceptable 
(see  4.2.3). 

4.2.1      Sourcea  of  hazarda 

Hazards  can  arise  from  the  robot  system  itself,  from  Its  as- 
sociatk)n  with  other  equipment,  or  from  interaction  of  persons 
with  the  robot  system.  Examples  of  sources  of  hazards  are 
(but  are  not  limited  to) 

a)  failures  or  faults  of 

1)  protective  means  (e.g.  devices,  circuits,  com- 
ponents) including  removal  or  disassembly; 

2)  power  sources  or  means  of  distribution; 

3)  control  circuits,  devices,  or  components; 

b)  moving  mechanical  components  causing  trapping  or 
crushing 

1)  indivkJually  (by  themselves); 

2)  in  conjunctk)n  with  other  parts  of  the  robot  system 
or  other  equipment  in  the  work  area: 

c)  stored  energy 

1)  in  moving  parts; 

2)  in  electrk:al  or  flukJIc  power  components; 

d)  power  sources 

1)  electrical; 

2)  hydraulk:; 

3)  pneumatic; 

a)    hazardous  atmospheres,  materials,  or  conditions: 

1)  expbsive  or  combustible; 

2)  corrosive  or  aggressive; 

3)  radioactive; 

4)  extreme  high  or  tow  temperature; 

f)  noise  (acoustical); 

g)  interferences: 

1)  electromagnets,  electrostatic,  radio  frequencies; 

2)  vibration,  shock; 
h)    human  errors  In 

1)  design,  devetopment,  and  constructton  including 
ergonomic  conslderattons; 

2)  installatton  and  commisstonlng  Including  access, 
lighting,  and  noise; 

3)  functional  testing; 


4)  appltoatton  and  use; 

5)  programming  and  program  veriftoatton; 

6)  set-up  including  work  handllng/hokiing  and  tool- 
ing; 

7)  trouble  shooting  and  maintenance; 

8)  safe  working  procedures; 

I)     moving,  handling,  or  replacing  of  tha  robot  systam  or 
assodatad  components. 

4.2.2  RIak  aaaaaamant 

Tha  size,  capacity,  and  speed  of  robots  vary  greatly.  In  ad- 
ditton.  there  are  many  different  potential  appllcatkms  for 
robots.  Consequently,  there  will  be  different  hazards  and  dif- 
ferent levels  of  risk.  The  risks  during  the  Installatton.  pro- 
gramming, operatton,  use,  trouble  shooting,  and  maintenance 
of  the  robot  system  shaH  t>e  assessed. 

Parttoular  attentton  should  be  paid  1b  the  need  for  ctose  ap- 
proach to  the  robot  when  power  is  available  at  the  machine 
actuators.  The  need  for  ctose  approach  is  recognized  in 
some  excepttonal  circumstances  and  shall  be  provided  for  in 
the  dasign  and  application  of  appropriate  safeguards. 
Attentton  shouM  be  pato  to  the  fact  that  the  final  posltton  of 
the  robot  after  an  emergency  stop  cannot  be  adequately  de- 
termined owing  to  the  kinetto  energy  involved. 

4.2.3  Safety  atrategy  for  aelectfon  of  aafety 
measurea 

Safety  measures  are  a  combinatton  of  the  measures  incor- 
porated at  the  design  stage  and  those  measures  required  to 
t>e  implemented  ft>y  the  user. 

The  design  and  devetopment  of  the  robot  system  shall  be  the 
first  constoeratlon  while  still  maintaining  an  acceptable  level 
of  performance.  Where  this  Is  not  possible,  safeguarding 
shall  be  constoered  in  such  a  manner  that  the  flexibility  of  the 
robot  system  in  Ks  appltoatton  to  retained.  Safeguarding  to- 
cludes  the  use  of  safeguards,  awareness  means,  and  safe 
working  procedures  (see  7.3,  7.4,  and  75). 


5  Gonoral  dosign  roqulromonts 

5.1  Failure  to  aafety 

The  robot  system  shall  be  designed,  constructed,  and 
implemented  so  that  in  case  of  a  foreseeable  failure  of  any 
single  component,  whether  electrical,  electronic,  mechantoal, 
pneumatb,  or  hydraulic,  safety  functions  are  not  affected  or 
when  they  are,  the  robot  system  Is  left  In  a  safe  conditton. 
Safety  functions  include  but  are  not  limited  to 

—  limiting  range  of  motton, 

—  emergency  and  safety  stopping, 

—  reduced  speed,  and 

—  safeguard  interlocking. 

The  requirements  of  lEC  204-1  regarding  control  functtons  in 
case  of  failure  shall  apply. 

5.2  Electrical   equipment 

The  appltoation  of  the  electrtoal  equipment  of  the  robot  and 
robot  system  shall  be  in  accordance  with  lEC  204-1. 

5.3  Power  aupply 

The  power  supply  and  grounding  (protective  earth)  require- 
ments shall  t>e  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  specifi- 
cations. 


IS  14530:1908 
ISO  10218:1002 

8.4       isolation  of  pow«r  oourctt 

Each  robot  syatam  ahall  hava  maans  to  Isotata  aach  of  its 
powar  sourcas.  Thasa  maans  shall  ba  locatad  In  such  a  way 
that  no  parson  will  ba  axposad  to  hazards  and  thay  shall  hava 
a  lockout/tagout  capability.  (For  raquiramanta  of  alactrical 
supply  disconnacting  davicas,  saa  EC  204-1.) 


6         Do8lgn  and  conatructlon  of  the  robot 

8.1  Qanarai 

Tha  robot  manufacturar  shall  dasign  and  construct  robots  In 
accordanca  with  tha  principlas  dascribad  in  this  clausa  and 
clausa  5. 

8.2  Ergonomic   aapacta 

Application  of  argonomic  maasuras  and  data  contributas  to 
improvamant  of  tha  safaty  laval  k>y  making  task  complatk)n 
aasiar  and  by  dacraasing  tha  numbar  of  human  arrors  during 
Intarvantbns  {o,a,  rapairing,  maintananca,  chacking.  pro- 
gramming, oparating).  Tha  folk)wing  raquiramanta  apply. 

—  Dasign  of  robot  alamants,  on  which  human  intarvantion 
is  intandad,  shall  taka  into  account  human  charactar- 
istics  such  as  siza.  postura,  strangth,  and  movamants 
(saa  ISO  6385). 

—  Human-machina  intarfacas  (including  oparating  and 
programming  davicas,  signalling  units  such  as 
portabia  control  davlcas,  control  panals,  computar 
tarminals,  and  softwara-drivan  faaturas  from  appli- 
cation programs)  shall  ba  dasignad  and  arrangad  to 
minimiza  difficulty  for  tha  Individual  usar. 

—  Partinant  informatton  shall  ba  provMad  such  as  claar<y 
Indicating  robot  working  modas  and  displaying  tha 
raason  for  unprogrammad  robot  stops. 

8.3  Machanlcal    aapacta 

8.3.1  Qanarai 

Whanavar  practk:abla,  hazards  arising  from  tha  moving  parts 
of  tha  robot  shall  ba  atiminatad  in  tha  Initial  dasign.  If  thay 
cannot  ba  aliminatad.  than  suitabia  safaguards  shall  ba  in- 
corporatad  as  part  of  tha  dasign,  and  If  this  is  not  practk:abla, 
provisk)n  shall  ba  mada  for  safaguards  to  ba  incorporatad  ei 
a  latar  staga. 

8.3.2  Limitation  of  ranga  of  motion 

Tha  dasign  of  tha  robot  shall  not  pravant  tha  provisions  of 
maans  for  limiting  tha  ranga  of  motion  of  tha  primary  axes. 
Whan  a  mathod  of  limiting  tha  ranga  of  motton  is  raquirad  by 
tha  dasignad  use,  it  shall  comply  with  ona  of  tha  following. 

—  Mechanical  stops  may  ba  provided.  Thasa  should  be 
adjustable  and  shall  be  capable  of  stopping  the  robot 
at  any  adjusted  position  when  It  Is  carrying  its  rated 
bad  at  maximum  vek>city. 

—  Alternative  methods  of  limiting  the  range  of  motion  may 
be  provided  only  if  they  are  designed,  constructed, 
and  installed  to  achieve  ithe  same  level  of  safety  as 
tha  mechanical  stops.  This  may  include  using  the 
robot  controller  and  limit  switches  according  to  lEC 
204-1. 

8.3.3  Covara  and  ancloauraa 

Electrk:al,  hydraulic,  etc.  equipment  whbh  constitute  a  haz- 
ard shall  be  provkied  with  fixed  covers  or  enclosures. 


Access  shall  not  ba  required  during  oparatton  of  tha  robot. 
Removal  of  the  fixed  covera  and  anctosuraa  ahall  require  the 
uaa  of  a  tool. 

8.3.4    Tranaportatlon 

For  tha  purposes  of  transportatton,  hooks,  aya-bolts,  ate. 
shall  ba  provkiad  whan  raquirad.  Thay  shall  ba  k>catad  so 
that  If  thay  are  used  properly,  unk)tanded  movement  during 
tranaportatk>n  la  pravaritad.  The  ahipping  weight  ahouU  also 
ba  marked  on  the  robot. 

8.3.8    Mounting  provlalona 

Means  shall  be  provkied  for  securely  mounting  the  rot>ot  to 
provide  stable  operation  during  all  designed  operating 
conditions. 

8.4        Control   aapacta 

8.4.1  Panel   arrangement 

Actuating  control  devices  shall  t>a  arranged,  kJentified,  and 
protected  against  unintended  or  acckiantal  operation  in 
accordance  with  lEC  204-1 . 

8.4.2  Emergency   atop 

Manually  operated  emergency  stop  devices  shall  be  in 
accordance  with  lEC  204-1.  Each  robot  shall  hava  provistons 
to  connect  external  emergency  stop  devk:es,  safaguards,  or 
interbcks  to  the  emergency  stop  circuit. 

It  shall  be  necessary  to  reset  manually  the  emergency  stop 
circuit  before  any  robot  motion  may  be  initiated.  The 
resetting  of  the  emergency  stop  circuit  by  itself  shall  not 
initiate  any  motion.  Where  an  emergency  stop  or  power  fault 
causes  the  k>ss  of  critbal  logic  or  memory  states,  a  reset 
sequence  of  the  logic  or  memory  shall  ba  necessary  before 
operatk)n  may  ba  initiated. 

8.4.3  Safety   atop 

When  a  safety  stop  circuit  is  provided,  each  robot  shall  have 
provisions  to  connect  safeguards  and  interbcks  to  this 
circuit.  It  shall  be  necessary  to  reset  the  power  to  the 
machine  actuators  before  any  robot  motk>n  may  be  initiated. 
The  resetting  of  the  power  to  the  machine  actuators  by  itself 
shall  not  Initiate  any  operatton  (see  lEC  204-1:  — ,  9.2.2, 
category  1). 

8.4.4  Electrical    connactora 

Electrical  connectors  used  on  robots  which  can  cause 
hazardous  motion  when  mismatched  shall  be  keyed  or 
labelled.  Electrical  connectors  which  could  cause  hazardous 
motion  of  the  robot  if  they  are  separated  or  If  they  break  away 
shall  be  designed  and  constructed  so  as  to  guard  against 
unintended  separation. 

8.4.5  Pendant 

When  a  pendant  is  provided,  the  following  design 
requirements  shall  apply. 

a)  The  pendant  shall  be  designed  In  accordanca  with 
known  ergonomk:  principles  (see  8.2)  so  that  it  can  be 
reliably  used  while  it  Is  being  carried. 

b)  As  long  as  the  pendant  Is  being  used  in  the 
safeguarded  space,  it  shall  not  t>e  possible  to  switch 
the  robot  to  automatic  operatbn. 


c)  The  pendant  thalt  have  an  amargancy  stop  davica. 

d)  A  pandant  intended  to  initiate  robot  motion  by 
personnel  who  are  wKhin  the  safeguarded  space  shall 
be  provided  with  hold-to-run  control  device(s). 

e)  The  robot  control  shall  be  designed  so  that  when  the 
robot  is  placed  under  pendant  control,  all  robot  motion 
shall  only  be  initiated  from  the  pendant. 

f )  All  motion  of  the  robot  that  is  initiated  from  the  pendant 
shall  be  at  no  greater  than  the  reduced  speed.  What 
constitutes  an  acceptable  reduced  speed  will  depend 
on  the  forces  exerted  by  the  robot  and  the  use  of  the 
robot  (e.g.  layout  of  installation).  The  reduced  speed 
should  not  exceed  250  mm/s  as  measured  at  the 
mechanical  interface. 

Exceptions  to  f):  When  a  speed  greater  than  the  reduced 
speed  is  required  (e.g.  for  verification  of  a  tasl^  program),  it 
shall  require  a  delit>erate  action  by  the  operator  (e.g.  with  a 
key  switch)  to  select  this  method  of  operation.  Robot 
motion  shall  only  be  initiated  by  the  use  of  hold-to-run 
control  device(8)  and  an  enabling  device  while  personael  is 
inside  the  safeguarded  space  (see  6.4.6). 

6.4.6    Enabling   device 

When  an  enabling  device  is  provided  as  part  of  the  robot 
system,  it  shall  be  designed  to  allow  robot  motion  or  other 
functions  in  one  position  only.  In  any  other  position, 
hazardous  motion  or  functions  shall  t>e  stopped  safely. 
Operation  of  the  device  by  Itself  shall  not  initiate  hazardous 
motion  or  functions. 

When  an  enabling  device  is  required  (e.g.  for  robot  motion  at 
a  speed  greater  than  reduced  speed).  It  shall  be  connected  to 
the  safety  stop  or  another  stop  circuit  with  an  equivalent  level 
of  safety. 

The  enabling  device  may  be  deactivated  by  design  when 
either 

—  there  are  no  persons  within  the  safeguarded  space,  or 

—  the  robot  motion  is  not  greater  than  the  reduced 
speed. 

The  enabling  device  may  t>e  part  of  the  pendant  or  may  be  a 
separate  device. 

6.5  Provisions  for  robots  with  arm-moving 
programming 

For  robots  which  are  programmed  by  manually  leading  the 
arm.  provisions  shall  be  made  to  switch  the  power  off  safely 
during  programming  and  counterbalancing  where  required. 

6.6  Provlalona  for  emergency  movement 

Means  shall  be  provided  for  the  movement  of  n^bot  axes  for 
emergency  purposes.  These  means  are  for  example: 

a)  with  power  off: 

—  relief  valves  to  depressurize  systems  under 
pressure; 

—  manual   release  »of   power-actuated    brakes 
provided  that  weight-balancing  exists; 

b)  with  power  on: 

—  manual  control  facilities  of  power-piloted  valves/ 
drives; 

— •    control  facilities  to  start  counter  motions. 

6.7  Power  aourcee 

Robots  shall  be  designed  and  constructed  so  that  any  loss. 


IS  14530:1998 
ISO  10218  :  1992 

restoratk>n.  or  variation  in  the  power  sources  will  not  result  in 
hazardous  motion  of  the  robot. 

6.8  Stored   energy 

Means  shall  be  provided  for  the  controlled  release  of  stored 
energy.  This  energy  source  may  be  in  the  form  of  (but  is  not 
limited  to)  fluid  pressure  accumulators,  capacitors,  springs, 
counter  balances,  and  flywheels.  An  appropriate  label  shall 
be  affixed  to  each  stored  energy  source. 

6.9  Interfference(e) 

The  design  and  construction  of  the  robot  shall  incorporate 
good  engineering  practices  to  minimize  the  effects  of 
Interference(s)  whk:h  can  affect  safety.  These  can  include 
electromagnetic  interference  (EMI),  electrostatic  discharge 
(ESD).  radio  frequency  interference  (RFI).  heat,  light, 
vibration,  etc. 

NOTE:  The  provisions  for  interference  requirements  and  testing  are 
found  in  lEC  204-1. 

6.10  Facilities  for  selection  of  operating 
conditions 

Facilities  shall  be  provided  to  ensure  unambiguous  selectk)n 
of  operating  conditions.  These  facilities  shall  also  indicate 
the  selected  operating  condition.  The  selection  of  different 
operating  conditions  shall  not  in  itself  cause  robot  motion  or 
start  other  functions. 

When  the  protection  of  safeguards  is  suspended  by  the 
selection  of  the  operating  conditk)n  (e.g.  for  set-up.  teaching, 
program  verification),  this  should  only  be  possible  when  the 
facilities  for  selecting  the  operating  conditions  are  secured 
(e.g.  key  selection).  Automatic  (normal)  operation  shall  be 
prevented  during  suspension  of  the  safeguards  and  robot 
motion  shall  be  at  reduced  speed  [see  6.4.5  f)  for  exceptbn). 

6.11  Requirements  for   documentation 

For  requirements  for  documentation  supplied  by  the  robot 
manufacturer,  see  10.1. 


7  Design  and  safeguarding  of  the  robot 

system 

7.1  General 

The  robot  system  manufacturer/supplier  shall  design  and 
construct  robot  systems  in  accordance  with  the  principles 
described  in  this  clause  and  clause  5. 

7.2  Design 

7.2.1     General 

The  robot  system  shall  be  designed  in  accordance  with  the 
manufacturer's  specifk:atbns  so  that  personnel  who  operate, 
program,  and  maintain  the  system  can  be  appropriately 
safeguarded.  All  environmental  conditions  shall  be  evaluated 
to  ensure  compatibility  of  the  robot  and  the  robot  system  with 
the  anticipated  operational  conditions.  These  conditions 
include,  but  are  not  limited  to.  explosive  mixtures,  corrosive 
conditions,  humidity,  dust,  temperature,  electromagnetk: 
interference  (EMI),  radio  frequency  interference  (RFI),  and 
vibration. 


IS  14530:1998 
ISO  10218 :  1992 

7.2.2  Saf •guarded    spaea 

The  risk  assessment  shall  determine  the  additional  space 
required  beyond  the  restricted  space  to  define  the 
safeguarded  space  (see  figure  1). 

7.2.3  Phyalcal  arrangement  of  the  robot  ay  atom 

7.2.3.1  Control  enclosures  should  be  installed  outside  the 
safeguarded  space.  When  they  are  installed  inside  the 
safeguarded  space,  they  shaN  be  located  and  fixed  In  such  a 
way  that  the  requirements  of  this  International  Standard 
regarding  safety  of  persons  within  the  safeguarded  space 
can  be  met  (see  also  7.6  and  clause  8). 

7.2.3.2  Robot  systems  shali  be  designed  to  avoid  trapping 
and  collision  between  the  movirig  parts  of  the  robot  and  other 
fixed  or  moving  objects. 

The  layouts  shall  be  designed  in  such  a  way  that  between 
moving  parts  of  the  robot  and  objects  in  the  environment  (e.g. 
pillars  of  the  structure,  ceiling  joists,  fences,  supply  leads) 
sufficient  clearance  is  available.  This  rule  does  not  apply  to 
associated  equipment  in  order  to  allow  it  to  perfonn  its  tasl( 
(e.g.  tool  flanges,  indexing  tables,  transport  equipment, 
automatic  lathes,  processing  centres,  presses,  injection 
moulding  machines). 

7.2.3.3  When  a  limitation  of  the  restricted  space,  by  limiting 
the  range  of  motion  of  the  primary  axes,  is  required  by  the 
plan,  limiting  devices  shall  be  provided  in  accordance  with 
6.3.2.  The  limiting  devices  shall  be  correctly  adjusted  and 
secured. 

7.2.3.4  End  effectors  shall  be  designed  and  constructed, 
or  safeguarded,  so  that 

—  power  failure  does  not  cause  release  of  the  load  or 
result  in  a  hazardous  conditbn,  and 

—  the  static  and  dynamic  forces  created  by  the  load  and 
the  end  effector  together  are  wHhin  the  load  capacity 
and  dynamic  response  of  the  robot. 

7.2.3.5  When  It  is  intended  that  operators  will  perform 
manual  operations  associated  with  the  robot,  such  as  loading 
and  untoading  of  parts,  this  shall  be  taken  Into  account  in  the 
arrangement  of  the  robot  system,  either  by  provkiing  toading 
devfces  so  that  the  operator  cannot  access  the  hazardous 
area,  or  by  provkJing  appropriate  safeguards  for  the  manual 
activity. 

7.2.4  Shut  down 

Shut  down  (removal  of  power)  to  the  robot  system  or  any 
associated  equipment  shall  not  result  in  a  hazardous 
conditton. 

7.2.5  Emergency   atop 

Each  robot  system  operator  statk>n  shall  have  a  readily 
accessMe  emergency  stop  devk:e.  The  manual  kiterventbn 
and  reset  procedure  to  restait  the  robot  system  after  an 
emergency  stop  shall  take  place  outsMe  the  restrk:ted 
space. 

7.2*8    Control  from  remote  locatlona 

Any  robolthat  can  be  controlled  from  a  remote  kxratton  shall 
be  provMed  with  an  effective  means  that  shall  prevent 
hazardous  conditbns  of  the  robot  being  InHiated  from  any 
other  k)catbn. 


For  robot  systems  thai  can  be  operated  from  a  remote  k>- 
cation  (e.g.  over  a  communlcattona  network),  a  means  aha! 
be  provMed  (e.g.  a  key  operated  switch)  to  ensure  that  no 
commands  can  bitiate  hazardous  conditk)na  from  the 
remote  bcatkm  when  in  local  control. 


7.3       Safeguarda 
7.3.1    Quarda 

7.3.1.1  Fixed  guarda 

Fixed  guards  shall 

a)  be  constructed  to  withstand  foreseeable  operatksnal 
and  environmental  forces, 

b)  prevent  access  to  the  safeguarded  space  except 
through  openings  associated  with  interbcking  or 
presence  sensing  devbes, 

c)  be  permanently  fixed  in  positk>n  and  only  be  removable 
with  the  aki  of  a  tool,  and 

d)  be  free  of  sharp  edges  and  projectbns  and  shall  not 
themselves  be  a  hazard. 

7.3.1.2  Interlocking    guarda 

a)  The  Interbck  and  the  guard  with  whbh  it  operates 
should  be  designed,  installed,  and  adjusted  so  that 
when  in  use 

1)  the  interlock  prevents  the  robot  system  from 
automatic  operation  until  the  guard  is  cbsed.  The 
closure  of  the  guard  shall  not  be  the  control  to 
restart  automatic  operation.  This  shall  be  a 
deliberate  actbn  at  the  control  statbn  (see  7.6), 
and 

2)  either  the  guard  remains  locked  cbsed  until  the 
risk  of  injury  from  the  hazard  has  paased 
(interk>cking  guard  with  guard  k>cking)  or  opening 
the  guard  while  the  robot  system  is  working  gives 
a  stop  or  emergency  stop  instructk>n  (interbcking 
guard). 

When  an  interlock  has  been  activated,  it  shall  be 
possible  to  restart  the  machine  from  the  stopped 
position  provided  that  this  does  not  create  other 
hazards. 

Interruption  of  the  power  sources  may  be  suffbient  to 
eliminate  the  hazard  before  access  is  possible.  Where 
the  hazard  cannot  be  eliminated  immediately  by  power 
interruption,  the  interlocking  system  shall  need  to 
include  a  guard  bcking  and/or  a  brakbg  system. 

Where  whole-body  access  to  the  safeguarded  space 
can  be  gained  through  an  interbcking  door,  a  device 
whbh  prevents  inadvertent  closing  of  the  door  shouM 
be  provbed. 

Care  shoub  be  tanen  to  ensure  that  actuatbn  of  an 
interlock  installed  to  protect  against  one  hazard  (e.g, 
stopping  hazardous  motbn  of  the  robot  system)  does 
not  create  a  different  hazard  (e.g.  the  release  of 
hazardous  substances  into  the  work  zone). 

b)  Seiectbn  of  the  prefen^ed  system  of  interbcking  for  a 
partbular  applbatbn  shall  take  account  of  the  risk 
assessment  (see  4.2.2). 

c)  The  design  and  constructton  of  the  Interbcking 
systems  shall  comply  with  5.1  of  this  Internatbnal 
Standard. 


IS  14530 :  1998 
ISO  10218 :  1992 


7.3.2    PrtMnc*   Mnsing   d«vlMft 

Whenever  presence  sensing  devices  are  used  for  safety 
purposes,  they  shall  comply  with  the  following. 

a)  A  presence  sensing  device  shall  be  installed  and 
ananged  so  that  persons  cannot  enter  and  reach  into 
a  hazardous  area  without  activating  the  device  or 
cannot  reach  the  restricted  space  before  the 
hazardous  conditions  have  ceased.  Barriers  used  in 
conjunction  with  the  presence  sensing  device  may  be 
required  to  prevent  persons  from  bypassing  the 
device. 

b)  Their  operation  shall  not  be  adversely  affected  by  any 
of  the  environmental  conditions  for  which  the  sf  stem 
was  intended. 

c)  When  a  presence  sensing  device  has  been  activated, 
it  may  be  possible  to  restart  the  robot  system  fromihe 
stopped  position  provided  that  this  does  not  create 
other  hazards. 

d)  Resumption  of  robot  motion  shall  require  the  removal 
of  the  sensing  field  interruption.  This  shall  not  be  the 
control  to  restart  automatic  operation  (see  7.6). 

7.4  Awareness  nneans 

The  following  awareness  means  may  be  used  in  addition  to 
but  not  as  a  substitute  for  the  safeguards  previously 
described  elsewhere  in  this  International  Standard. 

7.4.1  Awareness  barrle" 

An  awareness  banrier  shall  t>e  constructed  and  installed  so  as 
to  prevent  inadvertent  entry  into  the  restricted  space. 

7.4.2  Awareness   signal 

An  awareness  signal  device  shall  be  constructed  and  located 
such  that  it  shall  provide  a  recognizable  audible  or  visual 
signal  to  persons  of  an  approaching  or  present  hazard.  When 
awareness  signals  in  the  form  of  light  are  used  to  warn  of 
hazards  in  the  restricted  space,  sufficient  devices  shall  be 
used  and  located  so  that  the  lights  can  be  seen  by  all 
persons  in  the  proximity  of  the  space. 

Audible  awareness  devices  shall  have  a  distinctive  sound  of 
greater  intensity  than  the  ambient  noise  level. 

7.5  Safe  working  procedures 

K  is  recognized  that  for  certain  phases  of  the  robot  system 
life  (e.g.  commisstoning,  process  changeover,  cleaning,  and 
maintenance)  it  may  not  be  possible  to  design  completely 
adequate  safeguards  to  protect  against  every  hazard  or  that 
certain  safeguards  may  be  suspended.  Under  these 
conditions,  appropriate  safe  working  procedures  shall  be 
used. 

7.6  Reset  of  safeguards 

Reestablishing  the  Interlocked  gate  or  presence  sensing 
device  field  shall  not  in  Itself  restart  automatic  operation. 
Restarting  the  system  shall  reKJUire  a  deliberate  action  from 
outside  the  safeguarded  space.  The  restarting  device  shall 
be  located  so  that  it  cannot  be  reached  from  inside  the 
safeguarded  space  and  should  be  boated  in  a  manner  to 
afford  a  view  of  the  safeguarded  space. 

7.7  Requirements  for  documentation 

For  requirements  for  documentation  supplied  by  the  robot 
system  manufacturer,  see  10.2. 


8  Use  and  care 

8.1  General 

This  clause  specifies  the  requirements  for  safety  during 
teach  programming,  program  verifbatton,  automatk:  oper- 
ation, trouble  shooting,  and  maintenance.  The  user  shall  en- 
sure that  the  safeguarding  methods  are  provkied,  utilized, 
and  maintained  for  each  operation  associated  with  the  robot 
system  and  In  partk:ular  for  personnel  other  than  those  util- 
izing the  teach  pendant  or  enabling  device. 

The  user  shall  ensure  that  a  pendant  not  connected  to  the 
rot>ot  control  shall  k>e  inaccessible. 

8.2  Automatic  (normal)  operation 

Automatic  operatton  shall  only  be  permissible  when 

a)  the  intended  safeguards  are  in  place  and  functtoning. 

b)  no  personnel  are  present  within  the  safeguarded 
space,  and 

c)  proper  safe  working  procedures  are  folk>wed. 

8.3  Programming 

Wherever  possible,  programming  shall  be  performed  with  all 
persons  outside  the  safeguarded  space.  When  it  is  necess- 
ary to  perform  programming  with  personnel  inside  the  safe- 
guarded space,  the  protective  effectiveness  of  the  safe- 
guards (e.g.  door  interlocking,  presence  sensing  devices) 
may  be  suspended  by  means  of  selectton  of  operating  con- 
ditions according  to  6.10  provided  that  additk>nal  means  of 
safeguarding  as  described  bek)w  are  provided.  (The  folk>wing 
applies  to  teach  programming.) 

8.3.1  Prior  to  programming 

The  programmer  shall  be  trained  on  the  type  of  robot  used  in 
the  actual  robot  system  and  shall  be  familiar  with  the  rec- 
ommended programming  procedures  Including  all  of  the  safe- 
guarding methods. 

The  programmer  shall  visually  check  the  robot  system  and 
the  safeguarded  space  to  ensure  that  extraneous  conditbns 
which  can  cause  hazards  do  not  exist.  Where  required  for 
programming,  the  pendant  shall  be  tested  to  ensure  proper 
operation.  Any  faults  or  failures  shall  be  corrected  prior  to 
programming.  Where  power  to  the  robot  actuators  is  not 
required  for  programming,  it  shall  be  shut  off  (counter 
balances  where  necessary  shall  remain  effective). 

Before  entering  the  safeguarded  space,  the  proarammer  shall 
ensure  that  all  necessary  safeguards  are  in  place  and 
functioning.  The  programmer  shall  be  required  to  Initiate 
programming  operation  prior  to  entering  the  safeguarded 
space.  Automatit  operatbn  shall  not  be  possible. 

8.3.2  During  programming 

During  programming,  only  the  programmer  shall  be  allowed  in 
the  safeguarded  space  and  the  foltowing  condittons  shaH  be 
met. 

—  The  robot  system  shall  t>e  under  the  solo  control  of  the 
programmer  within  the  safeguarded  space. 

—  The  controls  of  the  pendant  shall  be  used  as  internled 
(see  6.4.5). 

-—  The  robot  system  shall  not  respond  to  any  remote 
commands  or  conditions  that  would  cause  hazardous 
conditions. 


IS  14530 :  1998 
ISO  10218 :  1992 

->  Movement  of  other  equipment  in  the  safeguarded 
space  which  can  present  a  hazard  shall  either  be 
prevented  or  under  the  sole  control  of  the  programmer. 
When  under  control  of  the  programmer.  It  shall  require 
deliberate  action  on  the  part  of  the  programmer 
separate  from  the  action  to  Initiate  robot  motion. 

—  All  robot  system  emergency  stop  devices  shall  remain 
functional. 

8.3.3    Returning  to  automatio  operation 

The  programmer  shall  return  the  suspended  safeguards  to 
their  original  effectiveness  prior  to  initiating  automatic 
operation  of  the  robot  system. 

8.4  Programming  data 

Wherever  possible,  a  record  of  the  task  programs  together 
with  any  modifications  should  be  maintained. 

Programmed  data  that  are  stored  on  a  transportable  medium 
(e.g.  paper,  magnetic)  shall  be  stored  in  a  suitably  protected 
environment  when  not  in  use. 

8.5  Program   verification 

When  visual  examination  of  the  robot  system  response  to  the 
task  program  is  necessary  as  part  of  the  verification 
procedure,  It  should  be  made  with  all  persons  outside  the 
safeguarded  space.  When  it  is  necessary  to  perform 
program  verlficatksn  with  personnel  inside  the  safeguarded 
space,  the  folk>wing  shall  apply. 

a)  Program  verification  shall  initially  be  performed  at 
reduced  speed.  The  requirements  of  8.3  shall  apply, 
except  that  motion  control  only  requires  a  hold-to-run 
control  or  an  enabling  devk:e. 

b)  When  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  movement  of  the 
robot  at  full  (operational)  speed,  the  following 
requirements  shall  apply: 

1 )  suspensk)n  of  the  reduced  speed  by  means  that 
require  deliberate  action  by  the  programmer  only 
(e.g.  the  use  of  a  key  switch); 

2)  an  enabling  device  or  a  device  with  an  equivalent 
safety  level  shall  be  used  by  personnel  within  the 
safeguarded  space; 

3)  safe  working  procedures  are  established  to 
minimize  the  exposure  of  personnel  to  hazards 
wKhin  the  safeguarded  space. 

8.6  Trouble   shooting 

Trouble  shooting  shall  be  performed  from  outside  the 
safeguarded  space.  When  this  is  not  practicable,  and  the 
design  of  the  robot  system  has  taken  into  account  the 
necessity  of  performing  trouble  shooting  from  within  the 
safeguarded  space,  the  folk>wing  requirements  shall  apply: 

—  personnel  responsible  for  trouble  shooting  are 
specifk:ally  authorized  and  trained  for  these  activities; 

—  personnel  entering  the  safeguarded  space  shall  use 
an  enabling  devk:e  to  allow  nfK)tk>n  of  the  robot; 

—  safe  working  procedures  are  established  to  minimize 
the  exposure  of  personnel  to  hazards  within  the 
safeguarded  space. 

8.7  Maintenance 

The  robot  or  robot  system  shall  have  an  Inspection  and 
maintenance  programme  to  ensure  continued  safe  operation 
of  the  robot  or  robot  system.  The  Inspection  and 
maintenance  programme  shall  take  Into  account  the  robot 
and  robot  system  manufacturer's  recommendations. 


8.7.1  Personnel  who  perform  maintenance  or  repairs  on 
robots  or  robot  systems  shall  be  trained  In  the  procedures 
necessary  to  perlorm  safely  the  required  tasks. 

8.7.2  Personnel  who  maintain  and  repair  robot  systems 
shall  be  safeguarded  from  hazards. 

8.7.3  Where  possible,  maintenance  shall  be  performed  from 
outskie  the  safeguarded  space  by  placing  the  robot  arm  in  a 
predetermkied  posltbn. 

When  it  is  necessary  to  perform  maintenance  within  the 
safeguarded  space,  selectk>n  of  the  preferred  means  of 
safeguarding  described  under  8.7.3.1  and  8.7.3.2  shall  take 
account  of  risk  assessment. 

8.7.3.1  The  robot  system  shall  be  shut  off  using  a 
k)ckout/tagout  procedure. 

8.7.3.2  Alternatively,  intervention  within  the  safeguarded 
space  while  power  is  available  to  the  robot  shall  require  the 
following. 

a)  Prior  to  entering  the  safeguarded  space,  the  foik>wing 
procedure  shall  be  performed: 

1)  a  visual  inspection  of  the  robot  system  shall  be 
made  to  determine  if  any  conditk>ns  exist  that  are 
likely  to  cause  malfunctions; 

2)  If  pendant  controls  are  to  be  used,  they  shall  be 
functionally  tested  prior  to  such  use  to  ensure 
their  proper  operatk>n; 

3)  if  any  damage  or  malfunction  Is  found,  required 
corrections  shall  be  completed  and  retesting  shall 
be  performed  before  personnel  enter  the 
safeguarded  space. 

b)  Personnel  perlorming  maintenance  or  repair  tasks 
within  the  safeguarded  space  shall  have  total  control 
of  the  robot  or  robot  system: 

1)  the  control  of  the  robot  shall  be  removed  from 
automatic; 

2)  the  robot  shall  not  respond  to  any  remote  signals; 

3)  all  robot  system  emerger>cy  stop  devices  shall 
remain  functional. 

c)  The  suspended  safeguards  shall  t>e  returned  to  their 
original  effectiveness  prior  to  initiating  automatic 
operatk>n  of  the  robot  system. 


.9  Installation, 

functional  testing 


commissioning      and 


9.1 


General 


This  clause  contains  provisions  and  requirements  for 
installing  and  functional  testing  of  the  robot  system  prk>r  to 
its  use  in  normal  operatk>n. 


9.2 


Installation 


The  robot  system  shall  be  installed  in  accordance  with  the 
manufacturer's  requirements.  The  safeguarding  methods 
shall  be  Identified  by  the  hazard  analysis  and  the  risk 
assessment.  ISO  9946  shall  be  consulted  for  addKkmal 
gukJance  during  Installatbn.  The  user  shall  review  the  safety 
requirements  to  ensure  that  the  appropriate  safeguards  are 
applied  and  operattonal  prior  to  use  In  productton. 

9.3       Commissioning  and  funetlonal  testing 

This  subclause  defines  the  procedures  that  shall  be  fotbwed 
during  the  testing  of  robots  or  robot  systems  after  installatbn 
or  rebcatbn.  It  also  appties  to  robots  or  robot  systems  iJter 


IS  14530 :  1998 
ISO  10218 :  1992 


modifications  (e.g.  changes  in  hardwara  or  software, 
replacement  of  parts,  adjustments)  and  after  maintenance  or 
repairs  that  can  adversely  affect  their  operatbn. 

9.3.1  Designation  of  the  restricted  apace 

When  the  safeguarding  methods  are  not  in  place  prior  to 
commissioning  and  functional  testing,  interim  means  of 
designating  the  restricted  space  shall  t>e  in  place  before 
proceeding. 

9.3.2  Restriction  of  peraonnel 

During  the  commissioning  and  functional  testing,  personnel 
shall  not  be  albwed  in  the  safeguarded  space  until  the 
safeguards  are  functional. 

9.3.3  Safety  and  operational  verification 

The  manufacturer's  instructions  for  commissioning  and 
testing  of  the  robot  and/or  the  robot  system  shall  l>e  followed. 
An  initial  start-up  procedure  shall  include,  but  is  not  nec- 
essarily limited  to.  the  following. 

a)  Before  applying  power,  verify  that 

1)  the  robot  has  been  properly  mechaf^ically 
mounted  and  is  stable, 

2)  the  electrical  connections  are  correct  and  that  the 
power  (i.e.  voltage,  frequency,  interference 
levels)  is  within  specified  limits. 

3)  the  other  utilities  (e.g.  water,  air,  gas)  are  properly 
connected  and  within  specified  limits, 

4)  the  peripheral  equipment  is  properly  connected, 

5)  the  limiting  devices  that  establish  the  restricted 
space  (when  utilized)  are  Installed, 

6)  the  safeguarding  means  are  applied,  and 

7)  the  physical  environment  is  as  specified  (e.g. 
lighting  and  noise  levels,  temperature,  humidity, 
atmospheric  contaminants). 

b)  After  applying  power,  verify  that 

1)  the  start,  stop,  and  mode  selection  (including  the 
key  lock  switches)  control  devices  function  as 
intended, 

2)  each  axis  moves  and  is  restricted  as  intended. 

3)  emergency  stop  and  safety  stop  (where  included) 
circuits  and  devices  are  functional, 

4)  it  is  possible  to  disconnect  and  isolate  tfie 
external  power  sources, 

5)  the  teach  and  playback  facilities  function 
correctly, 

6)  the  safeguards  and  Interlocks  function  as 
intended. 

7)  other  safeguarding  is  in  place  (e.g.  barriers, 
warning  devtees). 

8)  In  reduced  speed,  the  robot  operates  properly  and 
has  the  capability  to  handle  the  product  or 
workplece.  and 

9)  in  automatic  (normal)  operation,  the  robot 
operates  properly  and  has  the  capability  to 
perform  the  intended  task  at  the  rated  speed  and 
toad. 

9.3.4  Robot  ay  stem  restart  procedures 

A  procedure  for  the  restart  of  the  robot  system  after 
hardware,  software  or  task  program  modiffeatton,  repair,  or 
maintenance  shall  include  but  not  necessarily  be  limited  to 
the  folbwing: 

a)  check  any  changes  or  additk>ns  to  the  hardware  prior 
to  applying  power; 

b)  functionally  test  the  robot  system  for  proper  operation. 


10 


Docufnentatlon 


10.1  Robot  documentation  to  be  supplied  by 
the  robot  manufacturer 

The  robot  documentatk>n  as  a  minimum  shall  contain: 

a)  IdentHbatton  of  the  robot; 

b)  robot  characterlstbs  according  to  ISO  9946; 

c)  physical  environment  specifk:atk>ns  according  to  ISO 
9946; 

d)  installation  instructions  according  to  ISO  9946; 

e)  instructbns  for  use  including: 

1)  commissioning, 

2)  programming, 

3)  operation, 

4)  restarting  procedure,  and 

5)  maintenance. 

These  instructions  shall  include  the  response  of  the  robot  to 
the  various  controls  and  different  operating  conditbns,  and 
safety  measures  to  t>e  taken  to  avoid  hazardous  conditions. 

The  documentatbn  shall  Inform  about  the  training  of 
personnel  who  will  use  the  robot . 

10.2  Robot  system  documentation  to  be 
supplied  by  the  robot  system  manufacturer 

The  robot  system  documentatton  shall  contain  the 
documents  of  all  the  components  included  In  the  system  with 
their  Identification  (e.g.  robot,  associated  equipment, 
safeguards). 

it  shall  also  as  a  minimum  include  the  folk)wing: 

a)  a  clear,  comprehensive  description  of  the  robot  sys- 
tem and  its  installatk>n  including  mounting  and  con- 
nectton  to  external  power  sources; 

b)  a  description  of  foreseeable  hazardous  conditk>ns  and 
how  to  avoid  them; 

c)  a  description  (including  interconnecting  diagrams)  of 
the  safeguards,  interacting  functk>ns,  and  lnterk>cking 
of  guards  with  hazardous  condittons  partk:ularly  with 
interacting  installattons; 

d)  any  further  instructions  for  use  specific  to  the  system. 


1 1        Training 

The  user  shall  ensure  that  personnel  who  program,  operate, 
maintain,  or  repair  robots  or  robot  systems  are  adequately 
trained  and  demonstrate  competence  to^ perform  their  jobs 
safely.  Training  shall  include,  but  is  not  limited  to,  the  folbw- 
ing: 

a)  a  review  of  applicable  standard  safety  procedures  and 
the  safety  recommendatk>ns  of  the  robot  manufac- 
turer(s)  and  the  robot  system  designers; 

b)  a  clear  def initton  of  assigned  tasks; 

c)  Identification  and  explanatk>n  of  all  control  devtoes 
and  their  functions  used  in  performing  the  assigned 
task; 

d)  identHication  of  the  hazards  associated  with  the  as- 
signed task; 

e)  the  designated  method(s)  of  safeguarding  including 
the  safe  working  procedures  from  the  kientified  haz- 
ards; 

f )  the  method  for  testing  or  otherwise  ensuring  the  proper 
functk>ning  of  the  safeguards  and  interk>cks. 


S  14530:1098 
SO  10218 :  1902 


Annex  A 

(Informative) 

Schematic  diaoram  ahowino  major  elomanla  of  a  robot  ayatem 


1-  Robot 

2-  End  effector 

3-  Workplec* 

4  -  Control  or  power  equipmont  (control  panol,  hydraulic  group) 

5-  Associatad  equipment  (a.g.  conveyor,  rotary  table) 

6  -  Safeguard  (guard  or  presence  sensing  device) 

7-  Restricted  space 
8  {^7)  -      Maximum  space 

9-  Interlocked  gate' 

10—  Interlocking  devk:e 


10 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standarda 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1 986  to  promote 
hamnonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of 
goods  and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  In  any 
form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  Thisdoes  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course 
of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symt>dls  and  sizes,  type  or  grade 
designations.  Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standarda 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  tresis  of  comments.  Standards  are 
also  reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amerulments  is  reaffinned  when  such  review  indicates 
that  no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  reviston. 
Users  of  Indian  Standards  shoukJ  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possesston  of  the  latest  amendments  or 
editton  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Handtxx>k'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Addittons'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc :  No.  RE  18  ( 0107 ). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002 
Telephones :  323  01  31, 323  33  75, 323  94  02 

Regional  Offtees : 

Central    :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELH1 110002 

Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.T.  Scheme  VII M,  V.  i.  P.  Road,  Maniktda 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A.  CHANDIGARH  160022 
Southern:  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENf^  600113 


Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 


Telegrams  i  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offtees) 

Telephone 

{323  7617 
3233841 

{337  84  99.337  85  61 
337  86  26,337  9120 


{ 


603843 
60202S 


{ 


2350216,2360442 
2351519,2352315 


{8329296,83278  58 
832  7891,8327892 


Branches  AHMADABAO.  BANQALORE.  BHOPAL  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIOABAO.  QHAZIABAD.  QUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR 
LUCKNOW.    NAQPURPATNA.  PUNE.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


PrMad  at  Sbnoo  PriMlnfl  Pmm.  OpM,  Mte 


