**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9958 (1981) : Atomic absorption spectrophotometric method 
for determination of zinc [CHD 1: Inorganic Chemicals] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



W K irmed WW 

IS : 9958 - 1 981 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 

Indian Standard 

ATOMIC ABSORPTION 

SPECTROPHOTOMETRY METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF ZINC 



UDC 543-422 : 54647 




C Copyright L982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

UANAK BHAVAN. M BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAJL MARG 

NEW DELHI LIU002 



Gr,3 



Price J^SOg^m OXt d February mi 



IS : 9958 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

ATOMIC ABSORPTION 

SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF ZINC 



Chemical Standards Sectional Committee, CDC 1 

Chairman Representing 

Dr H. L. Bami Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New Delhi 

Members 

Dr K. Narayanaswamy ( Alternate to 
DrH. L. Bami) 
Agricultural Marketing Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur 

Adviser 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. Pain ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. N. Bhattacharyya Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri D. S. Chadha Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Smt Debt Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. S. Chadha Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri R. S. Chatim Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

Chemist & Metallurgist, South Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) 
Central Railway, Secunderabad 
Assistant Research Officer (MET), 
RDSO, Lucknow ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. R. Gupta Central Revenues Control Laboratory, New Delhi 

Shri Keshav Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Dr P. K. Gupta National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 

Shri C. Hingarh The Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Shri Om Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director (CHEM) Department of Industries & Commerce, Government 

of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Deputy Director (MCL) ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director (CHEM/TD) Directorate of Industries, Government of Maha- 

rashtra, Bombay 
Asstt Director (QM) ( Alternate) 
Dr B. N. Mattoo Maharashtra State Forensic Science Laboratory, 

Bombay 
Dr M. S. Madiwale ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. K. Nigam Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Shri N. S. Birdie ( Alternate ) 
Dr P. R. Pabrai Central Indian Pharmacopoeia Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9958 - 1981 



Representing 

Sarabhai M. Chemicals, Vadodara 
Bharat Heavy Eiectricais Ltd, Hyderabad 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri J. K. Patwa 
Shri D. Ramamurthy 

SHRI M. B. Unni ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S. K. Bose ( Alternate II ) 
Dr G. Ramana Rao Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri N. Rangaswamy ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. P. Sahakari Italab Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Honavar ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. R. Sant 

Dr T. P. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. K. Sen 



Shri N. S. SENGAR ( Alternate ) 
ShriH. M. Shaikh 
Dr V. Srinivasan 



Regional Research Laboratory (CSIR), Bhubaneshwar 
Ministry of Defence (DGI) 



National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 
Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd, Bombay 
Shri P. Mansukhani ( Alternate ) 
Dr Hari Bhagwan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) ( Secretary ) 



IS : 9958 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

ATOMIC ABSORPTION 

SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF ZINC 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 25 September 1981, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 The atomic absorption spectrophotometry method is dependent on 
the fact that metallic elements, in the ground state, will absorb light of 
the same wavelength they emit when excited. When radiation from a 
given excited element is passed through a flame containing ground state 
atoms of that element, the intensity of the transmitted radiation will 
decrease in proportion to the amount of the ground state atoms with the 
flame. A hollow cathode lamp whose cathode is made of the element to 
be determined provides the radiation. The metal atoms to be measured are 
placed in the beam of radiation by aspirating the specimen into an 
oxidant-fuel flame. A monochromator isolates the characteristic radiation 
from the hollow cathode lamp and a photosensitive device measures 
the attenuated transmitted radiation. 

0.3 This method covers the determination of zinc in low as well as high 
concentration, for example, in zinc ash, zinc sulphate, metals, etc. 
Various products where zinc estimation may be required include ferti- 
lizers, soils, food products, zinc smelter, animal feeds, paper pulp, 
petroleum products, water, electroplating solution, aluminium alloys, 
magnesium alloys, non-ferrous alloys, high purity metals, plastics, etc. 

0.3.1 For a specific method of determination of zinc in zinc sulphate, 
agricultural grade, reference should be made to IS : 8249-1976* and its 
Amendment No. 1, November 1980. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960f. 



•Specification for zinc sulphate, agricultural grade. 
fRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS : 9958 - 1981 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the atomic absorption spectrometry 
method for the determination of zinc. 

2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

2.1 Dissolve the sample in hydrochloric acid, oxidize with concentrated 
nitric acid and then evaporate to dryness. Dissolve again in hydro- 
chloric acid (1:1) by boiling, allow to settle and filter. Suitable 
dilutions are made to aspirate to air-acetylene flame, making standards 
in the same way. The most sensitive zinc absorption line is at 213'9 nm; 
however, 307*6 nm line is useful at higher concentrations ( 1 000 mg/1 
to 20 000 Mg/1) of zinc, Although most workers use air-acetylene flame, 
air-propane flame provides a 20 percent improvement. An oxidizing 
flame is recommended at 213*9 nm. The sensitivity is 0*025 /*g/ml in 
aqueous solution and the detection limit is 0'007 ftg/ml. The upper 
concentration limit is 5f*g/ml and by the rotation of the burner the 
upper limit .may be extended to T 50fAg/jnl. Molecular absorption and 
scattering are appreciable at 213*9 nm and require proper correctibn. 

3. INTERFERENCE - r ," 

3.1 No chemical interferences have> been found in air^acetylene flame 
At 213*9 ; nm, non-atomic ^species in the flame absorb stroaglyj When 
the solution has a high concentration of dissolved solids, it is necessary 
to correct for non-atomic absorption>using hydrogen continuum lamp. 

3.2 At each level of 1 000 /Ag/ml, only, silicon exhibits a significant effect 
and lowers the absorption. High concentration of gold interferes 
slightly. Perchloric acid and sulphuric acid cause a slight depression in 
the absorption. Equivalent amount of acids should be added to standards. 

3.3 Copper and phosphorus (100j&g/ml) interfere, the former enhancing 
and the latter depressing the zinc absorption. Addition/of I O00ftg/ml 
strontium checks the Interference clue to these dements. 

3.4 Zinc ads orption i s constant in the/>H range of 2 to 5. Between 5 to 
10/>H rjange, MM^ a sharp decrease in adsorption is observed. At pH 
above 10, zinc adsorption levels off to a constant value. Therefore, 
the />H of the solution and the standards should be the same. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer — generally with the following 
parameters. 

4.1.1 Lamp Current— 5 m A, 

4.1.2 Support — air. 



IS : 9958 - 1981 

4.L3 Fuel — acetylene. 

4.1.4 Flame Stoichiometry — Oxidizing. 

4.1.5 Wavelength and Working Range 

Wavelength, nm Band Pass, nm Working Range 

fig/ml 

213*9 0*2 0'4— 1-6 

307'6 0'5 3 500— 14000 

By rotation of burner (by reducing the path length of the sample) a 
213*9 nm measurement can be taken up to 50 ftg/ml. 

5- REAGENTS 

5.1 Zinc Metal — pure. 

5.2 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — See IS : 265-1976*. 

5.3 Concentrated Nfcric Acid — See IS : 264 - 1976f. 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 Transfer an appropriate quantity of the sample to a 400-ml beaker 
and add 50 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid slowly. Heat to 
dissolve, and oxidize with drop-by-drop addition of concentrated nitric 
acid. Evaporate to dryness. Dissolve again in 40 ml of hydrochloric 
acid (1:1) and heat to boiling. Add 100 ml of distilled water, boil 
again, cool and filter to remove siliceous matter and make up to 250 ml 
with distilled water. Make appropriate dilutions. 

Note — In the case of food organic substances a representative sample estimated 
to contain 25-100 <ig of zinc is accurately weighed into a clean platinum dish and 
ashed at temperature up to 525°C and is dissolved in minimum volume of HC1 
( 1 + 1). Add 20 ml water and evaporate to dryness on steam bath. Add 20 ml 
0-1 JV HC1. Heat for 5 min and filter with several portions of 0*1 A HC1. Further 
dilution may be made if required to attain the working range of the instrument. 

6.2 Optimize the response of the instrument by adjusting burner height 
and flame. Aspirate distilled water to get zero absorption. Aspirate 
blank and note down absorption, if any. Again aspirate distilled water 
to check zero. When stable response is observed, aspirate standards (at 
least 4) and note down the absorption. Aspirate the sample to get its 
absorption. Prepare calibration curve by plotting the net absorption 
values of the standards against concentration in mg/1 of zinc. Locate the 
point of sample absorbance and calculate the concentration of zinc in 
the sample. 



•Specification for hydrochloric acid ( second revision ), 
fSpecification for nitric acid ( second revision ). 



IS : 9958 - 1981 

7. CALCULATION 

C x V 100 
7.1 Zinc, percent by mass = — ^— x ~^- 

where 

C ~ Concentration of zinc in pg/ml in the final solution, 

V = Volume in ml of the final solution, and 

M — Mass in g of the sample in the final solution. 



