"~~AFFllhkf~~
UDC 629.135

1gy.p

: 001.4

IS : 7879 ( Part V I- 1982
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

, /

_-

J &XI

I

V

AERODYNES

( HEAVIER-Tii

AN-All-i AIRCRAFT

)

1. ScopeCoves ( Aerodynes).: 2. `Terminology `i .x

ihe +,

rd ,'

definitions

for

terms

relating

to

aircraft

heavier-than-air

.j..!,-

SECTION 51 COMPLETE

AIRCRAFT

No.

Term
- aeroplane A power driven surfaces which flight.

Definition
heavier-than-air aircraft with supporting remain fixed under given conditions of the surfaces providing the requisite and control in front of the main plane. of operating skis'as terrain. from a land surface. a mass of support on

5101

5102 5103 5104 5105 5106 j107 5108 5109 5110 5111

canard

aeroplane

An aeroplane with longitudinal stability An aeroplane A landplane snow-covered capable

landplane skiplane pusher seaplane float sea flying boat ( boat seaplane tractor aeroplane aeroplane

provided with or ice-covered fitted with capable provided

An aeroplane An aeroplane A seaplane water. )

pusher

propellers. from a water surface. on of

of operating with floats

as its means of support

A seaplane whose support on water. An aeroplane fitted

main

body or hull is also the means propellers. from either

with tractor

amphibian coleopter

An aircraft capable water surface.

of operating

a land or a

An aircraft- having an annular wing, with the engine and body mounted within the annulus, and designed to take off and land with its wing axis verlical. An aeroplane air, of landing capable, by a mechanical and taking off vertically. heavier-than-air only conversion in the

5112 5113 5114 5115 5115A

convertiplane glider sailplane towed glider powered glider ( motor glider) kite

A non-power-driven

aircraft atmospheric

(cf. 5301 ). currents free flight. of power for

A glider designed to utilize sustained free flight. A glider which

relies on towing

for sustained

A glider with a small power plant for short bursts for take off and/or in between gliding phases. A non-power-driven heavier-than-air controls, anchored or towed by a line. aircraft

5116

without

Adopted

18 August 19d .~-asaabw:
"

. ;" .,A._.&__._ _ _ __ __ r: * .j
I

I@ April _ _._ --

1983; ISI

Or8 I

,

."

:~<~INDIAN r.+lANAK .) .,

YTANDARDS BHAVAN, 9 0AHADUR
NEW DELHI

-

INSTITUTION SHAH ZAFAR
110002

.-. --------

- -MARG

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 1982
No.
5117 Term mixed-power-plant aircraft Definition An aircraft whose power plant embodies more than one type of engine, each being usually appropriate to a particular flight regime. An aeroplane under 5123). monoplane monoplane
A monoplane

5118

monoplane

or glider

with

one pair of wings

(see Note

5119 5120

high-wing low-wing

(shoulder-wing)

in which the wings are located the top of the fuselage. are located

at or

near

A monoplane in which the wings bottom of the fuselage.

at or near the

5121

mid-wing

monoplane

A monoplane in which the wings are located approximately midway between the top and bottom of the fuselage.

5122 5123

parasol

monoplane

A monoplane in which the wings structure above the fuselage.

are united

in a separate

multiplane

An aeroplane or glider with two or more sets of wings usually one above another, for example, biplane or triplane.
Note-Monoplane, biplane, triplane and multiplane are also used as adjectives associated with a particular component, for example, biplane rudder, triplane tail, etc.

5124

ornithopter

A heavier-than-air aircraft supported in flight chiefly by the reaction of the air on wings to which a flapping motion is imparted. A heavier-than-air or rotors. rotorcraft An aircraft rotorcraft.
A rotorcraft

5125

rotorc raft

aircraft

which

derives

lift

from

a rotor

5126 5127

compound

utilizing

in flight

features

of both

aeroplane

and

cyclogyro ( paddle-plane gyroplane

)

wheel,

on which the rotor is similar in form to a paddle power-driven about a horizontal axis.

5128

A rotorcraft with non-power-driven rotor(s) rotating about axes which are vertical or nearly so, when the aircraft is in horizontal flight. A rotorcraft deriving lift from power-driven about axes which are vertical, or nearly craft is in horizontal flight. A biplane in which one pair less span than the other pair. of wings rotor(s) rotating so, when the airis of substantially

5129

helicopter

5130 5131

sesquiplane stol aircraft

A heavier-than-air aircraft designed to takeoff and land with a short ground run, either by the provision of powered lift or by the use of special aerodynamic devices. An aircraft with its longitudinal rated in the main plane.
An aircraft

5132 5133 5134 5135

tail-less aircraft ( flying wing ) variable-sweep aircraft (swing-wing-aircraft ) vtol aircraft v/stol aircraft

control

surfaces

incorpo-

varied

in which in flight.

the sweep

of the main

plane can be

A heavier-than-air aircraft provided with powered lift, which can take off and land along a substantially vertical path. A vtol aircraft which can also take off and land with a short ground run, particularly when operating at an increased weight. 2

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 1982
SECTION No. 5201 aerofoil Term 52 SHAPE AND DISPOSITION OF SURFACES Definition A body so shaped as to produce normal to the direction of its motion excessive drag. aerofoil aerodynamic reaction through the air without

5202

annular

An aerofoil generated by the rotation of its section about an axis substantially parallel to its chord and thus having an annular cross-section normal to that axis. An aerofoil having one or more air passages connecting its two surfaces to delay separation and consequent stall. An auxiliary, main aerofoil cambered aerofoil positioned so as to form a slot. (or slots) (cf. 4479) of the in a of the of the

5203

slotted

aerofoil

5204 5205 5206 5207 ANGLES 5208

slat aerofoil aileron aileron section drop up-float

forward

The shape of the boundary of a section plane parallel to its plane of symmetry.

of an aerofoil

The simultaneous downdard or positive deflection ailerons on both sides of an aeroplane or glider. The simultaneous upward or negative deflection ailerons on both sides of an aeroplane or glider.

control

surface

angle

The angle between the chord of the control surface and the chord of the corresponding fixed surface (for example, aileron angle, elevator angle, elevon angle, rudder angle ). The angle between the chord of the upper plane of a biplane and that of the lower plane in a section parallel to the plane of symmetry. The angle at which, in an aeroplane or glider, the port and starboard parts of the main plane or tailplane are inclined upwards to the transverse plane of reference. If the inclination is downwards, the angle is termed anhedral or negative dihedral.

5209

decalage

5210

dihedral

5211

sweep

( back or forward

)

The angle in plan between a specified spanwise line along an aerofoil and the normal to the plane of symmetry. For an aerofoil as a whole, the quarter-chord line is preferred, but any other specified line, such as the leading on trailing edge, may be taken for a particular purpose. The angle between the root chord of the main supporting surface and the chord of the tailplane. Increase in angle other aerofoil. Decrease in angle other aerofoil. of incidence of incidence towards towards the tip of a wing or the tip of wing or

5212 5213 5214

tail-setting wash-in wash-out

angle

AREAS 5215 gross wing area a) The area of the surface bounded by the two wing tips and the leading and trailine edges continued to intersect in the plane of symmetry. b) The area of the surface bounded by the two wing tips, the leading and trailing edges and by straight lines joining their intersections ( ignoring fillets ) with the fuselage and wing nacelles. 3

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 1982
No. 5216 5217 5218

Term
net wing area aspect camber ratio

Definition
The gross wing area less the part covered The ratio of the square aerofoil. of the span by the fuselage.

to the gross area of an section: line

a) Curvature of the median more generally, the curvature

line of an aerofoil of a surface. of the

b) The ratio of the maximum height above the chord to the chord length. 5219 conical camber

median

The camber of an aerofoil having a surface derived from a cone ( not netiessarily right circular ) with its apex lying in the plane of symmetry of the aircraft. The straight line through the centre of curvature leading and trailing edges of an aerofoil section. fh;rp;zlnof A chord length of length equal defined at the by

5220 5221 5222

chord standard mean chord (first mean chord ) aerodynamic mean chord (second mean chord )

to the gross wing area divided by :

s
where

1

- b/2 c = chord length symmetry, at distance y from the plan of

I

c' dy

b = span, and S = gross wing area.
5223 5224 chord chord length position The length of that part of the chord which by the aerofoil section boundary. is intercepted

The position of the chord as defined by the co-ordinates (x, y, z) of its quarter-chord point referred to body axes and its inclination ( 0) to the x-y plane. line point The line through the quarter-chord points of an aerofoil.

5225 5226 5227

quarter-chord quarter-chord

The point on the chord of an aerofoil section at one quarter of the chord length behind the leading edge. Of a multiplane. The distance between the leading edge of a plane and of the one below it, measured parallel to the normal body axis.

gap

5228 5229

geometric leading

twist edge

Variation, along the span of a wing or other aerofoil, of the angle between the chord and a fixed datum. (cf. 4102). a) The forward edge of an aerofoil through the air. b) The forward portion of the structure or other body moving

of an aerofoil.

5230

supersonic

leading

edge

A leading edge designed for flight at supersonic speed, its sweep being greater than the complement of the Mach angle. The component of the stream velocity normal to the leading edge is, therefore, sonic. Of an aerofoil. A line, each point of which is equidistant from the upper and lower boundaries of the aerofoil section, the distance being measured normal to the chord. 4

5231

medium line ( centre line ) (camber line )

IS : 7879 ( Part
No.
5232 ogive Term a) The outline Definition of a Gothic arch. produced by rotating

V

) - 1982

b) The solid of revolution outline about its centreline. 5233 5234 tangent overhang ogive An ogive whose tangent line.

such

an

at its base is parallel

to its centresuperimposed to the tip different

a) The extent to which the`tip of one of two planes projects beyond the tip of the other. b) The distance of a plane. from the outer or point

of support of the

5235 5236

rigging rigging angle of incidence

The relative adjustment components of an aircraft. The angle between and the horizontal position. Note-Not
dence, 4104.

alignment

the chord of the main when the aeroplane

plane or tailplane is in the rigging

to be confused with aerodynamic angle of incian

5237

rigging

position

The attitude in which, with the lateral axis horizontal, arbitrary longitudinal datum line is also horizontal. a) Of an aeroplane. b) Of an aerofoil. The distance The length along between the wingtips. line.

5238

span

a specified

5239

stagger

Of a multiplane. The distance between the leading edge of a plane and of the one below it, measured parallel to the longitudinal body axis. The ratio of the maximum thickness of an aerofoil section measured perpendicular to the chord, to the chord length. a) The through rear edge the air. of an aerofoil or other body moving

5240 5241

thickness/chord ratio (thickness ratio ) trailing edge

b) The rearward 5242 wave rider

portion

of the structure

of an aerofoil.

A lifting body, designed for flight at supersonic or hypersonic speeds, which relies essentially on a shockwave, or system of shockwaves, beneath its lower surface for producing its lift force. A wing formed, in the way of the propeller, into an open semi-circular channel through which the slipstream from a propeller passes. A wing of triangular planform. dihedral and or markedly and whose roughly an in chord

5243

channel-wing

5244 5245

delta

wing

gull wing

A wing whose inboard section has pronounced whose outboard section has either anhedral less dihedral. A wing whose inboard section is swept forward outboard section is swept back, thus forming M in plan view. wing A wing in which there length from root to tip. is progressive

5246

M-wing

5247 5248

tapered W-wing

decrease

A wing whose inboard section is swept back and whose outboard section is swept forward, thus forming roughly a W in plan view. 5

IS : 7878 ( Part V ) - 1882
SECTION 53 COMPONENT PARTS
GENERAL No. 5301 5302 airframe control lock ( gust lock ) doping fence fin Term A power-driven engine(s). Definition heavier-than-air aircraft without its

A mechanical device designed to safeguard, by a positive lock, the control surface and flying control system against damage in high winds or gusts when the aircraft is parked. Treatment of a fabric render it air-tight. surface to tauten, strengthen or

5303 5304 5305

A projection from the surface of the wing and extending chordwise to modify the wing surface pressure distribution. A fixed vertical surface designed to provide directional stability. A fin projecting from the upper or lower surface of the body is referred to as dorsal or ventral respectively.

5306

plane (aerofoil main plane

)

A body so shaped as to produce normal to the direction of its motion excessive drag.

aerodynamic reaction through the airwithout usually divided

5307 5308

The main supporting surface of an aircraft, into port and starboard wings. An aerofoil fixed, movable or adjustable forward of the main plane contributing control and/or stability. A short length of plane projecting hull ( usually forming a part thereof) can be connected.

noseplane (fore plane ) stub plane

in flight, located to longitudinal

5309

from the fuselage or to which an aerofoil located control is

5310

tailplane

An aerofoil fixed, movable or adjustable in flight, after of the main plane, contributing to longitudinal and/or stability. A tailplane such that the movement used for longitudinal control. Surfaces, the primary an aircraft. function of the whole

5311

all moving tail (flying tail ) ( slab tail ) supporting surfaces

surface

5312 5313 5314 5315

of which

is to provide controlling

lift for

tail unit (empennage wing centre section

)

The combination of stabilizing and situated at the rear of an aircraft. A main supporting divided into inner,

surfaces

surface of an aircraft. This may be outer and wing-tip sections. ( see 5307 ).

The middle or central section of a wing, to which the outer wing panels are attached. Where a wing has no clearly defined central section, the centre section is considered to lie between points of attachment of the wing to the fuselage or fuselage struts.

FLIGHT
5316

CONTROLS
aerodynamic balance a) Reduction of the hinge moment opposing rotation of a central surface by so disposing the surface that part of it is forward of the hinge or by fitting a balance tab to it. b) A device surface. to reduce the hinge moment of the control surface.

5317

horn

balance

A localized balance area at the tip of a control This may be shielded by a surface in front. 6

IS:7879(PartV)-1982
No.
5318 shrouded Term balance Definition A balance with control area forward of its hinge operating within a space bounded by shrouds which part of the aerofoil contour. and form

5319

internal

balance

A shrouded balance with an overhang which leaves a small gap between itself and a shaped part of the aerofoil structure, so as to control aerodynamically the state of balance at any position. balance An internal balance in which the overhang with a brush or by a flexible partition. gap is sealed

5320

sealed

internal

5321

ailerons

Pairs of control surfaces, normally situated at the trailing edge of the wing structure, designed to control an aircraft in roll by their differential movement. Ailerons which maintain a smooth upper surface with the wing when moved down, but have a nose which projects below the lower surface when moved up, thus increasing the drag of the down-moving wing. Ailerons geared so that, when they are deflected, the upgoing aileron moves through a different angle from the down-going aileron. In practice, the up-going aileron moves through the greater angl e, in order to reduceadverse yaw and/or to lessen the pilot's effort. An aileron whose leading edge is so shaped that the slot between it and the wing improves the flow over its upper surface when the aileron is deflected downwards. Any device primarily will. A flap-type an aircraft. control used to increase drag of an aircraft velocity at of

5322

anti-yaw ailerons ( frise ailerons

)

5323

differential

ailerons

5324

slotted

aileron

5325 5326

airbrake, dive brake dive flap automatic

air brake used to reduce the limiting

5327

The state in being when the control surfaces and/or engine controls are automatically operated in accordance with signals detected by instruments and with no pilot control through flying controls.. A control system which will automatically manoeuvre the aircraft into, and stabilize it with respect to, a demanded flight condition determined by a computer ( human or otherwise ) inside or outside the aircraft. An automatic device which improves the natural stability of an aircraft by operating control surfaces independently or as part of a pilot control system in such a way that the human pilot retains continuous control through his normal flying controls. A control surface embodying aerodynamic balance.

5328

autopilot (automatic pilot automatic flight control system ) auto-stabilizer

5329

5330 5331

balanced control

surface column

The lever, or the pillar supporting equivalent, by which the longitudinal are operated.

a handwheel, or its and lateral controls

5332

control surface ( motivator )

An aerofoil or part thereof which moves to produce changes in the forces and/or moments acting on an aircraft in order to control it. (An output element of a flight control system ). A flap-type in pitch. 7 control surface designed to control an aircraft

5333

elevator

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 1982
No. 5334 elevons Term Definition Control surfaces combining the functions of ailerons and elevators. When placed on the tail, they are sometimes called tailerons. Elevons in the form of all-moving wing tips have been referred to occasionally as controllers or stabilizers. The sensations of force and displacement experienced by the pilot, from the air forces on the control surface, through those limbs which are in contact with the flying controls. feel system A device which simulates or augments natural feel when the control surfaces are operated mechanically. Its purpose is to provide additional information regarding the state of control in order to simplify the pilot's task. An artificial feel system in which the feel force tional to the square of the equivalent airspeed. is propor-

5335

feel

5336

artificial

5337 5338

q feel system spring feel system

An artificial feel system in which the load required to move a flying control in the absence of air forces is dependent on the displacement from the trimmed conditions. Any surface usually forming part of the rear portion of a wing, adjustable in flight, the primary function of which is to increase the lift. A flap over the upper surface gas is ejected with sufficient effectiveness. See 5326. of which air or some other momentum to increase its

5339

flap

5340

blown flap

5341 5342 5343

dive flap droop flap, leading-edge extension flap flap

A flap at the leading edge of a wing, deflected downward increase camber and thus improve stalling characteristics.

to

A flap, the movement of which increases the effective chord length of the aerofoil, for example fowler flap, gouge flap. A flap forming as a whole. the rear portion of the aerofoil and moving

5344

plain

flap

5345

recovery flap

A flap, the operation of which so alters the pitching moment characteristics of an aircraft that recovery from a dive is automatic, or is made easier to the pilot. A flap whose leading edge is so shaped that the slot or slots between it and the wing improve the flow over its upper surface when the flap is deflected downwards. A flap inset into the lower surface A flap whose suction. system effectiveness of fhe aerofoil. by boundary-layer

5346

slotted

flap

5347 5348 5349

split

flap flap control

suction flight

is increased

The arrangement of all control elements which enables control forces and torques to be brought into play by the human pilot or otherwise. That section of a flight control system which determines the application of a particular control surface, for example, elevator channel.

5350

channel

5351

multiple

channel

A channel containing multiple components connected together in such a way that alternative lanes exist for producing control surface application. 8

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 198%
No. 5352 Term irreversible control system ( irreversible control ) power-assisted system powered flying control control
A

Definition flight control system in which the control surface can be moved freely by the pilot but cannot be moved by aerodynamic forces alone.

5353

A

flight control system in which a power amplifier is placed between the flying control and the control surface to supplement the pilot's direct effort. A flight control system in which a power amplifier between the flying control and the control surface. is placed

5354 5355 5356

system

controls

Input elements directly moved by the human pilot or otherwise, to operate the control surfaces. A sheet of high velocity air or some other gas ejected near the rear of a wing at an angle to the main air stream to increase the lift, thus performing the function of a flap.

jet flap

5357

manoeuvre system

demand

control

A pilot control system in which the control surface deflections are automatically adjusted In accordance with the motion of the aircraft in such a way that a unique predetermined manoeuvre follows a single input by the pitot. Control of aircraft attitude and position by the reaction from compressed gas issuing from nozzles or by the thrust from jet engines. A control surface designed to control an aircraft in yaw.

5358

reaction control

5359 5360 5361 5362

rudder

rudder bar rudder pedals spoiler

The foot-bar

by which the rudder

is operated,

Pedals by which the rudder is operated. A light, controllable device fitted on the upper surface of wings ( usually at the rear), used for disturbing or spoiling air flow and thereby delay separation ( cf 4479). A spoiler mounted to intercept the airflow through a slot. Note-The
craft.
term is

5363

interceptor

also used to describe a type of military afr-

5364

stick pusher

A device which gives a forward push to the control column when the aircraft approaches a hazardous stalled condition, thereby producing a nose-down pitch. A device which vibrates the control column approach to a hazardous stalled condition. A fixed or hinged rear portion to reduce of a control to indicate

5365 5366 5367 5368 5369

stick shaker tab balance controlled geared tab tab tab

surface or flap. to operate a

A tab designed control surface. A balance

the effort in flight.

required

tab controllable

A balance tab mechanically that its angular movement control surface.

linked to a control surface so is determined by that of the to produce

5370 5371

servo tab spring tab

A balance tab directly operated by the pilot forces which in turn move the main surface.

A balance tab, the angular movement of which is geared to the compression or extension of a spring embedded in the main control circuit. The primary purpose is to reduce the pilot's effort at high airspeeds. 9

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 1982 No.
5372 5373 trimming Term tab Definition A tab, the setting of which in relation is separately adjustable by the pilot. to the main surface

trimming strip (trailing edge card, trailing edge strip ) fly by wire

A strip of metal or length of cord or wire, adjustable only on the ground, applied to the trailing edge of a control surface to modify fhe balance or trim. Method of actuating control surfaces by non-mechanical means, such as electrical or light signals.

5373A

FUSELAGE, 5374

HULL, afterbody

NACELLES a) Of a flying b) Generally. boat hull. The portion aft of the step. or nacelle. or cargo.

The rear portion for housing

of a fuselage

5375 5376 5377 5378 5379 5380 5381

cabin pressure capsule cockpit ejection ejection gun seat cabin

An enclosure A cabin pressure

crew and/or

passengers

in which means are provided to maintain the air at a higher level than the ambient air pressure.

A pressurized compartment of an aircraft, housing crew members and capable of being ejected in an emergency. A compartment housing the pilot(s). ram body. mechanism of an ejection

The explosively-operated seat or capsule, or other

A seat capable of being ejected in any emergency to carry the occupant and his equipment clear of the aircraft. A plate or surface at the end of an aerofoil, attached in a substantially vertical plane parallel to the direction of flight. Its effect is similar to that of increased aspect ratio. A flexible sheet, installed at the top of an ejection seat, which is pulled down to fire the ejection gun and to protect the face, oxygen mask, etc against wind blast during ejection. The compartment in an aircraft stations of the flight crew. a) Of a fiying b) Generally. boat hull. The forward containing forward the operating

end plate

5382

face curtain

5383 5384

flight

deck

forebody

The portion portion

of the step, or nacelle,

of a fuselage

5385 5386 5387 5388 5389 5390

fuselage gosport hull nacelle

The main structural body of an aircraft boat or boat amphibian. A flexible voice-tube between two cockpits used especially between a flying instructor The main structural boat amphibian. and flotation

other than a flying in an aeroplane, and a student. boat or

body of a flying

A streamlined structure on an aircraft, separate from the fuselage, for housing crew, engines or other items of load. A nacelle bottom supported externally from a fuselage of a hull or float or wing, designed to

pod planing

The part of the under-surface provide hydrodynamic lift. A projection

5391

sponson ( stub )

from a hull to give lateral

stability

on water.

10

IS : 7879( Part V ) - 1982
NO.

Term step tail boom A discontinuity in facilitate take off. the

Definition under-surface of a hull or flat to the

5392 5393

A dantilever carrying the tail unit of an aircraft fuselage does not perform this function. SECTION 54 LANDING GEAR

in,which

5401

landing

gear

The part of an aircraft ( other than the hull of a flying boat ) provided fdr its support and movement over land, water or other surface, and for absorbing the shock on landing. It comprises the main supports ( incorporating wheels, skids, skis ) and auxiliary items, such as nose-wheels, tail-wheels or skids and wing-tip floats. A landing A landing gear with a nose-wheel gear with a tail-wheel to engage undercarriage. undercarriage. arresting gear.

5402 5403 5404

nose-wheel (tricycle tail-wheel

landing gear landing gear) landing gear

arrester hook (arresting hook ) WHEEL

A hook on an aircraft

CASTORI(VG 5405 5406

axle offset castor length

The length of the common to the wheel axis.

normal

to the castor axis and

The distance between the centre of the tyre contact area and the intersection of the ground with the castor axis produced. An oscillation of a castoring wheel about the castor axis. It is excited when the wheel travels on a surface whose coefficient of friction exceeds a critical value.

5407

shimmy

5408 5409

shimmy float

damper

A damper

designed

for suppressing

shimmy.

A water-tight body giving buoyancy and stability in roll on water to a seaplane or amphibian and enabling it to take off and land. gear Emergency flotation appliances for aircraft.

5410 5411

flotation hydrofoil

A surface, similar in form to an aerofoil, on a seaplane or amphibian hull or float to facilitate takeoff by providing hydrodynamic lift. A telescopic structural member designed to dissipate the emergency at landing by the passage of oil under pressure through an orifice. The pillar lock A device carriage. A fairing A linkage members. connecting preventing around a ski to the aircraft. inadvertent retraction landing of the gear. telescopic of the under-

5412

oleo ( oleo leg) (oleo strut > pedestal retraction spat torque links

5413 5414 5415 5416 5417 5418

the wheel of a fixed relative rotation

to prevent

between of

track undercarriage

The distance between the outer points port and starboard main undercarriages. A major assembly 11 of the landing

contact

gear ( main, nose, tail ).

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 1982
No. 5419 5420 bicycle Term undercarriage A main landing in tandem. Definition gear using two wheels or pairs of wheels of tandem wheels

bogie undercarriage

An undercarriage carrying a pair or pairs pivoted at the end of a central strut.

5421

cross-wind

undercarriage

An undercarriage which permits an aircraft to move crabwise in a straight line down a runway in the presence of a cross-wind. An undercarriage position, usually which can be withdrawn from its operative into the structure, to reduce drag. to hold it in either centre

5422

retractable

undercarriage

5423 5424 5425

up-and-down wheel wheel base turning

lock

A lock on a retractable undercarriage the retracted or the operative position.

The fore-and-aft distance between the main-wheel and the nose-wheel or tail-wheel centre. radius

The effective rolling radius of a pneumatic-tyred wheel. It is the radius of the circle whose circumference is equal to the distance moved forward by the wheel during a single revolution.

SECTION 55 INSTRUMENTS
FLIGHT 5501 5502 INSTRUMENTS air-mileage air-mileage unit An indicating automatically instrument which shows the air distance flown. continuously and

An instrument which derives continuously and automatically the air distance flown and feeds this function into other automatic instruments. An indicating instrument which shows continuously and automatically the air position of an aircraft by calculation from inputs of heading and air speed. An instrument which determines the altitude of a celestial body, employing a special device to provide an artificial horizon. It may be fitted with a periscopic averaging, integrating or other special device.

5503

air-position

indicator

5504

air sextant

5505

airspeed (AS11

indicator

An instrument which indicates the airspeed simply from the stagnation or total pressure.

as derived

5506

maximum safe airspeed indicator

An airspeed indicator with an additional pointer which shows automatically the indicated airspeed corresponding to a predetermined limiting Mach number. In addition, there may be a mark on the dial showing the maximum permissible airspeed. A device for indicating altitude. to indicate altitude accord-

5507 5508 5509 5510 5511

altimeter barometric altimeter ( pressure altimeter cabin altimeter height indicator

)

An aneroid barometer graduated ing to a standard atmosphere. An altimeter cabin. to indicate

the equivalent

altitude

in a pressure the distance

An instrument in an aircraft for indicating between it and the surface vertically beneath. A height indicator 12 working

radio altimeter

on the radar principle.

IS:7879 (Part V)-1982
No. 5512 5513 artificial blind-flying Term horizon instruments Definition An instrument with a self-contained vertical gyro which displays the attitude of the aircraft elevation ,and bank. Instruments specifically designed to supply information sufficient for him to fly an aircraft ments only. a pilot with using instru-

5514

cable-angle

indicator

An indicator showing the angle in the vertical plane, at the point of attachment, between a towing cable and the longitudinal axis of the towing or towed aircraft. An instrument used to measure rev/min gear in a measured interval of time. by the motion of a

5515 5516 5517

chronometric dive-angle flight

tachometer indicator system

An instrument for indicating the angle between and the flight path of an aircraft in a dive.

the vertical

instrument

An arrangement of sensors and displays giving to the pilot information on the speed, orientation and flight path of an aircraft relative to a known datum. An instrument display which combines the functions of an attitude indicator and a flight director display. Other information to assist the pilot in a given manoeuvre, such as radio altitude, ILS deviation, and speed variation, is sometimes shown. An instrument which displays the attitude of an aircraft in elevation and bank ( and sometimes heading) the attitude information being transmitted from remote sensors and servo repeated within the instrument. A display in which one or more symbols are shown related to a datum, the deviation of the symbols from the datum being controlled by processed information. By flying the aircraft to keep the symbols at the datum, the pilot carries out a predetermined manoeuvre in a prescribed manner. A display such that the readings of a group of flight instruments or other information can be superimposed upon the pilot's forward field of view. A spinning rotor, usually in a gimbal system, one or more additional degrees of freedom. A gyroscopic instrument arbitrary azimuth datum ing relative to it. A device for locking provided with

5518

attitude

director

indicator

5519

attitude

indicator

5520

flight

director

display

5521

head-up-display

5522 5523

gyro ( gyroscope azimuth gyro

)

used in aircraft to establish an and to measure the aircraft headof a gyro.

5524 5525

caging

device gyro

the gimbals

directional free gyro integrating

An azimuth gyro with a direct display and means for setting the datum to a specified compass heading. A gyro which is free from constraint.

5526 5527

rate gyro

A gyro with one degree of freedom other than the spinning one and so constrained that the deflection of the spin axis relative to the case is the time integral of the angular velocity of the case. A gyro with one degree of freedom other than the spinning one and so constrained that the deflection of the spin axis relative to the case is a measure of the angular velocity of the case. 13

5528

rate gyro

IS : 7879( Part V ) - 1982
No.
5529 vertical gyro Term Definition A gyroscopic instrument used in aircraft to establish a vertical datum and to measure the aircraft attitude relative to it. An instrument for indicating the angle in the plane symmetry between the flight path and longitudinal axis an aircraft. An instrument display for measuring the Mach number. the position of the aircraft It is common to obtain to the Earth. of of

5530

incidence indicator ( angle of attack indicator) Machmeter navigation

5531 5532

A display of quantities relative to an arbitrary merely the plan position A tube, subsonic

defining datum. relative

5533 5534 5535

pitot tube ( impact pressure side-force

tube ) head meter

with an open end facing up-stream, wherein at speeds the pressure is equal to the total pressure.

A device which combines the pitot tube and static pressure tube in a form suitable for mounting on an aircraft. An instrument for measuring changes in the external side force acting upon it, excluding gravity. If suitably positioned, it will give an approximate measurement of the sideslip. An instrument ) An instrument for measuring the angle of sideslip. which displays variations in sideslip,

5536 5537 5538

sideslip display ( sideslip indicator sideslip static meter vent

A small aperture in a plate fixed to form part of the fuselage and located appropriately for measuring the ambient static air pressure. tube A small tube with an aperture the ambient static pressure.
An instrument

5539 5540 5541 5542

static-pressure statoscope turn indicator

or apertures changes

for measuring in altitude or

variations

for indicating small from a pre-set altitude.

An instrument for indicating about the vertical axis.

the rate of turn of an aircraft the functions of a turn

turn-and-slip indicator ( turn-and-sideslip indicator ) vertical speed indicator ( rate-of-climb indicator, variometer ) yaw meter

An instrument which combines indicator and a side-force meter. An instrument indicating

5543

the rate of climb

or descent.

5544

An instrument which detects changes in direction of air flow. By usage, the term is not restricted to instruments detecting changes in yaw.

TEST 5545

INSTRUMENTS accelerometer An instrument for measuring acceleration, indicating accelerometer, maximum-reading recording accelerometer. for example, accelerometer,

5546

counting accelerometer ( statistical accelerometer)

An accelerometer recording the number of times the acceleration has exceeded any or all of a number of predetermined values. Usually also records airspeeds and/ or altitude at pre-set intervals. A simple form of counting accelerometer presenting digitaf records of acceleration only and for a limited number of values. 14

5547

fatigue load meter ( fatigue meter)

IS:?879(PartV)-1992
No.
5548 5549 Term impact accelerometer integratlng accelerometer Definition An accelerometer used to measure aircraft on landing. the deceleration of an

A device, incorporating an accelerometer, which performs a single integration of the acceleration to derive the velocity and a second integration to derive the distance travelled. An instrument for measuring the flow of air in ducts. automatically in flight. the angle the readings of the flight of a

5550 5551 5552 5553 5554 5555 5556 5557

airflow

meter observer recorder

automatic flight-path flight

An apparatus for recording specified set of instruments An instrument the horizontal. for recording

path to

recorder

A device recording information about the behaviour of an aircraft, its crew and/or the ambient conditions in flight. A flight recorder giving ( usually graphically ) simultaneous values of indicated airspeed and acceleration. A flight recorder giving ( usually graphically ) simultaneous values of indicated airspeed and acceleration and altitude. A flight recorder giving ( usually graphically) values of indicated airspeed and altitude. simultaneous

Vg recorder VgH. recorder VH recorder hot-wire anemometer

An anemometer in which the speed of an airstream is deduced by the change in resistance of an electrically heated wire exposed to the stream. An instrument for the measurement of some quality characteristic of the strength of a noise, for example, sound pressure level or intensity. A noise meter operating objectively, that is, without requiring from the user any subjective judgement of the magnitude of the quantity under measurement. An instrument for the measurement comparison with a reference sound. of loudness by aural measurein an airis recorded

5558

noise meter ( audiometer objective

)

5559

noise meter

5560 5561

subjective pitot comb

noise meter

A group of pitot tubes deployed for simultaneous ment of kinetic pressure at a number of points flow. ) 56 An instrument against time. LOADINGS by which variation in altitude

5562

recording altimeter ( altitude recorder

SECTION 5601 CG datum point

AND WEIGHTS

An arbitrarily chosen fixed point from which distances are measured to the centres of gravity of the various loads carried for the purpose of determining the position of the centre of gravity of the loaded aircraft. A document indicating, interalia, how the load is distributed and the resulting position of the centre of gravity of the aircraft.

5602

load sheet

LOADING AND LOAD
5603 5604 load factor ( operational power loading

FACTORS The actual permissible payload as a percentage of the payload on a particular flight. an aircraft divided maximum horse-

)

The gross weight of power of the engine(s). 15

by the

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 1982
Nb. 5605 5606 span Term loading loading The gross weight of an the square of the span. The mean particular conditions, Gross weight loading ) Gross weight divided by net wing area. normal aerofoil Definition aeroplane or glider divided by

surface

force per under

unit area specified

carried by a aerodynamic

5607 5608 LOADS 5609

wing loading ( gross wing net wing loading

divided

by gross wing area.

disposable

load

a) Of a military b) Of a civil

aircraft.

The fuel, oil and armament The crew, fuel, oil and payload.

stores.

aircraft.

5610

maximum

disposable

load

The maximum licensed take-off weight less the empty weight of the aircraft. The empty weight includes all fixed equipment, fixed ballast, unusable fuel supply, undrainable oil, engine coolant and hydraulic fluid. That part of the useful load from which ( that is, passengers, mail and freight ). The gross weight less the basic weight revenue or weight is derived empty.

5611

payload ( commercial useful load

load )

5612

WEIGHTS 5613 5614 all-up weight ( total weight basic weight ) The total weight on any particular of an aircraft occasion. with the crew and contents

That weight which includes all items declared as fixed operating equipment and trapped fuel and oil, to which it is only necessary to add the ` variable ' or ` expendable ' load items for the various missions. The design gross weight at which an aircraft V/STOL is permitted to land conventionally. The design gross weight at which an aircraft V/STOL is permitted to take off conventionally. capable capable of of

5615 5616 5617

certified landing ( CL ) weight certified take off ( CT0 ) weight design gross weight

The design weight at which it is expected that an airairworthiness craft will meet the relevant specified requirements. For operational less fuel. The weight purposes, the gross weight of the aircraft

5618

dry weight

5619 5620

gross weight maximum weight

of an aircraft

with its crew and contents.

The maximum flying weight of an aircraft permissible under the regulations obtaining irrespective of operating conditions. weight The maximum weight at which an aircraft is permitted, due to design or operational limitations, to land except in an emergency. Maximum certificate. take-off weight, according to the airworthiness must be

5621

maximum

landing

5622 5623

maximum weight maximum

licensed take-off

take-off weight

The weight of the aircraft in fuel or load in the wing. 16

above which

all weight

IS : 7878 ( Part V ) - 1882
NO.

Term
operating weight ( aircraft prepared service weight ) ( APS weight ) for

Definition
The weight of an aircraft equipped for flight. Normally comprises the ` basic weight ' plus those ` variable ' items which remain substantially constant for the type of mission. These include oil, crew, crew's baggage, steward's equipment and emergency and extra equipment that may be carried. For design purposes, the standard weight craft complete in flying order but without removable equipment or payload. The maximum gross weight VTOL is possible. of a particular of a type of aircrew, fuel, oil, aircraft at which

5624

5625

tare weight

5626 5627

VTOL weight

weight empty

For operational purposes, the measured weight of an individual aircraft tess non-mandatory removal equipment and disposable load. SECTION 57 ROTOR CRAFT

ANGLES 5701
alpha-one angle The angle between the blade-span axis, viewed in the plane of rotation from the blade trailing edge, and the laghinge axis. The angle, in plan view, between the downwind position ( or plane or symmetry) and a line passing through the centre of the rotor hub and lag hinge, measured in the direction of rotation. The acute angle between the line of zero lift section and the plane of no feathering. The angle between tip-path plane. the longitudinal axis of a blade

5'102

blade azimuth

angle

5703 5704 5705 5706

blade pitch angle ( blade angle ) coning angle angle

of a blade and the in

delta-three flapping

The acute angle between the normal to the blade axis plan view and the flapping-hinge axis.

angle

Theyangle between the blade-span axis and the plane of no feathering. Blade flapping motion is the variation with azimuth angle of the blade flapping angle. The component of the air flow normal to the tip-path plane.

5707

axial flow

BLADES 5708
articulated blade a) A blade connected to the rotor head by flapping, feathering hinges ( fully articulated ). lag and

b) A blade connected to the rotor head by either a flapping or a lag hinge and a feathering hinge. 5709 5710 5711 5712 5713 blade damper A device for damping lag hinge. The thrust blades. blade the motion of a rotor blade about the

blade loading rigidly-mounted disc area disc loading

of the rotor divided

by the total area of the rotor connection to the shaft other

A blade which has no pivoted than a feathering hinge. The area of circle The thrust 17 described

by the tips of the blades. by the rotor disc area.

of the rotor divided

IS : 7879 ( Part V ) - 1982
No. 5714 drag link Term Definition An adjustable link between each blade and the hub of certain rotors, used to maintain the angular spacing between the blades. A limit stop used in a rotor*to prevent movement of a blade in azimuth. blade chord excessive horizontal

5715 5716

drag stop equivalent

The chord of an imaginary rectangular blade of the same tip radius as a non-rectangular blade giving the same torque ( or thrust ). Variation with azimuth the feathering hinge. Angular oscillation angle of the blade pitch angle about

5717

feathering

5718 5719

flapping ground resonance

of a blade about the flapping

hinge.

A mechanical vibration of a rotorcraft on the ground or other surface when the rotor is in operation, caused by coupling between the periodic motion of the rotor and oscillation of the aircraft on its landing wheels.

HINGES 5720 5721 5722 5723 5724 5725 5726 feathering hinge A blade varied. pivot which allows the blade pitch angle to be

flapping

hinge

A blade pivot whjch allows

the flapping

angle to vary. inclined to to a plane be displaced

delta hinge lag hinge ( drag hinge ) in-plane inflow oscillation ratio axis

A flapping hinge which is obliquely normal to the axis of the rotor hub. A blade angularly Angular pivot which in azimuth. oscillation allows the

blade

of a blade about the lag hinge. the

The ratio of the total velocity of the axial flow through rotor disc to the rotor tip speed.

no-feathering

The axis through the centre of rotation of the rotor with respect to which there is no variation of blade pitch angle with azimuth angle. The ratio of the distance of the centre of the flapping or lag hinge from the centre of the rotor hub to the rotor radius.

5727

offset

ratio

OPERATING 5728

CONDITIONS That condition of flight of a rotorcraft and continuous rotation of the rotor driven ( see also 4111 1. state The operating condition in the opposite direction side the rotor disc area. wherein there is free when it is not power

autorotation

5729

normal

propeller

of a rotor when the rotor thrust is to the axial flow through and out-

5730

vortex-ring

state

The operating condition of a rotor when the axial flow through the rotor disc is in the opposite direction to the axial flow outside the rotor disc area and to the rotor thrust. The operating condition of a rotor when the rotor thrust and the axial flow through and outside the rotor disc area are all in the same direction.

5731

windmill-brake

state

18

IS : 7879( Part V ) -1982
No.
WTCH 5732 CONTROL Term Definition

collective

pitch control

A control by which an equal alteration of blade pitch angle is imposed on all the blades independently of their azimuthal position. The phase angle by which pitch variation is displaced control-lever displacement. the controlled change of cyclic in azimuth from the direction of

5733

control

advance

5734

cyclic pitch control (azimuthal control rotor auxiliary rotor (anti-torque rotor, tail rotor)

)

A control by which the blade pitch angle dally with the blade azimuth position. A system of rotating aerofoiis.

is varied sinusoi-

5735 5736

A rotor, the primary function of which is to counterbalance the torque reaction of the main rotor in a rotorcraft and/or to change the motion of the aircraft about one of the body axes. A small servo rotor, mounted coaxially with the main rotor on certain helicopters, the displacement of which by the pilot causes the main rotor to be displaced to direct the thrust. By a damping action, the control rotor usually also contributes to the stability of the helicopter. A rotor driven by jet reaction devices mounted upon the rotor blades, usually at the tips. A rotor, the primary function of which is to provide within or

5737

control

rotor

5738

jet,rotor

5739 5740

main

rotor

lift.

see-saw rotor (teetering rotor )

A rotor system, usually of two blades, wherein the blades are attached rigidly to a central head which is in turn attached flexibly ( that is, by gimbals ) to the rotor shaft. The entire rotor assembly less the rotor blades. carries

5741 5742 5743

rotor head rotor hub rotor radius

The central rotating member of the rotor head which the blade arms and hinge assemblies.

The distance of the blade tip from the centre of the rotor hub for zero lag angle and zero or built-in coning angle. The rotio of the total blade area of a rotor to the disc area. The mean angular rotor radius. velocity of the rotor multiplied by the

5744 5745

solidity tip speed

5746

tip-speed ratio ( advance ratio )

The ratio of the component of the aircraft's forward speed in the no-feathering plane ( or tip-path plane ) to the rotor tip speed. This is approximately equivalent to the ratio of the velocity of the rotorcraft along the flight path to the rotor tip speed. The plane substantially containing the blade tips as they rotate. the path described by

5747

tip-path

plane

19

IS : 7879( Part V ) - 1982
EXPLANATORY
This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards Other standards in this series are: astronautical terms. IS : 7879 ( Part I )-1975 IS : 7879 ( Part II )-I975 of aircraft, IS : 7879 ( Part III )-I975 Structure, IS : 7879 ( Part IV )-I980 Aerodynamics, and IS i 7879 ( Part VI )-I979 terms Glossary Glossary Glossary Glossary Glossary of aeronautical of aeronautical of of aeronautical aeronautical

NOTE
on the glossary of aeronautical and

and astronautical and astronautical and and

terms -

Part I General, II Motion Part Part III IV

terms -Part terms terms -

astronautical astronautical

of aeronautical

and astronautical

terms -

Part VI Space

The present standard provides standard definitions of technical terms relating to aeronautics, Terms in general use in other branches of engineering are also astronautics and related subjects. The other parts of included where they have some special relevance to aeronautics or astronautics. the standard cover terms specific to a particular feature, type of aircraft, equipment and services, However, in certain cases, the relative The general arrangement of the terms is alphabetical. Where two or more synonyterms have been given together under a heading or general definition. mous terms are in use, the term which is favoured is given first with the intension that it should The alternative terms are given in parentheses. gradually displace the others. The first one ( or two ) digit, in the Each term has been, assigned a 4-digit or 5-digit number. This part number with the following digit in the thousandth place, represents the part number. hundredth place represents the section. The last two digits represent the position of the definition within a section. Thus, the term 5215 is the 15th definition of Section 52 which is in Part V. In the preparation of this Indian Standard assistance has been derived nautical and Astronautical Terms' issued by the British Standards Institution. from BS: 185 ` Aero-

----`v-.

20
Printed at the New India Printing Presc, Khurja, India

