NAT HIAF IS 14606 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


frarg sart — aren Afa 
farca — AN 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Irrigation Equipment — Granulated 
Media Filters — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.060.35 


© BIS 2022 


anda get Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERE TH AMT, 28 ect 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2022 Price Group 7 


Farm Irrigation and Drainage Systems Sectional Committee, FAD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Farm Irrigation and Drainage Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 

A Sand and Gravel filter (hereinafter called media filter) is basically a tank filled with sand or Gravel of 
appropriate size and grade. Media filters are especially suitable for micro irrigation systems because they are 
three dimensional filters. Media filters are often used with Emitting pipe systems and with emitter (dripper) 
systems, particularly where the water is from a surface source such as stream or reservoir. 


This standard was first published in 1998. The first revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and international practices. 


In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following standards: 
ISO/FDIS 9912-4 Agricultural irrigation equipment — Filters for micro irrigation — Part 4: Granulated 
media filters 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14606 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT — GRANULATED MEDIA 
FILTERS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard deals with manual and automatic 
backflow media filters and applies to: 


a) manually cleaning filters. 
b) complete automatic filters at a single unit level. 


c) a filtration battery which is a complete filter 
system that includes: 


1) Inlet — Unfiltered supply water; 


2) Outlet — Filtered water carried to the irrigation 
network; and 


3) Back flush outlet — This is for the water 
and filtrate, flushed out during the backflow 
procedure. 


d) Command power source — Usually 
hydraulic-filtered water for automatic operation 
(can also be pneumatic or electric). 


1.2 This standard specifies the construction 
requirements and test methods for “granulated media 
filters”, hereinafter called media filters, intended 
for operation in agricultural irrigation systems. It 
includes manual cleaning media filters and automatic 
self-cleaning media filter “batteries” (2 units or more 
working in parallel). 


1.3 This standard deals with the operation and 
performance of a media filter including related valves, 
backwash mechanism, under-drains, manifolds and all 
related accessories necessary for the operation of the 
filter. 


1.4 This standard deals only with pressurized filters 
operating in a range of filtration velocities declared 
by the manufacturer. The standard does not deal with 
filtration ability, efficiency and capacity (quality of 
filtered water, time of operation before media filter 
becomes entirely clogged, etc). 


2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 


possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below. In case the standards are to be 
referred in this clause they are to be listed as follows: 


IS No. Title 
2: 1960 Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised) 
554 : 1999/ Pipe threads where pressure — 
ISO 7-1 Tight joints are made on the 
threads — Dimensions, tolerances 
and designation (fourth revision) 
6418 : 1971 Cast iron and malleable cast iron 


flanges for general engineering 
purposes 


2405 (Part 1): Industrial sieves: Part 1 Wire 


1980 cloth sieves 

2405 (Part 2) : Industrial sieves: Part 2 Perforated 
1980 plates 

10483 : 1983/ Code for designating perforations 
ISO/DIS 7806 of industrial plate sieves 

12785 : 1994 Irrigation equipment — Strainer- 

type — Filters 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Granulated Media Filter — A filtration device 
that uses a bed of media to remove organic and inorganic 
particles from the incoming irrigation water. Each 
media filter is contained within a pressure vessel(s) 
or tank(s) having service openings, inlet, outlet and 
backflush connections that contains underlying drains 
(for example, PVC plastic, stainless steel, or ceramic 
materials) with or without a gravel bed to facilitate 
the backwashing procedure. Media filter is sometimes 
referred to as a depth filter. 


3.2 Filtration Media — The filtration material used in 
a media filter. The media generally consists of crushed 
granite, silica, or quartz sieved to specific particle sizes. 
Media may also consist of many other materials such as 
cardboard or synthetic fibres, woven textiles of various 
type or synthetic particles. 


IS 14606 : 2022 


3.3 Clogged Filter Media — A filter which has 
collected a quantity of solid contaminates, such that it 
cannot maintain the highest flow rate recommended by 
the manufacturer without exceeding the safe maximum 
pressure drop. 


3.4 Flush Valve — A valve through which the back 
flushing to the atmosphere is performed, normally 
closed in the filtering stage and opened during back 
flushing. 


3.5 Nominal Pressure — Maximum static water 
pressure immediately upstream of the filter inlet at 
which the filter is required to operate. 


3.6 Clean Pressure Drop — Pressure drop in a clean 
filter measured with a flow of clean water. 


3.7 Safe Maximum Pressure Drop — Maximum 
allowable difference, declared by the manufacturer, 
between inlet and outlet pressures across the filter when 
the filter element has become clogged to the extent of 
requiring cleaning or replacement. 


3.8 Range of Recommended Flow Rates — Flow-rates 
declared by the manufacturer for proper operation of 
the filter. 


3.9 Nominal Size — Conventional numerical 
designation expressed in mm (or inches) to indicate the 
nominal diameter of the inlet connections. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 
Granulated media filters are classified as given below: 
4.1 Flow Direction 


4.1.1 From top to bottom. Back flushing in reverse 
direction. 


4.1.2 From bottom to top. Back flushing in any 
direction. 


4.2 Type and Number of Different Media Layers 


4.2.1 Single layer (including inner support layer, if 
existing). 


4.2.2 Multilayer, provided layer stratification can be 
resumed after back flushing. 


4.3 Mechanical Structure 
Clarification Purposes Only) 


and Shape (for 


4.3.1 Cylinder 

4.3.2 Oval/Ball/Spherical 

4.3.3 Other Pressure Sustaining Shapes 

4.3.4 With Pipe Collection Underdrain System 


4.3.5 With Separate Chamber Collection System 


4.4 Velocity of Filtration (through the Filter) 
Expressed in m?/h-m? 


4.4.1 Relatively slow flow, 36-49 m?/h-m? 
4.4.2 Medium flow, 50-85 m?/h-m? 

4.4.3 High velocity, above 85 m?/h-m? 

5 TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS 


5.1 General 


The filter parts that are in contact with water shall be 
made of non-toxic materials, and shall be resistant to 
or protected against degradation caused by existing 
working conditions and types of water used in 
agricultural irrigation. The filter housing shall also be 
resistant to environmental conditions. Components 
belonging to filters of the same size, type and model, 
and produced by the same manufacturer, shall be 
interchangeable. Plastics parts of the filter that are 
exposed to ultra-violet radiation under the normal 
working conditions in which the filter operates shall 
include additives to improve their resistance to UV 
radiation. Plastics parts that enclose waterways 
shall be opaque or shall be provided with an opaque 
cover designed to block all light from reaching clear 
waterway enclosures. When made of mild steel, the 
inside of the vessel shall be suitably powder coated, not 
dip galvanized or painted with rubberized paint. The 
construction of the filter shall be such as to facilitate its 
proper installation in its intended location and position. 


5.2 Inlet and Expansion Space Chamber 


This chamber shall contain a cover to enable media 
filling and visual inspection. This chamber shall be 
designed to accommodate expansion of the media 
during back flushing: 


a) For filter tanks larger than 914 mm, a hydraulic 
inlet distributor is recommended. It should evenly 
distribute incoming flow across media surface. 

b) Expansion volume should be at least 1/3 of the 
media volume. 

c) All filter covers operating under pressure shall be 
supplied with a safety mechanism to protect the 
operator in case of failure. 


5.3 Media (main filtering) Compartment 


Total volume, surface area, and depth of filtering layer 
shall be informed by the manufacturer: 


a) Parameters pertaining to specific granular media 
shall be supplied by the manufacturer (or filter 
media provider). 

b) Ifa rough media support layer is applied, it should 
be deducted from the active media parameters. 

c) If the filter tank is other than a cylinder, the 
surface area as a function of media level, shall be 
indicated in the manufacturer’s catalog. 


In case there is an underdrain plate, this compartment 
shall have a large access port to enable media 
replacement, testing, and servicing. 


5.4 Underdrain (Collection) and Back Flush Unit 


This component collects the filtered water, while not 
allowing media leakage. It distributes reverse water 
flow used for back flushing in the back flushing stage. 
Generally, there are two major configurations: 


a) A “mushroom” system assembled on a “spider 
web” collection piping; and 

b) A “mushroom” system mounted on top of a plate 
which separates the filtering compartment from 
the collection chamber-“underdrain plate”. 


The maximum size of the mushroom openings shall be 
no more than half of the smallest media grains diameter. 
Mushroom placement shall ensure even distribution of 
back flushing water over all the granular media surface 
area. 


5.5 Connections 


5.5.1 In filters with threaded ends for direct connection 
to the supply line the threads shall comply with IS 554. 


5.5.2 Flanged connections shall comply either with 
IS 6418. 


IS 14606 : 2022 
5.5.3 Flanged connections shall comply with 
dimensions mentioned in Table 1. 


5.5.4 The backwash outlet shall be provided with a 
suitable end connection for the removal of the drained 
effluent from the site of the media filter. 


6 MECHANICAL TESTS 


6.1 General 


Tests shall be performed with water at a temperature 
of 20 to 30 °C except for test in 6.3 where the water 
temperature shall be 60 + 2 °C the instruments used 
for measuring the various parameters shall permit 
measurement to an accuracy of within + 2 percent of 
the actual values. 


6.2 Resistance of Filter to Internal Hydrostatic 
Pressure 


6.2.1 Preparation 


Perform this test on the filter with all its parts assembled 
for normal operation. Close the filter housing cover 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Measure 
the force or moment required to do so. Before 
conducting the test on filters equipped with a drain 
valve, open and close the valve 100 times while applying 
a water pressure at the valve inlet equal to the nominal 


Table 1 Dimensions of Flanges 
( Clause 5.5.3 ) 


Nominal O.D. of O.D. of Flange P.C.D. of Flange No. of Diameter of Bolt Thickness of Flange 
pipe/ID of Flange Bolt 
inch mm inch mm inch mm No. inch mm inch mm 
0.5 21.80 3.75 92.25 2-5/8 66.67 4 1/2 12.70 3/16 4.76 
0.75 27.30 4.00 101.60 2-7/8 73.02 4 1/2 12.70 3/16 4.76 
1 34.20 4.50 114.30 3-1/4 82.55 4 1/2 12.70 3/16 4.76 
1.25 42.90 4.75 120.70 3-7/16 87.31 4 1/2 12.70 1/4 6.35 
1:5 48.80 5.25 133.40 3-7/8 98.42 4 1/2 12.70 1/4 6.35 
2 60.80 6.00 152.40 4-1/2 114.30 4 5/8 15.87 5/16 7.94 
25 76.60 6.50 165.10 5 127.00 4 5/8 15.87 5/16 7.94 
3 89.50 T23 184.20 5-3/4 146.05 4 5/8 15.87 3/8 9.52 
4 115.0 8.50 215.90 7 177.80 4 5/8 15.87 3/8 9.52 
5 140.80 10.00 254.00 8-1/4 209.55 8 5/8 15.87 1/2 12.70 
6 166.50 11.00 279.40 9-1/4 234.95 8 5/8 15.87 1/2 12.70 
8 219.07 13.25 336.40 11-1/2 292.10 8 5/8 15.87 1/2 12.70 
10 273.10 16.00 406.40 14 355.60 8 3/4 19.05 5/8 15.87 
12 323.80 18.00 457.20 16 406.40 12 3/4 19.05 5/8 15.87 
14 381.00 20.75 527.10 18-1/2 469.90 12 7/8 22.22 3/4 19.05 
16 431.80 22.75 577.90 20-1/2 520.70 12 7/8 22.22 3/4 19.05 
18 482.60 25.25 641.40 23 584.20 12 7/8 22.22 7/8 22.22 
20 533.40 27.75 704.90 25-1/4 641.35 16 7/8 22.22 1 25.40 
24 635.00 32.50 825.50 29-3/4 755.65 16 1 25.40 1 1/18 28.57 


IS 14606 : 2022 


operating pressure multiplied by 0.75. Close the filter 
outlet by suitable means. Apply a hydraulic pressure at 
the filter inlet and check that no air remains trapped in 
the system and that the water reaches all places that 
may be under pressure during filter operation. 


6.2.2 Metal Filter Housing (Tank) 


Raise the pressure gradually to the declared nominal 
pressure multiplied by 1.5, and maintain this pressure 
for at least 5 min. The filter shall withstand the test 
pressure without suffering damage or permanent 
deformation. If the seal of the housing cover swells 
or is dislodged, apply the pressure for an additional 
15 min and recheck for leakages. No signs of leakage 
shall appear through the filter housing, the filter housing 
cover seal or the drain valve. 


6.2.3 Plastics Filter Housing 


6.2.3.1 Plastics moulded material of filter housing 


The pressure test shall be performed on an 
injection-moulded tube specimen made of the same 
material as the plastic moulded body. The dimensions 
of the specimen shall be as shown in Fig. 1. The 
wall thickness of the test sample shall not be less 
than that fitting a PN6 pipe and not greater than for a 
PN12.5 pipe for the same diameter dimension and 
the same diameter. The specimen shall be tested in 
accordance with Annex A and shall meet the strength 
requirements specified in Table 2. The specimen tested 
shall not suffer fracture or other damage. 


lim GE 


E _| 


de Geesse 


Fic. 1 FREE Test LENGTH 


6.2.4 The filter shall withstand the test without showing 
any signs of leakage. After completing the test, 
disassemble the filter and check the parts for damage. 
The parts of the filter shall show no signs of damage or 
permanent deformation. 


6.3 Resistance of Filter to Internal Hydrostatic 
Pressure at High Temperature 


6.3.1 Proceed as described in 6.2.1 but fill the tank 
(vessel) with water at 60 + 2 °C and raise the internal 
pressure. Maintain the pressure and temperature for 
15 min. The filter shall withstand the test without 
showing any sign of leakage. 


6.3.2 After completing the test, disassemble the filter 
and check the parts for damage. 


6.3.2.1 The parts of the filter shall show no signs of 
damage or deformation. 


7 RESISTANCE TO CYCLIC PRESSURE 


The pressure at that filter inlet shall be increased from 
atmospheric pressure to the maximum working pressure 
followed by reducing it to atmospheric pressure and 
continued for 1 000 cycles. The duration of each 
pulse shall be five minutes. Raising pressure shall take 
one minute. Holding pressure time is three minutes. 
Declining pressure down to atmospheric pressure in 
one minute. There shall not be any leaks or defects in 
the filter parts. 


8 HYDRAULIC PARAMETERS AND TESTS 


8.1 General 


Filter media used for the clean pressure drop shall be 
recommended by the manufacturer. It should be of the 
most commonly used grades, not being extremely fine 
or coarse grades. 


8.1.1 Clean Pressure Drop (Pressure Loss) 


Backwash initiation (if necessary) and optimal 
cycle duration criteria shall follow manufacturer’s 


Table 2 Test Conditions and Requirements 
( Clause 6.2.3.1 ) 


Material Temperature Circumferential Stress Minimum Duration 
Kë Nimm? h 

PVC-U 60 10 1,000 
HDPE, Type I 80 3 170 

HDPE, Type II 80 4 170 

PP, Type I 95 3:5 1,000 
PP, Type II 95 2:5 1,000 
POM 60 10 1,000 
ABS 70 4 1,000 
DAG (GF reinforced) 70 4 1,000 


recommended operating procedures. The specific 
criteria used for each test period and general test 
conditions shall be reported. The pressure loss vs. 
flow tests shall be conducted with newly installed, 
backwashed media. 


8.1.2 Test Period 


The duration (time) for testing each pressure-flow 
combination depends on the time required for the entire 
system to reach conditions of hydraulic equilibrium. 
These conditions will normally occur after about 20 to 
30 min as determined by monitoring pressure and flow 
fluctuations. 


8.1.3 Pre-screen the water used for testing pressure 
loss in clean filter media by passing the water through 
a filter element with an aperture size at least 50 percent 
smaller than the common declared filtration capability 
of filters being tested. This pre-screening will avoid 
or reduce the need to back flush the filter during a 
single complete flow test run. The measured pressure 
drop shall not be more than 10 prcent greater than the 
pressure drop declared by the manufacturer. 


8.2 Flows, Pressure and Test Sequence 


8.3.1 Flows 
Tests shall be conducted at the following flow-rates: 
a) The manufacturer’s minimum recommended 
operating flow per unit; 
b) 0.4 Qaras 
DAS 
d) Maximum recommended operating flow per unit; 
and 
e) 1.2 times the manufacturer’s maximum 


recommended operating flow. All flows tested 
shall be reported. 


8.3.2 Inlet and Outlet Pressures 


Inlet pressures shall be maintained at the manufacturer’s 
maximum recommended operating levels. Inlet and 
outlet pressures shall be reported at each flow, once 
equilibrium conditions have been established. 


8.3.3 Testing Sequence 


Tests shall proceed from the lowest to the highest flow. 
Backwash, if necessary, to maintain the manufacturer’s 
recommended post-backwash pressure differentials. 


9 BACK FLUSHING 
PARAMETERS AND TESTS 


HYDRAULIC 


9.1 Test for Flushing Mechanism 


Prior to conducting this test, flush the media in 
accordance with the media manufacturer’s instructions 
(for normal field operating conditions). 


IS 14606 : 2022 


Connect the filter as described in the manufacturers’ 
instructions to a test assembly to simulate field 
installation. The test assembly shall be capable 
of supplying at least twice the maximum flushing 
volume and maximum flow rate as declared by 
the manufacturer at the nominal pressure. Attach a 
collecting vessel to the flushing opening of the filter 
(flush collecting manifold) for collection of the 
flush water. Set the pressure at the filter inlet to the 
minimum working pressure and perform the flushing 
cycle manually. Measure the time from the moment 
the flush valve begins to open to the time it shuts. 
Repeat the test 3 consecutive times for each flow at 
minimum back flush flow rate and at maximum back 
flush flow rate recommended. Test results will be the 
average of all six tests. 


The following requirements shall be met: 


a) The flushing shall 
satisfactorily. 


mechanism operate 


b) The volume of water measured shall not exceed 
the volume of flushing water declared by the 
manufacturer by more than + 7 percent. 


c) The duration of flushing measured shall not 
deviate from the flushing duration declared by 
the manufacturer by more than 15 percent. 


9.2 Detecting Media Escape 


9.2.1 A large volume appropriate fine screen should 
be installed at the back flushing outlet free flow port. 


9.2.2 All media that has escaped during each single 
test run should be collected, dried and weighed 
separately. 


9.2.3 Media Escape Results 


Operate the flushing cycle for three times at the 
maximum recommended flow rate. The total escaping 
media (combined from all tests) should not exceed 
0.05 % (1: 2,000) of media in the filter. In the three 
flushing cycles there shall be a rapid decline of media 
escaping in each consecutive test (with the same back 
flushing flow and pressure). The separate weighing 
should show such decline. 


9.2.4 After test completion, perform visual inspection 
of particle media. 


Upon completion of each set of backwash tests, as 
stated above, the granular media shall be visually 
inspected for the appearance of ‘“‘dishing”’, 
depressions, uneven upper surface media, 
channelling, tunnelling, or other factors that may 
reduce the filtration effectiveness. The existence, 
nature, depths, and sizes of these occurrences shall 
be described, recorded, and reported. 


IS 14606 : 2022 


10 AUTOMATIC BACK FLUSHING AND 
CONTROLLER 


10.1 Backwash Initiation 


Initiation of individual backwash operations for a filter 
system shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
criteria with respect to: 


a) Specified timing (for example, 3 h) between 
backwash events. 


b) Achieving a specified pressure drop across the 
filter system. 


c) Both timing and pressure drop. 
d) By volume of filtered water. 


The construction of an automatic self-cleaning filter 
shall comply with the following specific requirements: 


1) When the flushing control mechanism is 
included as part of the filter package, it shall 
be installed and tested together with the filter. 


2) The filter control mechanism shall permit 
manual flushing at any time, irrespective of the 
conditions that apply to automatic flushing. 


3) The construction of the filter shall allow for 
manual operation in the event of failure of the 
automatic flushing control mechanism. 


4) The coordination of the cleaning operation 
and the opening of the flushing valve shall 
prevent water flowing out of the flushing valve 
unless the filter is being cleaned. However, 
an overlap of 5 percent + 5 s of the flushing 
time is permitted where these two valves are 
open/close at the same time. 


5 


wm 


The filter shall be equipped with a protective 
mechanism that prevents repeated flushing or 
notifies of repeated flushing. The mechanism 
may include the possibility of cancelling this 
operation. 


6) In addition to the above construction features 
it is also recommended that the filter shall be 
fitted with a device to enable adjustment of 
the pre-set value of the filter flushing control 
mechanism for activation of the flushing 
control mechanism and for control of the 
duration of the automatic flushing cycle of the 


filter. 


wm 


10.2 Flushing Control Mechanism Testing 


10.2.1 Mechanism Activated by Pressure Differential 
Sensor 


Disconnect the “low” pressure connection of the 
differential valve and connect it to an external pressure 
source. Leave the “high” pressure connection as 
connected for regular filter operation. Apply a pressure 
equal to the minimum working pressure at the filter inlet 
and the same at the external pressure source. Gradually 


reduce the pressure at the external pressure source 
(simulating filter outlet pressure) until the flushing 
operation is performed. Repeat the test once with a 
filter inlet pressure, equal to the value in the middle of 
the Pressure range recommended by the manufacturer, 
and once more with a filter inlet pressure equal to the 
nominal pressure. 


The pressure differential (the filter inlet pressure minus 
the external source pressure) that causes flushing shall 
not deviate from the pressure differential declared by 
the manufacturer by more than + 10 percent. 


10.2.2 Mechanism Activated by Duration of Operation 


Pre-set the flushing control mechanism to three different 
time intervals — short, long and intermediate — within 
the range of possibilities declared by the manufacturer. 
Operate the filter with an inlet pressure equal to the 
minimum working pressure. Measure the time interval 
between one activation and the next one. Repeat the 
test with a filter inlet pressure equal to the specified 
pressure. The time interval between the two activations 
shall not deviate from the preset time intervals by more 
than + 10 min. 


10.2.3 Mechanism Activated by Volume of Filtered 
Water 


Pre-set the flushing control mechanism to two different 
volumes of water within the range specified by the 
manufacturer. One volume is selected from the lower 
20 percent of the range declared by the manufacturer 
and the second volume from the upper 20 percent of 
this range. Operate the filter and measure the volume of 
water flowing through the filter, up to activation of the 
automatic flushing control mechanism. The measured 
volume of water flowing through the filter shall not 
deviate from the pre-set quantity of water by more than 
+ 10 percent. 


10.2.4 Mechanism Activated by Some Other Physical 
Quantity 

Connect the filter to a water source and make all 
the adjustments necessary in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Maintain the pressure at 
the inlet to the filter at the minimum recommended 
working pressure. If the control mechanism is 
adjustable, conduct the test three times with the control 
mechanism pre-set differently each time to the lowest, 
the highest and the mid-range setting, respectively. 
Otherwise, conduct the test only once. 


Operate the filter according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions until three flushing cycles have been 
completed. Measure the value of the determining 
quantity at the initiation of each flushing cycle. Repeat 
the entire process with the pressure at the inlet of 
the filter readjusted to the maximum recommended 
working pressure. The following requirements 
shall be met: 


a) The flushing cycle shall be initiated and shall 
proceed as prescribed by the manufacturer. 


b) The value of the determining quantity at the 
initiation of any flushing cycle shall not deviate 
by more than + 10 percent from the pre-set value 
for an adjustable mechanism, or from the value 
declared by the manufacturer for a non-adjustable 
mechanism. 


10.2.5 Test of Protective Device 


The filter system shall be equipped with a protective 
device, to prevent repeated flushing. This device shall 
be tested as described below: 


Operate the filter with an inlet pressure equal to the 
minimum working pressure. Perform two consecutive 
manually triggered flushing. The filter shall flush 
satisfactorily. Continue to operate the flushing control 
mechanism manually triggered until the protective 
device stops the flushing cycle or creates, by artificial 
means, the conditions declared by the manufacturer 
which will activate the protective device. The number 
of flushing until activation of the protective device, or 
(according to type of control mechanism), the time that 
elapses until activation of the protective device, shall 
not deviate from the manufacturers declaration by more 
than + 20 percent. 


11 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE 
MANUFACTURER 


The manufacturer shall supply the 
information about the media filter: 


following 


a) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

b) Model and code number of filter; 

c) Material of construction and type of paint or 
coating; 

d) Nominal size and working pressure; 


e) Minimum and maximum working pressure; 


f) Minimum pressure required for: 
1) filtering operation, 
2) flushing operation, and 
3) operation of the control syste. 
g) Maximum and minimum flow-rate; 
h) Dimensions of filter; 
j) Type of connections to piping network; 
k) Length for assembly; 
m) Bed area and depth of filter; 
n) Mass 
1) Tank (empty vessel); and 
2) Tank with valves, manifolds and media. 
p) Quantity, size and type of bed; 
q) Pressure differential required to initiate flushing; 
r) Duration of flushing; 


IS 14606 : 2022 


s) Flow of flush water in the range of pressures stated 
by the manufacturer; 

t) Range of possibilities for flushing control 
according to time, volume, etc. (in case of 
automatic back flush filter); 

u) Number of repeat flushing (in the event of failure) 
until flushing stops in filters equipped with a 
protective mechanism (in case of automatic back 
flush filter); 

v) Safe maximum pressure drop and closing of cover 
instructions; 

w) Drawings that describe the filter and the filter 
battery, their parts and the manner of assembly; 


y) Quantity, size and type of filter media; and 


z) Head-loss versus flow at the recommended range 
chart for media defined by the manufacturer. 


12 BACK FLUSHING CONTROLLER 


Power supply and driving source, including 
instructions as to prefiltering (if water), replacement 
and troubleshooting. Maintenance and spare parts for 
the controller system. 


13 MAINTENANCE 
Chemical and corrosion resistance table Instructions 
for maintenance: 

a) Current service; 


b) Periodical - during the irrigation season 
including (for example) more thorough media 
cleaning/lubricating metal parts and rubber seals, 
covers, etc.; 


c 


wa 


Seasonal maintenance between irrigation seasons. 
This should include chemical immersion of 
the media, checking of valve and solenoids, 
lubricating, etc.; and 


d 


wa 


Oxidants, used for media bleaching and chemicals 
commonly used in agriculture, should be at the top 
of this table. 


14 INFORMATIVE ANNEX 


14.1 General 


a) A great variety of granular material is used for 
filtration. It is not in the scope of this standard 
to recommend specific media, nor its use with a 
water or irrigation type. 


b) However, the filter media is a decisive factor both 
in filtration performance as well as backwashing 
and maintaining the filter system. 


c) The supplier should recommend the filter media to 
be used and his range of media for different water 
quality. 

d) The supplier should relate all data to the specific 
filter media, such as: hydraulic, pressure and back 
flushing parameters, etc. 


IS 14606 : 2022 


14.2 Rough Media Classification 


a) Granule material — A wide range from 
gravel/silica/granite/sand, to anthracite and/or 
other organic, chemically manufactured granules, 
etc. 


b 


wm 


Specific gravity can be classified into three major 

categories: 

1) Most of the 
(2.5 - 2.75 g/cm*); 

2) Anthracite and light material (around 1.4 g/cm’); 
and 


geological materials 


3) Similar to water (Specific gravity of + 1 g/cm’). 
c 


wa 


Granule Shape 


1) Sharp edge shaped (crushed or occurring 
naturally) commonly used; 


2) Round shaped; 
3) Mixed shape; and 
4) Random shape. 

d 


wa 


Grain size and particle size distribution — There 
are complete standards defining this subject. The 
most common method is the U S No. size system. 
However, millimetric grain size is widely used. 

NOTE — If multilayer filtration is applied (which is not 
common nor justified in most cases in agricultural irrigation), 
the difference between layer granule specific gravity and size 
is essential in order to keep layer order after back flushing. 


14.3 General Guidelines for Media Parameters to be 
defined by the Supplier 


14.3.1 Grain size and particle size distribution The 
most common parameters are: 


a) Effective size — The size (opening) in mm that 
will just pass 10 percent of the grains (10 percent 
by weight) [see IS 2405 (Part 2) and IS 10483]. 


b) Median size — The size in mm that half the 
grains will pass through (50 percent by weight) 
[see IS 2405 (Part 2) and IS 10483]. 


c) Uniformity Coefficient (Uc) — The uniformity 
coefficient (Uc) is a numeric estimate of how sand 
is graded, and is a dimensionless number or in other 
words it has no units. The term ‘graded’ relates 
to where the concentrations of sand particles are 
located by size. Sand with all the particles in two 
size ranges would be defined as narrowly graded 
sand and would have a low Uc. Sand with near 
equal proportions in all the fractions would be 
defined as widely graded sand and would have a 
high Uc value. The Uc is calculated by dividing 
D60 (the size of screen opening where 60 percent 
of a sample passes and 40 percent is retained) by 
D10 (the effective particle size- that size of screen 
opening where 10 percent of a sample passes and 
90 percent is retained). The larger the Uc the less 


uniform the sand. The value of Uc which is 1.5 or 
less is regarded as satisfactory. 


14.3.2 Other Common Guidelines 


a) Purity — The filter media should be visually free 
of: clay, shale, organic material, dust and any other 
impurities. 


b 


wm 


Specific gravity should be clearly indicated. There 
should be a clear technological reasoning for 
using filter media with specific gravity of less than 
2.5 g/cm. If applied, media escape tests should 
be performed with this specific media, and back 
flushing parameters adjusted in accordance. 

c) A table, relating media size to flow rate (for 
different contaminants) should be presented by the 
supplier. 

d 


wm 


A general chart, relating media grade to filtration 
capability in microns, for various flow rates should 
be presented by the system supplier. 


e) Chemical resistance — Should be clearly 
indicated. Acid solubility should not exceed 
5 percent by weight. 


f) Thorough cleaning of media, including chemical 
bath instructions, should be part of the operation 
manual. 


g) Life expectancy of media should be declared. 


h) Media replacement facilities and service should 
be referred to. 


15 THIS STANDARD REFERS TO THREE 
SUPPLY PHASES OF THE FILTER 


a) The filter vessel (tank) housing. 


b) The filter vessel above filled with granulated 
media filter material(s) as a charged (filled up) 
filter. This configuration is complete with valves, 
connections, air release and / or other accessories. 


c) This construction phase when connected to 
and controlled by a flushing control device is 
a complete operating single filter unit, usually 
positioned as a part of a filtration station called 
a “filter battery”. In most cases a filtered flush 
stream is supplied by other filter units of the 
battery that are in the filtering stage. In case other 
options are used to supply flush water, the supplier 
should guarantee that it is in accordance with this 
standard. 


16 SAMPLING 
REQUIREMENTS 


AND ACCEPTANCE 


16.1 Type Tests 


The sample of test specimens shall be taken at random 
from a quantity of at least 20 filters. The number of test 
specimens required for each test shall be as specified 
in Table 3. 


IS 14606 : 2022 


Table 3 Number of Test Specimens and Acceptance Number 
( Clause 16.1 ) 


Clause No. Name of Test No. of Test Specimens Acceptance No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
6.2 Resistance of filter to internal hydrostatic pressure 3 1 
6.3 Resistance of filter to Internal hydrostatic 3 1 
Pressure at high Temperature 
7 Resistance to cyclic pressure 3 IW 
8 Hydraulic parameter and tests 1 0 
9.1 Test for flushing mechanism 1 0 
92 Detecting media escape 3 1 
10.2 Flushing control mechanism testing 3 1 


(1) Refers only to leakage at joints. Leakage through the filter tank (vessel) is cause for rejection of the lot. 


16.1.1 If the number of defective specimens in the 
sample does not exceed the acceptance number 
specified in Table 3, the sample shall be considered 
as complying with the requirements of this 
Indian Standard. If the number of defective specimens 
in the sample is greater than the acceptance number, 
the sample shall be considered as not complying 
with the requirements of this Indian Standard. 


16.2 Acceptance Test 


The test specified in 6.3 shall be only performed as part 
of type tests at the time of inclusion and then at every 
one-year frequency. The test specified in 7 shall be only 
performed as part of type tests at the time of inclusion 
and then at every three years’ frequency. For acceptance 
of manufacturing lot or shipment of media filter, 
the sampling shall be conducted according to 
IS 2500 (Part 1) based on the AQL 2.5 and special 
inspection level IV. For the test specified in 6.2, 8, 
9.1, 9.2 and 10.2 the shipment or manufacturing lot 
complies with this standard if number of defective 
specimens found in the test does not exceed the 
acceptance number specified in IS 2500 (Part 1). 


17 MARKING 


17.1 Each filter shall be marked with the following 
particulars on filter housing (vessel); 


a) Name of manufacturer and/or his registered trade- 
mark, 


b) Model Identification, 

c) Nominal connection size, (inlet, outlet, backflush) 
d) Nominal pressure, 

e) Arrow indicating the inlet and outlet, 

f) Recommended flow range, 

g) Type of filtration media, 

h) Safety instructions, and 


j) Input/output type and voltage requirements (only 
in case of automatic back flushing). 


18 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 14606 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 6.2.3.1 ) 


RESISTANCE OF FILTER TO INTERNAL HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE: TEST FOR PLASTIC 
MOULDED MATERIAL FOR FILTER HOUSING 


Prepare the test specimen as per 6.2.3.1. 


A-1 PRINCIPLE 


After conditioning, test pieces are subjected to a 
specified constant internal hydrostatic pressure for a 
specified period of time or until a test piece or pieces 
fail. 


Throughout the test, the test pieces are kept in an 
environment at a specified constant temperature this 
is either water (“water-in-water’” test), another liquid 
(“water-in-liquid” test) or air (““water-in air test). 
The following test parameters shall be specified: 
a) the type of end cap to be used; 
b) the test temperature; 
c) for evaluation purposes, the SDR or S-series or 
size of pipe or fitting to be used; 
d) number of test pieces; 
e) the test pressure, p, or the circumferential (hoop) 
stress, a, to be induced by the test pressure; 
f) the type of test, that is, “water-in-water’, 
“water-in-liquid” or “water-in-air’”; 
g) the duration of the test under pressure and the 
criteria for a failure; and 
h) the requirements, or patterns of requirements, if 
any which determine the initiation of additional 
testing. 


Utilitie, 
SAR, 


5 


Kr? 


TypeA 


A-2 APPARATUS 


A-2.1 End Caps, fixed to the ends of the test piece. By 
means of an appropriate system or procedure, end caps 
shall allow sealing and connection to the pressurizing 
equipment and shall allow purging of the air before 
testing. 


The end caps shall be one of the following types: 


Type A: fittings rigidly connected to the test piece 
but not to each other, and hence transmitting 
the hydrostatic end thrust to the test piece, for 
example, as shown Fig. 2, or equivalent. They 
may comprise flanged plates on the ends of a large 
diameter pipes, optionally fused when flanges, 
caps, plugs or plates are of a compatible material 
to the test pieces. 


Type B: sockets, made of metal, fitted with joints 
ensuring sealing onto the external surface of the 
test piece and connected to one another, and hence 
not transmitting the hydrostatic end thrust to the 
test piece. They may comprise one or more metal 
rods, see Fig. 2, allowing sufficient longitudinal 
movement at the ends of the test pieces, to avoid 
buckling due to thermal expansion. If external 
rods are used, contact of the outside surface of 
the test piece with one or several rods shall be 
avoided during the test. In this case, the test shall 
be disregarded. 


G 
A 


l Type B 


Fic. 2 EXAMPLES OF ENDS CAPS FOR INTERNAL PRESSURE TESTING 


10 


Other than toothed gripe any sharp edges which 
would come into contact with the outside surface 
of the pipe shall be rounded off. The constituent 
material of the end caps might have an adverse 
effect on the test piece under test and such 
materials should therefore be avoided as far as 
possible. 


NOTE — It is recognized that times to failure can be different 
depending upon the type of end caps used. 


A-2.2 Tank, filled with water or other liquid kept at 
a constant temperature as specified in the referring 
standard to within + 1 °C, or oven, the temperature 
of which shall be kept at the specified value to within 
*_1 °C, When an environment other than water is used, 
necessary precautions shall be taken, in particular those 
concerning safety and any interaction between liquid 
and the material(s) of the test piece. When environments 
other than water are used, tests which are intended 
to be comparative shall be carried out in the same 
environment. As the results are strongly, influenced by 
temperature, the tolerance on temperature should be 
kept as small within the specified limits for example, 
by using forced circulation of the fluid. When testing 
in all the pipe surface temperature should be checked 
in addition to the air. Potable water should be used and 
it is necessary to avoid contamination of the water by 
any substance likely to affect the results, for example, 
detergents lubricants. 


A-2.3 Support or hangers, enabling test pieces to be 
pieces in the tank or oven such that contact between 
them of with the sidewalls of the tank/oven is avoided 
as far as possible so as not to influence the test results. 


A-2.4 Pressurizing equipment: capable of applying the 
required pressure gradually and smoothly and then of 
keeping this indicated (or measured) pressure to within 
“_1 percent for the duration of the test. As the results 
are strongly influenced by pressure, the tolerance on 
pressure should be kept as small as possible within 
the specified limits. The pressure should preferably be 
applied individually to each test piece. However, the 
use of equipment enabling the pressure to be applied 
simultaneously to several test pieces is also permitted if 
there, is no danger of interference when failure occurs 
(for example, by the use of an isolation valve or a 
test based on the first failure in a batch). To maintain 
the pressure within the specified tolerance, a system 
should be introduced which automatically controls the 
pressure within this specified tolerance (for example, 
due to expansion of the test piece). 


A-2.5 Pressure measurement devices, capable of 
checking conformity to the specified test pressure. 
The range of the gauge shall be such that the required 
pressure setting shall lie within the calibrated range of 
the device used (see A-4). The pressure measurement 
devices shall not contaminate the test fluid. In case 
of dispute, the reference level of the pressure device 
shall be equal to the water level in the tank. Master 


11 


IS 14606 : 2022 


gauges for calibration of the apparatus should be used. 
It is recommended to use equipment which is capable 
of stopping the timer (A-2.7) in event of failure or 
leakage and closing the pressure circuit to the test piece 
concerned. 


A-2.6 Temperature measuring equipment, capable of 
checking conformity to the specified test temperature 
(see A 2.2). 


A-2.7 Timer, capable of recording the duration of the 
pressure applications up to the moment of failure or 
leakage, to within 0.5 percent of the expected testing 
time. 


A-3 NUMBER OF TEST PIECES 


Prepare a minimum of three test pieces unless otherwise 
specified in the referring standard or specification. 


A-4 CALCULATION OF TEST PRESSURE 


A-4.1 General 


For material testing, the test pressure shall be calculated 
from a given circumferential hoop stress and based on 
the measured dimensions of the test piece, see A-4.2. 


For pipe testing, the pressure shall be calculated from 
a given circumferential hoop stress and using one of 
the following options/given by the referring standard 
or specification: 


a) Based on the measured dimensions of the test 
piece, see A-4.2; and 

b) Based on the nominal dimensions of the test piece, 
see A-4,3. 


For testing of components, the test pressure shall 
be as given in the referring standard. For testing of 
assemblies, the test pressure shall be calculated from a 
given circumferential hoop stress and based on the SDR 
of the pipe(s) used for the test piece, see A-4.4, unless 
a test pressure is specified by the referring standard or 
specification. 


A-4.2 Pressure calculations based on the measured 
dimensions of the test piece: 

a) Calculate the test pressure, p, in kg/cm? ; and 

b) to three significant figures, using the following 


equation: 
2emin 
P = 10.2 o ————_ 
dem -— e min 
where 
o = is the hoop stress to be induced by the applied 
pressure, in megapascals d. 
dem = is the mean outside diameter of the test piece, 
in millimetres 
emin= is the minimum wall thickness of the free 


length of the test piece, millimetres 


IS 14606 : 2022 


NOTE: The factor 10.2 results from the ratio between 
megapascals and kg/cm’. 


A.4.3 Pressure calculations based on the nominal 
dimensions of the test piece 

1) Calculate the test pressure, p, in kg/cm? 

2) to three significant figures, using the following 


equation: 
2en 
P=10.20 
dn-en 
where 
o = is the hoop stress to be induced by the applied 
pressure, in megapascals d. 
dn = is the mean outside diameter of the test piece, 
in millimetres; and 
en= is the minimum wall thickness of the free 


length of the test piece, millimetres. 


NOTE — The factor 10.2 results from the ratio between 
megapascals and kg/cm’. 


A-4.4 Pressure Calculations Based on SDR of Pipe(s) 
of the Test Piece 


a) Calculate the test pressure, p, in kg/cm? ; and 


b) to three significant figures, using the following 
equation: 
2 (10.2 o) 


[SDR]-1 
where 


o = is the hoop stress to be induced by the applied 
pressure, in megapascals d` and 


SDR = is the standard dimension ratio of the pipe(s) of 
the test piece. 


NOTE — The factor 10.2 results from the ratio between 
megapascals and kg/cm’. 


A-5 CALIBRATION AND ACCURACY OF THE 
APPARATUS 


The temperature and pressure control systems and 
the equipment for measuring temperature, pressure 
and time shall be capable of maintaining the values 
within the specified limits and shall be calibrated. The 
accuracy of the apparatus shall be considered such that 
the requirements for temperature, pressure and time are 
fulfilled. 


A-6 CONDITIONING 


Prepare the test pieces, removing any traces of dirt, 
oil, wax or other contamination, and fit them with 
the end caps (A.2) specified for the test. Measure and 
record the free length of the pipes of the test piece 10, 
as appropriate. Fill the test pieces with water, which 
may be preheated to a temperature not more than the 


12 


test temperature. After filling the test pieces, immerse 
them in a water bath or place them in an oven at the 
temperature specified by the referring standard and 
condition for a period in accordance with Table 4. 
When conditioning at temperatures in excess of 100 °C 
sufficient pressure shall be applied to prevent boiling. 


Table 4 Conditioning Periods 
( Clause A-6 ) 


Thickness e... mm Minimum conditioning period 
h 
er 1 
3 <emin<8 3 
Her 16 6 
16 < e ain < 32 10 
32 < emin 16 


NOTE — It is recognized that extended conditioning periods 
beyond those specified in Table 4 could influence the test 
results. 
The test pieces shall not be tested within the period of 
time after their manufacture specified in the referring 
standard. Otherwise, a minimum period of 24 h after 
production shall be observed. 


A-7 TEST PROCEDURE 


A-7.1 Select the type of test, that is, “water-in-water”, 
“water-in-air”, or “water-in-liquid”, as specified by the 
referring standard or specification. Measure and record 
the time taken to pressurize the test piece as follows. 
Connect the test pieces to the pressurizing equipment 
(A-2.4) and bleed off the air. After conditioning, 
progressively and smoothly apply the test pressure 
as calculated in A-4, in the shortest time practicable 
between 30 s and 1 h depending upon the material, 
the size of the test piece and the capability of the 
pressurizing equipment. 


When the test pressure is achieved, record the time or 
reset the timer as necessary to begin to measure the 
period for which the specified pressure is maintained 
in the test piece(s). 


A-7.2 Keep the test piece suspended in the thermally 
controlled environment. Maintain a constant 
temperature as mentioned in Table 2 of clause 6.2.3.1 
and observe the temperature tolerances specified in 
A-2.2 until testing ceases in accordance with A-7.3 or 
A-7.4 as applicable. 


A-7.3 The test is terminated either when the specified 
duration as mentioned in Table 2 of 6.2.3.1 is reached, 
or when a failure or leak occurs in the test piece, in 
which case record the time to failure, unless the 
procedure given in A.7.4 is applicable. 


If a failure occurs, record the type, that is, brittle, or 
ductile, or other. 
NOTE — Failure is “brittle” if no visible yield deformation 
has occurred in the failure zone. If the failure is accompanied 
by a yield deformation in the failure zone, visible without 
magnification, it is of the “ductile” type. For some materials, 
brittle failure could be indicated by weeping at the pipe surface. 
In the event of equipment failure, tests which have 
been ongoing for a period of 500 h to 1 000 h may be 
continued providing the equipment is reinstated within 
one day. For tests which have been ongoing for a 
period of more than 1 000 h, the test may be continued, 
provided the equipment is reinstated within three days. 
The time during which the equipment is not able to 


13 


IS 14606 : 2022 


function normally shall not be included in the test time. 
Test interruptions shall be recorded in the test report. 


A-7.4 If a break occurs in the test piece at a distance 
of less than 0.1 10 mm from an end cap, disregard the 
result and repeat the test using another test piece. 


When testing components, if there is a leakage 
outside of the component itself (failure of the seal or 
bursting of the pipe), or any failure associated with 
grooves machined and indicative of inappropriate 
groove design and/or machining conditions, repeat the 
test — if necessary using other components — such that 
the assembly remains watertight for the minimum 
period required for the test. 


IS 14606 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Farm Irrigation and Drainage Systems, FAD 17 


Organization 


National Institute of Biotic Stress Management, 
Raipur 


Automat Industries Private Limited, New Delhi 


Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural 
University, Hisar 


Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET), Chennai 


EPC Industries Private Limited, Nashik 
Finolex Industries Limited, Pune 


Gas Authority of India Ltd. (GAIL), New Delhi 


Gujarat Green Revolution Company Limited, 
Vadodara 


ICAR-Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 


Jain Irrigation Systems Limited, Jalgaon 
National Committee on Plasticulture Applications in 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Productivity Council, New Delhi 


Netafim Irrigation Private Limited, Vadodara 


Nimbus Pipes Limited, Jaipur 
Orange Growers Association of India, Amravati 
Premier Irrigation Adritec Limited, Nagpur 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 
Dr S. K. Amrast (Chairman) 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 
SHRI DURGA PaDA GHOSH (Alternate) 


Dr ViAyA RANI 


SHRI S. K. JAIN 
DR A. K. Nema (Alternate) 


SHRI SANKAR KUMAR MAITI 
SHRI C. V. JosHi (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY JADAV 
SHRI BAJIRAO BHOSALE (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH KHANDELWAL 


Sur P. P. DONGA 
SHRI R. V. LimBasulia (Alternate) 


DR RAMDHAR SINGH 


Dr K. V. RAMANARAO 


DR ASHOK MISHRA 
SHRI CHANDRANATH CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL LODHA 
SHRI ABHIJIT JOsHI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 
Suri Routt LALL (Alternate) 


SHRI N. K. CHANJI 
SHRIMATI RACHANA SHALINI (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SETHURAMALINGAM 
SHRI GOVIND TAPADIA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHISH KUMAR LATH 
SHRI ER ATIT SONI (Alternate I) 
SHRI B. L. JANGID (Alternate ID) 


SHRI AMOL MOHANRAO TOTEY 


Suri P. K. BASAK 
SHRI G. K. Kumar (Alternate) 


DR K. G. SINGH 


SHRI SAURABH BAGAL 
SHRI AMIT SHAH (Alternate) 


14 


IS 14606 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 

Saurashtra Plastics Manufacturer’s Association, SHRI ARUN ROKAD 

Rajkot SHRI J. K. Pater (Alternate D 

SHRI BHARAT Kumar V. SIROYA (Alternate ID 

Visvesvaraya Technological University (VTU), DR NAGRAJ S. PATIL 

Belgaum SHRI VIJAY KUMAR H. (Alternate) 
In Personal Capacity Dr T. B. S. RAJPUT 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (FAD), BIS 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 17 (02226). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


f 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western S Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


