( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard APPLICATION GUIDE FOR THE SELECTION OF HIGH VOLTAGE FUSES FOR TRANSFORMER CIRCUIT APPLICATIONS
0.

FOREWORD
factors to be taken into account for specific applications where certain aspects of the characteristics of the fuse-links are required to be carefully considered. Realizing this need, an Indian Standard has already been prepared as IS : 10624-1983* to cover fuse-links on motor circuit applications. The present standard is an addition to this series and is intended to provide guidelines on fuse-links for transformer circuit application. 0.5 The object of this application guide is to specify the criteria for coordination of high voltage fuse-links with other circuit components in transformer application and to provide guidance on the selection of such fuse-links with particular reference to their time/current characteristics and ratings. 0.6 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Publication 787 ( 1983) `Application guide for the selection of fuse-links of high-voltage fuses for transformer circuit applications' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is or complied with, the final value, observed calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-19607. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Specification for high voltage
circuit applications. tRules for rounding off numerical fuse-circuits values for motor

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standard on 24 November 1988, after the draft finalized by the High Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Three classes of high voltage fuses are in general use, namely, the expulsion, liquid and high rupturing . capacity cartridge types. The most common application is on distribution systems up to 33 kV while the liquid and cartridge type fuses are available for use on systems up to 132 kV used largely for protecting voltage transformers. 0.3 The following Indian Standards ble on high voltage fuses: IS : 9385 fuses: Part l-1979 Part 2-1980 Part 3-1980 Specification for are availahigh fuses voltage

Current limiting Expulsion fuses

fuses and similar for high

Application guide voltage fuses

While Parts 1 and 2 cover the requirements and methods of tests for the two types of high voltage fuses, Part 3 covers essential guidelines on their application, operation and maintenance as an aid in obtaining satisfactory performance with high voltage fuses. 0.4 Even though Part 3 mentioned above is adequate enough on selection of fuse-links, there has been a need to elaborate on additional

( reaised ).

1. SCOPE

1.1 This application guide applies to the use, for
transformer circuit applications, of fuse-links fuses complying with the requirements IS : 9385 ( Part 1 )-1979*.
for high voltage fuses: Part

2. FUSE-LINK TERISTICS

TIME CURRENT

CHARACof highCircuit

of of

2.1 The time/current characteristics for transformer voltage fuse-links applications should have:

*Specification limiting fuses.

1 Current

a) Relatively high operating current in the 0'1 s region so as to withstand 1

I8 : ~12534- 1988 transformer inrush current and give good coordination with protection devices on the secondary side ( where fitted ). b) Relatively low operating current in the 10 s region so as to ensure rapid clearance of transformer winding faults, secondary side faults and if applicable, primary side earth faults, and to give good co-ordination with overcurrent protective devices on the source side. The pre-arcing time/current characteristics of fuse-links for transformer circuit applications should preferably, therefore, be within the following limits: Win where IO = current rating of the fuselink, and Ins and Jr,.1 pre-arcing currents corresponding to 10 s and 0' 1 s, respectively expressed as the mean values with the tolerances specified in IS : 9385 (Part 1 )-1979*.
values shall be expressed in

3.2 Referring

to Fig. 1

4

The primary side high-voltage fuse-link minimum pre-arcing time/current characteristic should be to the right of the point A defining the transformer inrush characteristic (For practical purposes, this may be taken from 10 to 12 times the highest continuous current associated with the actual transformer size for a duration of 0'1 s). NOTE- The wording `actual transformer size' was chosen to cover also the case of a transformer that with its magnetic circuit unchanged, has been uprated or derated for whatever reason, such as, thermal.

< 6

W The

If&l/Al > 7 (IO/100 )sD2s

current rating of the primary side high-voltage fuse-link should exceed the full load current of the transformer:

1) by 2)

an amount sufficient to allow for permissible overloading of the transformer under service conditions;

by a further amount where the fuselink(s) are mounted in an enclosure so as to ensure that the specified temperature-rise limits for fuse-links are not exceeded; and

NOTE-AH
amperes.

the

current

3) by a further amount where the ambient air temperature is likely to exceed that specified in IS : 9385 ( Part l)-1979*.

The term (ls/lOO)""s is introduced to take account of the fact that the pre-arcing timecurrent characteristics for a range of fuse-links diverge as they approach the short-time region. 3. CO-ORDINATION 5.1 Figure 1 illustrates a typical transformer application involving a high-voltage fuse-link ( or fuse-links ),. a transformer and possible protective devices on both source and load sides. The transformer will be chosen for its particular duty and the full load current, thus fixing the value of permissible overload current ( where applicable and also by inference, the The high-voltage fuse-link(s) inrush current. are chosen so as to give optimum protection to the circuit, bearing in mind the facts of 3.2(a) to (d). Finally, where it is seen that the desired degree of co-ordination has not thereby been achieved, the selection or setting of the source
side overcurrent protective device may be reexamined. Similarly, the maximum rating of the secondary side fuse-link(s) may need to be reduced for the same reasons. ~*Specification for high voltage fuses : Part 1 Current
fuses.

4

The pre-arcing current of the primary side high-voltage fuse-link should be as low as possible in the 10 s region of the fuse time/current characteristic in order to ensure the maximum protection of the transformer ( see 2 ). co-ordination between For complete primary side and secondary side fuse-links or other protective devices on the load side, the intersection B of the primary side time/current characteristic (minimum pre-arcing ) and the secondary side device characteristic ( maximum total operating ) ( as referred to the primary side taking into account the appropriate ratio ) should occur at a value of current greater than that of the maximum fault current on the load side of the secondary side protective device.
RATINGS

4

4. OTHER

4.1 The other ratings shall be as follows: a) Voltage b) Breaking capacily : see IS : 9385 ( Part 1 )-1979*. : see IS : 9385 (Part 1 )-1979*.

c) Minimum breaking current
*Specification limiting fuses. for high voltage fuses: Part 1 Current

limiting

2

ISr12534-1988
ECFECI Wl6H Of AM6lENT POSSl6LE AIR / OERATING TEMPERATURE /--PROTECTIVE -ERlSTI$ DEVICE SOURCE CHARACT SIDE DUE TO ENCLOSURE OR

ON

LOW

VOLTAGE

FUSE-LINK DEVICE OPERATING (REFERRED SIDE) FUSE-LINK

1

OR PROTECTIVE MAXIMUM TOTAL CHARACTERISTIC TO HIGH VOLTAGE VOLTA6E

aa
-h

`iW

wa

I

h,

HIGH MINIMUM

PRE-ARCING

MAXIMUM AT LOCATION PROTECTIVE

FAULT OF

CURRENT LOW-VOLTAGE (REfERRED

DEVICE

CURRENT -Manufecturing components of the circuit
NOT=

tolerances and variations should be taken into account.

between

cold

and

hot

characteristics

of

the

various

Fro.

1

CHARACTERISTICS RELATING TO THE PROTECTION OF A HV/LV TRANSFORMER CIRCUIT tive device, for example, expulsion fuse-links or overload relay, it is necessary to ensure that the minimum breaking current of high-voltage fuselinks is lower than that at the intersection of the respective time/current characteristics. In the case of high-voltage fuse-combinations having instantaneous striker-operated tripping, it is necessary to ensure that the minimum breaking current of the fuse-links is less than the maximum interrupting current of the mechanical switching device of the fuse-combination. NOTE-Due note should be taken of the requirements of Indian Standard Specification on `High-voltage alternating current fuse-switch combinations and fusecircuit-breaker combinations' ( render~~cj~arotion ).

In the case of systems where sustained low value fault currents ( that is, currents higher than the rated current but lower than the minimum rated current of the fuse-link) are unlikely to occur, the use of back-up fuse-links as the only \protection is possible ( in place of general-purpose fuse-links ). In the case of systems where sustained low value fault currents are likely to occur and switching devices, there are no associated damage to back-up fuse-links could occur and general-purpose fuse-links should be used. In the case of high-voltage fuse-links coordinated with some other over-current protec-

3

