**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 2071-1 (1974): High voltage test techniques. Part 2: 
Test Procedure [ETD 19: High Voltage Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 2071 ( Part II ) • 1974 
(Rm" 



Indian Standard 
METHODS OF HIGH VOLTAGE TESTING 

PART II TEST PROCEDURE 

( First Revision ) 

Seventh Reprint SEPTEMBER 2001 
UDC 621.317.32.027.3 



O Copyright 1974 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 



Gr7 S^temberWIA 



{Page 24, clause A-L2.1, tine 4 )— Substitute *p = 0'5' for 

{Page 24, clauses A.1.2.1 and A.1.2.2 )- Substitute 'U' for ' t/' 
wherever it appears. 

( Page 24, clause kA3 ) — - Substitute the following for the existing 
clause: 

'* A-1.3 ConfldeBcc Limits — From any set of n measurements, statistical 
checks may be made to define limits between which the true mean value 
Um and the true standard deviation a may be stated to lie with a given 
probability pc of this being correct. 

These limits are commonly expressed for pc =» 0*95 and are then 
termed ' 95 percent confidence limits '. 

For Class 2 test results, and on the assumption that these have an 
approximately Gaussian distribution, the limits are given by the 
confidence limits for an arithmetic mean value. These are: 

U-stJVT^ t/n,< U + slplW 

sy/{jr^f) ix^pi2<o < iV'or^iT/"^*^! -p*y 

where U is the arithmetic mean of n voltage values, i is the standard 
deviation of n voltage values, tp , x* pl2 and x* ( 1 — /J/2) are variable 
in the student's ( /p ) and in the chi-square ( x* ) distribution for n— 1 
degrees of freedom and with ^ «■ 1 — ^q . If no standard statistical 
table is available, the following values may be used for ^e ■" 0'95. 

n /p /VT 



5 1-24 

10 0-72 

15 0-55 

20 0-47 

30 0-37 

40 0-32 

50 0-28 

NoTB — That the confidence limits of o are aiymetrioil. 

For II •• 20, the 95 percent confidence limits thus are given by: 
£r- 0-47i < Wn < t7 + 0-47 s 
0*76 1 < a < i-46 1 

In the case of Class I or Clau 3 tests, other methods for the calculation of 
the confidence Unfits ihaU he used, foi which reference should bt msde to the 
literature." 



V(«-l)/x' 


'PI2 


vr> 


«-l)/x»( 1-^/2) 


( Lower limit } 




(Upper limit) 


0-60 






2'87 


0-69 






1-83 


0-73 






1-58 


0-76 






1-46 


0-80 






1-34 


0-82 






1-28 


0-84 






1*25 



( Page 2% elausi Ap1.4 ; — SubfUtute the following for the existing 
clause: 

' A-1.4 Determinatimi of Voltaf m Corresponding to Very Low or 
Very High Diemptive Dioeiinrgo Probnbilitieo — ror some purpoiei, 
a determination is desired of voltage levels corresponding to veiy low or 
very high probabilities of disruptive discharge of the test object. 

Conventional rated withstand tesU or assured disruptive discharge tesu 
as described in 4«3.2 and 4.3.3 are neither intendedi nor suitable for provid- 
ing such information. The fact that a test object has passed such test 
procedures in itself gives little information concerning actual disruptive 
discharge probability. 

Analysis of Class 1 test results as described in A»L2«1 rives more 
information on the probability distribution^ but this is still not adef|uate for 
determining the test voltage levels giving defined low or high disruptive 
discharge probabilities. A modified test procedure is therefore described 
below for determining the voltage level corresponding to a very low 
disruptive discharge probability. (For high probability, sa Nbte below ). 

As a preliminary test, several sets of three voltage applications are 
made, starting at a level Uo below the estimated withstand voltage. After 
every set» the voltage level is increased by a constant amount £ of between 
2 percent and 5 percent of Uo. The series of tests are finished at the level 
Ui when the first disruptive discharge occurs. 

The test procedures are then continued in a simibu* manner, but with 
25 voltage applications at each voltage level and starting at the level I/t«» Ug 
—3 S. If no disruptive discharge occurs, the voltage level is increased after 
each series of 25 by successive steps of the same amount £, until a-tUsniptive 
discharsne occurs. When a disruptive discharge does occur, say during the 
series or applications at level t/t, the voltage is then reduced m successive 
steps equal to 2 £ until a full series of 25 applications has been applied with 
no disruptive discharge. Thereafter, the level is increased in steps equal to 
S until one more disruptive dischaige is obtained. 




Nora — Almost Identical procedures are used to detenniae the voltafo ccmt* 
ponding Co very high tmbftbihtics; the foregoing description applies If the %mds 
' withstand ' and ' probability of withstand ' are replaced by « disruptive discharge^ 
and « probability of disruptive discharge *. Tlie vohigc is first decreased from a higil 
value instead of being increased from a low value. 



( ?ag€ 2, dau5$ ^A.\^ lini2) — Add the word ' test * after * i witdiiiig 
impulse voltage*. 

( Page 24, clause A-1.2 ) ~ Add the following matter after the fint 
paragraph: 

* Qass 3 — Class 3 comprises tests made by repeated applicalioii 
of voltages of substantially constant shape in which the levels for euli 
voltage applied, is determined by the result of the preceding votaige 
application, the first voltage applied being roughly equal to the €s8* 
mated 50 percent disruptive discharge value/ 

{Page 24, clause A4.2.2)— Add the foUowmg new dause 
after A-1.2.2: 

* A-1.2.3 Analysis of Rssidts from Class 3 TssU— A test procedure far 
making Class 3 testt and the method of analysis of test results to obtained to 
determine the 50 percent disruptive dischaige voltage are described in 43.4 
(b). For other methods and applications reference should be made to the 
literature/ 

( Page 26, clause Ap1«4 ) —Add the following new clause after ApI.4: 



* ApLS Conventional Rated WIthstnnd suki Awnrod DInrnptivn 
macharga Testa — The probabilitv P of passing a conventional rated 
withstand test ( see 4«3«2«2 ) is given oy the binominal distribution: 

P-(l-^)H+!5^(l^^)" + l*jii^i(l-^)» 

where p is the probability of a disruptive discharge application at the tot 
voltage. 

Using the test procedures described in 4JJ, therefore^ and far a 
test voltage correspondinff to ^ •- 0*10, the object will have 0*82 
probability p of passing the test* With p mm 0*0l| the ^*MF >**pHli i y 
value is ^ « 0*999 5. 

Similarlv, an assured disruptive discharge voltage test, aooord- 
ing to 4«3.3 gives the probability d of passings the test, where 
(l-^» + 5(l -^)^* 

With p » 0*9, the object will have 070 probability of passing the 
test and with p -> 0*99, the corresponding value is Q, «■ 0*994. 



(ETDCI9) 



FUnted at Dee lUy Printen, New Ddhi. bdk 



ISt 2071 (Part n)- 1974 

• Indian Standard 

METHODS OF HIGH VOLTAGE TESTING 

PART li TiST PROCEOUMS 

(First Revision) 

High VolMge Techniques Secttooal Committee, ETDC 19 
Smt H. V. Nakayama lUe Hyiore Stale Electricity BcMtl, Bangelore 

Svatt N. S. S. Arouaiwamv 1 amil Nadu Electricity Boud, Midrat 

Sum M. IC SuNOABABAjAii {Mmmk) 
Shei V. Balabubiaiianiam Hinduitan Bro%ini Bovtri Ltd, Bombar 

Shm K. p. H. Sharma ( AutnuUt ) 
Dm S. C. Bhatia Sicmena India Ltd, Bombay 

Da D. P. Sahoal lAlUrmk) 
DniCTOR ( CPRI ) Central Water k P6%vcr CSonmiMOO ( Power Wing )» 

New Delhi 
DiMfTV DiRBOTOR ( GPRI ) (AUtmok) 
8mri M. L. Donobs Bombay Electric Supply h Timaaport UndertakiBi. 

Bombay 
8mri M. R. K. Kbhon (AUmrnU) 
EitoiNtBa SuFamiMTBNoairr, High U. P. Govcnuscnt Pdctcry Dcvdopmcnt Cntitp 
It Low TaNtiOit TktTiKO Khurja 

LABOaATORY 

AMiiTAfrr EtaoTBiOAL Enouibbb 
{AiUmak) 
Dm H. V. Go^ALARBitHNA Indian Institute of Sdencc, Bangalore 

DBR.S.N.RAu(il/finwf#) 
8«Bi M. M. MuBHiBjBB Calcutta Electric Supply Corpormtioa Ltd, Gdeuna 

Da K. S. Da* Gupta ( Allenuk ) 
Bmnt S. K. Mukhbbjbb National Test House, Cilcutta 

Swii D. V. Nabkb Heavy Electrical! ( Indim ) Ltd, Bbopal 

Shri B. N. Gmoui ( MkmaH ) 
Smt J. S. Nboi Jyod Lid, BanxU 

Snbi a S. N. Rajv (AtkrmOi) 
Sum Sokan Sikom Punjab Sute* Electricity Board, Patiala 

Snbi A. K. Chofba ( AUtmalt ) 
SwuP.J. Waoia The Tata Hydfo-Electric Power Supply Co Ud, 

Bombay 
SfiBf G. K. TiffAKim ( AUtnmti ) 
Smbi N. SaiNt vAtAN, Director General, IS! ( Ar-tfErit hUmkm ) 

Director (Elec tech) 

Snrmtairy 

Simi R. C Jain 

Deputy Difvctor ( Elec tech ), ISI 



e Copyrigiu 1974 
BUftEAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publicatkm it protictod uodor tho /fid/a«i C^pyrlfki Act ( XIV of I9S7 ) tod 
rooroduciion in whole of in part by any nicani except with wrtiton pcrmistlon of tht 
publiiher shall bt docmad to be an infringimeot of copyright under tha laid AoL 



ISt2071(Ptetn).1974 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF HIGH VOLTAGE TESTING 

PART II TEST PROCSDURES 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) ( First Rcvisioa ) was adopted by the 
Indian Standards Institution on 17 January 1974, after the draft finaUzed 
by the High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee had bees^ approved 
by the Electrotechnical Division Council 

0.2 With a large number of hi^h voltage and extra high voltage thuumission 
system being constructed in this coimtry, expensive electrical equi)>ments are 
being put in sfrvice. It is necessary 'to ensure that such equipments are 
callable of withstanding the overvoltages normally encounteral in service. 
This standard is intended to provide uniform methods of high voltage testing 
of electrical ^uipments. 

0.3 This standard covers various aspects of High voltage testing, such as 
definition of terms, test procedures, requirements of the test objecti and 
approved measuring devices for dielectric tests with direct, alternating, 
and impulse voltages, as well as impulse current. The Sectional Committee 
drcidea to withraw IS : 2070-1962 which covored impulse voltage testing. 

6«4 The revision of this standard was undertaken in view of the advanoem«its 
in high voltage technology. 

v.4.1 This standard in addition, includes the procedures Smt canryinff 
out switching impulse voltage, artificial pollution test and the itatisticiu 
method of evaluating the test results. 

03 This part ( Part II ) of the standard coven test procedures. The other 
two parts are: 

Part I General definitions and requirements 

Part III Approved measuring devices. 

0.f In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived fi^om 
lEC Documents 42( Central Ofiice)15, 20 and 20A Draft Hi|^-Voltate 
Test Techniques, Test Procedures issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission. 



IBt20n(Pmrtn).lfM 

0.7 In reportiiig the result of a teit made in accordance with this itandard 
the final value, observed or calculated, if to be rounded off in aocordanoe 
with IS: 2.1960*. 



1. 8GOPB 

1,1 Thit standard ( Part II ) covers the test procedures and methods for 
generation and measurement of test voltage and currents for dielectric test 
with direct voltages, alternating voltages, impulse voltages and impulse 
currents. It also describes methods for the evaduation of test results and 
specifies the criteria for acceptance. 

2. TEST WITH DIRECT VOLTAGE 

2.1 Definidotta 

2.1 •! RippU — Ripple is the periodic deviation from the arithmetic mean 
value. The magnitude of the ripple is defined as half the difference between 
the maximum and minimum values. The ripple factor is the ratio of the 
ripple magnitude to the arithmetic mean value of the voltage. 

2.1.2 Value of Test Voltage — The value of the test voltage is defined by 
its arithmetic mean value. 



NoTB — The nuudmum value of the voltage it approximately equal to the sum of the 
mean value and the ripple amplitude. 

2.2 Teat Voltage 

2*2*1 RetpdremnU 

2.2.1 .1 The test voltage with the test object connected should be a direct 
voltajse with not more than a 5-percent ripple factor, unless otherwise speci- 
fied in the relevant standards. Note that the presence of the test object 
may affect the ripple factor. 

2.2.2 GennoHm of Test Voltage 

2AJLA The test voltage is generally obtained by means of rectifiers, 
or by electrostatic generators. The requirements to be met by the test 
voltage source depend considerably upon the type of the apparatus to be 
tested, and the test conditions. The requirements are determined mainly 
by the values and the nature of the test current to be supplied. 

The important constituents of the test current are indicated in 2AA. 
The output current niting of the source and the magnitude of the storage 
capacitance should be sufficient to charge the capacitance of the test object 

^Rulet for routidtnf off nuacrical values (mnM). 



Ilt2071(Pfirtn).1974 

in a reasonably short time. ( This can take several minutes in some cases. ) 
The source should be adequate to supply the leakage and absorption currents, 
an4 any internal and external partial discharge currents without excessive 
voltage drop which might influence the test results. 

In tests on internal insulation these currents are usually small, but when test- 
ing wet insulators, leakage currents of the order of some tens of milliamperes 
or predischarge pulses of the order 10*^ coulomb may occasionally be 
encountered. 

For test on polluted insulaton, special circuit giving larger output 
currents are necessary. Provisionally it is recommended that the output 
impedance of the source should be such that when a pulse current of 500 mA 
is drawn for a duration of 500 ms the voltage drop during each pulse or a 
sequence of such pulses should not exceed 5 percent, the repetition rate of the 
current pulses being one per second. 

2JIJ3 Miasurmmt of T$st Voltagi 

2.2.3.1 MMSurmmU with approvid dmnca — The measurement of the 
arithmetic mean value, the maximiun value or the ripple factpr or any 
transient drop of the test voltage should be made with a device specified in 
Parr III of this standard. Attention is drawn to the requirements on response 
characteristics when measuring ripples and transients. 

2J23J2 Measwimmtwiihsphiri^gap — The measurement of the maximum 
value of the voltage only can be made with a sphere-gap. 

The procedure usually consists in establishing a relationship between 
the spacing at which disruptive discharge occiurs and some other circuit 
variaole related to the test voltage. ( The relationship between the supply 
voltage and the output voltage may not be sufficiently stable for measunng 
purposes. ) In establishing this relationship, the procedure specified in 
\& : 1876-1961^ should be foUowed. 

If this relationship is dependent on the presence of the test object, 
the n>here-gap, the precipitation in wet test, etc, it is important that the 
conditions should be the same during the calibratioh and the actual test 

The calibration is preferably made at 100 percent of the test voltage, 
but if necessary, extrapolation may be made from a voltage not lower than 
80 percent of the test voltage. Attention is drawn to the possibility of 
erratic results due to pollution in the atmosphere. 

2J2A Miosurment of Tist Cumni 

2.2.4.1 When measurements ofcurrent through the test olgect are made, 
several separate components may be recognized which differ from each 



^Method for voltage measurement by means of iphere-gaps ( one sphcn earuMd )• 



I8t2071(Ptotn).lfM 

other by several orders of magnitude for the same test object and test voltage 
as follows: 

a) The capacitance current, due to the initial application of the test 
voltage and to any ripple or other fluctuations imposed on it; 

b) The dielectric absorption current, due to slow charge displacements 
within the insulation and persisting for periods of a few seconds 
up to several hours. This process is reversible, currents of opposite 
polarity being observed when the test object is discharged and 
short-circuited; 

c) The continuous leakage current, which is the final steady current 
attained at constant voltage after the components mentioned above 
have decayed to zero; and 

d) Partial discharge currents. 

2.2.4.2 Measurement of the first three components necessitates the use 
of instruments covering a wide range of magnitudes. From the obsoved 
current variation with time, information may sometimes be obtained con- 
cerning the condition of the insulation in non-destructive tests. Measure 
ments of partial discharge pulse currents are made with special iiistrumcnh 
which are dealt with in the IS : 6209-1971*. 

2*2.4.3 The relative importance of each component depends on the type 
and the condition of the apparatus being tested, the purpose for wliich the 
test is made and the duration of the test. Accordingly, the measurement 
procedures should be specified in the relevant standard when it is required 
to (Ustinguish a particular component. 

2.2.5 TestProciduTi 

2.2.5.1 The voltage should be applied to the test object starting with a 
value sufficiently low to prevent overvoltage due to switching transients. 
It diould be nused suffiaently slowly to permit accurate reading of the 
instruments but not so slowly as to cause unnecessary prolongation o4 the 
stressing of the test object near to the test voltage. These requirements 
are in general met if the rate of rise above 75 percent of the estinuted final 
yoltage is about 2 percent of this voltage per second. 

2.2.5.2 The polarity of the voltage or the order in which the voltage 
of each polarity is applied, and also the rate of rise should be specified in the 
relevant standard, in those cases where deviations are required firom the 
above specification. 

2«23.3 Assurid withstand voltagi tat — The test voltage should be raited 
to the specified value as described in 2.2.S.I. It should be maintained for 
the specified time and then reduced by dischamng the smooddng c^tpadtoc 
tfaroui^ a suitable resistor. The test is generally satisfactory if no disruptive 
discfaiurge occurs on the test object 

^MeilMds Ibr partial dkchaffe 



lli3071(Pwtn).l»74 

2.2«5.4 AsswTid disrypHvi diuhargi voltagi Ust — The test voltage should be 
raned as described in 2JI^d until a disruptive discharge occurs on the test 
object The value of the test voltage reached just prior to the disruptive 
discharge is the assured disruptive discharge voltage. 

S. TBfT WITH ALTERNATING VOLTAGES 

S»l.l Piok Valui — The peak value is the maximum value except that 
small high frequency oscillations arising for instance from partial discharges 
art disrqpuded. 

5.1.2 tms Valui — The rms value of an alternating voltage is the square 
root of the mean of the square of the voltage during a complete cycle. 

3.1.3 Valm of Ttst Voltagi — Tht value of test voltage is defined by its 
peak value divided by V2. 

NoTB — The relevant equipment tundard may require a measurement of the rms 
value of the test voluge inttoul of the peak value for the cases where the rms v^ue 
may be of importance. Such cases are for instance when thermal effects are under 
investigation. 

3.2 Test Voltage 
3»2.1 JUquinments 

3.24.1 The test voltage should be an alternating voltage having a 
frequency in the range 40-62 Hz or of an agreed value. Its. form shall 
approximate to a sinusoid with both the half cycles closely alike and having a 
ratio of peak/rms values eoual to V2 within ±5 percent. The results of a 
high voltage test are considered unaffected by deviations from a sinusoid if 
these requirements are met. 

3.2.1.2 There is insufficient information available to indicate whether 

these requirements are generally met by tests circuits in common use; hence 

somewhat greater deviation from a sinusoid may have to be accepted. Note 

that the presence of the text object, especially those having non-Unear impe<- 

dance characteristics, may considerably effect the deviation from a sinusoid. 

NoTi — A useful measure, for the specification or acceptance testing of test equipment, 

is the rms value of the harmonics. It can generally be assumed that the above requiie- 

menu on deviations from a sinusoid will be met if this value does not ewced 5 pereeotof 

tibe rms value of the fundamental. 

3.2«2 Gtwraium 
SJ2J2.1 The test voltage is generally supplied from a step-}ip trans- 
former but alternatively, it may be generated oy means of a series resonant 
circuit. 

NoiB— Attention is drawn to the possibility that non-sustained cxierail disruptive 

may cause alarce ofvennving bet%ireca the terminals of the test oMaet. The 

i may cause &Sure or fiashover of the M el^ect or of the trstmg ti 

:ure can usually be effected by < * 

, or by introducing some attcnuatioa 



A cure can uwally be effected by ch a n g in g the natinil firequeaqr eCtlMireltiige 
ioainlothti 



Ut 2971 (Ftotn). 1974 

S.2.2.2 Ttst tfansfmm — The voltage in the test circuit should be 
stable enough to be practically unaffected by varying leakage currents. 
Partial dischiurges or predtscharges in the test object should not reduce the 
test voltage to such an extent and for such a time that the measured disruptive 
discharge voltage of tibe test object is affected. This is usually achieved it: 

a) tfie total capacitance of the test object and any additional capaci- 
tance is not less than about 1 000 pF. 

Non — If any external protective aeriet renftance doei not exceed 1 kQ, the traat- 
Ibnner cAectave tcminal capacitance may be regaided at being in parallel with the tot 
olject 

b) the steady state current delivered by the transformer, when the 
test object is short-circuited at the test voltage, is not less than 1 A 
rms. Exceptions are: 

i) Tests on small samples of solid insulation, insulating liquids, or 
combination of the two. For such tests, a short-circuit current 
of the order of 0* 1 A rms may suffice. 

ii) Tests under artificial pollution. For such tests, the requirements 
of the following table should be met where R^ is the total series 
resistance and X% the steady-state scries reactance at the test 
firequency of the supply circuit including the generator or the 
network. 

IUIXb Shmt-Cifaiii 

Current I, 
Arms 

<:oi 6 

0- 1-0-3 12 

S.2«2.3 Thi smis nsolmnt circuit — The series resonant circuit consists 
essentially of a capadtive test object or load connected in series with a variable 
inductance to a medium voltage power supply. By varying the inductance 
the circuit can be tuned to resonance at the required frequency under which 
condition a voltage of a shrae approximating very closely to a sinusoid is 
applied to the test object The stability of the resonance conditions and of 
the voltage depend on the constancy of the test circuit impedanc 



The method is especially useful when testing objects such as capadton 
and cable samples, when the external insulation effects are swamped by the 
capacitance of the load. The circuit is unsuitable for tests when the resonant 
conditions are seriously disturbed by non-linear leakage currents or discharges, 
for example for tests on external insulation under wet and polluted conditions. 

S«2«3 McanarmnmU 

S.2.S4 Mcasurmna with approved dmccs — The test voltage and the 
deviation finom a sinusoid should be measured with devices spedned in Pirt 
III of diis standard. 



l8t2071(PArtII)-1974 

3.2.3«2 Miosurmmt with sphere-gap — The measurement of the peak 
value of the test voltage only may t^ made with a sphere^gap. The pro- 
cedure usually consists in establishing a relationship between me spacing at 
which disruptive discharge occurs and some other circuit variable related to 
the test voltage. In establishing this relationship, the procedure specified in 
IS : 1876-1961 * should be foUowed. 

If this relationship is dependent on the presence of the test object, the 
sphere-gap, the precipitation in wet tests, etc, it is important that the condi- 
tions should be the same during the calibration and the actual test 

The calibration is preferably made at 100 percent of the test voltage, 
but extrapolation may be made from a voltage not lower than 80 percent of 
the test voltage. Extrapolation may be unsatisfactory if the current of the 
test circuit is not proportional to the voltage, or if modincations have occurred 
m the voltage shape or in the fiequency at the 100 percent vcdtage level. 

SJt.4 Test Procedure 

S.2.4.1 The voltage should be applied to the test object starting at a 
value sufficiently low to prevent overvoltages due to switching transients. It 
should be rabed suffidently slowly to permit accurate reading of the measur- 
ing instrument, but not so slowly as to cause unnecessary prolongation of the 
stress near the test voltage. 

These requirements are in general met if the rate of rise above 75 per* 
cent of the estimated final test voltage is about 2 percent per second of this 
voltage. However, ceruin types of objects may necessitate a different rate 
of rise which should be specified in the relevant standards* 

3.2*4.2 Assured withstand voltage test — The test voltage should be raised 
lo the specified value as described in 3.2.4.I. It should be maintained for 
the specified time and then rapidly decreased. The voltage should not be 
intemipted suddenly to avoid the possibility of iwitcHing transienti which 
may affect the subsequent test results. The test is satisfactory if no disruptiva 
dischaige occurs on the test object, unless other acceptance criteria are speci- 
fied in the relevant equipment specifications. 

S.2.4.3 Assured disruptive discharge voltage test — The test voltage should be 
raised as described in S.2.4.1 until a disruptive discharge occurs on the test 
object. The value of the test voltage reached just' prior to the disruptive 
discharge is the assured disruptive discharge voltage. 

4. lESTWnHUGHIMING IMPULSE VOLTAGES 

4.1 



4.14 Full Ughimng Impulse — A full lightning impulse (see JPart I of diis 
standard ) is a lightning impulse which is not intemipted by a disruptive 
discharge. 

^Method for voltoge mcanirement by meani of sphere-gaps ( one sphere earthed )• 

8 



ISi2071(Partn).1974 

4.1.2 Chopped Lighlmng Impidsi — A chopped lightning impube is a lightn- 
ing impulse which is interrupted b*y the disruptive dtsdiarge or an external 
chopping ffap or of the external insulation of the test object, causing a sudden 
collapse of the voltage, practically to zero value. The collapse can .ccur on 
the wave front, at the peak or on Uie tail. 

4.1.3 Valui of Tat Voliagi — The value of the test voltage is normally the 
peak value. With some test circuits oscillations or overshoot may be present 
on the voltage. If the amplitude ot the oscillations is not greater than 3 
percent of the peak value and the frequency is at least 0*5 MHz» or alter- 
natively, if the amplitude of tlic overshoot is not greater than 5 percent of the 
peak value and the duration not greater than 1 /iS, a mean curve may be 
drawn for the purpose of measurement, the maximum amplitude of which is 
defined as tlie value of the test voltage ( sa Fig. 1 A ). For other cases f iwr, 
for instance, Fig. IB ), the relevant standards should define the value or the 
test voltage t^Jdng into account the type of test and test object 

N6tB — In whftt follows, the term *peak value' includes the term 'virtual peak 
value ' tinleti otherwiie stated. 

4.1.4 Virtual Front Tirrn T, — The virtual front time Tt is defined as 
1*67 times the time interval T between the instants when the impulse is 30 
percent and 90 percent of the peak value ( sa points A^ B in Fig. 2 to 4 ). 
If oscillations are present on the wave front, the points A and B should be 
taken on the mean curve drawn through these oscillations. 

4.U Virtud'Origin 0, of an Impulsi — The virtual or gin 0| of an impulse 
is defined as the instant preceding that corresponding to the point A {sm 
Fig. 2 to 4 ) by a time 0*3 T,. For oscillograms having linear time sweeps, 
this is the intersection with x*axis of a straight line drawn through the 
reference point A and B on tlic wave front. 

4.1.6 Virtual Time to Half Value T, — The virtual time to half value T^ 
of an impulse is the time interval between the virtual origin and the instant 
on the tail, when the voltage has decreased to half of the peak value. 

4.1.7 Definitions Applicable Only to Chopped Impulses — Ideally the chopping 
of an impulse is characterised by an initial discontinuity which decreases the 
voluge. The voltage then continues to decrease to zero or nearly zero, 
either directly or via oscillations. 

Note — Withioine impulse measuring systems, test objectt or test arranfrments^ 
osctllogramt of chapped impulses show a rounding off of the voltage or a step which may 
be followrd by a partial recovery, or even may cause a double peak before the final 
oollapte of the voltajge. Such cases are not dealt with in this sundard. 

4.1.7.1 Virtual time of voltage collapse during chopping — The virtual time 
of voltage collapse during chopping is 1*67 times the time interval between 
poinU C and D ( see Fig. 3 and 4 ). 

4.1.7.2 Instant of chopping — The instant ofchopping is the instant when 
tfie initial discontinuity occurs. 





Fio, lA Construction for Dbrivation of Virtual Psak Values 




! I I I I I I 

2 4 6 6 /iS 
TIME ^ 




t I I I I ' I I I 
0.2 4 6 B M 

TIME ^ 



Fio. IB Irregular Impulse Shapes 
10 



I8t 2071 (Part n). 1974 

4.1.7 J Virtual Hm ft to chopping — The virtual time Tc to chopping m 
the time interval between the virtual origin Oj, and the virtual instant of 
chopping. 

4.1.7.4 Virtual steepness of voltage during chopping — The virtual steepn^ 
of voltage during chopping is the <|uotient of the estimated voltage at the 
instant of chopping and the vjrtual time of voluge collapse. 

Non — The me of potnti C and /) are for definition purpoiet only; it b not impMcd 
that the stcepnett of chopping can be measured with any degree of accuracy uUng 
conventional measuring circuits. 




Tf»Ve7T 



Fig. 2 Full Impulsb Voltaob 




TIME — «^ 
Fig. 3 Impulse Voltaob Chopped on the Front 

11 



ISt2071(PmrcII).1974 



1*0 
0*9 



III 

P 
>0'3 



(H) 











-n 




^^ 








F--0»7cc 


"r 






F--O0«e 


^\- 


Tc — 


- ■■ ■ m 





TIME 



Fio. 4 Impulse Voltage Chopped on the Tail 

4.1 .8 Linearly Rising Front-Chopped Impulses — A voltage rising with appro- 
ximately constant steepness, until it is chopped by the occurrence of a dis- 
ruptive discharge, is described as a linearly rising impulse ( see Fig. 5 )• 









// 


u 

1-0 
0*9 




,u:" 


F> 




1 




At -^^ 


1 


0*5 


# 


I 




// 




\ 









\ 


^r 


— 


Tr/2-5 


*- ^v>^ 



Fio. 5 Lincakly RmNa Impoui 
12 



ISt2071(PmrtII)-1974 

The parametera of the impulse are determined by two points E and F, 
located on the wave front of the impulse or, if oscillations are present, on a 
mean curve through them at 50 percent and 90 percent of the peak value. 

The impube is defined by: 

— the peak value at the instant of chopping as measured on the 
oscillogram. 

— the ri e time Tr, Tliis is the time interval E-F ( see Fig. 5 ) 

multiplied by 2*5. 

— The virtual steepness, S. This is the slope of the straight line 

iff-F, usually expressed in KV/pis. 

Trf judge whether the wave front can be considered approximately 
linear, two straight lines are drawn parallel to the line E-F such that they 
enclose the entire impulse from 50 percent up to the instant of chopping. 

Ifthe time difference corresponding to these two lines is not more than 
0*05 times the rise time, the impulse can be considered approximately linear 
( see Note ). 

NoTB >- To avoid rxcetrivc deviation from linearity it is recommended that the 
prospective pealc value of the impulse should not be ie» than 1*1 timet the peak value 
at the mstant of chopping. 

4J.9 Curves Relating ihi Disruptive Discharge Voltage Peak to tha Thms to thi 
Disruptive Discharge ( Voltage I Time Curves ) 

4*1 .9.1 Voltage I time curve for wave fronts rising linearly — The voltage/time 
curve for impulses with wave fronts rising linearly is the curve relating the 
disruptive discharge voltage of a test object to Tn^ 

The curve is obtained by applying impulses with Kpproximately linear 
wave fronts^of different steepnesses. 

4.1 •9.2 Voltage I timo curve for impulses of constatU frospeetive shape — The 
voltage/time curve for impulses of constant prospective shape is the curve 
relating the disruptive discharge voltage of a test object to the virtual time to 
chopping which may occur on the wave front, at the peak or on the tail. The 
curve b usually obtained by applying impulse voltages of constant shape but 
with different peak values ( soetig. 6 ). 

4.2 TMt Volteg* 

4.24 Standard l^gkUiinf Impedse — The standard lifj^tning impulse it a 
full liffhtning impulse having a virtual front time of 1*2 |a and a virtual time 
to hau value of dO |is. It is described as a l*2/S0 impulse. 

4.2«2 ToUranees — If not otherwise specified in the rdevaat itandards, 
the following differences between specified values for the standard impulse 

IS 



ISt2071(Partn).1974 

and those actually recorded are pernutted when the measuring system meets 
the requirements of Part III of this standard. 

Peak value ± 3 percent 

Front time ± 30 percent 

Time 'to half value ± 20 percent 

Overshoot or oscillations in the neighbourhood of the peak value are 
tolerated provided their si-^gle peak amplitude is not larger than 5 percent 
of the peak value. Oscillations on the first part of the impulse ( below 50 
percent of the peak value ) are tolerated provided their single peak amplitude 
does not exceed 25 percent of the peak value. 

Note 1 — In specific casrs, such as during tests on low impedance objects, it may be 
difficult to adjust the shape of the impulse within the tolerances recommended, to keep 
the oscillations or overshoot within the specified limits, or to avoid a polarity reversal. 
Such cases shall be dealt with separately m the relevant equipment standard. 

NoTB 2 — It b emphasized that the tolerances mentioned above constitute the permit- 
ted differences between the specified values and those actually recorded by measurements. 
These differences shpuld be distinguished from measuring errors which are the difference 
between the true values and those actually recorded. 

No corrections are accepted for measuring errors. Note however that the measure- 
ment of impulses chopped at the front at times shorter than 0*5 i»s, especially those of 
high voltage, presenu considerable technical difficulties. The same applies to the 
measurement of oscillations on the wave front especially at frequencies above one MHt. 




TIME 
Fig. 6 Volt/Time Curve for Standard Impulses 



4,2.3 Standard Chopped Lightning Impulse — \ standard chopped lightning 
impulse is a standard impulse which is chopped after 2-5 fts. Because of 
incomplete technical information, the virtual time of voltage collapse has not 
yet been standardized. This characteristic is of importance only for some 
specific tests. 

14 



IBta071(PMrtn).1974 

4.2«4 Gmuraim and RsqmrmninU of T$st Voltagi — The impulse is usually 
generated by an impulse generator which essentially is an apparatus in which 
a number of capacitors are charged in parallel from a direct voltage source 
and then discharged in series via a circuit which includes the test object. 
The values of the circuit parameters should be such that the required impulse 
shape is obtained with the test object in the circuit. 

4.2*5 D$tirminatum of Impulse Shape — The impulse shape should be adjusted 
with the test object in circuit. For this pUrpoie, an approved divider and 
oscillograph should be used ( sw Part III of this standard ). The impulse 
shape should be measured in accordance with 4*1 .4 to 4.1 .8. 

In general, the impulse shape should be checked for each test object. 
Where a number of test objects or the same design and size are tested under 
unchanged conditions, the shape need only be verified once. 

Note — A determiiiation of the impulse shape by calcoUtioQ is net lattsfactory. 

4.2«6 MiosurmifU of Tist Voltage 

4.2.6.1 Measurement with ^proved demees — The test voltage should be 
measured by a device specified in Part III of this standard. 

4.2«6.2 Measurement with sphne-gap — The measurement of the peak 
value of the test voltage may be made with a sphere-gap. The procedure 
usually consists in establishing a relationship between the spacing at which 
disruptive dischaiqge occurs and some other variable in the circuit related to 
the test voltage, for instance the maximum charging voltage of the first stage 
of the impulse generator. In establishing this relationship, the procedure 
spedfied in IS : 1876-1961 * should be followed. If this relation is dependent 
on the presence of the test object, the sphere-gap, etc, it is important that the 
conditions are the same during the calibration and the actual test excqpt that 
the sphere-gap shall be opened sufficiently to prevent sparkover dunng tfie 
test. 

For tests on insulation which is not likely to be damaged by repeated 
voltage applications or flashovers, calibration is made up to nearly 100 per- 
cent of the test voltage. 

For tests on other objects, extrapolation may be unavoidable but such 
extrapolation should not be greater than 60 percent of the test voltage. The 
extrapolation is only permissible if it can be shown that the test voltage is 
proportional to the related quantity. 

4«S TMt Piroced«r« 

4.S.1 The test procedure applicable to particular items of equipment, 
for example the polarity to be used, the preferred order if both polarities are 



^Method ibr voltage meMuremeiit by means of sphere-gaps ( one sphere earthed ). 

15 



ISi2071 (Part n). 1974 

to be used, the number of applications, and the interval between applications, 
should be specified in the relevant equipment standard; having regard to such 
factors as: 

a) the accuracy of test results, 

b) the statistical nature of the observed phenomenon and the polarity 
dependence of the measured characteristic, and 

c) the possibility of piogres^-'j'e deterioration with repeated voltage 
applications. 

The test procedures recommended below arc applicable to test objects 
which are not subject to progressive deterioration by repeated voltage appli- 
cations. For other types of test objects acceptance criteria other than 
those specified in 4.3.2 to 4.3.5 may be needed. 

4,3.2 Rated Withstand Voltage Test 

4.3.2.1 Tests on nonself-restoring insulation — Unless otherwise specified 
for tests on nonself-restoring insulation, tliree impulses of the specified shape 
and polarity are applied at the rated withstand voltage level. The require- 
ments of the test are satisfied if no indication of failure is obtained, using the 
methods of detection specified in the relevant equipment standard. 

4*3.2«2 Tests on self-restoring insulation and on combinations of self and non* 
self restoring insulation — A procedure usually recommended for test objects 
having combinations of self-restoring and nonself-restoring insulation is given 
below : 

Fifteen impulses of the rated withstand voltage and of the specified 
shape and polarity are applied. The requirements of the test arc satisfie 1 
if no disruptive discliarge occurs in the nonself-restoring insulation and not 
more than two disruptive discharges occur in the self-restoring insulation. 

In the cases of tests objects having self-restoring insulatidh only, the 
test object can also be deemed satisfactory if the 50 percent disruptive dis- 
charge voltage, determined according to 4.3.3 is not less than 1 /( I - 1*3 'j ) 
times the rated impulse withstand voltage, where o is the per unit standard 
deviation of the disruptive discharge voltage. Unless otherwise recommen- 
ded in the relevant equipment standard the following values should be used 
for air insulation: 

— Lightning impulse tests, a « 0*03 

— Switching impulse tests, a = 006 

NoTB — In case of doubt, the relevant equipment Mandard is to deride in which of 
the above categories a particular lypc of equipment should be plac(*d. 

4,3,3 Assured Disruptive Discharge Voltage Test — This test is intended as a 
check that a specified test voltage will cause a disruptive discharge witli a 
given high probability ( see also Appendix A ). Five impulses of the specified 

16 



IltM71(Ptetn).lfM 

protpecdve peak value, shape and polarity are applied. If each impulse 
causes a disruptive discharge, the requirements of the test have been satisfied 
If more than one impulse fails to cause a disruptive discharffe, the require- 
ments of the test have not been satisfied. If one impulse fails to cause dis* 
ruptive discharge, ten additional impulses are applied. If each of these 
additional impulses causes a disruptive discharge, the requirements of die 
test have been satisfied. 

43 A Fifty Percent Disru^Hve Discharge Voltage Test — The voltage corres- 

Ending to a 50 percent disruptive discharge probability U, 50 percent may 
determined as follows ( see also Appendix A ). 

a) At least ten impulses are applied at each of the several test voltage 
levels, the steps in voltage being 2-5 Percent of the expected 50 
percent disruptive discharge voltage. The value of die 50 percent 
disruptive discharge voltage is found from a curve of disruptive 
discharge probabihty versus prospective test voltage. The accuracy 
of the determination increases with increased number of voltage 
applications but there is usually no need to go above 20 applications 
at each level. 

The same method can be used to determine the standard deviation 
of the flashover voltage. See Appendix A, which also gives some 
information on confidence limits both for the 50 percent voltage and 
ibr the standard deviation. 

b) The following is an alternative procedure to determine the 50 
percent value. A voltage U^ is chosen which is considered approxi- 
mately equal to the 50 percent disruptive discharge level. A voltage 
interval A U, approximately 3 percent of C/k> is also chosen. One 
impulse is applied at the level U^. If this does not cause a disrup- 
tive discharge, the next impulse shduld have the level C/k + A ^• 
If a disrupuve discharge occurs at the level C/ki the next impulse 
should have the level t/k — AU- 

This procedure is repeated, a number of times each impulse having 
a level determined by the eflfect of the proceeding impulse. The 
number of impulse nv at each voluge level Uv, is counted and the 
50 percent disruptive discharge voltage is determined as: 

U|o percent « ^^^ — 

In this equation, the first level taken into account should be one at 
which two or more impulses were applied. This partially corrects 
for the error which may be introduced if I/k is much too low or much 
too high. For normally distributed flashover probabilities, the 
indicated value of U|o percent determined as above for 
2 My — >20 will generally lie within the range from 30 percent to 
70 percent of die true disruptive discharge probability. 

17 



Ift2071(P«wtn)-l»74 

4.3.5 Ditirmination of Vify Low w Vtty High Disrupt DUckargi 
ProbabiliHis — Some guidance for the detennination of volta^ correspond* 
ing to very low and very high disruptive discbarge probabibties is found in 
Appendix A. These procedures are not intended ror conventional accep- 
tance testing but may be useful in other cases for study related to insulation 
coordination. 

5. TESTS WITH SWrTGHING IMPULSE VOLTAGE 

5.1 Deflnidoiui 

5.1 •! Switching Impulse — A switching impulse which should be 
distinguished from a lightning impulse is defined in Part I of this standard. 

5.1.2 Valui of Tist Voltage — If not otherwise specified in the relevant 
standards, the value of the test voltage is the prospective peak value. 

5.1.3 TifM to Peak T^ — The time to peak TV r is the time interval between 
actual zero and the instant when the voltage has reached its peak valuA. 

5.1.4 Tim to Half Valui Tb — The time to half value Tn is the time 
interval between actual zero and the instant on the tail when the impulse 
has first decreased to half the peak value. 

5.1.5 Timi Above 90 Percent Tet-^The time above 90 percent T4 b the 
time interval during which the impulse voltage exceeds 90 percent of its pedi 
value. 

J/ote to clauses 5.1.3 to 5.1.5 — Practical reasons and theoretical consi- 
derations have caused several diflferent time parameters to be used to chara- 
cterize a switching impulse. Two such parameters related to die wave 
front are the time to peak and the virtual front time. The former is defined 
in 5.1.3, the latter is defined either by analogy with virtual front time for 
lightning impulses ( see 4.1.4 ) or by using some different reference points and 
multiplying factors. The difference between wave front times defined accord- 
ing to these various measures is usually small. For switching impulses with 
time parameter as given in 5.2.1 and 5.2.2, the time to peak is between 
1*4- rS times the virtual wave front time. 

Two other time parameters are related to the duration of the impulse; 
they are the time to half value and the time above 90 percent. The latter 
measurement is found practical in the cases where the wave form of the 
impulse is dictated, for instance, by the saturation phenomena in the test 
object or the test circuit, or when it is felt that the stress of the test object is 
highly dependent on this parameter as for some kind of internal insulation. 
These time parameters are defined in 5.1.4 and 5.1.5. It should be empha- 
sized that, when defining a switchin^^ impulse, only one parameter related to 
the wave front and one to the duraUon should be used. 

18 



I8t 2071 (Fartn). 1974 

5.1*6 Tim to Chopping Tt — The time to chopping Te of a twitching 
impulse is the time interval between the actual zero and the moment when 
the chopping occurs. 

5«1«7 Linoofly Rising SwitcUng Imptdso — The linearly rising impulse is 
defined in 4«1,8. 

5.2 Tmt Voltagt 

S.2.1 Standard Switching Impids$ — The standard switching impulse is an 
impulse having a time to peak of 250 /iS and a time to half value ot 2 500 fis. 
It IS described as a 250/2 500 impulse. 

5«2.2 Sbocial InUmlses — In the cases where the standard impulse alone is 
not considered to oe appropriate or adequate, impulses of 100/2 500 and 500/ 
2 500 are recommended. Also an oscillatory impulse has been proposed, 
which has a duration of the first half period between 2 000 and 3 000 /as and 
the peak value of the second half period its high as possible up to about 80 
percent of the peak value of the first one. 

5*2«3 ToUrancts — If not otherwise specified in the relevant equipment 
standards the following differences between recorded and specified values are 
accepted both for standard and special impulses when the measuring device 
meets the requirement of Part III of this standard. 

Peak value ± 3 percent 

Front time d: 20 percent 

Time to half value ± 60 percent 

NoTB 1 — • In tpecific casei, such st during tests on \ow impcdanee obsject^ it may be 
difficult to adjust the shape of the tmpul^ within the tolerances reoommcnoedt to keep 
the oiciUations or overshoot within the iii>eci6ed limits, or to avoaid a polarity revcnal* 
Such cases shall be dealt vnth separately in the relevant equipment standard* 

NoTB 2 -» The measured resultt of testt using switching impulses with linear wave 
fronts are usually present as curves showing the times to disruptive discharfe» or alter* 
nadvely virtual steepneu on one axis and disruptive discharge voluge on tha other. For 
this reason, and because the range of practical mterest is very large, there is no need to 
specify any particular wave front time or steepness to be used, nor any tolerances oo 
tiiese values. 

5J2A Gmuraiion and RafnwnmUs of Tost Voltagi — Switching impulses are 
usually generated by an mipulse generator ( sot 4.2.4 ). They can also be 
generatra bv dischiursing a capacitor through the primarv winding of a 
testing transformer. The basic circuit arrangement (or the latter method is 
shown in Fig. 7 where C| is the capacitor to be dischaimd and JT ia a 
switdi. Hie circuit elements within ttie dotted area used for adjusting the 
impulse shape, Jig and C^ merely beinff shown as one possible arrangement 
fur this purpose. Other methods are also in use involving current througha 
transformer winding. 

NoffB-^Wbm tasdflf a traadbmicr with switcblag impulses, the 
may be «Md ior fsasfiHoi the Isspvlst by the medbod dacribed te 1^^ 

19 



(tM71(Ptetn)-1974 



TEST MJCCT 




VQlTAOe 
OIVIOCII 



Flo. 7 Gbnbration of SwircmNo Ivruuis 



The elements of a circuit for the generation of twitching impulies should 
be so chosen as to avoid excessive distortion of the impulse shape due to pre* 
discharge ciurrents in the test object Such currents may reach considerable 
values especially during jpoilution tests on external insulation at high voltages. 
In test circuits of high mtemal impedance, distortion of the voltage due to 
fuch currents may prevent the occurrence of disruptive discharge. 

5.23 Miasurmmt of T$st Voltagi — The test voltage should be measured 
with a device specified in Part III of the standard. Alternatively, it may be 
measured with a sphere gap {sh IS: 1876-1961 ^ ). However, it may be 
noted that this standard gives no information specially related to switching 
impulses. 

5«2.S T$H Proe§dwr$ — The test procedure is the same as for lightning 
impube testing ( i»» 4.S ) . 

CIMrULIBCUlUIEMT 

6.1 DafliritiMM 

€*14 Impudsi QtnmU — Two types of impulse currents are dealt with. 
One has a shape which increases from zero to the peak value in a short time 
and thereafter decreases to zero approximatelY exponentially or in the manner 
of a heavily damped sine curve. This type is designated oy the wave fincmt 
time and the time to half value, sa 64.S and 6.I.7. 

The other type has an approximately rectangular shape and is designa- 
ted by the virtual duration oi the peak and the total virtual duratiosi 
( lit ••M and 6X7). 

64.2 VUui rf Tisi Currmi-^ The value ol the test current b normally 
defined by the peak value. With some test circuits overshoot of osdllatiooi 



^Method lor voltage mcMureiiieat hf u»nm of 

20 



U 



h 



I8i2071(Ptoin).1974 

may be present on the current it will depend on the type of the test and also 
whether the value of the test current shall be defined by the actual peak or a 
smooth curve drawn through these oscillations. 

6.1.3 Virtual FrarU Tim 7\ — The virtual front time 7\ is defined as 
1*25 times the interval between the instants when the impulse current is 10 
percent and 90 percent of the peak value. 

If oscillations arc present on the >vave front, the 10 percent and 90 
percent values should be derived from the mean curve drawn through these 
oscillations. 

NoTt •— The dUTerence between wave front timci measured aooording to thia defini- 
tion and the one in 4.f .4 ii generally leu than 10 percent. 

6J.4 Virtual Origin O^ — Th.e virtual origin 0| of an impulse current 
is defined as the instant preceding that corresponding to the tune at which 
the current is 10 percent of the peak value by 0*1 7\. 

For oscillograms bavins linear time sweeps this is equivalent to the 
intersection with the x-axis of a straight line drawn through the 10 percent 
and 90 percent t>oints on the wave front. 

6,1.5 Virtual Ttmi to Half Vdui, T, — The virtual time to half value, Tg 
is the time interval between the virtual origin and the ixistant on the tail» 
where current has first decreased t6 half the peak value. 

C«1.6 Virtual Duration of ths P$qk of a Rectangular Impulse Currmi — The 
virtual duration of the peak of a rectangular impulse current is defined by the 
time during which the current is greater than 90 percent of the peak value. 

6*1 .7 Virtual Total Duration of a Rectangular Impulse — The virtual total 
duration of a rectangiilar impulse current is the time during which the 
amplitude of the impulse is greater than 10 percent of its peak value. If 
small oscillations are present on the wave front, a mean curve should be drawn 
to determine the time at which the 10 percent value is reached. 

6.2 Test Corrent 

6.2*1 Standard Impulse Currents — Two standard impuke currents are used. 
One has a virtual wave front time of 8 (jis and a time to half value of 20 |is; 
it is described as an 8/20 impulse. The other has a virtual wave front time 
of 4 ^s and a time to half value of 10 (is; it is described as 4/10 impulse. 
Rectangular impulse currents usually have virtual durations at the peak 
within 2 000 to 3 500 (is. 

6.2.2 Tolerances 

6.2.2.1 The following tolerances on the actual recorded values are 
permitted when the measuring system meets the requirements of Part III of 
this standard. 

21 



Ut 2071 (Part n). 1974 

Fof 8/20 and* 1 10 impuUts 

Peak value ± 10 percent 

Virtual front time, 7\ ±10 percent 

Virtual time to half value, T^ ±10 percent 

Small oversnoot and oscillations are tolerated provided that their single 
peak amplitude in the neighbourhood of the peak value of the impulse is not 
more than 5 percent of the peak value. Any polarity reversal after the 
current has fallen to zero, should be not more than 20 percent of the peak 
value. 

For rtctangidar impulses 

Peak value + 20 percent 

— percent 

Virtual duration of the peak + 20 percent 

— percent 

Overshoot and oscillations are tolerated provided that their single 
peak amplitude is not more than 10 percent of the peak value. The total 
duration of a rectangular impulse should not be more than 1*5 times the 
virtual duration of the peak and the polarity reversal should be limited to 10 
percent of the peak value. 

6.2.3 Measurement of Test Current — The test current should be measured 
by a device specified in Part III of this standard. 

6.2.4 Measurement of Voltage During Tests with Impulse Currents 

6.2.4.1 It is sometimes required to measure the voltage developed across 
the test object during tests with high impulse currents. Anyone of the app- 
roved devices listed in Part III of this standard can be used for the purpose. 

The impulse current may induce high voltages in the impube voltage 
measuring circuit, thereby giving measuring errors. To check this, it is 
recommended that the conductor which normally joins the voltage divider to 
the live end of the test object, should be disconnected from the uve end and 
connected to the earthed end of the test object but maintained in approxi- 
matcly the same loop. Alternatively, the test object is short-circuited or 
replaced by a metal conductor. The voltage measured under this condition 
when the generator is discharged should be substantially zero at least dtiring 
the part of the impulse, which is of importance for evaluating the results. 

NoTB — This short-circuit check may be made at a reduced current. 

22 



I8i2071(Partn).1974 

APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 4.3.3, 4.3.4 and 4.3.5 ) 

STATISTICAL PROCESSING OF THE TEST RESULTS 
A^l. GENERAL 

A-1.1 Statement of the Problem — As disruptive discharges are a random 
phenomenon, statistical procedures are important to obtain more precise 
lofoiimation from the tests. It is assumed that, to each test voltage level £/, a 
probability^ is attached, for a disruptive discharge to take place at that level. 
llie aim of the tests is to determine the probability distribution function 
p ( U) relating^ to U. 

Usually the probability function is expressed in terms of certain para- 
meters out of which the mean value C/m s^nd the standard deviation o are 
dealt with below. These parameters and the form of the function can be deter- 
mined from a very large number of voltage applications if successive voltage 
applications do not change significantly the characteristics of the test object, 
or if a fresh test object is used for each application. In certain cases, such as 
inq>ulie tests on ixtemal insulation, the probability distribution function is 
found to be approximately Gaussian from a few up to 95 or even 98 percent 
flashover probability. The standard deviation usually is between 2 and 8 
percent. Very large values of the standard deviation have been found 
during impulse tests in internal insulation. 

Little information is available on the character of the probability dis- 
tribution function for internal insulation for any type of voltage and for 
external insulation for direct and alternating voltage. 

In practical tests, the number of voltage applications is limited. Then 
the parameters are determined only within certain limits with a certainty 
which can be determined. The values so determined are called U and /. 

A brief iummary of some simple methods which have been found useful 
in the analysis of high voltage test resulu are given below. The methods are 
based on the above assumption of undisturbed test objects. 

Noti — Atteotion is drawn to the fiict that the distribudoa function is not neccsMrily 
•ymmetfical ydih reference to the avenge. Thus, it is necessary to distinguish bet«irccn 
tM terms ' theavcrage value ' and the * the most probable value '. 

iUl.2 QaeiHIcatlesi ef Test Resnalte — Test results can be subdivided 
into two categories to permit statistical evaluation. 

Oui i -^Thii dais comprisei tests iMde by repeated application of 
voltages of lubatantially coAit«nt shape in which, for each voltage levdl, 
the proportion of vottige* applicationt causing disruptive ditdUum 
k fecoraed* It mainly applies to impulse testa biit certain altemat&g 
and direct voluge teiu belong to this cbiit. 

2S 



iii9>n(Pteitn).i»74 

Class 2 — This class comprises procedures in which each application of 
the test voltage causes a disruptive discharge. The tests are made by 
applying continuousfy increasing voltages to the test object, and bv 
measuring the actual disruptive discharge voltages obtained. Such 
tests can be made with direct, alternating or impulse voltages. Tests 
causing disruptive discharge on the wave front of an impulse belong to 
this class. 

Af-1.2.1 Analysis of Class 1 T$st Rssults — The results of Class I tests can be 
plotted on Gaussian linear paper ( probability paper ) with the voltage on 
the linear axis. If they lie approximately a straight line, then the distribif- 
tion is approximately Gaussian. The voltage corresponding to^ «» 50 can 
be used as determination of the mean value U and the voltage range between 
p ■■ 0'5 and ^ «» 0* 16 as an estimation of J. 

Other more accurate methods to determine U and s are foUhd in the 
literature. 

AfI.2^ Analysis of Class 2 Test Rssults — The results of Class 2 tests appear 
as a series on n volta^ values U^ from which the mean ilashover voltagp U 
and the standard deviations can be obtained: 

- I ^ 

M 



n-l 1^ 



Alternatively, nv/ii+ 1 can be plotted on a probability paper as a function 
of £7v where nv is the number of flashovers up to and including the voltage 
l/v and n is the total number of voltage applications. The curve permits a 
determination of U and s in the same manner as in A-1.2.1 but does not 
necessarily give the same result as the numerical method described above. 

Ap1«3 ConfldMiM Limits — From any set of n measurement^^ Statistical 
checks may be made to define the limits between which the true mean value 
Urn and the true standard deviation o may be stated to be with a given 
mrobabiiity p^ of being correct. These limits are commonly expressed for 
r« ■» 0*95 mA are then termed * 95 percent confidence limits *. 

The limits for the true mean value Um are then given by: 

where Ip is a function of ^ and n, n being the total number of voltage applica* 
tions bothin the case of Class I and Class 2. The function tp for any value of 
p% can be obtained from sundard text books on statistics, but for pt «• 95 
percent and n » 20, the value <p »t 2 may be used as an approximation: 

Um - U± 0-45 s 
24 



I8f2071(Ptetn)-1974 

Confidence limits foi the value of the true standard deviation a of the 
measurements may be found but with less accuracy from the e3q>ression: 



-'['*V.-^] 



For a more exact calculation of the confidence limits, the distribution function 
shall be known. 

NoTB -— The attumption of • Gauinan diftribudon lemdt to asymmetrical confidence 

limtu for o, 

A-1 .4 Determiiiatioii of Voltages Corrcmonding to Very Ixiw or Very 
Higli Diamptive ZMaduurgct ProbabUitiM — In specific cases, a deter- 
mination of very low or very high flashover probabilities of the test object is 
described. 

Conventional assured withstand and assured flashover {see 4.3«2 
and 4*3»3 ) tests are not suitable to provide such information. The probability 
P of passing a conventional withstand test is: 

where P is the probability (rf*a flashover and account is taken of the additional 
10 voltage applications if flashover occurs during the first 5. 

With a test voltage corresponding to / » 0*05 the object will have 90 
percent probability P of pa»ing the test. With/ ^ 0*01 the correipondiiig 
value UP mm 0*99. 

ThuSy the fact that a test object has oassed or iailed such a test gives 
little information concerning the actual flashover probability. 

Even the test method described in ApI.2.1 is not particularly suited fat 
ihe determination of low or hirii probabilities. A modified test procedure, 
therefore, described below for the particular case of low flashover probabili- 
ties. For hig^ probabilities, sa ^iote given at the end of thb chuise. 

In a first approach, several sets of three voltage applications are made, 
starting at a level Uo below the estimated withstud voltage. After every 
set, the voltage level is increased by a constant amount e ofbetween 2 percent 
and 5 percent of C/'o* This series of tests is finished at die level C/inriientbe 
first flashover occun. 

The test is then continued in a similar manner but with 25 voltage 
appiicatioiii at each voltage level, starting at the level U^mm Ui — St. 
If no flashover occurs, then the voltage level it increased by successive steps 
of • until a flashover occurs. If a flashover occurs durmg the series of 
^iplicationf at C7,, then the voltam level it reduced succesrivdy by stept of 
2 • until 25 applicationtcaute no flashover. Thereafter, die lc;vcl is increased 
by ftqpt oft until a flashover occurs osioe again. 

25 



ttt2e71(Pftrtn).1974 

The test result is taken as the highest voltap;e value which has not given 
flashover during any series of 25 voltage applications. This value corres- 
ponds to a flashover probabililv of about one percent and is below eight 
percent with 98 percent probability. Usually, the complete test requires 
about 75 voltage applications. 

Non — The above procedure applies alto to the caie of high probabilitief; it ii 
fufficient to replace the wordi 'withstand' and 'probability' of 'withstand' by 
' Bashover ' and ' probability of flashover '. The voltage is decreased from a high value 
instead of being increased from a low value. 



as 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

HeadquMrterm 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 1 0002 

Telephonea: 323 01 31 . 323 3375. 323 9402 Fax :i- 91 01 1 3234062. 3239399. 3239382 

E - mall : bis@vsnl.oom. Internet : http:/Avwwdel.vsnl.net.in/bis.org 

CentnlLMbantory: Telephotw 

Plot No. 20/9. Site IV. Sahibabad Industrial Area. Sahibabad 201010 477 00 32 

Regional Otflcea: 

Central : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELH1 1 1 0002 323 76 1 7 

♦Eastern : 1 /1 4 QT Scheme VII. V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi, CALCUTTA 700064 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 1 60022 60 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus. IV Cross Road. CHENNAI 6001 13 235 23 15 

tWestem : Manakalaya. E9. MIDC. Behind Mard Telephone Exchange, 832 92 95 
Andheri (East). MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Offleea: 

Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg. Khanpur. AHMEDABAO 380001 550 1 3 48 

tPeenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 839 49 55 
BANGALORE 560058 

Commerdal-cum-Offioe Complex, Opp. Dushera Maklan, E-5 Arera Cotony. 72 34 52 
Bittan Market. BHOPAL462016 

62/63. Ganga Nagar. Unit VI. BHUBANESWAR 751 001 40 36 27 

5th Roor. Koval Towers. 44 Bala Sundaram Road, COIMBATORE 641018 21 88 35 

Plot No. 58. Neeiam Bata Road, NIT. FARIDABAD 1 2 1 001 42 82 60 

Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road. GHAZIABAD 201001 471 19 98 

53/5 Ward No.29, R.G. Barua Road. 5th By-lane, Apurba Sinha Path, 54 1 1 37 
GUWAHATl 781003 • 

5-8-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg. Nampally Statk>n Road. HYDERABAD 500001 320 10 84 

E-52. Chitranjan Marg. C- Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 37 38 79 

1 1 7/41 8 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 21 68 76 

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Fkxxr, Behind Leela Onema, Naval Kishore Road, 21 89 23 
LUCKNOW 226001 

NIT Building, Second Roor. Qokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 52 51 71 

Patliputra Industrial Estate. PATNA 80001 3 26 28 08 

Rrst Roor. Pk>t Nos. 657-660, Market Yard, GuHekdi, PUNE 411037 426 86 59 

Sahajanand House' 3rd Roor, BhaktinagarOrde, 80 Feet Road, 3782 51 
RAJKOr 360002 

T.C. No. 14/1421. University P. O. Rakiyam, THRUVANANTHAPUFV\M 695034 32 21 04 



^Sales Office Is aft 5 Chowringhae Approach, P.O. Princep Street, 237 1 85 

CALCUTTA 700072 

tSales Office Is at Novelty Chambers. Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 309 65 28 

^Sales Offtoe is at F Bkxdc, Unity BuikJing, Narashtmaraia Square. 222 39 71 
BANGALORE 560002 



Printed at Dee Kay Printere, New Delhi 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 FEBRUARY 1977 

TO 

IS 1 2071 ( Part n H974 METHODS OF HIGH 

VOLTAGE TESTING 

PART II TEST PROCEDURES 
(Fint RevUion) 

Alteratioiui 

(Page Ily clause 4.1.7.3 ) — Substitute the following for the exsrting 
clause: 

* 4.1.7.3 Timi to chopping Tt — Time interval between the virtual 
origin and the instant of chopping.* 

{Pag9 17, clausii^iA) 

a) JLm2-Substitute«C;»o'>'{^,50\ 

b) Item (b), paragraphs 2 aurf 3 — Substitute the following for the exii* 
ting paragraphs: 

* This procedure is continued, the level of each impulse being thus 
determined by the result of the prevbus one, until a sufficient number 
of observatbns has been recorded. The number of impulses ny applied 
at each level Uy is then counted and the 50 .percent disruptive 
dischaige voltage is given by: 

.. I fly Uy 

In this equation, ny should be > 20, the first level taken into 
account being one at which two or more impulses were applied. This 
avoids any appreciable error if Uk is chosen much too high or much 
too low. If a better accuracy in the determination of the 50 percent 
disruptive discharge voltage is required, the number of voltage appli* 
cations should be increased but generally need not be higher 
than 40/ 

c) Last but one line — Substitute the following for the existing matter: 

'InF>20' 

( Page 21, clause (•2J, last sentence ) — Substitute the following for the 
existmg sentence: 

* Rectangular impulse currents have virtual durations of the 
peak equal, within the specified tolerances, to 500 (iS, 1 000 |as or 
2 000 /^s or between 2 000 |jis and 3200 |is. * 

1 



