IS 13268 : 1992
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

SrrdT

WTT

Indian Standard

DEMINERALTZATIONPLANT GUIDELINES
UDC 628'165'04

-

@

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN
BHAVAN,

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group 6

Water Sectional Committee,

CHD 013

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, sfter the draft finalized by the Water Secticnal Committee had teen approved by the Chemical Division Council. Demineralized water is required for a wide range of industries involving production of chemicals, pharmaceut'cals, fertilizers, sleel, rower, etc. Besides its other uses, the major use of demineralized water is as toiler feed water in -boilers, ranging frcm low pressure to supercritical pressure. With the advent of high pressure and super-critical pressure boilers, the quality of demineralized water has acquired greater importance. This makes it essential to develop and make available the requirtd specification for the guidance of users to procure and instal efhcient and economical system for producticn of demineralized water. The specification for dcmineralization plant varies from one place to other depending upon the source of water available, ionic load of water, treated water quality desired, regenerant availability, etc. These factors are to be taken into account for proper selection of demineralization plant, and to develop their detailed specifications.

IS 13268: 1992

Indian Standard
DEMINERALIZATION PLANT GUIDELINES
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers ( a ) the basic details of demineralization plant, ( b ) brief guidelines for framing the specification of demineralization plant, ( c ) brief details of various systems currently in use for production of demineralized water, and ( d ) the various considerations required for making the buyers specification complete in all respects. 1.2 Attempts have been made to expose the buyers to different systems of demineralization plant, so that it may be easier for them to compare and select the best possible system suiting their particular requirements. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 252 : 1973 265 : 1987 Title Caustic soda, pure and technical ( second revision ) ( third acid Hydrochloric
revision )

manganese besides other dissolved solids. The analysis of raw water shall be carried out throughout the year to determine its profile variations with the change of seasons. Records of analysis of at least two years shall be made available before fixing up the treated water quality. Sufficient margin in various constituents of water may be kept in order to take care of variations in the coming years based on yearly seasonal variations in water analysis. The tubewell water composition does not vary much with the season, so in that case, it becomes easier to fix up the design parameters of water analysis; but in surface water, fluctuations are quite high, so it becomes difficult to arrive at the designed analysis. However, a proper assessment has to be made for fixing up designed water analysis. 3.2.3 The next is to properly pretreat the raw water to obtain water suitable for feeding into demineralization plant as the ion exchange resin used in demineralization plant are susceptible to various constituents commonly present in water including iron, manganese, colour, suspended solids, residual chlorine, etc. The feed water for demineralization plant shall be free from chlorine, organics, iron, manganese, suspended solids within 2 to 3 mgll. It shall also be free from oil and grease to ensure long life of the ion exchange resins. All these considerations have to be kept in view in the design of a demineralization plant. 3.3 Regenerant Chemicals The availability of regenerant chemicals in the neighbourhood of demineralization plant also plays a decisive role for fixing the guidelines. It is economical to make use of chemicals available in nearby areas for regeneration of various ion exchange resins. This will also lead to substantial savings in storage capacity of chemicals in the plant due to their availability at a short notice. Regenerant chemicals like hydrochloric acid ( IS 265 : 1987 ) and pure caustic soda ( IS 252 : 1973 ) used shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards. 3.4 Disposal of Regeneration Wastes The disposal of regeneration wastes plays an important role. The toxicity, acidity and alkalinity of the waste water have to be within the specified limits. These are strictly monitored vis-a-vis pollution control and environmental protection measures. Normally, the pH of effluents of demineralization plant varies depending upon the regeneration of cation or anion. In case of cation regeneration, the waste acid comes to drain, whereas, in case of anion, the 1

3 FACTORS FOR DRAWING UP SPECIFICATION

3.1 The following factors are to be kept in view ,before drawing up the specification for demineralization plant: a) The source of water ( river water, well water, etc ) available for treatment; b) Quality of treated water; c) End-use of demineralized water; d) The availability of regenerants in the vicinity of the proposed plant; e) Disposal of regeneration wastes; and f) The availability of utilities, such as steam, instrument air, etc. 3.2 Quality of Feed Water .3.2.1 The quality of water to be treated plays an important role in drawing up the specifications. The system has to be designed to process raw water available from different sources, such as rivers, tube wells, rivulets, wells, ponds, Sakes, etc. 3.2.2 The first step is to make a detailed analysis Of raw water for various parameters including srganics, colour, suspended solids, iron,

IS 13268 : 1992 waste alkali is drained. On mixing of both acidic and alkaline wastes the effluent gets neutralized to a certain extent. However, it is essential to ensure full neutralization to about pH 7.5 before the disposal off as plant effluent. 3.5 Utility and Cost 3.5.1 Prcper assessment of -the availability of utilities 1s imperative before puttmg up the plant. Depending upon the availability, the complete scope of demineralization plant can be developed. In some cases heating of regenerant is required, for which arrangement for steam is to be made; otherwise electrical heating is to be resorted to. Besides this, compressed air may be required for operating various instruIf the existing ments/mechanical equipment. infrastructure does not include arrangements for supply of compressed air, the same are to be provided in plants specification. 3.5.2 The type of operation, namely, automatic, semi-automatic or manual has got a major bearing on the cost of the plant. In some cases only operation is preferred; whereas in manual other cases semi-auto or auto operation is being considered. In case semi-auto operation is desired, proper care has to be taken in developing the specification because this greatly depends L pon many process sequences. 3.5.3 The process sequerce edopted for the plant, requires special attention as it makes the plant operation more economical. 4 BASIC PARAMETERS 4.1 Considerable importance is to be given for determination of the basic parameters so as to get a plant suiting the requirements of the client. 4.1.1 Buyer specification consists of ( a ) design, ( b ) er gineering, ( c ) procurement, ( d ) transportation, ( e ) storage, ( f ) erection, and ( g ) commissioning of all the work including mechabesides civil nical, -electrical, instrumentation work.
NOTE - Sometimes civil work is excluded from the scone. and included in the scooe of main civil &nt&o;,~who executes civil wo;k for the entire plant including demineralization plant. It becomes gdvantageous-toadopt this, as the complete responsibility lies with a smgle civil contractor, following the same norms for the complete factory. It has got certain disadvantages as well because increased co-ordination is needed between demineralization plant supplier and civil contractor to complete the civil work in time so that the erection work of the demineralization plant is started as scheduled. Hence, it is preferred to have one source responsible for demineralization plant supply in all respects including civil works.

demineralized water in the end use in other plants which has to be assessed prior to framing the specifications. The number of streams are also to be clearly identified as it makes a big cost impact in the plent. Sometimes, it is preferred to have 100 percent spare stream, whereas in other cases, no spare stream is desired as it is being compensated by creating a large capacity for storing treated water. The single stream demineralizaticn plant is designed with higher capacity to get extra water for storage to take care of any extreme urgency. However, it is definitely preferable to go in for a minimum of two streams. One can go for any number of streams, but then the cost of the plant would increase with increase in number of the streams. Therefore, an optimum balance has to be struck for fixing the number of streams for a given end use. 4.1.3 The header system shall also be clearly marked in the plant specification. Sometimes, it is desirable to have a single header system, whereas in other cases, separate headers for each stream are favoured. In some cases, a mixed approach is being adopted having both single header, and separate headers for some of the process fluid streams. Single header system is having certain flexibility, as any unit of this stream can be easily connected $0 other unit or the Other stream. So single header system is Commonly ~preferred. Some clients do prefer individual streams but the cost implications require to be looked into seriously. 4.2 Storage Capacity The storage capacities for the feed water tank, degassed water tank, demineralized water tank and acid and alkali tank are also to be predetermined, and clearly defined in the specification of demineralization plant. 4.2.1 Feed Water Tank The feed water tank capacity largely depends upon the availability of feed water, chances of failure of feeding system, fluctuations in the pressure, and flow of feed water. But in most of the cases, this tank acts as a buffer tank, and is not provided with more than 2 to 3 hours capacity which is just sufficient to provide suction to the feed water pump, so as to maintain constant pressure to the demineralization plant systems. 4.2.2 Degassed W'uter Tank The capacity of degassed water tank largely depends upon the frequency of the regeneration of ion exchange resins, waste water used in the for regeneration and extra capacity desired emergency in the plant. All these factors shall be kept in view while evolving the minimum capacity of degassed water tank so that it covers all the contingencies in the plant. Normally it 2

4.1.2 The specification shall clearly give the minimum, normal and maximum flow rates desired for the system. The flow and number of streams required largely depend on the requirement of

IS 13268 : 1992 is sized at half an hour pumping degsssed water pump. 4.2.3 Demineralized
Water Tank

cspzcity

of

The capacity of the demineralized water t?nk greatly varies from one client to the other. The capacity is normally fixed~on the basis of exigencies occurring in the plant, the variations in use of demineralized water in down stream plants, use of demineralized water for -regeneration, etc. Normally, in power plants clients prefer to have the storage capacity for 16 to 24 hours, but in other plants it is being kept for 4 to 8 hours. However, there is no strict rule for it as this entirely depends upon the client's requirements. 4.2.4 Acid and Alkali Tank
The storage

treatment of water in order to get demin:raliz:d water. Nowadays, as the cost of regenerant chemical is high, it is advisable to select an economical system to reduce recurring cost on chemicals. Systems in op:ration are d:sctib?d in brief to guide the bayers in selecting a viable and stable demineralization water plant. 6.1.1 Cation exchzng:r uait having strong acidic-cation. exchsnp resin followed by anion unit hiving s:rong basic anion exshsng:r exchange resin without any degasssr system in between. This system is prepzrsd for wlter hiving less alkslinity of 103 pgm and capable of giving demineralized water suitable for 10~ pressure and to a certain limit for m:dium pressure bailers. B:side$, this system can come handy also for industries using demineralized water for processing. In this system, both cocurrent and countercurrent techniques can be adopted depending upsn thz qllzlity of fe=d water, but countercurrent technique is mDre economical ( see Fig. 1 ). strong exchanger unit hiving 6.1.2 Cation resin follow:d by exchange acidic-cation degasser system having degasser tower, and degassed water tank followad by strong basic anion exchanger. This system gives deminsralized water for low pressure, and to a certain limit for msjium pressure boilers as well. H:re also, b3th cocurrent and countercurrent reg:neration upon the techniques can b: used depending of feed water but conntercurrent quality technique is more economical. This system is suitable for water having mod:rate alkalinity of about 250 mg/l alkalinity. H:re also strong basic anion exchnnge resin of Typ: 1 or Typs 2 is used depending upon the requirem:nt of silica leaky: ( sez Fig. 2 ). 6.1.3 Cation exchanger unit having strong acidic-cation exchange resin, followed by anion unit having strong basic anion exchang:r exchange reri I, followed by mixed bzd exchsnger unit, having a mixture of strong acidiccation exchange resin, and strong basic anion exchange resin Type 1. This system gives improved quality demineralized water, sometimes called polished water bacause of the use of mixed b:d exchanger unit which is also named as pslishing unit b:czuse of its basic role t; ,,"~Gsiso~( refine ) the demineralized water. countercurrent cocurrent or e regeneratio; techniques can b,- adopted for both cation and anion exchanger, but for mixed bed exchanger it is always preferable to adopt regeneration. This system gives cocurrent demineralized water of high purity, which is required for use in medium pressure, high p,ressure boilers and other chemical pro:essing industries where purity of water is of rnaj.jr The system is suitable for water concern. alkalinity less than 103 pp.n. H:re having also in anion exchnngzr, strong basic anion exchange resin of Type 1 or Type 2 can b4 used depending upon silica leakage ( see Fig. 3 ). 3

capacities of acid and alkali tanks required for regenerations are also to b: clearly indicated in the specification. These capacities are dependent upon the consideration of the time it takes to procure the chemicals at plant site. Where it may take lo-15 days for obtaining the chemicals, it becomes advisable to go in for at least one month's storage at the plant site. In normal~cases, where a tanker of acid or alkali is expected within 4 to 6 days time, storage capacity of a minimum of 15 days may be desirable. Wherever the regenerant chemicals are available in the plant, a limited storage of 3 to 4 days only may be considered. 5 FEED WATER 5.1 Before developing a system and fixing spzcifications for demineralization plant, the source of feed water and its availability has got to be established. Sometimes, water is available in the form of filtered water after proper chlorination, coagulation, flocculation, clarification and filtration. The filtered water is being directly fed to ihe feed water tank followed by ion exchangers for production of demineralized water. However, it becomes essential to establish water quality, which shall be free from colour, organics, etc. In case of any colour, organics or free chlorine, the water has to be treated with active carbon to take care of minor quantities of contaminants coming in feed water. In case of unfiltered water, the active carbon filters are to be preceded by filters for which pressure sand filters are normally used; sometimes dual media filter having sand and anthracite are also used. 5.2 For dechlorination, sometimes sodium sulphite is used, which is dosed in feed water before filtration. Sometimes the system is having only one dosing pot, wh;re solid sodium sulphite is added alongwith water to mnke solution. The solution thus prepared is dosed at a desired rate under pressure before filtration: In other situation, a solution preparation tank with agitator is provided. The solution is dosed to feed water by means of sulphite dosing pump. 6 DEMINERALIZATION 6.1 There are different SYSTEM kinds of systems for

IS 13268: 1992

=--l-I

KS_

FRW SAC

Filtered raw water Strong acid cation unit

SBA DMW

Strong base anion unit Demineralized water

FIG. 1 FLOW D~AGRAMSHOWING THE ARRANGEMENTOF A DEMINERALIZATION PLANT

SBA

FRW SAC DT

Filtered raw water Strong acid cation unit Degasser tower

SBA Strong base anion unit DMW Demineralized water

FIG. 2 FLOW DIAGRAM SHOWING THEARRANGEMENT OF A DEMINERALJZATION PLANT WITH A DEGASSERTOWER

FRW

'

4

SAC

FRW

Filtered raw water Strong acid cation unit DMW Demineralized water

SBA MB

Strong base anion Mixed bed unit

unit

FIG. 3 FLOW DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT~OP A DEMINERALIZED PLANT WITH A MIXED BED UNIT

unit having strong 6.1.4 Cation exchanger resin follou'ed by t xchange acidic-cation tower and degasser system having degasser tank followed by anion degassed water exchanger unit bavirg strong basic anion exchange resin followed by mixed bed exchanger of strong acidicunit having a mixture cation exchange resin and strong basic anion ex change resin of Type 1. Here also both kinds of regeneration techniques as in 5.1.3 can 4

be used depending upon the quality of demineralized water desired except for mixed bed unit. The system yields demineralized water of high purity which is useful for medium and high pressure boilers. This system is suitable for water having moderate alkalinity of 250 ppm. Use of Type 1 or Type 2 strong basic anion exchange resin in system depends greatly upon leakage of silica from the system ( see Fig. 4 ).

IS 13268: 1992

FRW SAC DT

Filtered raw water Strong acid cation unit Degasser tower

SBA MB DMW

Strong base anion unit Mixed bed unit Demineralized water

FIG. 4 FLOW DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF A DEMINERALLZATION PLANT WITH A DEGASSER AND A MIXED BED UNIT 6.1.5 The cation exchanger unit in the systems described above may further be split into a system consisting of weak acid cation exchanger unit having weak acidic-cation exchange resin, followed by strong acid cation exchanger unit having strong acidic-cation exchange resin. This system is more useful for water having high alkalinity of more than 300 ppm and high hardness of more than 300 ppm. The modified systems are commonly adopted to conserve the regenerant chemicals. Here, the regeneration is adopted in thoroughfare manner involving passing of regenerant from one unit to the other unit in series. Normally, the regeneration is being done from strong acid cation resin to weak acid cation resin by adopting coeurrent thoroughfare technique, that is, using both the regeneration in cocurrent manner in series or using countercurrent thoroughfare regenerations technique involving countercurrent regeneration of strong acid cation exchanger in series with cocurrent regeneration of weak acid cation resin ( see Fig. 5 ). 6.1.6 The anion exchanger unit in the above .systems can also contain two separate anion exchangers involving weak base anion exchanger followed by strong base anion exchanger. This system is also used to conserve the regenerant the plant more chemicals and to make economical by adopting either coccurent thoroughfare technique, involving regeneration of both weak base and strong base anion unit in cocurrent manner in series or countercurrent thoroughfare technique with countercurrent regeneration of strong base anion exchange resin with cocurrent regeneration of weak base anion exchange resin in series is adopted. The system is used when the water is having a high amount of chlorides and sulphates ( see Fig. 6 ). 6.1.7 In the systems given in 6.1.1 and 6.1.2, sometimes it becomes desirable to go in for weak base anion exchanger in place of strong base anion exchanger specially in cases where silica removal is not so critical from the feed water. 6.1.8 In the system given in 6.1.1 to 6.1.6 for strong base exchanger, sometimes Type 2 strong base anion exchange resin is used in place of Type 1 strong base anion exchange

0-J
1 1
DT
.FRW WAC

SAC
.DT

Filtered raw water Weak acid cation unit Stroog acid cation unit Degasser tower FIG.

SBA Strong base anion unit MB Mixed bed unit DMW Demineralized water

5 FLOW DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF A DEMINERALIZATION PLANT WITH AJWEAK ACID CATION AND A MIXED BED UNIT
5

IS 13268 : 1992

=-l-l

i-1
r
1
FRW Filtered raw water Strong acid cation unit SAC Degasser tower DT WBA Weak base anion unit

SAC

DT

SBA MB DMW

Strong base anion unit Mixed bed unit Demineralized water

aQ
SBA
MB DMW

FIG. 6 FLOW DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF A DEMINERALIZATION PLANT WITH A WEAK BASE ANION-AND A MIXED BED UNIT

resin. This system is useful when silica leakage desired in the demineralized water is slightly higher.
6.1.9 The system sometimes necessitatesto

7 EQUIPMENT 7.1 The equipment details constitute an important criterion to be given in the specification. Basic parameters for each and every equipment are to be given in the specification. 7.1.1 Pressure Sand Filters The pressure sand filters shall be either of vertical or horizontal type which is to be clearly mentioned in the requirement. Normally, vertical sand filters are preferred except in cases, The flow for the where higher flow is required. filters may clearly be established so as to cover the requirement of demineralized water, waste water for regeneration of exchangers, and filtered water for backwashing the filters. Backwashing operation is adopted for cleaning the filter bed, and to make the bed loose, for reducing pressure drop while running the plant. The backwashing of filters is done by either filtered water alone or by air and filtered water together or independently. The desired mode of backwashing is to be clearly specified in the specification. The storage tank shall be located either overground at a desired height to get the sufficient pressure for backwashing or on the ground level. In the latter case, extra pumps ( 1'5 kg/cm2 ) are required for backwashing the filters. Air requirement for backwashing should always be met by the rotary air blowers. Services air of 3 to 6 kg/cma pressure shall never be used for air scouring as it will churn up the filter media. For provision of filtered water tank, its elevations, specification of filtered water pumps and air blowers shall clearly be stipulated to get the complete system. The guarantee of the filtered water coming out of filter shall be given in the specification based on In general, turbidity is which filter is designed. specified for filter design and water -outlet of filter shall contain turbidity less than 2 NTU. 6

make use of two mixed bed exchanger unit in series, that is, one mixed bed unit followed by an other mixed bed unit in place of only one mixed bed unit. Such systems are normally employed to get highly pure demineralized water which is suitable for high pressure or super-critical pressure boilers or in cases where highly refined water is required.

6.1.10 The cation exchanger unit in the system given in 5.1.2 may also be selected in two separate cation exchanger units, each having ' strong acid cation exchange resin where the countercurrent regeneration is made by technique for second cation exchanger unit and the thoroughfare manner in series with first cation exchanger unit. This process becomes more advantageous than one single exchanger, as it takes care of any extra leakage coming from the first cation exchanger and thereby gives much better treated water than in single exchanger unit. This system becomes more useful with higher dissolved solids in feed water. 6.2 Any one of the above described systems can be selected for including in the specifications by client. However, analysis of water and economics of the process play the decisive role. As is evident from above, the regeneration technique plays an important role for achieving the desired quality of demineralized water. Depending upon Ihe mode of regeneration, performance of exchangers varies. So it becomes important to fix the mode of regeneration in the specifications itself by the client. 6.3 The minimum depth of resin used in the above exchangers shall not be; less than 91'5 cm ( 3 feet).

IS 13268: 1992

The material of construction of filter is to be given clearly. The void space above the packed bed may be mentioned which is normally kept about 50 percent of the packed height. The standard design specification are as follows :

Besign specification: 3 m minimum 12 m maximum 6 m normal time of 15 minutes minimum b) Contact water with activated 30 minutes normal carbon a) Activated carbon bed depth
c

4
b)

Air blown - 0'4 to 0'5 kg/cm2 air discharge pressure 0'015 to 0'025 m3/m* set of filter bed area ( air requirement ) Backwash pump - 1'5 kg/cm2 discharge pressure at 10 l/m2 set of filter bed area ( backwash requirement )

1.1.3 -Exchanger

Unit

The details of the exchanger units are to be :learly specified keeping in view the requirenents of the client. These also include the of inspection windows, tequired number number of manholes and other mechanical d Filter pump - 3 to 4 kg/cm2 discharge requirements. The internal arrangement of the 1'3 to 4'1 l/m2 set of bed area pressure, exchanger is to be left to the bidders as it ( filteration rate > depends upon the type of system adopted by sand: ( 30 cm ): them either header lateral system or strainer d) Filter media - Fine on bed plate system for proper collection and uniformly through distribution of water 0'45 to 0'5 mm; Coarse sand: Grade exchanger bed. The minimum, normal and 25 cm; maximum flow through exchanger may clearly be specified. The void space above the packed Grade - 0'8 to 1'2 mm; Fine pebbles: resin bed may clearly be mentioned, which is 10 cm; normally kept about 75 percent of the resin Graee - 3 to 6 mm; Medium pebbles: depth for cation and anion exchangers, whereas 10 cm; for mixed bed it is preferable to keep minimum 100 percent of the mixed bed resin depth for Grade - 6 to 12 mm; Coarse pebbles: expansion. The quality of treated water 20 cm; guaranteed as coming out of each exchanger may be given in the specification based on Grade - 12 to 25 mm. Normally which exchangers are to be designed. for cation exchangers there shall be leakage of 7.1.2 Active Carbon Filter some sodium ions which depends upon the For cation regeneration level of the exchanger. The active carbon filter, wherever desired, is to of hardness is the leakage exchangers, be installed after pressure sand filters which considered nil and sodium leakage is being consist of active carbon packing capable for depermitted normally in the range of 1 to 2 mg/ 1. chlorination, de-oiling and de-colouration along The term regeneration level refers to the amount with removal of traces of iron and organics. of regenerant chemical used for the regeneration The grade of active carbon to be used for anion exchangers of exchanger resin. For The the purpose shall also be mentioned. there is some leakage of chloride ion and silica of backwashing tbese filters with mode ion, depending upon the type of anion exchange filtered water is also to be mentioned. Here resin used in the system. With any leakage of also a similar arrangement for backwashing as sodium ion from cation exchanger, there is a given above for the pressure sand filters is to resultant increase in leakage of anion thereby be given. Normally arrangement ~for backwash increasing conductivity and silica content of of active carbon filter, and pressure sand filters demineralized water. The conductivity and are common, as at no stage simultaneously desired silica content of treated water coming backwash of both active carbon filter and out of anion exchanger shall be clearly defined pressure filter is expected. Even, if it in the specification for design, so that optimum so happens, backwashing of the units can regeneration level can be selected both for be easily staggered. The guarantee of cation and anion exchanger units. The guaranthe quality of treated water shall be incorpoteed water quality desired from mixed bed unit quality rated in the specification. The shall also be clearly defined in the specification parameters of the treated water shall conform so that the unit may be designed accordingly. to limits as follows: turbidity ( Q 1 NTU ), chlorine (4 0'01 mg/l ), and iron (4 0'01 mg/l,). 1.1.4 Degasser Tower The material of construction of the body and lining, if any, is to be specified. Normally, The deggasser tower requirement may also be epoxy lining is preferred on inside surface. The clearly defined with respect to its flow rate, void space above the packed bed may be type of packing ( stainless steel or glazed specified which is kept about 50 percent of ceramic ), etc. The guaranteed water quality packed bed. coming out of degasser shall also be clearly 7

IS 13268 : 1992 given for which carbon dioxide shall be normally in the range of 4 to 8 mg/I as calcium carbonate. Necessary manhole, hand hole, etc, may be clearly spelled out to facilitate easy maintenance. Tower is normally placed on some height to give a gravity flow to degassed water tank placed below it, where degassed water coming out of the tower is collected and fed to down stream systems, and other uses in the plant. The degassed water tank inside is normally lined with acid and alkaline resistant tiles to prevent hardness and silica pick up from the walls by the acidic water. Normally, degasser water system is kept common for the streams, but sometimes installations may be required stream-wise which is to be clearly indicated in the specification. The number of air blowers required for the degasser tower shall be mentioned which is normally kept two for each tower. The number of degassed water pumps may also be clearly specified, so that the bidders arc able to give the same type of system. Sometimes pumps are designed for 50 percent capacity only whereas in other case it is preferable to have pump capacity of 100 percent. The main consideration is the economic of the recurring cost of the plant. 8 ACID HANDLING SYSTEM 8.1 The details of acid handling system and regeneration equipment desired for the system shall be mentioned in the specification. The details of acid storage tank capacity requirement has been given in 4.2.4. Normally, sulphuric acid or hydrochloric acid is used for regeneras tion of the cation exchange resin. The acid supply to plant is made by road tanker. In cases, where requirement is very large, provision of rail tanker is also made in addition to road tanker. As the sulphuric acid is much more dangerous, extra precautions are to be taken for its handling. Acid tankers are sometimes preferred to be placed on height, so as to get the gravity flow from the acid tanker to acid storage tank in demineralization plant. The transfer of acid from acid tanker to acid storage tank is being done normally by pumps, but sometimes this transfer is also effected by pressurizing the tanker by air. In this case, the acid tanker shall be capable of withholding that much air pressure, as otherwise it would lead to failure of tank causing a serious accident. The material of acid transfer pumps are to be suitably selected depending upon the type of acid used. Separate regeneration equipment are required for use with sulphuric acid and hydrochloric acid, respectively. Generally, polypropylene pumps are used for hydrochloric acid series and stainless steel pumps for sulphuric acid series. 8.1.1 Regeneration
Equipment
C

S ilica

:ontact of moist air with stored acid, for which gsl breather shall be provided. In 2addition, proper seal shall also be included in overflow line to act as a vacuum breaker. Acid fiom storage tank is withdrawn either by gravity or by pumps and sent to acid day tank, e )r to acid measuring tank, depending upon the -equirement. The acid measuring tanks are Iiven separately for each exchanger ( cation :x&anger or mixed bed exchanger ) as the -equirement of each is different. Sometimes, :he acid is fed directly to ion exchanger units with the help of acid dosing pumps. The on.ine dilution of acid is done by providing a mixing tee, but extra precaution is to be taken ,n choosing suitable material of construction of stainless steel for mixing tze ( normally sulphuric acid series ), to avoid frequent failures due to the corrosive action of acid and heat of dilution acid which is required to be diluted from 98 percent to desired regenerant concentration ranging from 1'5 to 5 percent. Separate acid dosing pumps are required for cation unit and mixed bed unit. The acid from each acid measuring tank which are normally put on sufficient elevation, is taken by gravity to acid dilution tanks placed at ground level where the concentration is reduced to about 20 to 30 percent. This dilute acid at the desired concentration is taken with the help of water ejector to different exchangers for further online dilution used for regeneration. Acid concentration is very important for regeneration of cation exchanger because the presence of more hardness in water leads to precipitation of calcium sulphate during regeneration, thereby leading to imperfect regeneration. 8.1.1.2 In case of hydrochloric acid storage tank, proper precautions shall be taken to avoid hydrochloric acid vapour going out of the tank to the surroundings, for which fume absorbers shall be provided. Acid from storage tank is transferred in similar fashion as in the case of sulphuric acid mentioned in 8.1.1.1. The on-line dilution is done by water ejector ( normally ebonite ejector for hydrochloric acid series ) for getting desired concentration of regenerant concentration to about 3mto5 percent. Sufficient care has to be taken to control the acid fume in the plant area by providing -fume absorbers wherever necessary. Here also, separate acid measuring tanks for different exchanger units are to be provided. Information is also to be provided on the material required for construction of equipment to handle acid. 9 NEUTRALIZATION SYSTEM

8.1.1.1In case of sulphuric the acid acid, storage tanks shall be fully guarded to avoid 8

9.1 Neutralization system is another important aspect particularly in the perspective of pollution control measures. All the waste waters coming out during regeneration of exchangers are required to be collected in a pit which is to be neutralized before discharge. Normally two

IS 13268 : 1992 sections in neutralizing pit are provided, each section being capable of holding total waste water coming out of all exchangers at a time. Sometimes, the nuetralization pit is designed to take up either 12 hours or 24 hours collections of waste water coming out during regeneration of exchangers ; but this will add to the cost of plants as the pits require a suitable lining over RCC structure to handle acid/alkali. Proper pumping and recirculating arrangement for effluent mixing are also to be provided. Sometimes, additional air grid is provided in the pit for thorough mixing of alkali/acid fcr complete neutralization. Proper specifications are to be developed for this system suiting client's requirement. Lime is normally used for neutralization for which lime preparation tank and feeding arrangement by gravity shall also be included in the specifications. Otherwise, proper acid/alkali mixing is to be specified in the specifications. 9.2 The details of alkali handling system and regeneration equipment desired for the system shall be clearly mentioned in the specifications. Details of alkali storage tank are given in 4.2.4. Normally only caustic soda is used for rcgeneration of anion exchange resin in ~anion and mixed bed exchanger units, but sometimes ammonia is also used for regeneration of weak base anion exchange resin specially, in the nitrogenous fertilizer plant producing ammonia. 9.2.1 Ammonia solution ( 10 percent) is preferred storage to be stored in the tank, which shall be properly sealed to avoid any vapour of ammonia escaping into atmosphere. This solution is fed to exchanger with the help of pump or water ejector to get the final concentration of ammonia ( about 4 for percent ) required regeneration of exchanger. 9.2.2 The caustic soda solution tanks details have been given in 4.2.4, which shall be part of the specification, but the tanks shall be provided with air breather to avoid carbon dioxde intake from atmosphere which could Proper lead to formation of sodium carbonate. sealing, therefore, is also to be provided. The alkali tank normally stores caustic lye solution ( about 40-47 percent ) coming by tanker ( road or rail ) depending upon the requirement of alkali in the plant. The alkali pumps are used for transfer of alkali solution from the tanker to storage tank, from where, it is transferred to alkali day or alkali measuring tank by gravity or by alkali transfer pumps depending upon the elevation of the tank. The alkali day tank is designed for storing alkali required for regeneration of various exchangers in a day. The alkali measuring tanks are separately provided for anion exchange resin of anion and mixed bed exchanger units. The transfer of alkali from measuring tank to anion
9

exchanger can be done either by alkali dosing pumps with on-line dilution by alkali ejector concentration of alkali to achieve desired solution for regeneration which normally ranges from 2 to 5 percent. But for regenebed unit the ration of alkali to mixed alkali ejector is used to get the desired alkali solution concentration in the range of 4 to 5 percent. Use of alkali dosing pumps is also preferred specially in case where pressure drop expected is high, such as in thoroughfare regeneration system. Sometimes, it becomes difficult to get lye solution in the vicinity of the plant. then alternste arrangement of preparing alkali solution is to be made at the site by getting solid alkali in the form of flakes or solid. For this purpose, a separate alkali solution preparation tank has to be provided equipped with proper stirring arrangement. In addition, the alkali transfer pumps are required for transferring alkali solution prepared in the tank, which shall also be used for recirculation of alkali solution in the tank for proper mixing of solid to prepare the solution. At least one caustic preparation solution tank shall be included in the specification to take care of any extreme emergency, in case lye solution is not made available due to some reasons beyond control.

10 GENERAL FEATURES

AND CONSTRUCTIONAL

It is essential to describe general and constructional features of various equipment in the specification, including the mode of their operation, location of the plant, etc.

10.1General Features
These cover ( a ) mode of operation ( b) location of the plant, ( c ) tvpe of instrumentation desired, and ( d > electryccal system requirement, etc.

10.1.1 Mode of Operation
manual operation is preferred, as the operation of the small size valves does not pose any problem. Further, with the instruction, the total cost of the plant goes up, which discourages recourse to sophistication in small plants. Nowadays, due to operational difficulties and to minimize the recurring cost, the labour cost is to be reduced, which encourages one to go in for semi-auto The mode of and auto operation of the plant. operation, therefore, has to be clearly specified. 10.1.1.2 Semi-auto operation includes the opevalves through selector ration of various switches located in the control panel so that the operators can operate the plant from the control panel. Sometimes semi-auto operation includes stopping of the plant during service run by the

10.1.1.1 For small plants,

IS 13268 : 1992 selector switch, and thereafter the regeneration is to be carried out by means of sequence timer or programme logic controller. This system requires a lot of precision, maintenanc.5, workmanship, reliability, and smoothness in operation of various instruments and valves. Although, such kind of system is becoming popular, one has to consider before hand the factors mentioned earlier. Complete autooperation is not at all desirable in India because of the large variation in night and day temperature. However, still, some client prefer to go in for automatic plants, Naturally, success will depend upon the regular maintenance of various instruments and auto valves in operation. 10.1.2 Locatix of the Plunt required to assess the pressure drop across the bed, but inlet pressure gauge can be avoided. 10.1.3.2 The exchang:rs are required to have more instrumentation particularly in auto and semi-auto plants. It is desirable to have flow indicator in the inlet. Sometimes, only one flow indicator is provided in the inlet with a water m:ter in th: outlet to assess the total quantity of water coming out during service Somerun or in between two regenerations. differential pressure indicator is also times, provided to assess the pressure drop a.cross the bed, otherwise only pressure gauges are provided in inlet and oulet pipes. The cation exchange unit is required to have sodium in indicating meter to indicate the leakage of cations, for which one prob: is put in the outlet of the exchanger. The anion exchanger unit is provided with conductivity indicator to assess th: conductivity, with silica analyser to and even sometimes estimate the silica content in the treated water. In some cases, even on-line, pH mster is provided in the outlet of the unit, but normally pH is rn:asured in the laboratory only. The mixed bed exchangers have conductivity meter, silica anslyser, pH meter to give the indications of quality of treated water. Sometim:s, only a conductivity indicator is provided and rest of the measurements are carried in the laboratory. Besides above, pneumatic control valves are provided for each operation on the exchangers, sometimes motor operated valves are selected in place of pneumatic type specially at the place where instrument air is not available for use. In case, auto or semi-auto operation of the plant is not envisaged, most of the instruments on exchangers can b: discarded, except flow indicator, and integrator which are needed in all circumstances. 10.1.3.3 On regeneration side, handling of acid, alkali tanks and their feeding systems are involved. Here also, a good instrumentation is required for auto and semi-auto plants. The instrumentation depends upon the type of operation for feeding regenerant to exchangers. The tanks shall have level switches, so t,hat proper levels in various tanks can be mainThe system shall be provided with tained. sufficient pneumatic or motorized control valves, besides the auto operation of pumps or blowers wherever necessary. Various stages of operation are better controlled by the timers which have to be set in advance during operation of the plant. Nowadays, use of programme logic control is also adopted. for these systems, where the programme of operation is set in advance. The basic requirements of the instruments in the system shall be givenin the specification, based on which the system shall be designed for operation. 10.1.3.4 Some instruments are required for inlet and outlet pipelines to and from the battery 10

This becomes an important factor for the total cost of the plant. In power sector it is normally preferable to go in for completely covered plant but in other chemical industries, including fertilizers, trends have set in to go in for open plants. The open plant is more economical compared to a covered plant, but there are some operational hazards which may have to be faced by the operators during monsoon, winters, and summers. In case, the plant is made semi-auto type it really becomes advantageous to go in for op:n plant, as frequent visit of operators to field is avoided. However, ultimately the choice b:twzen open and covered plant remains with the client. But the type ( open or covered ) must be included in the specification. 10.1.3 Instrumentation Nowadays, more and more on-line instruments are included in the plants. This gives instantaneous analysis of water at various stages of the plant. More and more instruments are there in semi-auto and auto plants to control the regeneration and service run. 10.1.3.1 In filters, most of the time manual operation is preferred but in some cases auto operation is selected. In case of auto operation, any high pressure drop across the bed leads to automatic backwashing followed by rinsing of the filter before putting for service run. For detection of pressure drop across the bed, differential pressure indicator alarm is used, ,vhich is connected with operation of service and backwash valves of the filter. Further, flow indicator integrator on individual filters required besides recorder. Sometimes, are in manual plant, use of only water meter in the feed line is preferred. In case of auto or sepliauto operation, the valves included for operation are pneumatically operated gate valves and only in some cases, where instrument air is not available, motorized valves are used. Inlet and outlet of the individual filters have pressure gauges which depend upon client's requirement. However, outlet pressure gauge is definitely

IS 13268 : 1992 Normally, on water incomlimits of the plant. contain pressure irdilines instruments caters, recorders, pressure switch, etc. Sometimes use of water meter is made only for recording total water flow to the plant, specially in case of manual plants. For treated water line, many online instruments are needed, such as pressure indicator, flow indicator/recorder, conductivity ir.dicator, pH indicator/recorder, silica analyser recorder, sodium analyser, recorder, chloride analyser recorder, etc, deIn normal pending upon the requirement. plants, even the outgoing line has minimum flow For the indicator and pressure indicator. neutral effluent I;ne, it becomes essential to provide at least a pH indicator to assess the pH of the effluent of the plant, which has to be neutral before disposal. However, specific instrrments cn various lines cannot be listed their inetallation varies from plant to plant. All the same, requirements of these instruments are to be clearly mentioned in the specification.
ing

proper arrangements for collection and distribution of water so that no cbannelling occurs inside the packed bed. The basic details may only be mentioned to enable the designer of the plant to meet the proper performance and guararteed requirements. 10.2.2 Exchanger
Vessels

10.1.3.5 Instrument

control

panel

The details of instrument control panel may clearly be given in the specification so that all necessary ir.struments are provided on the panel. The requirement of enurciations for alarms may clearly be mentioned in the specification. The control panel varies according to the system adopted. But this lcads to requirement of airconditioned room for satisfactory performance of instruments incorporating integrated circuits, relays acd solid state system provided in control circuits. 10.1.4 Electrical System Requirements of electrical system are to be broadly converted in the specification so that the plant can accordingly be designed. Sometimes, only high voltage power is available which calls for provision of a step down transformer in the system which shall be mentioned in the specificat ion. The specification of control centres, switches, and location of push buttons may clearly be mentioned in detail so that these items are provided in the plant accordingly. 1.0.2 Constructional Features

All the exchangers require some kind of protective inner lining over mild steel to protect it from corrosive liquids. Normally, rubber lining or eborite lining is suggested, but now, use of FRP or polymethane is also recommended. Proper distribution of water and regenerants are to be provided inside the vessel so that, it is uniformly distributed all over the packed bed. In smaller diameter vessels, only one distributor is enough for putting both water and regenerant but in other cases it is preferable to have separate water and regenerant distributors. For collection of the treated water, good system is required for which lateral header system or bed support system is provided. As the collector system works as distribution system during back-washing of the vessels, it requires special design. In case of countercurrent regeneration, the regenerant flows from bottom, so the collection system which requires a good arrangement for uniform distribution throughout the bed. In this case, a middle collector is also provided for discharging the water coming during the regeneration. In mixed bed exchangers also, similar kind of arrangement is made. However, the details of constructional features are to be left to the system designer to be worked out on the basic requirement and treated water guarantee at different stages. 10.2.2.1 Back-wash outlet strainers Strainers of stainless steel or PVC Construction are installed in the back-wash outlet of exchanger prevent resin loss during back-wash to operation. 10.2.2.2 Resin traps Resin traps are installed at the treated water outlet of each exchanger to cater the resin leaks through leaky strainers or loosened strainers in the collecting system during service runs. 10.2.3 Water Storcrge Tanks RCC tanks are used with bitumen lining for feed In case of degassed water tank, water storag:. acidic water from degasser tower is stored, so Normally, proper lining is desired from inside. rubber lining is suggested for this purpose In but nowadays, FRP lining is also suggested. case of demineralized water tank or polished water tank, lining becomes essential from inside to avoid corrosion and iron pick up in the treated water. In some cases, only epoxy lining 11

The important constructional features of the various tanks, exchangers may be mentioned in the specification, so that the system is The aspects covered designed accordingly. include the material of construction, and general features of the tanks, exchangers, etc. 10.2.1 Filters As the filters contain feed water and no acid/ alkali is coming in contact, only mild steel Sometimes epoxy or vessels are required. bitumen lining is desired so that iron pick up from the vessel is minimized. The filters have

IS -13268: 1992

is suggested from insid?, but in other `cases rubber lining is also recommended. The neutralization pit for storing waste water during regeneration is normally made of RCC with suitable lining from inside. Epoxy, acid-alkali resistant titles and bricks suitably joined are also used. The details of such lining are to be clearly marked in the specification. I&2.4 Regenerant
Tanks

In case of hydrochloric acid FRP lining or rubber lining for inside surface is quite useful. In case of caustic soda or sodium carbonate sometimes no lining for inside surface is provrded, but it is advisable to give some lining to avoid ingress of extra iron from the vessel. These linings may be of epoxy, rubber or FRP, is to be clearly spelt out in the which specification. 10.2.5 Others For pressure vessels, dished ends are to be provided; for some atmospheric tanks also dished For horizontal end bottoms are required. cylindrical tank like degassed water tank, large size acid/alkali tanks, etc, also dished ends are required. Proper breather seals, etc, are required in various tanks to check the harmful vapours escaping out, and also to check the Suitable on-line traps ingress of moisture. are also desired to check the loss of various packings in case of any damage in collection system during operation.

For concentrated sulphuric acid only mild steel tanks are to be used, whereas dilute sulphuric acid shall require stainless steel tanks or some special lined tanks particularly where it IS getting diluted as heat evolved in those tanks is quite high; suitable corrosive resistance lining material is used for sustajning the temperature rise. Teflon lining for such tanks shall be ideal, but due to its limited availability, special rubber lining is suggested, which is to be The properly maintained during operation. temperature of the solution is never allowed to go beyond 70 - 80�C to protect the lining.

12

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of hdfan Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the proStandard marked products are also continuously checked by BTS for conformity to ducer. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Blregu oflndiun Standards Act, 2936 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implemmting the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright b: addressed to the Director (Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent following reference :

Dot : No. CHD 013 ( 0026 ) Amendments Issued Since Poblication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 235 0216 6 32 92 95

160036 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

