IS 16054 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


IRRA HAF 
aaf fa wa wer — afaa tAm da 
(aii) F E 5-a & alsa Ga aad act 
grea Sed p g ch aae — Ufa aea 


Indian Standard 


PERIODIC INSPECTION AND TESTING — WELDED 
LOW CARBON STEEL CYLINDERS EXCEEDING 
5-LITRE WATER CAPACITY FOR LIQUIFIED 
PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) — CODE OF PRACTICE 


ICS 23.060.40; 75.160.30 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 6 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard has been formulated as a guide to cylinder fillers for establishing their own cylinder inspection 
procedures and standards. It is of necessity, general in nature although some specific limits are recommended. It 
should be distinctly understood that it will not cover all circumstances for each individual cylinder type. Rejection 
or acceptance for continued use in accordance with these limits, does not imply that these cylinders are or are not 
dangerous or subject to impending failure, but represents practice which has been satisfactory to a cross-section 
of the industry. 


Experience in the inspection of cylinders is an important factor in determining the acceptability of a given 
cylinder for continued service. Users lacking this experience and having doubtful cylinders should return them 
to a manufacturer of the same type of cylinders for re-inspection. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 10464:2004 “Gas cylinders 
— Refillable welded steel cylinders for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) — Period inspection and testing’, issued 
by the International Organization for Standardization. 


While implementing this standard compliance with statutory regulations shall be ensured. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16054 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


PERIODIC INSPECTION AND TESTING — WELDED 
LOW CARBON STEEL CYLINDERS EXCEEDING 
5-LITRE WATER CAPACITY FOR LIQUIFIED 
PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the inspection and testing 
procedure for the periodic inspection of transportable 
refillable welded cylinders for LPG, of water capacity 
exceeding 5 litres up to and including 250 litres, as per 
periodicity defined under Gas Cylinders Rules, 2004. 


It does not apply to cylinders permanently installed in 
vehicles. This Code is for mandatory testing of 
cylinders and not applicable for repair and 
reconditioning of LPG cylinders in use. 


1.2 This standard refers only to technical suitability 
and does not absolve the user from legal obligation 
relating to health and safety at any stage. It has been 
assumed that the inspection is entrusted by 
appropriately qualified and experienced people or 
competent persons who have been trained specifically 
for the task. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts 
to this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7241 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Batch — Batch means a lot of 400 cylinders of 
same capacity received from the cylinder owner 
company. The batch may comprise of cylinders from 
different cylinder manufacturers, manufactured at 
different dates. 


3.2 Competent Person — Person appointed by the 
retesting agency and who by a combination of training, 
experience and supervision is able to make objective 
judgments on a subject. 


3.3 Gross Weight — Sum of the tare weight of cylinder 
and the maximum weight of the LPG permitted in it. 


3.4 Periodic Inspection — Activity carried out at 
defined intervals which includes examining, 
measuring, testing or gauging the characteristics of a 
cylinder, in line with Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004. 


3.5 Pit — Local corrosion not in excess of 6 mm 
diameter and occurring not more frequently than one 
in any 500 mm? of the surface. 


3.6 Rejection — Putting cylinder out of service until 
final disposition is defined. 


3.7 Retesting Agency — Corporate body, approved 
by Statutory Authority under Gas Cylinders Rules, 
2004 on the basis of combination of appropriate 
qualification, training, experience and resources for 
periodic inspection of cylinders. 


3.8 Route Card — Format used for recording the 
details of the cylinders being tested at various work 
stations as defined in this standard. 


4 INTERVAL 
INSPECTIONS 


BETWEEN PERIODIC 


The interval between periodic inspections shall be as 
defined by statutory authority. 


5 PROCEDURES 
INSPECTION 


FOR PERIODIC 


5.1 General 


The periodic inspection procedures shall be in line with 
the written scheme approved by statutory authority. 
Periodic inspection shall be carried out by approved 
retesting agency. 


5.2 Test Procedures 


Procedures for periodic inspection shall essentially 
consist of the followiing processes and sequence: 


a) Preparation of cylinders for testing, 

b) External and internal visual inspection, 
c) Tare weight checking, 

d) Valve bung threads inspection, 

e) Hydraulic proof pressure test, 

f) External painting for surface protection, 


IS 16054 : 2013 


g) Tare weight checking, 
h) Stenciling and markings, 
j) Valve fixing, 
k) Pneumatic test, and 
m) Final certification. 


Since the cylinders received at testing stations are 
of different serial numbers and from different 
manufactures, the recording and handling of cylinders 
should be done with proper care to ensure a systematic 
and batch-wise movement of cylinders to avoid mix 
up resulting into escape of few operations. On receipt 
of cylinders, a batch of suitable number of cylinders 
preferably one day’s production or 400 cylinders 
whichever is less, shall be formed and the cylinders 
details shall be recorded in route card. Route card shall 
be signed by the competent person. Details for the 
procedure to be followed for handling route card are 
given in 5.14.1. 


5.3 Preparation of Cylinder for Periodic Inspection 
and Testing 


5.3.1 Removal of Valve 


All the cylinders identified for periodic testing shall 
be depressurized to atmospheric pressure in a safe and 
controlled manner at the site approved by statutory 
authority. Residual LPG shall be cold flared by using 
a suitable adopter and shall be vented through a piping 
1.5 m above the eves of the shed. 


The valve shall be removed carefully after ensuring 
complete depressurization. While removing the valve 
a suitable adopter and proper fixture shall be used to 
ensure that the cylinder bung threads do not damaged. 


5.3.2 Degassing of Cylinders 


The cylinder shall be degassed at a site approved by 
statutory authority. Cylinders shall be degassed by 
purging it by inert gas, steaming or by filling water till 
it overflows. In case of degassing by water, the water 
shall be retained for not less than | h to ensure that the 
cylinder is degassed. After emptying out the water, 
cylinders shall be kept in inverted position and be 
tapped gently by non-metallic hammer to remove dust, 
rust or any loose remnants in the cylinder. After 
degassing the inside of LPG Cylinder shall be checked 
by explosive meter to ensure that the cylinder is gas 
free. 


5.3.3 External Cleaning of Cylinder 


Loose coatings, corrosion products, tar, oil or other 
foreign matter on the cylinder surface shall be removed 
by wire brushing, water jet cleaning, caustic soda 
cleaning or combination of these. Care shall be taken 
to avoid damaging the cylinder surface and metallizing. 
During cleaning the cylinder opening shall be covered 


suitably with cap to prevent entry of foreign material, 
water, soap solution inside the cylinder. 


5.4 External and Internal Inspection 
5.4.1 External Inspection 


The entire surface shall be inspected by a competent 
person for, 


a) dents, cuts, gouges, bulges cracks, 
laminations or punctures,bottom shell 
thickness, footring bottom clearance applying 
the criteria for rejection given in Table 1. 

b) corrosion, giving special attention to areas 
where water can be trapped, at the base of the 
cylinder, the junction between the body and 
the footring, the junction between the body 
and valve guard or shroud, applying the 
criteria for rejection given in Table 2. 


c) other defects (for example, depressed bung 
or fire damage), applying the criteria for 
rejection given in Table 3. 

d) integrity of all permanent attachments for 
example, VP ring and footring. 


Any cylinder rejected by the competent person shall 
be segregated for repair or shall be rendered 
unserviceable. The reasons for repair or declaring the 
cylinders as unserviceable shall be recorded along with 
the cylinder detials, for example, S1 No., Name of 
manufacturer and Year of manufacture. 


5.4.2 Internal Cleaning and Inspection 
5.4.2.1 Internal cleaning 


Cylinder shall be first cleaned from inside by using 
vaccum pump. After internal cleaning, magnetic bar 
shall be used to remove any ferruos particle sticking 
at the bottom of the cylinder surface. 


5.4.2.2 Internal inspection 


The inside of the cylinder shall be visually inspected 
with appropriate internal illumination using low 
voltage lamp. Cylinder showing sign of internal 
corrosion shall be evaluated further in accordance with 
Table 2. If mechanical cleaning is required, care shall 
be taken to avoid damging the cylinder wall. Cylinders 
shall be reinspected after cleaning. 


5.5 Tare Weight Checking 


After external and internal cleaning, the cylinder shall 
be checked for tare weight. Cylinder having lost its 
weight by more than 5 percent of original tare weight 
shall be rejected. 


5.6 Valve Pad (Bung) Thread Inspection 
The valve pad thread shall be checked in line with 


IS 16054 : 2013 


Table 1 Physical Defects in the Cylinder Wall 
[Clause 5.4.1(a)] 


SI Defects Description Rejection Criteria 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Bulge Visible swelling of the cylinder Rejection in all cases 
ii) Dent Depression in the cylinder that has a) Depth of dent is greater than 1/10th of the mean diameter of the 
neither penetrated nor removed the dent 
metal or 
b) Mean diameter of the dent is greater than one-quater of the 
diameter of cylinder 
or 
c) Dent on or adjacent to weld 
iii) Cut or gouge Sharp impression where metal has 75 mm or more in length or when the depth of cut is such that the 
been removed or redistributed undamaged (remaining ) wall thickness is less than the minimum 
calculated wall thickness 
iv)  Intersecting cut or Point of intersection of two or Rejection in all cases 
gouge more cuts or gouge 
v) Dent containing Depression in the cylinder within When the size of dent or cut or gouge exceeds the dimension for 
cut or gouge which there is cut or gouge rejection as an individual defect 
vi) Crack A split or rift in the cylinder shell Rejection in all cases 
vii) Lamination Layering of the material within the Rejection in all cases 
cylinder wall appearing as a 
discontinuity, crack. Lap or bulge 
at the surface 
viii) Dig A sharp depression where the 75 mm or more in length and 4 mm or more in width 
surface material has been 
penetrated 
ix) Bottom shell Thickness of the bottom of the Less than minimum calculated wall thickness 
thickness cylinder surface 
x)  Footring bottom Clerance of the body bottom from a) Less than 8 mm for cylinders of water capacity up to 34 litres 
clearance the ground b) Less that 15 mm for cylinders of water capacity exceeding 
34 litres and up to 50 litres 
c) Less than 25 mm for cylinders of water capacity exceeding 50 litres. 
Table 2 Corrosion Defects in the Cylinder Wall 
[Clause 5.4.1 (b)] 
SI Defects Description Rejection Criteria 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Isolated corrosion  Pitting of metal occuring in isolated areas at a concetration Depth of penetration of any pit exceeds 0.4 mm” 
pits not greater than I pit/500 mm? of surface area 
ii) Area corrosion Reduction in wall thickness over an area not exceeding Depth of penetration of any pit exceeds 0.4 mm” 
20 percent of the cylinder surface including the ends (top 
and bottom) 
iii) General corrosion Reduction in wall thickness over an area exceeding 20 Rejection in all the cases 
percent of the cylinder surface 
iv) Line corrosion Series of pits or corroded cavities of limited width along a) Total length of corrosion in any direction 
the length or around corrosion circumfrence exceeds 50 percent of the circumfrence of the 
cylinder 
b) Depth of penetration exceeds 0.4 mm” 
c) Depth of corrosion cannot be measured 
v) Cervice corrosion Cervice corrosion occurs in the area of the intersection of When the depth of penetration exceeds 0.4 mm or 


the footring or stay plate with the cylinder 


when the depth of corrosion cannot be measured” 


D Cylinders shall be rejected in case the observed thickness of the undamaged remaining wall in the affected portion is less than the 
minimum calculated wall thickness. 


IS 16054 : 2013 


Table 3 Other Defects 
[Clause 5.4.1(c)] 
SI Defects Description Rejection 


No. Criteria 


(1) (2) (3) (4) 


i) Depressed Damage to the bung which Rejection in 
bung alters the profile of the cylinder all cases 


ii) Arcortorch Burning of the cylinder base Rejection in 


burns metal, a hardened heat affected all cases 
zone, the addition of extraneous 
weld metal, or removal of metal 
by scarfing or cratering 
iii) Fire Excessive general or localized Rejection in 
damage heating of the cylinder usually all cases 


indicated by: 

a) Charring or burning of paint” 

b) Fire damage of the metal 

c) Distortion of the cylinder 

d) Melting of metallic valve 

parts 

e) Melting of safety cap 
In case of superficial charring of paint cylinder may be 
accepted. 


IS 9121. Prior to checking, the threads shall be properly 
cleaned by soft wire brush and 34" 14 NGT thread 
cleaning tap. 


The cylinder of which the valve pad thread is worn out 
or not meeting the requirements of IS 9121 shall be 
rejected. 


5.7 Hydraulic Proof Pressure Test 
5.7.1 Preparation of Cylinders 


The external surface of the cylinder shall be clean and 
completely dry so that any leak can be detected during 
the test. 


5.7.2 Test Equipments 


All pipework, flexible tubing, valves, fittings and other 
components forming the pressure system of the test 
equipment shall be designed to withstand a pressure 
of 1.5 times the maximum test pressure of cylinder to 
be tested. The design and the installation of the 
equipment and the cylinders connected to it shall ensure 
that no air is trapped in the system. 


Equipment shall be either rotary type or invertible type 
to faciliate examination of complete surface of the 
cylinder. Equipment shall be provided with isolation 
valve to isolate the system once the test pressure is 
reached. 


Dedicated pressure gauges for each cylinder to read 
the cylinder test pressure in accordance with relevant 
Indian Standard shall be provided. In addition to this 
two numbers of main gauges shall also be provided on 
the inlet line of the equiment after the isolation valve. 


The gauges shall be callibrated for accuracy against a 
master gauge at regular interval of minimum once in a 
month. The master gauge shall be recallibrated in 
accordance with Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004. 


A device shall be fitted in the test equipment to ensure 
that no cylnder is subjected to pressure in excess of 
its test pressure by more than 10 percent. 


5.7.3 Procedure 


The cylinder shall be tested at the test pressure of 
2.45 MPa ( 25 kgf/cm’). 


Before applying pressure, the extenral surface of the 
cylinder shall be in such a condition that any leak can 
be detected. Cylinder shall be positioned so the welds 
are visible during the test. 


During test the pressure shall be increased gradually 
till the required test pressure is reached. Then the 
cylinder shall be isolated from the pumping system 
and the pressure shall be retained for a period of not 
less than 30 s. During the test, the cylinder shall be 
gently tapped with wooden/nylon hammer near the weld 
joints. 


The cylinder shall be thoroughly examined externally 
for any leak. Any reduction in pressure noticed during 
this retention period or leakage, visible bulge of 
deformation, sweating on cylinder body shall be treated 
as a case of failure in the test. 


In case of a leakage in the pressure system, it shall be 
corrected and the cylinder re-tested. 


5.7.4 Internal Cleaning and Drying 


Subsequent to hydraulic proof pressure test, water 
inside the cylinder shall be completely removed. The 
internal surface shall be completely dried by dry 
compressed air and vacuum pump. Internal cleaning 
and drying shall be checked by low voltage lamp. 


5.8 Painting 
5.8.1 General Requirements for Painting 


Both the primer coating and enamel paint application 
on the external surface of cylinder shall be done by 
using spraying gun. While applying the primer coating 
and final painting, care should be taken to ensure that 
the shadow zones, such as, surfaces under footring, 
VP ring, etc, are properly coated. 


A uniform coating of primer and finish paint shall be 
applied, the combined minimum coat thickness for 
layers of primer and paint shall not be less than 30 u. 
For measurement of paint thickness, procedure given 
in IS 3196 (Part 1) shall be followed. 


Cylinder shall be dried as per paint manufacturer’s 
recommendations after application of paint and primer. 


5.8.2 Primer Painting 


Cylinder found acceptable in all the tests described 
above shall be taken for primer coating. Before 
applying the primer coat, the external surface of 
cylinder shall be properly cleaned of dirt, dust and loose 
remnants of previous paints and dried. The bung 
threads should be closed by a plastic/rubber cap to 
prevent the entry of primer and paint in to the cylinder. 


The zinc chromate primer conforming to IS 2074 of 
brushing consistency and suitable for spraying or as 
agreed between the owner and the retesting agency 
shall be used. 


5.8.3 Enamel Painting 


After drying of primer, super synthetic enamel paint 
conforming to IS 2932, as per the colour scheme agreed 
to upon between the cylinder owning company and 
the retesting agency, shall be applied on the cylinder. 
The paint shall be of brushing consistency and suitable 
for application by spraying. 


5.9 Tare Weighment 
The cylinder fitted with valve shall be weighed for tare. 


The weighing scale used shall have a least count of 
not more than 10 g and the value of tare weight may 
be rounded to the nearest 100 g in accordance with 
IS 2. The weighing scale shall be of adequate weighing 
capacity. 


5.10 Marking/Stenciling 


After satisfactory completion of periodic inspection 
and testing, each cylinder found acceptable shall be 
marked with following on the vertical stays of cylinder: 


a) Identification mark of the testing unit as 
registered with statutory body on the stay 
plate near the retest date punching. 

b) New test date while retaining the previous 
test dates. 

c) New tare weight of cylinder according to 5.9 
and gross weight in, kg, shall be punched on 
the cylinder stay plate while retaining the old 
tare weight and gross weight. Details for 
punching are given in Annex B. 

d) Loss in tare weight, if observed under 5.5. 
(within 5 percent of original tare weight ) shall 
be punched at the footring . For example, if 
the loss in tare weight is 200g, it shall be 
punched as LTW 200. 


The next periodic inspection date and tare weight shall 
be stencilled on the cylinder as per the agreement 
between the cylinder owning company and the 
re-testing agency. 


IS 16054 : 2013 


5.11 Valve Fixing 


Valve suitable for intended use and conforming to 
IS 8737 shall be fitted to the cylinder using a sealing 
material to ensure a seal between valve and bung joint. 


Before valve fixing operation the valve pad (bung) 
threads shall be cleaned by using #4” — 14 NGT cleaning 
tap and wire brush. 


5.12 Pneumatic Test 
5.12.1 General 


Each cylinder after it has been dried and fitted with 
valve shall be tested for leakage by subjecting to air 
pressure of not less than 1 180 kPa (12 kgf/cm”) for 
period of 1 min. 


5.12.2 Test Equipment 


All pipework, flexible tubing, valves, fittings and other 
components forming the pressure system of the test 
equipment shall be designed to withstand a pressure 
of 1.5 times of the pneumatic test pressure. 


Equipment shall have facility to fully immerse the 
cylinder in water during the test by use of suitable 
pneumatic fixture. Equipment shall faciliate rotation 
of cylinder manually during the test. 


Air drier (refrigeration type) of suitable capacity and 
capable of achieving dew point required for removal 
of water traces shall be provided in the line to remove 
moisture from the air before it enters the cylinder. 


Pressure gauge of suitable capacity shall be provided 
at the air filling point to check the pressure of air in 
the cylinder prior to starting the test. 


5.12.3 Procedure 


Cylinder shall be filled with dry air up to the pressure 
of 12 kgf/em?. After that the cylinder shall be isolated 
from the presure source. The cylinder shall be 
immersed in water for a peirod of 60 s. 


The cylinder shall show no leakage from the body of 
cylinder and the joint between valve and bung. The 
test is to be carried out after fixing the safety cap on 
the valve. 


Any cylinder that fails the test shall be inspected for 
leakage cause. In case the leakge is due to improper 
tightening of valve, same shall be corrected and 
cylinder shall be rechecked. 


Otherwise the cylinder shall be rendered unserviceable. 


After testing, air shall be removed by press opening 
the valve using suitable adaptor. 


No cylinder shall be stored with air pressure inside. 


IS 16054 : 2013 


5.13 Cylinders Segregated for Re-conditioning or 
Rendered Unserviceable 


5.13.1 Re-conditioning 


Cylinders segregated during the visual inspection shall 
be returned to the owner for re-conditioning or shall 
be re-conditioned in accordance with IS 13258 as per 
the agreement between the owner company and the 
re-testing agency. 


5.13.2 De-shaping 


Cylinder rendered unserviceable at any stage during 
periodic inspection procedure shall be returned to the 
owner for proper de-shaping or shall be returned after 
de-shaping as per the agreement between the owner 
company and the re-testing agency. Complete record 
of such cylinders shall be maintained. 


5.14 Records 
5.14.1 Route Card 


On receipt of cylinders, a batch of maximum of 
400 cylinders shall be formed. 


Recording of the cylinders details shall be done in route 
card as per format given in Annex C. The format is to 
be printed on thicker card, as this moves along with 
the batch, to avoid mutilation and tearing off at the 
shop floor. Recording of the various stages of periodic 
inspection shall be done in the route card. On 
completion of operation/inspection, the concerned 
inspecting staff shall sign on the route card with date 
and forward the same to the next stage. 


It is advisable that the allotment of batch number is 
linked with year and month of testing. For example, 
09 A - XX which indicates 09 as the year of re-testing, 
A for the month of January, B for the month of February, 
etc, and XX is the control number for the month as 
1, 2, 3. This procedure provides necessary assistance 
in monitoring the control on the production as well as 
for easy access to a certain cylinder, if any information 
is required in future. 


5.14.2 Certification 


After completion of the testing, the re-testing agency 
shall record the details for cylinders accepted and 
cylinders rejected/recommended for repair as per the 
format given in Annex E and Annex F, respectively. 


Re-testing agency shall issue a certificate as per the 
Annex D towards periodic testing of cylinders. This 
certificate along with the list of cylinders accepted (see 
Annex E) and list of cylinders rejected/recommended 
for repair (see Annex F) shall be sent to the cylinder 
owning company. 


5.14.3 General Record Keeping 


The re-testing agency shall maintain records of 
inspection reports and test data, calibration data and 
the reports concerning the qualification or approvals 
of the competent persons. Record shall be maintained 
for all tests and inspections for the cylinders by the 
re-testing agency. All records pertaining to cylinder 
testing shall be stored in computer and shall be 
maintained till the life of the cylinder. 


IS No. 
2: 1960 


2074 : 1992 


2932 : 2003 


3196 (Part1) : 


2006 


B-1 TEST DATE AND IDENTIFICATION MARK 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised) 

Ready mixed paint, air drying, red 
oxide zinc chrome, priming — 
Specification (second revision) 
Enamel, synthetic, exterior: 
(a) Undercoating (b) Finishing — 
Specification (third revision) 
Welded low carbon steel gas cylinder 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity for 
low pressure liquefiable gases: Part 1 
Cylinders for liquefied petroleum 
gases (LPG) — Specification (fifth 
revision) 


IS No. 
7241 : 1981 


8737 : 1995 


9121 : 2005 


13258 : 1991 


ANNEX B 
[Clause 5.10 (c)] 
DETAILS OF MARKING ON STAY PLATE 


a) Old Test Date 
b) Test Dates 


XXYY 


XXX: IDENTIFICATION MARK OF TESTING STATION 
XXYY: MONTH AND YEAR OF RE-TEST DATE 


B-2 TARE WEIGHT AND GROSS WEIGHT 


a) Tare Weight Old New 
b) Gross Weight Old New 


IS 16054 : 2013 


Title 


Glossary terms used in gas cylinder 
technology (revision) 

Valve fittings for use with liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders of 
more than 5 litre water capacity — 
Specification (first revision) 
Inspection gauges for checking 
Type I (size 2) taper threads of gas 
cylinder valves, taper 1 in 16 — 
Specification 

Welded low carbon steel cylinders 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity for 
low pressure liquefiable gases — 
Code of practice for inspection and 
reconditioning of used LPG cylinders 


IS 16054 : 2013 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.14.1) 
ROUTE CARD 


Name of LPG Cylinder Testing Station : 
Owner of LPG Cylinders: ... 


Batch No. : we Batch Size : we. Date : 


Control No. 

Sl. No. of LPG cylinders 

Name of manufacturer 

Date of manufacture (that is, first test date) 
Previous test dates 

Internal inspection Ok/Rej. 
External inspection RT/R/Rej* 

(in case of rejection write code for rejection) 

Tare weight check Ok/Rej. 


Bung thread inspection Ok/ Rej. 


Hydrostatic test at 2.45 MPa 
(25.00 kgf/cm? ) Ok/ Rej. 


Tare weight 

Old 

New 

Final inspection for marking, painting, stenciling 
Accepted/Not accepted 

Any other defects 


Accepted /Not accepted 
Pneumatic testing Ok/Rej. 
Remarks, if Any 


Name and signature of inspector : 


Date of completion : 


* RT — Accepted for re-testing, R — Repair, Rej. — Rejected. 


The code used shall be as given below: 
Bulge — E, 

Dent — E,, 

Cut — E,, 

Line corrosion — E,, 

Bung thread damaged — E,, 

Identity lost — E,,, 


Wall thickness less than limits — E,, 


Burn — E, 

Dig — E,, 

Pit — E,, 

General corrosion — Eg, 

Loss in tare weight — E,, 

Bottom clearnace less than limits: E,, 


Internal defect cannot be assessed — I, 


IS 16054 : 2013 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 5.14.2) 
CERTIFICATE ON PERIODIC TESTING OF LPG CYLINDERS 


Certificate No: Date: 
This is to certify that LPG cylinders having nominal water capacity of liters as per enclosed list 1 have 
been found acceptable in accordance with IS and hydrostatic test at 2.45 Mpa (25.35 Kgf/cm? ) 


pressure in accordance with IS 3196 (Part1) : 2006. These cylinders are fitted with self closing (SC) type LPG 
valves in accordance with IS 8737:1995 of Type 1 threads (3/4”-14 NGT OF ANSI/CGA V-1-1987) 


Batch detials : 

Batch No. Batch Size 

No. of cylinders accepted : 

No. of cylinder rejected : 

Duration of testing: From To 

The cylinders accepted and tested are as per attached List 1 . 

The cylinders rejected/recommended for repair are as per attached List 2. 


Re-testing agency signature and seal 


IS 16054 : 2013 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 5.14.2) 
NAME OF TESTING STATION 
E-1 LIST 1: LPG CYLINDERS ACCEPTED 
Owner of cylinders : 
Certificate No. : 
Date: 
SINo. Cylinder No. Name of Manufacturer Date of Manufacture Tare weight 
Old New 
1 
2 
3 
Re-testing agency signature and seal 
ANNEX F 
(Clause 5.14.2) 
NAME OF TESTING STATION 


F-1 LIST 2: LPG CYLINDERS REJECTED/RECOMMENDED FOR REPAIR 


Owner of cylinders : 


Certificate No. : 


Date: 

SINo. Cylinder No. Name of Manufacturer Date of Manufacturer Rejected/ Reason 
For repair 

1 

2 

3 


Re-testing agency signature and seal 


10 


IS 16054 : 2013 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


BOC India Ltd, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. B. YEDLA (Chairman) 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI KARAN BHATIA 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri J. VEDAGIRI 
Suri SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. SINHA 
Suri P. G. CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI K. MANOHARAN 
SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


Suri P. P. NADKARNI 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI RABINDRA N. GHOSH 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
Suri NIKHILESh K. Garc (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri S. GOPAL Aran (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. Bomat (Alternate) 


Suri G. P. GUPTA 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


SHRI Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
SHRI ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. KOHLI 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
SHRI R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR KARN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


SHRI T. KALYANASUNDARAM 
Suri N. K. VIJAYAVARGIA (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


IS 16054 : 2013 


Organization 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura 
Road, Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows Lane 
Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri M. K. CHAUDHARI 
Suri S. S. THIPSE (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAIN 
Suri ANUJ JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. KHANDEKAR 
Suri S. R. SARVATE (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


SHRI L. D. THAKKAR 


Suri C. K. Vepa, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Composition of Low Pressure Gas Cylinders Sub-Committee, MED 16:2 


Organization 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Ideal Engineers Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


In Personal Capacity, (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile 


Mathura Road, Faridabad) 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


J. R. Fabricators Ltd, Halol 


Jindal Stainless Ltd, Hisar 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Sahuwala Cylinders (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 


Shri Shakti Cylinders Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Shiv Energy India Ltd, Hyderabad 
Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Iron and Steel Company Ltd, Jamshedpur 


12 


Representative(s) 
SHR1 ALOK KUMAR Gupta (Convener) 


SHRI KARAN BHATIA 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri J. VEDAGIRI 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri S. Devaposs (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI DEEPAK KABRA (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


SHRI RABINDRA N. GHOSH 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AsHwin H. MEHTA 
SHRI S. SESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri L. C. JAIN 
SHRI PRAVAIN GOEL (Alternate) 


Suri G. P. GUPTA 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI, 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. B. YEDLA 
Suri D. K. Gurra (Alternate) 


SHRI A. S. SOMAYAJULU 
Suri S. S. KRISHNA RE (Alternate) 


Suri D. V. Raja SEKHAR 
Suri G. NARASIMHA REDDY (Alternate) 


Suri R. R. Raj 


SHRI T KALYANASUNDARAM 
Suri N. K. VIJAYAVARGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Dr N. Gope 
Suri M. C. Sapnu (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED (16 (1101). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


