IS : 11418 (Part 3).1986
UDC 681'321'8

IS0 Indian Standard

7809-l 984

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

1I m
National Foreword

HIGH
PART

LEVEL

DATA

LINK CONTROL C'
OF CLASSES .<

PROCEDURES
OF PROCEDURES

3 CONSOLIDATION

I

[ IS0 Title : Information Processing Systems -Data Communication-High-Level Data Link Control Procedures-Consolidation of Classes of Procedures ]

This Indian Standard (Part 3) which is identical with IS0 7809 - 1984 `Information processing systems-Data communications -High level data link control procedures-Consolidation of classes of procedures', issued by .fhz!< International Orbanization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Indian Standardi&, Hstitution on the recommendation of the Computers, Business Machines and Calculators Sebti'onal Committee and approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Diirision Council. Wherever the words `International be, read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear, referring to this standard,

they

should

:: Cross References International
IS0 ,33C9-1984 bms-Data data link structure

Standard

Corresponding

Indian

Standard

Information processing syscommunication-High-level control procedures-Frame Data communication-Highlink control procedures-conof elements of procedures

IS : 11418 (Part l)-1986 High level data link control procedures : Part 1 Frame structure (Identical) IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1986 High level data link control procedures : Part 2 Consolidation of elements 6f procedures (Identical)

I

IS0

4335-1984 level data solidation

Adopted
L

15 January 1986

8

November 1986, ISI

I

Gr 7

INDIAN MANAK

STANDARDS BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 984

0

Introduction

High-level data link control (HDLC) classes of procedures describe methods of data link operation which permit synchronous, code-transparent data transmission between data stations in a variety of logical and physical configurations. The classes are defined in a consistent manner within the framework of an overall HDLC architecture. One of the purposes of this International Standard is to maintain maximum combatibility between the basic types of procedures, unbalanced'and balanced, as this is particularly desirable for data stations with configurable capability, which may have the characteristics of a primary, secondary, or combined station, as required for a specific connection.

This International Standard defines three fundamental classes of procedures (two unbalanced and one balanced). The unbalanced classes apply to both point-to-point and multipoint configurations (as illustrated in figure 1) over either dedicated or switched data transmission facilities. A characteristic of the unbalanced classes is the existence of a single primary station at one end of the data link plus one or more secondary stations at the other end(s) of the data link. The primary station is alone responsible for data link manaoement, hence the designation "unbalanced" classes of procedures.

4 Primary station ,

W ---

I ?Secondary station A

t_
Figure

I I

Secondary station

1 -

Unbalanced

data link configuration

2

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 984

The balanced class applies to point-to-point configurations (as illustrated in figure 2) over either dedicated or switched data transmission facilities. A characteristic of the balanced class is the existence of two data stations, called combined stations, on a logical data link, that may share equally in the responsibility for data link management, hence the designation "balanced" class of procedures. For each class of procedures, a method of operation is specified in terms of the capabilities of the basic repertoire of commands and responses that are found in that class. A variety of optional functions are also listed. Procedural descriptions for the use of the optional functions are being~consideredfor inclusion in this International Standard at a later date. It is recognized that it is possible to construct symmetrical configurations for operation on a single data circuit from the unbalanced classes of procedures which are defined in this International Standbrd. For example, the combination of two unbalanced procedures (with I frame flow as commands only) in opposite directions would create 2 symmetrical. point-to-point configuration (as illustrated in figure 3).

1

Scope and field

of application

This International Standard describes the HDLC unbalanced classes of procedures and the HDLC balanced class of procedures for synchronous data transmission. Balanced operation is intended for use in circumstances which require equal control at either end of the data link. Operational requirements are covered in accordance with the overall HDLC architecture. The procedures use the HDLC frame structure defined in IS0 3309lJ and the HDLC elements of procedures described in IS0 43352). For the unbalanced classes, the data link consists of a primary station plus one or more secondary stations and operates in either the normal response mode or the asynchronous response mode in a point-to-point or multipoint configuration. For the balanced class, the data link consists of two combined stations and operates in the asynchronous balanced mode in a point-topoint configuration. In each class, a basic repertoire of commands and responses is defined, but the capability of the data link may be modified by the use of optional functions.

Figure 2 -

Balanced date link configuration

I
2)

Primary station / 1 \

Secondary station 2

Primary station

Figure 3 -

Symmefrical

data link configuration

11 IS0 3309, Data communication-

High-level data link control procedures -

Frame structure.

IS0 4335, Dota. communication - High-level date link contrd procedures - Consolidation of elements of procedures. 3

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1966 IS0 7809-l 964

2
2.1

General

description

2.1.1.2

One type of data station is defined for the balanced class of procedures (see figure 41, i.e. combined stations, which send both commands and responses, receive both commands and responses, error recovery. and are responsible for data link layer

Principles

2.1.1

Types

of data

station

2.1.2 are defined for the un-

Configurations classes of procedures, a single primary sta-

2.1.1.1

Two

types

of data station

For the unbalanced

balanced classes of procedure.? (see figure 4)

:

tion plus one or more secondary station(s) shall be connected together over various types of transmission facilities to build point-to-point non-switched For the or multipoint, half-duplex configurations. class of procedures, together or duplex, switched or

,

which sepds commands, receives a) primary station, responses and is ultimatelv responsible for data link layer error recovery; b) secondary stations, which receive commands, send

balanced

two

combined

sta-

tions shall be connected responses and may initiate data link layer error recovery.

over various types of transor duplex,

mission facilities to build point-to-point, half-duplex switched or non-switched configurations.

.

Source and sink*

,

I

`0
2 g U Response control

Command and response control

4

i

Pi imary 5,:dtlOn

Secondary station

Combined station

Figure l

4 -

HDLC

stations

-

Building

blocks

For send-only

I frame stations or

receive-only

I frame

stations,

remove source or sink capability,

as appropriate.

4

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 984

2.1.3

Operational

modes

2.2.2.1

UNC

In an unbalanced class, any coupling of a primary station with secondary station(s) shall be operated in either the normal response mode (NRM) or the asynchronous response mode (ARM), two-way alternate or two-way simultaneous, in accordante with the capability of the configuration being employed. In the balanced class, two combined stations shall be operated in the asynchronous balanced mode (ABM), two-way alternate or two-way simultaneous, in accordance with the capability of the configuration being employed. 2.1.4 Addressing scheme

The basic repertoire of commands and responses for UNC shall be as follows: Commands Responses I RR RNR UA .DM FRMR

I
RR RNR SNRM DISC

2.2.2.2 In all classes (unbalanced and balanced), commands shall always be sent containing a destination data station address, and responses shall always be sent containing the assigned transmitting data station address, 2.1.5 Send and receive state variables

UAC

The basic repertoire of commands and responses for UAC shall be as follows : Commands I RR RNR SARM DISC Responses I RR RNR UA DM FRMR

For each primary-to-secondary or combined-to-combined pairing, a separate pair of send and receive state variables shall be used for each direction of transmission of information (I) frames. Upon receipt and acceptance of a mode setting command, both the send and receive state variables of the receiving station shall be set to zero. Upon receipt and acceptance of an acknowledgment response to a mode setting command, both the send and receive state variables of the originating station shall be set to zero.

2.2.2.3

BAC

The basic repertoire of commands and responses for BAC shall be as follows : Commands I RR RNR SABM DISC Responses I RR RNR UA DM FRMR

2.2
2.2.1

Fundamental Designations

classes

of procedures

Three fundamental classes of procedures are defined. They are designated : UNC Class; Unbalanced operation Normal response mode

UAC - Unbalanced operation Asynchronous response mode Class; BAC Class. Balanced operation Asynchronous balanced mode

2.3

Optional

functions

In these designations the first letter, U or B, indicates unbalanced or balanced operation ; -. the second letter, A or N, indicates asynchronous or normal response mode;

Fourteen optional functions are available (see table 1) to modifv the fundamental classes of procedures defined in 2.2. These'optional functions are obtained by the additions or deletions of commands and responses to or from the basic repertoires, or by the use of alternate address or control field formats or alternate frame checking sequences (see figure 5). Option 11 is applicable to the balanced class of procedures only.

2.4

Consistency

of classes

of procedures

2.2.2

the third letter, C, stands for class. Basic repertoires

The following basic repertoires utilize single octet addressing, unextended control field format, and a 16-bit FCS.

The consistency in the three classes of procedures, obtained through the use of the concepts of modes of operation, basic command/response repertoires, and hierarchical structuring, is shown in figure 5. This consistency in repertoire facilitates the inclusion of multiple versions of the classes of procedures in a data station that is configurable.

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 984

Table Option 1 2 3 4 5 Functional

1 -

Optional

functions Required change Add command: XID Add response: XID Add command : REJ Add response: REJ Add command : SREJ Add respohse: SREJ Add command: UI Add response: UI Add command: SIM Add response: RIM Add command: UP Use exiended addressing format instead of basic addressing format Delete response : I Delete command

description

Provides the ability to exchange identification and/or characteristics of data stations Provides the ability for more timely reporting of I frame sequence errors Provides the abilityfor more efficient recovery from I frame sequence errors by requesting retransmission of a single frame Provides the ability to exchange information fields without impacting the I frame sequence numbers Provides the ability to initialize a remote data station, and the ability to request initialization Provides the ability to perform unnumbered group and all-station polling as well as unnumbered individual polling Provides for greater than single octet addressing

6 7

9 9 10

, Limits the procedures to allow I frames to be commands only
Limits the procedures to allow I frames to be responses only

:I

/ Provides the ability to use extended sequence numbering (module 128) ( I I Provtdes the ability to reset the state variables associated with only one direction of flow (for 8AC only) I Information . I
Provides the ability to perform a basic data link test

Use extended control field format instead of basic control field format. Use SXXME instead of SXXM Add command

11 12 13 14

: RSET

Add command: TEST Add response: TEST Add response: RD Use the 32-bit +CS instead of the lbbit FCS

' Provides the ability to request logical disconnection i Provides . for 32-bit frame checking sequence (FCS) , I

6

IS : 11418

(Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 98 4

UNC Primary station
Commands
I RR RNR SNRM DISC

UAC Primary station
Commands

BAC Combined station

Secondary station
Responses
I RR RNR FRMR UA DM

Secondary station
Responses

Commands

Responses

I
RR RNR SARM DISC

I
RR RNR FRMR UA DM

I
RR RNR SABM DISC

I
RR RNR FRMR UA DM

3asic addressing format, L Modulo 8 I

16-bit FCE> J

I'
L

Basic addressing format, 08

16-bit FCS

Basic addressing format, Modulo 8

16-bit FCS

I
Command Response Command Response

I

I

1
I

For identification XID + Add -. XID

For improved REJ

performance + Add REJ

.Trlx--t
For single frame retransmission For unnumbered 4 UI + Add * UI information

For extended

sequence

numbering

I

x) -i

Use extended

control field format

instead of basic control field format; use SXXME instead of SXXM

For one-way

reset (BAC only) Add

11

RSET

5

For initialization SIM + Add + RIM

-I
I-

For data link test

12

TEST

+

Add

--t

TEST

For unnumbered

polling + Add

For request disconnect

6

UP

13

Add

-

RD

For multi-octet

addressing instead of basic addressing 14

For 32-bit FCS Use the 32-bit FCS instead of the 16-bit FCS

7

Use extended format

Figure

5 -

HDLC

classes

of procedures

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-1984

2.5 Conformance procedures

to the HDLC

classes

of

NOTE - The HDLC unbalanced classes of procedures operate as illustrated in the examples given in IS0 4335, annex B. (See clause 1.)

A data station shall be described as conforming to a given class of procedures, with optional functions, if it implements all Commands and responses procedures a) in the basic repertoire for the ClaSS of i.e. as modified by the selected optional functions,

3.2 3.2.1

Description Configuration

of the data

link

(see figure 1)

a priman/

station shall have the ability to receive all of in the basic repertoire as modified for the unbalanced optional bv the selected

the responses functions;

class of procedures

The unbalanced operation data link configuration shall consisl of one primary station and one or more secondary station5 interconnected by physical layer transmission facilities.

b) a secondary station shall have the ability to receive all of the commands in the basic repertoire for the unbalanced class of procedures functions; c) a combined station shall have the ability to receive all of and responses in the basic repertoire for the as modified by the selected optional

3.2.2

Physical layer transmission

facilities

The physical layer transmission facilities may provide either half-duplex or duplex transmission over switched or non
switched data circuits.

the commands

balanced class of procedures as modified by the selected optional functions. 2.6 Method functions of indicating classes and optional

NOTE - In the case of a switched data circuit, the procedures de scribed assume that the switched data circuit has been established.

The classes of procedures and the optional functions shall be indicated by specifying the designation of the class (see 22.1) plus the number(s) of the accompanying optional functions (see 2.3).
Example 7: Class UNC 1,2,6,9 indicates the unbalanced operation normal response mode class of procedures with the optional function for identification (XID), improved performance (REJ). unnumbered polling (UP), and one-way data flow from the secondary station(s) to the primary sta-

The data link layer shall not initiate data transmission until ar indication of circuit availability is provided by the physical layer, (In some systems providing two-way alternate data exchange on physical layer data circuits using half-duplex transmission, this indication of physical layer circuit availability is indicated b! an idle data link channel state.)

3.3

Description

of the procedures

3.3.1

General

tion .
Example 2: Class UAC 1.5.10.13 indicates the unbalanced operation asynchronous response mode class of procedures with the optional functions for identification (XID), initialization (SIM, RIM), extended sequence numbering fmodulo 1281, and request disconnect (RD). Example 3: Class BAC 2,8 indicates the balanced operation

Unbalanced control procedures shall operate on a data link witt one primary station and one or more secondary station(s) ir either normal or asynchronous response mode. Only ont secondary station at a time shall be put in asynchronou!
response mode. The primary station shall be ultimately sible for overall data link error recovery. Each data station shall check for the correct I frame or supervisory receipt of the frame. respon

asynchronous balanced mode class of procedures with the optional functions for improved performance (REJ) and the ability to send I frames as commands only.

frames it has sent to the remote data station by checking the N(R) of each received

3.3.2

Data station characteristics

3 Unbalanced multipoint) 3.1 General

operation

(point-to-point and

The primary station shall be responsible for : a)
setting up tne data link and disconnecting the data link and un

The following requirements apply to the procedure

for unbalanced operation of synchronous data transmission over Point-to-point or multipoint data links with two-way alternate Or two-Way simultaneous data transfer. The procedure uses the

b) sending information transfer, numbered commands; and c) checking received responses.

supervisory

HDLC frame structure defined in IS0 3309 and the HDLC elements of procedures described in IS0 4335. It uses the basic command/response repertoire (see figure 5) designated UNC for UAC). Although only the basic commands and responses are described, there are several optional functions available for enhanced operation. These are listed in 2.3 and shown in figure 5.

Each secondary a) b) checking sending

station shall be responsible received commands; information responses transfer, and

for:

supervisory by the

and

ur con

numbered mands.

as required

received

6

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-1984

3.4

Detailed

definition

of the

procedures connected data link or an in 3.4.1 to 3.4.6. a switched Stanand/or is

This action may continue response

until either the UA response or a DM correctly or until recovery action

has been received

The procedures established

for a permanently connection

takes place at a higher level.

switched

are defined

The protocol dard. However,

for establishing

and disconnecting

3.4.1.3

Procedure station

in a disconnected in NDM

mode shall monitor oppprtunity, DISC in 3.4.1.1, comto a

data circuit is not within the scope of this International the ability to exchange after the switched identification characteristics connection

A secondary mands, SNRM respond

(or ADM) as outlined

is established

shall react, (or SARM)

at the earliest command

respond

and shall command.

available as an optional function.

with a DM response

to a received

3.4.1

Setting

up and disconnecting

the data

link

The secondary station shall respond to other commands received with the P bit set to "1" with a disconnected mode (DM) response with the F bit set to "1". Other commands received with the P bit set to "0" shall be ignored. The DM response shall be used to report chronously in ADM. the secondary station status asyn-

3.4.1.1

Setting

up the data link

The primary station shall initialize the data link with a secondary station by sending a SNRM (or SARM) command and shall start a response time-out ed secondary command portunity station, correctly, function (or equivalent). the SNRM The address(or SARM)

3.4.2

Exchange

of information

II) frames

upon receiving

shall send the UA response at its first opthe data link set and the

3.4.2.1

Sending

I frames shall be as defined in IS0 4336 (see

and shall set its send and receive state variables to The control field format clause 1) for an secondary station is complete,

zero. If the UA response is received correctly, up to the addressed primary station

I frame, with N(S) set to the value of the send
Following parameter. N(S), plus data link set-up, both V(S) and

shall set its send and receive state variables station to zero and shall stop the If, upon receipt
Of

state variable V(S) and with N(R) set to the value of the receive state variable V(R). be a system-defined V(R) shall be set to zero. The maximum length of I frames shall

relative to that secondary response?ime-out the SNRM DM function (or SARM)

(or equivalent).

command,

the secondary is received time-out

station detercorrectly, function the for

mines that it cannot enter the indicated mode, it shall send the response. If the DM response primary station equivalent). If the SNRM (or SARM) command, UA response or DM resThe result function (or 3.4.2.2 Receiving I frames shall stop the response If the data station is ready to send an I frame numbered where N(S) is equal to the last received acknowledgment the modulo-1, shall follow the procedures ponse is not received correctly, equivalent) SNRM function it shall be ignored. described in 3.4.3.

the data station shall not send the I frame but

will be that the primary station's response time-out (or SARM) command

will run out, and the primary station may resend the and restart the response time-out (see 3.4.3). until a UA response has been reAfter a data station receives correctly.an in-sequence I frame that it can accept, it shall increment its receive state variable V(R), and, at its next opportunity to send, take one of the following a) actions

(or equivalent)

This action

may continue

:
is available is ready and for transmission the and received the I station 3.4.2.1 to receive, it shall act as field of the next

ceived correctly or until recovery action takes place at a higher level.

tf information data in

remote

described 3.4.1.2 Disconnecting the data link the data link with a seconand shall start a The addressed command corb)

ac&nowledge

frame(s) by setting N(R) in the control transmitted I frame to the value of V(R). If information

The primary station shall disconnect dary station by sending a DISC response time-out secondary station,

command

is not available for transmission

but the

function (or equivalent). upon receiving the DISC

data station is ready to receive I frames, the data station shall send an RR frame and acknowledge the received I frame(s) by setting N(R) to the value of V(R).

rectly, shall send a UA response at its first opportunity and shall enter the normal disconnected mode (NDM), or the asynchronous disconnected mode (ADM), as predefined for that secondary station. If, upon receipt of the DISC command, the addressed secondary station is already in the disconnected mode, it shall send the DM response. The primary station, upon receiving a UA or DM response to a sent DISC command, shall stop the response time-out function (or equivalent).

c) If the data station is not ready to receive further I frames, the data station may send an RNR frame and acknowledge the received I frame(s) by setting the N(R) to the value of V(R). If the data station is unable to accept the correctly received I frame(s), V(R) shall not be incremented. The data station may send an RNR frame with the N(R) set to the value of V(R).

If the DISC command, UA response or DM response is not received correctly, it shall be ignored. This will result in the expiry of the primary station's response time-out function (or equivalent), and the primary station may resend the DISC command and restart the response time-out function (or equivalent) (see 3.4.3).

3.4.2.3

Reception

of incorrect frames with an incorrect FCS, it shall be dis-

If a frame carded.

is received

9

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 984

If an I frame is received with a correct FCS but with an incorrect N(S), the receiving data station shall ignore the N(S) field and discard the information field in that frame. This shall continue until the expected I frame is received correctly. The data station shall, however, use the P/F and N(R) indications in the discarded I frames. The data station shall then acknowledge the expected I frame, when received correctly, as described in 3.4.2.2. The P/F recovery (checkpointing) shall cause retransmission of the I frames received incorrectly, as described in 3.4.4.

In the case of normal respond opportunity, two-way alternate, data link operation, a data station shall not accept further frames after a frame with the P/F bit set to "1" was accepted and before it sends a frame with the F/P bit, respectively, set to "1". In the case of asynchronous respond opportunity, two-way alternate, data link operation, transmission from a data station shall not be allowed until either
a) detection of an idle data link channel state after receipt of a frame or a flag; or

3.4.2.4

Data station receiving acknowledgments

b) the end of an extended period of inactivity (idle data link channel state).
NOTE - In the case of half-duplex data circuit facilities, appropriate accommodation has to be made to control the direction of data fransmission. The direction of transmission is controlled by the data link layer, and may be signalled by the physical layer.

A data station receiving an I, RR or RNR frame with a valid N(R) = x shall treat as acknowledged all previously transmitted I frames up to and including the I frame transmitted with N(S) equaltox - 1.

3.4.3

Time-out

considerations

In order to detect a no-reply or lost-reply condition, each primary station shall provide a response time-out function (or equivalent). Also, in ARM, each secondary station shall provide a command time-out function (or equivalent). In each case, the expiry of the time-out function (or equivalent) shall be used to initiate appropriate error recovery procedures. In NRM, a secondary station shall depend on the priman/ station to initiate time-out recovery. The duration of time-out functions (or equivalent) shall be system-dependent and subject to bilateral agreement. To resolve possible contention situations in ARM, the duration of the secondary station's time-out function shall be different from that of the primary station.

If no frames were transmitted from either data station while in ARM and information is waiting for transmission, it is advisable that the data station transmits at first a supervisory frame only in order to avoid long time recovery action, which would occur in the case of I frame contention. If a data station has transmitted frames and no further frames are pending for transmission, it shall give the right to transmit to the remote data station.
Two-way simultaneous considerations

3.4.6

3.4.4

P/F bit usage

P/F bit usage in the unbalanced classes of procedures, UNC and UAC, shall be as described in IS0 4335.

For each unbalanced class of procedures, two-way simultaneous communication protocols may be used independent of physical data circuit capability (i.e. half-duplex transmission). However, in the case of half-duplex data circuit facilities, appropriate.accommodation has to be made to control the direction of data transmission. The direction of transmission is controlled by the data link layer. In addition, in the case of normal respond opportunity, data transmission from the secondary station shall not be allowed until receipt of a frame with the P bit set to "1".

3.4.5

Two-way

alternate considerations

4
In the &se of normal respond opportunity, two-way alternate, data link operation

Balanced General

operation

(point-to-point)

4.1
from the primary station shall not be

a)

transmission

allowed

until either

1)

receipt of a frame with the F bit set to "1". or

The following requirements apply to the procedure for balanced operation of synchronous data transmission over point-to-point data links with two-way alternate or two-way simultaneous data transfer. The procedure uses the HDLC frame structure defined in IS0 3309 and the HDLC elements of procedures described in IS0 4335. It uses the basic command/response repertoire (see figure 5) designated BAC. Although only the basic commands and responses are described, there are several optional functions available for enhanced operation. These are listed in 2.3 and shown in figure 5.
NOTE - The HDLC balanced class of procedures operates as illustrated in the examples given in IS0 4335, annex B. (See clause 1.1

2)

expiry of a no-response

time-out

function

; and

b! transmission from the secondary station shall not be allowed until receipt of a frame with the P bit set to "1". NOTE - In multipoint configurations of normal respond opportunity, two-way alternate, data link operation over duplex physical facilities, the primary station may transmit frames with the P bit set to "0" to non-polled secondary stations in the above mentioned period.

10

IS :11418(Part 3)-1988 IS0 7809-1984

4.2 4.2.1

Description Configuration

of the data

link

(see figure 2)

The balanced operation data link configuration shall consist of two combined stations interconnected by physical layer transmission facilities. 4.2.2 Physical layer transmission facilities

The physical layer transmission facilities may provide either half-duplex or duplex transmission over switched or nonswitched data circuits.
NOTE - In the case of a switched data circuit, the procedures described assume that the switched data circuit has been established.

response time-out function (or equivalent). The other combined station, upon receiving the SABM command correctly, shall send a UA response and reset both its send and receive state variables to zero. If the UA response is received correctly, the data link set-up shall be complete, and the initiating combined station shall set both its state variables to zero, stop the response time-out function (or equivalent), and enter the indicated mode. If, upon receipt of the SABM command, a combined station determines that it can not enter the indicated mode, it shall send the DM response. If the DM response is received correctly, the initiating combined station shall stop the response time-out function (or equivalent). If a SABM command, UA response or DM response is not received correctly, it shall be ignored. The result will be that the response time-out function for equivalent) will run out in the combined station which originally sent the SABM command and that combined station may resend the SABM command and restart the response time-out function for equivalent) (see 4.4.3). This action may continue until a UA response has been received correctly or until recovery action takes place at a higher layer.

The data link layer shall not initiate data transmission until an indication of circuit availability is provided by the physical layer. (In some systems providing two-way alternate data exchange on physical layer data circuits using half-duplex transmission, this indication of physical layer circuit availability is indicated by an idle data link channel state.)

4.3 4.3.1

Description General

of the procedures 4.4.1.2 Disconnecting the data link

Balanced control procedures shall operate on a data link where the data station at each end of the data link is a combined station. The procedures shall use the asynchronous balanced mode. Each combined station shall be equally responsible for data link layer error recovery. Each combined station shall check for the correct receipt of the I frames it has sent to the remote combined station by checking the N(R) of each received I frame or supervisory frame. 4.3.2 Combined station characteristics

Either combined station may take the initiative to disconnect the data link. It shall send the DISC command and start a response time-out function for equivalent). The other combined station, in an operational mode, upon receiving the DISC command correctly, shall send a UA response and enter the asynchronous disconnected mode (ADM). If, upon receipt of the DISC command, the other combined station is already in the disconnected mode, it shall send the DM response. The initiating combined station, on receiving a UA or DM response to a sent DISC command, shall stop its response time-out function for equivalent). If a DISC command, UA response or DM response is not received correctly, it shall be ignored. The result will be that the response time-out function for equivalent) will run out in the combined station which originally sent the DISC command unless a separate mode setting command is received, in which case the response time-out function for equivalent) may be stopped. This combined station may resend the DISC command and restart its response time-out function for equivalent). This action may continue until a UA or DM response has been received correctly, a DISC command has been received correctly, or until recovery action takes place at a higher layer.

Each station shall be a combined station, i.e. it shall be able to set up the data link, disconnect the data link, and both send and receive commands and responses. 4.4 Detailed definition of the procedures

The procedures for a point-to-point data link using a permanently connected or an established switched connection are defined in 4.4.1 to 4.4.6. The protocol for establishing and disconnecting. a switched data circuit is not within the scope of this International Standard. However, the ability to exchange identification and/or characteristics after the switched connection is established is available as an optional function. 4.4.1 4.4.1.1 Setting up and disconnecting Setting up the data link the data link

4.4.1.3

Procedure in a disconnected mode

Either combined station may take the initiative to initialize the data link. It shall send the SABM command and start a

A combined station in ADM shall monitor received commands, shall react to a SABM command as outlined in 4.4.1 .l, and shall respond with a DM response to a received DISC command. It shall respond to other, commands received with the P bit set to "1" with a disconnected mode (DM) response with the F bit set to "1". Other commands received with the P bit set to "6" shall be ignored. The DM response shall be used to report the combined station status asynchronously in ADM.

11

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 98 4

4.4.1.4

Simultaneous

attempts

to set mode (contention)

b)

if information

is not available for transmission,

but the

When a combined station issues a mode setting command and, before receiving an appropriate response, receives a mode setting command in the following When from the remote combined Contention manner. mode setting commands are the station, a contention situation has developed. situations shall be resolved

combined station is ready to receive I frames, the combined station shall send an RR frame and acknowledge the received I frame(s) c) by setting N(R) to the value of V(R); or I

if the combined the combined

station is not ready to receive further station may send an RNR frame and I frame(s)

frames,

acknowledge the sent and received same, each combined station shall send a UA response at the

the received

by setting the N(R) to

the value of V(R). If the combined station is unable to accept the correctly received I frame(s), V(R) shall not be incremented. The combined station may send an RNR frame with the N(R) set to the value of V(R). The I or supervisory frame transmitted or a response depending bit set to "1" on whether transmission, frames will be either a command a P bit set to "1" or an F is required. commands If the the or

earliest respond opportunity. Each combined station shall either enter the indicated mode immediately or defer entering the indicated mode until receiving a UA response. In the latter case, if the UA response is not received, equivalent) expires, or the combined the combined station (or may enter the mode when the response time-out station mode setting command. When the mode setting commands are different, each comfunction

may reissue the

respectively, may be

transmission responses.

of a P bit or F bit set to "1" is not required, either

bined station shall enter ADM earliest respond opportunity.

and issue a DM response at the In the case of a DISC command

acknowledgment

contention with a different mode setting command, no further action is required. In the case of contention between SABM and SABME SABME sending the commands, SABM the combined in station sending data the command shall have priority over the combined station command re-attempting link

4.4.2.3

Reception

of incorrect frames with an incorrect FCS, it shall be dis-

If a frame carded.

is received

establishment. If an I frame is received with a correct FCS but with an incorrect 4.4.2 Exchange of information (I) frames N(S), the receiving combined station shall ignore the N(S) field and discard the information field in that frame. This shall continue until the expected 4.4.2.1 Sending I frames shall be as defined in IS0 4335 (see I frame is received correctly. The combined station shall, however, use the P/F and N(R) indications in the discarded I frames. The combined station shall then acknowledge described the expected I frame, when received correctly, as in 4.4.2.2. (checkpointing) shall cause the retransmisas described in 4.4.4.

,

The control

field format

clause II for an

I frame, with N(S) set to the value of the send

state variable V(S) and with N(R) set to the value of the receive state variable V(R). Following data link set-up, both V(S) and V(R) shall be set to zero. The maximum length of I frames shall be a system-defined If the combined parameter.

The P/F recovery

sion of the I frames received incorrectly,

4.4.2.4 station is ready to send an I frame numbered N(S), where N(S) is equal to the last received acknowledgment plus the modulo-1, the combined station shall not send the I frame but shall follow the procedures described in 4.4.3. The decision whether response, to send an I frame as a command or as a 4.4.3

Combined station

station receiving acknowledgments receiving an I, RR, or RNR frame with a

A combined valid N(R) transmitted

= x shall treat as acknowledged all previously I frames up to and including the I frame transmitted

with N(S) equal to x - 1. i.e. to use the remote or the local address to indicate

a P or an F bit, respectively, shall depend on the need to a acknowledge a received P bit set to "1" by transmitting response with the F bit set to "1".

Time-out

considerations

In order to detect a no-reply or lost-reply condition, each combined station shall provide a response time-out function (or equivalent). The expiry of the time-out function (or equivalent) shall be used to initiate appropriate error recovery procedures.

4.4.2.2

Receiving

I frames The duration of time-out and functions to (or equivalent) bilateral shall be The receives correctly [i.e. N(S) equals an in-sequence I the value of the system-dependent subject agreement.

After a combined station frame that it can accept

receive state variable V(R)], the combiried station shall, at its next opportunity to send, take one of the following actions: a) if information is available for transmission and the

duration of the time-out function (or equivalent) in the two combined stations shall be unequal in order to resolve contention situations, The time-out especially in two-way alternate operation.

function

(or equivalent)

shall be started whenever

remote combined station is ready to receive, it shall act as described in 4.4.2.1 and acknowledge the received I frame(s) by setting N(R) in the control field of the next transmitted I frame to the value of V(R);

the combined station has transmitted a frame for which a reply is required. When the expected reply is received, the time-out function (or equivalent) shall be stopped. If, during the interval that the time-out function (or equivalent) is running, other

12

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 984

frames are sent for which acknowledgments are required, the time-out function (or equivalent) may have to be restarted. If the response time-out function (or equivalent) runs out, a command with the P bit set to "1" may be (rehransmitted, and the response time-out function (or equivalent) restarted.

NOTE - In the case of half-duplex data circuit facilities, appropriate accommodation has to be made to control the direction of data transmission. The direction of transmission is controlled by the data link layer, and may be signalled by the physical layer.

4.4.4

P/F bit usage

If no frames were transmitted from either combined station while in ABM and information is waiting for transmission, it is advisable that the combined station transmits at first a supervisory frame only in order to avoid long time recovery action, which would occur in the case of I frame contention. If a combined station has transmitted frames and no further frames are pending for transmission, it shall give the right to transmit to the remote combined station. 4.4.6 Two-way simultaneous consideration

P/F bit usage in the balanced class of procedure, BAC, shall be as described in IS0 4336 (see clause 1).

4.4.5

Two-way

alternate

considerations

In two-way alternate, data link operation, transmission from a combined station shall not be allowed until either a) detection of an idle data link channel state after receipt of a frame or a flag; or b) the end of an extended period of inactivity (idle data link channel state).

For the balanced class of procedures, two-way simultaneous communication protocols may be used independent of physical data circuit capability (i.e. half-duplex or duplex transmission). However, in the case of half-duplex data circuit facilities, appropriate accommodation has to be made to control the direction of data transmission. The direction of transmission is controlled by the data link layer.

IS : 11418

(Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 984

Annex Examples of typical HDLC procedural subsets

(This annex does not form part of the standard.)

A.1

Introduction
procedures are designed to cover a wide range of applications between computers, concentrators half-duplex switched with or non-switched, define (for example, or duplex). characteristics, including frame formats, operational' two-way alternate [TWA], two-way simul-

The HDLC

taneous [TWS] ple, multipoint International modes,

data communication or point-to-point,

and terminals)

and a wide range of configurations

(for exam-

Standards

dealing

HDLC

a number

of necessary

commands,

responses and exception included in HDLC.

recovery techniques.

These functions,

used in various combinations,

provide the full

range of capabilities The majority Therefore,

of HDLC

implementations

will not require the full range of capabilities future.

provided

by these

International

Standards. intended

this annex describes several typical subsets of the HDLC procedures of applications independent required in the immediate HDLC implementations among

to provide uniform HDLC implementations requirements.

to meet the majority interoperability Other procedural this International

Use of these suggested

typical subsets will help to promote

designed to satisfy similar operational requirements

subsets may be chosen to meet new or additional Standard.

provided that they conform to the classes defined in

A.2

Selection

parameters
subsets, the following application parameters have been considered:

In order to define these typical HDLC procedural data communication configuration (TWA, TWS); (pt-pt), and

[point-to-point

multipoint

(mptll.
and are summarized in table 2.

From these parameters, The optional functions

three typical procedural

subsets have been selected as examples in table 3 (see also table 1). Typical HDLC procedural subsets

2, 8 and 10 are recapitulated Table 2 -

Parameters Data communication
1

Typical HDLC procedural subsets I
I

Configuration

No.

I I

Definition

TWA TWS

1 mpt/pt-ptl)
mpt/pt-ptt) Pt-Pt

1 1 1 UNC
2 3 UNC 2 BAC 2,82)

1J Pomt-to-point may be vlewed as a specific multipoint configuration. 2) BAC 2,8,10 is recommended in some cases (see 4.3.21 Table Option 2 Functional 3 Optional functions Command Add REJ . Delete I 2, 8 and 10 Response Add REJ Comment

-.

description

Provides the ability for more timely reporting of frame sequence errors Limits the procedures to allow I frames to be commands only

I

8

I
10

I

m__..: l-r""l"t 9s the ability to use ext,ended sequence numbelring (module 728)

Add SABME Delete SABM

Uses extended contra field format instead oi basic control field format

14

IS : 11418 (Part 3)-1986 IS0 7809-l 964

A.3

Common

features

The following common features have been established for all the procedural subsets described in clause A.4: data integrity and recovery is assured by P/F checkpointing;

-

time-outs are used in conjunction with the P/F mechanism; and each subset may be used with either half-duplex or duplex transmission.

A.4
A.4.1

Typical procedural

subsets
or point-to-point, UNC (no options)

Subset 1: TWA, multipoint

Commands I RR RNR SNRM DISC

Responses I RR RNR UA DM FRMR

This procedural subset uses the P/F bit for polling of information and status, for last frame indication and for checkpointing. The subset is suitable for two-way alternate operation on point-to-point or multipoint configurations. In two-way alternate, multipoint configurations operating over duplex physical facilities, the primary station may at any time transmit frames with the P bit set to "0" to non-polled secondary stations. Primary and secondary stations shall be able to receive all listed responses and commands from the remote data station.

A.4.2

Subset 2: lWS,

multipoint

or point-to-point,

UNC 2

Commands

Responses

I
RR RNR REJ SNRM DISC

I
RR RNR REJ UA DM FRMR

This procedural subset uses the P/F bit for polling of information and status, for last frame indication and for checkpointing. The REJ frame is used by a data station to request retransmission of I frames. The subset is suitable for multipoint or point-to-point configurations where the primary and secondary stations are both capable of two-way simultaneous communication. Some point-to-point data links may be considered as specific multipoint data links. Primary and secondary stations shall be able to receive all listed responses and commands from the remote data station.

A.4.3 A.4.3.1

Subset 3 Non-extended sequence numbering: `MIS, point-to-point, BAC 2.8

Commands I RR RNR REJ SABM DISC

Responws

Rk
RNR REJ UA DM

This procedural subset uses the P/F bit for polling of status, and for checkpointing. The REJ frame is used by a data station to request retransmission of I frames. The subset is suitable for two-way simultaneous communication on point-to-point data links when symmetrical control of the data link is desirable. Both combined stations shall be able to receive all listed commands and responses.
NOTE X.25 LAPB is compatiblewith this procedure.

A.4.3.2

Extend sequence numbering: TWS, point-to-point, BAC 2.8.10

Commands I RR RNR REJ SABME DISC

Responses RR RNR REJ UA DM FRMR

;.a.
P

This procedural subset is applicable in the same conditions as the non-extended one, when higher performance is needed on data links with specific characteristics such as long round trip delays and short information field lengths.

i

18

Printed at Slmco Prlntlna Prei;; Delhiilndla

___.__

___..__.. _

