(Reaffirmed 2001)

$3 : 10782 - 1983

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE LABORATORY DETERMINATION OF DYNAMIC MODULUS OF ROCK CORE SPECIMENS
soi1 Engineering and Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, BDC 23
Chairman Representing

DR JA~DISI~ NAR~IN Mumbers SHRI P. D. A~ARWAL

Association Of Indian Universities, New Delhi

Public Works Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow SW B.L.DHAWAN( Alternate) University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur PROP A~AM SINoH Engin~ring Research Laboratories, Government SHRI B. ANJIAH of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI E. M. BENJAMIN SBm N. C. DUGGAL( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, CHIBF ENGINBBR( IPRI ) Chandigarh

DIRECTOR ( DAM ) ( Akrna~e ) In personal capacity ( 5 Hungerford Street, 1211, SARIA. G. DASTLDAR Hungerford Street, Calcutta ) Indian, Geotechnical Society, New Delhi DR G. S. DHILLON

DIRECTOR,IRI SHaI A. H. DIvANJI

Irriga;;;es3"t,

Government

of Uttar

Asia Foundations and Construction (P) ,Ltd, Bombay SHRI A.N.JANGLE( Alternate) Cent~ra,~ioii & Materials Research Station, New DIRSC~~R
DEPUTY DIRECM~R ( AIternate ) University of Roorkee, Roorkee; and Institute DR GOPALRANJAN of

SHRIS. GUPTA Spur N. v. DE-SOUSA ( Alternate ) Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI M. IYENaAa G. S. Jain and Associates, Roorkee &RI ASHOKK. JAIN SBai VIJAY K. JAIN ( Alternate )

Engineers ( India ), Calcutta Cemindia Company Limited, Bombay

( Continued on page 2 ) @o, Copyright 1984

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by FY means except with .written permission of the publi&er shall be ~deemed to be an lnfrlngement of CoPYrIght under the said Act.

( Continuedfrom page 1') Members Representing

JOINT DIREIXOR RESEARCH ( DE )-I, RDSO JOINT'D~RXTOR RESEAFZCH ( GE )-II, RDSO ( Alternote LT-COL V. K. KANITKAR SHRI0. P. MA~HOTRA
SHW D. R. NARAHARI SHRI T. K. NATRAJAN

Ministry of Railways

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters Public Works Department, Chandigarh Administration, Chaodigarh Ceot;~or~~ldiog Research Institute ( CSIR ),

SHRI V. S. AGARWAL ( Alternare ) Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), Central New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) &RI RANJITSINGH SHRI P. D. DE~HPANDB ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR Gi V. RAO DR K. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of R~~URCHOFFICER ( B & RRL ) Puojab, Chandigarh Centgti?oard of Imgation and Power, New SECRETARY DEP~YYSECRBTARY ( Alternate ) Roa$rzzr;) SHRI N. SXVA~URU SF ( Ministry of Shipping and

SHRI P. R. KALRA( Alkfnate ) National Buildings Organization. New Delhi K. S. SRIF~VASAN SHRI SUNILBERRY( Alternate ) Jadavpur University, Calcutta DR~N. SOM Engineering Research Station, Karnataka S~tttN. SUBRAMANYAM Krishnarajasagar Public Works Department, Government of Tamil SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER Nadu' Madras ( ?$&)mn ENGINEER ( SMRD ) ( Alternate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers land Dealers &RI H. C. VERhlA Association, Bombay SHRI H. K. GUEU ( AIternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI G. R&IAN. Director ( Civ Engg )
Secretary

SHRI K. M. MAPHUR Senior Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

( Continued on page 10 )

ISs10782;1983

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE LABORATORY DETE-RMINATION OF DYNAMIC MOD-ULUS OF ROCK CORE

SPECIMENS
O.FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 December 1983, after the draft finalized by the Soil Engineering and Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 A number of Indian Standards covering method of test to assess various properties of rock are being formulated. This standard covers the property of dynamic modulus which is important property for assessing suitability of type of foundation. 0.3 In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.
1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the method for determination of dynamic modulus of rock core specimens in the laboratory from ultrasonic wave velocities.

2. ROCK CORE SPECIMEN 2.1 The test specimen shall preferably be a right cylinder with tolerances speci6ed in 2.3, although specimens of any shape with regular geometry The specimen may be prepared as sljecified in could be used. IS : 9179-1979t. 2.2 The specimen to be tested in laboratory should be rock sam$les ovendried at 60&2'5"C for 1 to 2 hours and cooled in a desiccator, unless otherwise specified by defining the moisture content, or thti simulated in Situ conditions. 2.3; Sptwimen Dimensioris
2.3.1 The specimen dimensions may be according to IS : 91.79-1979t. *Rules for rounding off numericai values ( revised ). tMethod for the preparation of rock specimen for laboratory ~QS!&, 3

IS : 10782 - I983 2.3.2 In addition, the diametral end faces are required finished and polished to ensure good acoustic contact. to be smooth

3. EQUIPMENT 3.1 Technique - There are different acoustic and ultrasonic techniques for the velocity determination of rock core specimens on laboratory specimena. The most commonly used and widely accepted is the pulse transmission technique involving the measurement of transit times of the compressional ( longitudinal ) and shear ( transverse > waves for a known length of the sample. 3.2 Electronic Layout - The simplest layout of the electronic units for the pulse transmission technique is in Fig. 1. 3.3, Equipment 3.3.1 Pulse Generator Pulse form : Sine, square, step-wave. Pulse width : 0'1-10 t~s, or more. Pulse repetition frequency : 10-5 000 Hz, or more. Pulse advance : O-10 vs. Pulse delay : O-100 ps. 8 .. Pulse polarity : Positive or negative. Pulse rise time : 0'02 t.cs. Pulse amplitude : The pulse voltage shall be commensurate to the acoustic transducers and not exceed their permissible limits. Provisions for synchronising output and input. _ 3.3.2 Acoustic Transducers

a)

: -. ,. ^

It converts the electrical pulses into acoustic ( mechanical ) pulses. Depending on the frequency of excitation desired, a suitable probe may be chosen. b) Receiver - Converts back the mechanical pulses into electrical pulses. pairs of transmitting and receiving Matching - Matched 4 transducers with respect to their fundamental' frequency of ; excitation yield ,the best wave form and amplitude. 4 Piezo-elements - The piezo-electric ceramic elements ( barium titanate, or lead zirconate titanate ) of the required frequency normally 100 KHz:10 MHz ) be chosen in the form of .* ( plates, discs, rods, rings, etc, to generate/receive the excitation ( assuming the media are ,non-dtsperstve ).

Transmitter -

4

IS:10782-1983
e) Excitution -

The mode of excitation could be compressional, or shear wave, suitable ceramic elements polarized to vibrate in the thickness mode for transmitting, or receiving, the compressional waves be used; similarly, suitable ceramic elements polarized for shear waves. Alternatively, the shear waves may be generated and received using mode conversion transducers, or angle probes.

f) Logarithmic taper A low noise, wide-band ( DC-15 MHz ), preamplifier will be necessary for rock core studies. It can have a gain of 100, or more, and where necessary, two amplifiers in cascade may be used for highly attenuating media.
3.3.3 AmpGjier -

3.3.4 Oscilloscope a) A double beam oscilloscope with a band width of DC-15 MHz, and rise time of 0'02 PS or faster will be suitable. b) An inbuilt delay time marker facility in the oscilloscope will be necessary for transit-time measurements. Alternatively, a marker generator, preferably with a movable marker, be used for the same purpose. cl A time base with a maximum sweep rate~of 0'1 ps/cm on at least one of the channels may also be had. X-amplification facility ( at least ten times >, in addition to the d) normal Y-amplifier would be advantageous for the observation of the on-set pulse and its form. 4. ACOUSTIC COUPLING 4.1 To ensure good acoustic coupling between the test specimen and the transmitting, and generating piezo-transducers, suitable coupling media like light oil, soft grease, phenolic jelly, resin, salol ( phenyl salicylate ), epoxy compounds, etc, may be used. To keep the acoustic contact conditions uniform, a nominal stress of about 10 N/cm2 ( with a suitable contraption or jig > is desirable. 5. TEST PROCEDURE 5.1 The rock core specimen be prepared bestowing due care in its drilling, cutting, grinding, lapping and polishing as mentioned in 2. 5.2 The transmitting and receiving piezo-transducers be made ready by selecting the piezo-elements of the required frequency. Separate transducers/probes be made ready for the compressional wave propagation ( also called the dilatational wave, or P-wave ) and the shear wave propagation ( also called the torsional wave, or transverse wave, or $-wave ), using a suitable jig, or otherwise. 5

1s : 10782 - 1983 5.3 By placing the transmitting and receiving transducers on opposite sides of the test specimen, check for uniform contact throughout the surface area of the polished faces. Also apply the nominal stress and recheck for good contact ( which will be possible only when the errors in non-parallelism of the sample faces are minimum ). 5.4 Check the individual electronic units for their working. Complete the layout of Fig. 1. Observe the wave form of the transmitted pulse alone initially on the oscilloscope for its form and changing the repetition frequency, polarity, and width; and note position of the start of the pulse.
GENERATOR
1

ROCK CORE SPECIMEN

R

SVNCHRONISING OUT PUT

c

OS,CILLOSCOPE DUAL BEAM

T=Transmitter FIG.

R-Receiver

1 LAYOUT OF THE ELECTRONIC UNITS

5.5 Bring the transmitter and receiver in direct contact after applying a little of the coupling medium and observe the received pulse and set the pulse rate, width and amplitude to attain an optimum level of the visua!ized steep pulse that would allow accurate measurement; and note the initial delay (t& in the transducers and the electronic set-up ( resulting due to the thickness of the end covers of the two transducers, cables, coupling, etc ), as against the observation earlier made with the' transmitted pulse alone. 5.6 Measure the length (I) of the test core specimen. Introduce the specimen between the transmitting and receiving transducers ensuring good contact conditions after using a coupling medium; and thereafter reset the pulse rate, width and amplitude to obtain the best and optimum pulse form; and also note the horizontal shift in the received pulse position on the oscilloscope screen and record the travel time with the sample (tz), using the movable delay time marker of the oscilloscope, or independently using a time marker generator. 5.1 Verify tl and t2 by repeating the operations given in 5.5 and 5.6 observing for consistancy of results. The difference of (t,) and (tl) is a measure of the transit time (t& or (t,) in the specimen corresponding to the P-wave, or S-wave, and for these measurements, a precision of 1 in 100 for (t,) and in 1 in 50 for (z~) are generally in practice. These accurate transit time measurements are best made in the fastest workable sweep ofthe oscilloscope permissible for known length (I) of the sample. 6

.

fs:lO782-l!%d
5.8 The velocities of either P-or S-waves (V,, V,) are calculated from the measured transit times (t9), or (t,), and the distance (I) between the transmitter and receiver. 5.9 For shear waves, however, the measurement of apparent travel time of some standard material ( steel, aluminium, quartz ) as a function of its length is desirable, in addition to the transmitter and receiver being in ,direct contact for (t,) measurement so wasto avoid any misjudgement of the shear wake first alrival. 6. MEASUREMENTS AND CALCULATIONS

6.1 Length of the rock core specimen = 1 cm Delay time in transducers and~electronic layout = t,, ps Delay time with the insertion of test specimen = I~, ps Transit time in test specimen ( rock core ) = tl--tl = to, or ts, vs Compressional velocity = V, a l/tl), m/s Shear velocity = V, = I/t,, m/s When once V, and V8 are known, and if the measured density of the rock core specimen is p ( kg/m3 ), then the dynamic modulus of the specimen (E), as well as all the other elastic constants, namely, rigidity modulus (G), Poisson's ratio (v), bulk modulus (K) and compressibility (p) could be calculated following the relations given below: 6.2 Relations for dynamic moduli
E = PV,~ ( 3Vs2-4Vsz ) 1 ( VD"-Vs2 ),

Pa

G = y = K = /3 =

pV?, Pa. ( V,*-2Vs2 ) / 2 ( VP2--V2 ), p ( 3V,2-4V,2 ) / 3, Pa 1 / K, Pa-'

Ratio

is:lo%i - 1983
6.3 Transit time display ( see Fig. 2 ) Wave form of the pulse _-r7 generator Wave form of the pulse with the transmitter and receiver in direct contact ( first arrival ) Wave form of pulse with rock specimen between transmitter the and receiver ( first arrival ) -_-.--_ .__. __

-CL/+---as in 2.2 should be

FIG. 2 TRANSITTIME DISPLAY 7. PRECAUTIONS 7.1 The individual electronic units of the layout impedance matched.

7.2 Use of shielded cables and suitable connectors should be practised for efficient energy transfer as well as for the suppression of noise.

7.3 Prevention of damage to the layout given in 3.2 is ensured exceeding the allowable input voltages.

by not

7.4 Care in the preparation of the specimen faces, as well as the transmitter and receiver faces will help in avoiding errors due to non-parallelism and ensure proper acoustic contact conditions that are essential for the wave velocity measurements. 7.5 Where saturated specimens are to be tested, the saturation time shall be not less than 72 hours at ambient conditions, and the sample shall remain submerged in water up to the time of testing. 7.6 The pulse travel distance through the sample shall not be less than ten times the average grain size of the test specimen and also not less than ten times the wavelength.
NOTE - The condition less than the wavelength dimension.

for infinite extent is satisfied, when average grain size is of the pulse which is less than the minimum specimen

8

Is : 10762 - 1983 8. REPORT The report shall give the following information: a) Particulars of the rock core specimen i) Rock type ii) Location [ place ( latitude, longitude ), country, area/region, geological formation, quarry, drill hole, any other allied special information 1. b) Sample dimensions and its geometry. c) Megascopic description [ fresh, weathered, nature of phenocrysts, geological features ( bedding, lineation, folination, joints, veins, etc 1. d) How obtained ( sample collection is due to quarrying, breaking, blasting, drilling, sawing, etc ). e) Orientation f particulars of north, dip, strike, etc ). f) Microscopy ( details of petrography and fabric examination, microfracture distribution, etc ). g) Preparation ( details of sample preparation, quality of the core, number of cores taken and their orientation, etc ). h) Details of electronic layout ( particulars of the pulse generator, amplifier and oscilloscope settings used for actual measurement of transit time and observation of the wave form ). j) Particulars of the acoustic transducers ( size, shape, frequency, mode of excitation, details of mounting, etc ). k) Ply--ical properies ( density, porosity, permeability, absorption, m) 1Measurements Length of the sample = 1 cm = tl, FS Initial delay in transducers, electronics and set-up Delay time with the sample between the transducers = t2, 1s &uutacy/re@eatability of ti and t2 ( interchanging the faces for eontact ) Density, P, kg/m" Ii-oeiocity, v-, ~II/S Stress, Pa !&velocity, V,, m/s Partictflars of transit times, how measured? Computer programmed elastic moduli CR0 tr&~photograph p) Name of laboratory/observer. q) Date. 9

Is : 10782- 1983
( Continued from page 2 )

Rock Mechanics Subcommittee,
C0?ZVe?li?r PROPBHAWANI SINGH
Members SHRI AMARSINGH

BDC 23 : 5

Representing

University of Roorkee, Roorkee Cent~~o~e~ding Research Institute ( CSIR ),

SHRI CHAND~A PRAKASH( Alternate ) ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICER, IRI Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow @Itrdl Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTOR, CSMRS New Delhi DIRECTOR Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune SHRI S. L. MOKHA~HI( Alternate ) DR A. K. DUBE Centr~~~Iv$ing Research Station ( CSIR ), SHRI P. S. GOSAL SHRI M. D. NAIR Irrigation & Power Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Associated Instrument Manufacturers (I) Private Limited, New Delhi

PROFT. S. NAGARAJ (Alternate ) SHI~IP. L. NARULA Geological Survey of India, Calcutta DR Y. V. RAMANA National Geophysical Research Institute ( CSIR ), Hyderabad DR T RAMAMURTHI Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi RESEARCH OFFICER,SRPD Irrigation Department, Government of Maharash&a. Bombav SECRETARY Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi DIRECTOR (C) ( kIterirate )

