(Reaffirmed 2005)

Indian Standard

DETERMINATIONOFPOWER REQUIREMENTOFSCREWFEEDERGENERALREQUIREMENTS
UDC 621*86*067*2:621.867*4

@ BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAYAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

November 1990

Price Group

1

_Conveyors,

Vertical

Hoists and Bucket

Elevators

Sectional

Committee,

HMD

06

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on finalized by the Conveyors, Vertical Hoists and Bucket Elevators Sectional by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 12 March 1990, after the draft Committee, had been approved

Power requirement determination is one of the most important parameter in the design, manufacture and selection of screw feeder/conveyor. Since there are large number of aspects and factors involved, to develope a theoretically reliable and correct formula would only be too complicated and cumbersome, this standard provides guidelines for determination of power requirements of screw feeders/conveyors. The consideration of power requirements has varied approach with the designers. Some consider only 2 types of material and the factor of resistance for one type approximately half that for the other type, white others may have eleborate material charts and various recommended factor of resistance for different of screw feeders for materials, where the range could be 1 : 10. Some other designers and manufacturers limited industries say for example only to cement industi-y or aluminium industry, etc, recommend a power calculation which is constant up to a certain length say 5 m or 10 m and then for each additional metre a constant portion and the variable portion being power gradient ( with respect to length ) is applied, different for each size of screw feeder. Thus for designer to designer considerations, for identical screw feeders/conveyors the determination of power requirement may lead to different values. In addition to the factors given in 2 of this standard, in and consequent change in the frictional characteristics in addition to functioning of the screw feeder whether with hot and dry aid supply, etc, may also have to be of screw feeder. specific applications other factors such as caking of the material hygroscopic nature of material, etc, continuous, intermittent, under a system pressure considered for determination of power requirement

In view of above, this standard attempts to provide guildetines for uniform applications by the designers, manufacturers and users organisation, reatising the limitations of variations still, depending upon the specific applications and considerations for utilization, life and some other factors individually applicable to installations. However, in each case it should be ensured that the drive of the screw feeder is of adequate power. The example given in Annex A of this Indian Standard is based on information `Continuous mechanical handling equipment for loose bulk materials - Screw for drive power' published by the International Organization for Standardization. given in conveyors IS0 7119-1981 - Design rules

Indian Standard

"

'

DETERMINATION OF POWER REQUIREMENT OF SCREW FEEDER GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
3 SCOPE
1.1 This standard covers general requirements -considered for determination of power requirement sf screw feeder.

2 -FACTORS FOR .DETERMINATlON

POWER

REQUlREMENT

e) Additional resistance due to partial compensation of thermal expansion of the screw supported between the bearings when transporting hot material or when the temperature difference between winter and summer is too high and the screw conveyor is comparatively long. f) Additional resistance owing to accumulation of transport material at the intermediate bearings, mixing and rolling of the transport material. resistance for friction of the g) Additional screw edge with the transport material when a grain is wedged between the gap between the screw and the casing. h) Additional resistance for upward conveying in case of inclined screw conveyors. 2.2 The various factors mentioned in 2.1 shall apply basically to horizontal and slightly inclined screw feeder/conveyor. For vertical screw feeder/ conveyor there may be some other factors also. 3 POWER CALCULATION

2.1 Power requirement of screw feeder basically `depends on the length of screw conveyor, capacity -and a factor for total apparent resistance. This resistance varies with respect to type of material .,conveyed that is its nature, abrasiveness, grain size, internal resistance, etc, and may also depend upon the degree of filling. There are various factors with quite a few variables involved for "determination of power requirement of screw feeder. Some of the important factors, on which the power requirement of a screw feeder depends, F 7, -are as 1oIIows:

4 Friction between the casing and the transported material.

b) Friction between the screw and the transported material. Friction in the intermediate and in the end c) bearings and hence on type of bearings installed. d) Friction in the axial bearing owing to axial force.

3.1 Example of one of the method for calculation of power requirements of screw feeder is given in Annex A for general information.

ANNEX
EXAMPLE
A-l

A
FOR SCREW \ FEEDER Units -t/h ms/h m kW kW kW kW t/ms -

( Czausf? 3.1 )
OF POWER CALCULATION Symbol Ihf Iv L A-l.2
Symbols and Units

EXAMPLE

Designation

A-l.1 Example of one of the methods for calculation of power requirements of screw feeder is given below for general information.

Mass flow rate Volume flow rate Conveying length Total power Power for material progress Power when operating at no load Power due to inclination Density of bulk material Progress resistance coefficient

P PEl PN Pst P h 1

Symbols and units used in the formulae -in A-I.3 $0 A-l.7 are as follows: Symbol D g H Designation Nominal screw diameter Acceleration due to gravity Lifting height Units m m/G m

IS 12960 : 1990 A-1.3 Drive Power of Loaded Screw `.. The drive power of the loaded screw is given by the formula: Finally, other resistances due to the grading or the shape' of the output show up. All this gives the parameter A a higher value than that of.the friction coeffidients p. Each material has its own coefficient generally in the order Of 2 to 4. of the A-1.5 D&e Power of the Screw no Load, PN h. It is

P = PH + PN -I- Pst
where PH power necessary for the progress material;

Feeder at

PN drive power of the screw feeder at no load; Pst power due to inclination. A+1.4 Power Necessary the Material, Pn for the Progress of

The power PN is very low compared to the power required for the progress of the material. This value is proportional to the diameter and the length of the screw. In practice it is given, in kilowatts, by the formula:

In practice, the capacity of screw feeder is expressed by the formula: I&l plv

For a length L of the screw feeder, the power PB in kilowatts will be the product of the capacity IM by the length L and an artificial friction coefficient h also called the progress resistance coefficient. PH = &&LA -367 This formula stresses factors that are involved in the power input, which, for a horizontal screw, is proportional to the mass flow ,rate and length of conveyance. Power is also proportional tance of the material, h. to the progress resisAg

A-l.6

Power Due to Inclination,

Pst

The power, in kilowatts, will be the product of the capacity IM by the heght H and by the acceleration due to gravity g, that is:

The height His positive in ascending screws and will be negative in the formula for descending screws. A-l.7 Total Power Necessary of the Screw Conveyor for the Shaft

In addition, it should be noted that the sliding of the material particles against each other gives rise to internal frictions.

The total power necessary is the sum of the various powers described above: p=

IM(AL+H)
367

DL +YB-

Standazd Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Zndian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a hcence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Blueau

of Indian standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No without the prior permission in writing of BIS. implementing the standard, of necessary details, Enquiries relating to copyright zbe addressed to Revision of Indian Standards
Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the latest amendments or edition. following reference:

part of these publications may be reproduced in any form This does not preclude the free use, in the course of such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

Dot : No. HMD 6 ( 5254 )

Amendments Amend No.

l.ssned Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31,331 13 75 ____ -._. -._* * Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg DELHI ii0002 Telegrams : Man&`( Common to all C ----*_.----ir 7'

Telephone I 331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 86 62

NEW

Eastern : I 14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola &L CUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
S0UthW.l

168036 600113

2 1843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS Marol. Andher

Western : Manakalaya, %9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD.

( East )

BANGALORE. FARIDABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR.

BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printad at New India Printinti Prem. Khuris. Iedts

