IS10052(Part2):1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATlON FOR RADIO DISTURBANCE AND IMMUNITY MEASURING APPARATUS AND METHODS
PART 2 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF DISTURBANCES AND IMMUNITY (

First Revision )

ICS 33.100

CQBIS 1999

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

September1999

Price Rs. 220.00

Electromagnetic Compatibility Sectional Committee, LTD 22

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) which is identical with CISPR 16-2 (1996) `Specification for radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus and methods - Part 2 : Methods of measurement of disturbances and immunity' issued by Special Committee on Radio Interference (CISPR), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Electromagnetic Compatibility Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. This standard (Part 2) was originally published in 1982 and was largely based on CISPR 16 (1977) Section 2. IS 10052 (Parts 3 to 7) were based on Sections 3 to 7 of CISPR 16 (1977) respectively. This revision is now being published to combine IS 10052 (Parts 2 to 7) covering methods of measurement of radio disturbance and immunity in a single standard as IS 10052 (Part 2) and also to align it with the latest edition of CISPR 16. Consequently, IS 10052 (Parts 3 to 7) have been withdrawn. Radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus are covered in IS 10052 (Part 1). In the adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words'lnternational Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. CROSS REFERENCES In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: international Standard Corresponding lndian Standard Degree of Equivalence Technically Equivalent

IEC 50 ( 161 ) :1990 International Electrotechnical Vocabulary(lEV) - Chapter 161: Electromagnetic compatibility IEC 83 :1975 Plugs and socketoutlets for domestic and similar general use - Standards CISPR 11 ( 1990 ) Limits and methods of measurement of electromagnetic disturbance characteristics of industrial, scientific and medial ( ISM ) radii-frequency equipment ( since revised in 1997 ) CISPR 13 ( 1990 ) Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics of sound and television broadcast receivers and associated equipment ( since revised in 1996 )

IS 1885 ( Part 64/Set l&2 ) : 1987 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 64 Electromagnetic compatibility, Section 1 General terms, Section 2 Specific terms IS 1293 : 1998 Plugs and socket-outlets for household and similar purposes ( third revision ) IS 6873 ( Part 4 ) : 1999 Limits and methods of measurement of radio disturbance characteristics : Part 4 Industrial, scientific and medical ( ISM ) radio-frequency equipment ( first revision )

do

Identical

IS 6873 ( Part 3 ) : 1999 Limits and methods of measurement of radio disturbance charactteristics : Part 3 Sound and television broadcast receivers and associated equipment ( first revision )

do

( Continued on third cover )

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

CONTENTS

Page

Clause SECTION 1.1 1.2 1.3 1: GENERAL .3 3 3

Scope ........................................................................................................................................ Normative Definitions.. references ............................................................................................................... ...............................................................................................................................

SECTION 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 Types of disturbance Connection Measurement Measurements Measurement General measurement

2: DISTURBANCE

MEASUREMENTS 6 6 7 10 24 25

to be measured ...................................................................................... requirements and conditions ...............................................................

of measuring equipment ........................................................................................ of disturbances conducted along leads, Q kHz to 30 MHz ................................ ..- .......................................

using the absorbing clamp, 30 MHz to 1000 MHz.. ......................................... of radiated disturbances .........................................

SECTION 3.1 3.2 3.3

3: IMMUNITY

MEASUREMENTS procedures .................................................. ........................... 32 35 36

Immunity test criteria and general measurement Method of measurement Method of measurement

of immunity for conducted

signals ....................................................

of immunity to radiated electric field interference..

SECTION 4.1 Automated measurements

4: AUTOMATED

MEASUREMENTS .................................................................... 43

(under consideration)

SECTION 5.1 Factors influencing

5: FACTORS measurement

INFLUENCING

MEASUREMENT

ACCURACY 43

accuracy .............................................................................

Figures .. . . .. . ... .. ... .... .... .. ... . .... ... ... ... .. ... .. ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... .. .... ... .. ... .. .... ... ... ... .. .. .... . .. .. .. . .. ............*.........

44

Annexes A Guidelines to connection of electrical equipment to the artificial mains network . . .. ... .. .. .. . ... .. ... .. and scanning receivers.. .. ... ... ... .. ... .... ... ... .. ... .. ... . .. . .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .... .. .. ... 65 72

B Use of spectrum analyzers

C Historical background to the method of measurement of the interference power produced by electrical household and similar appliances in the VHF range ... .... .. ... . ... .. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. .. .. ... . .. ... ... . ...

74

1

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Indian Standard SPECIFICATION FOR RADIO DISTURBANCE AND IMMUNITY MEASURING APPARATUS AND METHODS
PART 2 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF DISTURBANCES AND IMMUNITY

( First Revision )
1.1 Scope
of CISPR 16 specifies the range 9 kHz to 18 GHz. methods of measurement of EMC phenomena in the

This part frequency

1.2

Normative references

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of CISPR 16. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All normative documents are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of CISPR 16 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid international Standards. IEC 83: 1975, PIugs and socket-outlets IEC 364-4: Electrical installations for domestic and similar general use - Standards

of buildings

- Part 4: Protection

for safety

CISPR 11: 1990, Limits characteristics of industrial,

and methods of measurement of electromagnetic disturbance scientific and medical (ISM) radio-frequency equipment characteristics of

CISPR 13: 1990, Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference sound and television broadcast receivers and associated equipment

CISPR 14: 1985, Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics household electrical appliances, portable tools and similar electrical apparatus CISPR 14: 1993, Limits and methods electrical motor-operated and thermal tools and electric apparatus of measurement of radio disturbance appliances for household and similar

of

characteristics of purposes, electric

CISPR 16-l : 1993, Specification for radio disturbance and immunity measuring methods - Part 1: Radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus ITU-R 468: Measurement of audio-frequency noise voltage

apparatus

and

level in sound broadcasting

1.3

Definitions
of this part of CISPR 16, the definitions of Iid 50(161) apply, as well as the

For the purpose following: 1.3.1

associated equipment:
(e.g. probes, networks and antennas) connected to a measuring receiver or

1) Transducers test generator.

2) Transducers (e.g. probes, networks, antennas) which disturbance transfer between an EUT and measuring equipment 3

are used in the signal or or a (test-) signal generator.

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996)

1.3.2 EUT: The equipment (devices, and immunity) compliance tests.

appliances ..

and systems)

subjected

to EMC (emission

1.3.3 product publication: Publication product family, taking into account specific

specifying EMC requirements for a product aspects of such a product or product family. maximum emission

or

1.3.4 emission limit (from a disturbing source): The specified a source of electromagnetic disturbance. [IEV 161-03-121 1.3.5

level of

immunity limit: The specified

minimum

immunity

level. [IEV 161-03-151 parasitic capacitance to the

1.3.6 ground reference: A connection that constitutes a defined surrounding of an EUT and serves as reference potential. NOTE - See also IEV 161-04-36. 1.3.7 (electromagnetic) emission: The emanates from a source. [IEV 161-01-061 phenomenon by

which

electromagnetic

energy

1.3.6 Immunity (to a disturbance): The ability of a device, equipment or system to perform without degradation in the presence of an electromagnetic disturbance. [IEV 161-01-201

1.3.9 coaxial cable: A cable containing one or more coaxial lines, typically used for a matched connection of associated equipment to the measuring equipment or (test-)signal generator providing a specified characteristic impedance and a specified maximum allowable cable transfer impedance.
1.3.10 common artificial midpoint the effective RF voltages) against defined terminating

mode (asymmetrical disturbance voltage): The RF vottage between the of a two-conductor line and reference ground, or in case of a bundle of lines, disturbance voltage of the whole bundle (vector sum of the unsymmetrical the reference ground measured with a clamp (current transformer) at a impedance.

NOTE - See also IEV 161-04-09. 1.3.11 common mode current: The vector sum of the currents conductors at a specified cross-section of a "mathematical" conductors. flowing through two or more plane intersected by these

1.3.12 differential mode voltage; symmetrical voltage: The between the wires of a two conductor line. [IEV 161-04-06, modified]

RF

disturbance

voltage

1.3.13 differential mode current: Half the vector difference of the currents flowing in any two of a specified set of active conductors at a specified cross-section of a "mathematical" plane intersected by these conductors. 1.3.14 terminal two-port a)

unsymmetrical

mode (V-terminal voltage): The voltage between a conductor or of a de,vice, equipment or system and a specified ground reference. For the case of a network, the two unsymmetrical voltages are given by:
sum of the asymmetrical difference between voltage and half of the symmetrical voltage and half vottage; and

the vector

b) the vector voltage.

the asymmetrical

of the symmetrical

NOTE - See also IEV 161-04-13.

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

1.3.15 measuring detectors.

receiver: A receiver

for the measurement

of disturbances

with

different

NOTE - The receiver is specified according to CISPR 1.3.16

16-l.

test configuration:
an emission or immunity

which

Gives the specified level is measured.

measurement

arrangement

of the

EUT

in

NOTE - The emission level or immunity level is measured as required by IEV 161-03-11, IEV 161-03-14 and IEV 161-03-15, definitions of emission level and immunity level. 1.3.17 artificial network (AN): An agreed reference load (simulation) to the EUT by actual networks (e.g., extended power or communication RF disturbance voltage is measured.

IEV 161-03-12,

impedance presented lines) across which the

1.3.18 artificial mains network (AMN): A network inserted in the supply mains lead of apparatus to be tested which provides, in a given frequency range, a specified load impedance for the measurement of disturbance voltages and which may isolate the apparatus from the supply mains in that frequency range. [IEV 161-04-051 1.3.19 weighting (quasi-peak detection): The repetition-rate dependent conversion of the peak-detected pulse voltages to an indication corresponding to the psychophysical annoyance of pulsive disturbances (acoustically or visually) according to the weighting characteristics, or alternatively gives the specified manner in which an emission level or an immunity level is evaluated.
NOTES 1 The weighting characteristics are specified in CISPR 16-1. definitions of level

2 The emission level or immunity level is evaluated as required by IEC 50(161) (see IEV 161-03-01, IEV 161-03-11 and IEV 161-03-14).

1.3.20 continuous disturbance: RF disturbance with a duration of more than 200 ms at the IF-output of a measuring receiver, which causes a deflection on the meter of a measuring receiver in quasi-peak detection mode which does no? decrease immediately. [IEV 161-02-l 1, modified] NOTE - The measuring receiver is specified in CISPR 16-l.
1.3.21 discontinuous disturbance: For counted clicks, disturbance with a duration of less than 200 ms at the IF-output of a mea,suring receiver, which causes a transient deflection on the meter of a measuring receiver in quasi-peak detection mode. NOTES
1

For impulsive disturbance, see IEV 161-02-08. The measuring receiver is specified in CISPR 18-1.

2

5

IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996.)

Section

2: Disturbance

measurements

2.1 Types of disturbance to be measured
This subclause describes the classification appropriate for their measurement. 2.1.1 Types of disturbance of different types of disturbance and the detectors

For physical and psychophysical reasons, dependent on the spectral distribution, measuring receiver bandwidth, the duration, rate of occurrence, and degree of annoyance during the assessment and measurement of radio disturbance, distinction is made between the following types of disturbance: a) narrowband continuous disturbance, i.e. disturbance on discrete frequencies as, for example, the fundamentals and harmonics generated with the intentional application of RF energy with ISM equipment, constituting a frequency spectrum consisting only of individual spectral lines whose separation is greater than the bandwidth of the measuring receiver so that during the measurement only one line falls into the bandwidth in contrast to b); b) broadband continuous disturbance, which normally is unintentionally repeated impulses of, for example, commutator motors, and which frequency which is lower than the bandwidth of the measuring receiver measurement more than one spectral line falls into the bandwidth; and produced by the have a repetition so that during the

c) broadband discontinuous disturbance is also generated unintentionally by mechanical or electronic switching procedures, for example by thermostats or programme controls with a repetition rate lower than 1 Hz (click-rate less than 30/min). The frequency spectra of b) and c) are characterized by having a continuous spectrum in the case of individual (single) impulses and a discontinuous spectrum in case of repeated impulses, both spectra being characterized by having a frequency range which is wider than the bandwidth of the measuring receiver specified in CISPR 16-1. 2.1.2 Detector functions measurements may be carried out using a measuring

Depending on the types of disturbance, receiver with: a) an average detector signals, and particularly

generally used in the measurement to discriminate between narrowband

of narrowband disturbance and and broadband disturbance;

b) a quasi-peak detector provided for the weighted measurement of broadband disturbance for the assessment of audio annoyance to a radio listener, but also usable for narrowband disturbance; c) a peak detector measurement. Measuring 2.2 receivers which may be used for either broadband or narrowband disturbance

incorporating

these detectors

are specified

in CISPR

16-l.

Connection of measuring equipment
of measuring equipment, measuring receivers and networks, voltage and current probes, absorbing

This subclause describes the connection associated equipment such as artificial clamps and antennas.

6

CEPR

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.2.1

Connection

of associated

equipment the measuring receiver and the associated equipment shall be impedance shall be matched to the input impedance of the

The connecting cable between shielded and its characteristic measuring receiver. The output 2.2.2 of the associated

equipment

shall be terminated

with the prescribed

impedance.

Connections

to RF reference

ground

The artificial mains network (AMN) shall be connected to the reference ground by a low RF impedance, e.g. by direct bonding of the case of the AMN to the reference ground or reference wall of a shielded room, or with a low impedance conductor as short and as wide as practical (maximum length to width ratio is 3:l). Terminal voltage measurements shall be referenced only to tne reference ground. Ground loops (common impedance coupling) shall be avoided. This should also be observed for measuring apparatus (e.g. measuring receivers and connected associated equipment, such as oscilloscopes, analyzers, recorders, etc.) fitted with a protective earth conductor (PE) of Protection Class I equipment. If the PE connection of the measuring apparatus and the PE connection of the power mains to the reference ground do not have RF isolation from the reference ground, the necessary RF isolation shall be provided by means such as RF chokes and isolation transformers, or if applicable, by powering the measuring apparatus from batteries,' so that the RF connection of the measuring apparatus to the reference ground is made via only one route. For the treatment of PE connection of the EUT to the reference ground, see clause A.4.

Stationary test configurations do not require a connection with the protective earth conductor It the reference ground is connected directly and meets the safety requirements for protective earth conductors (PE connections). 2.2.3 Connection between the EUT and the artificial mains network connections of the EUT to

General guidelines for the selection of grounded the AMN are discussed in annex A. 2.3

and non-grounded

General measurement

requirements and conditions
shall be: of the measurement location and environmental

Radio disturbance

measurements

a) reproducible, i.e. independent conditions, especially ambient noise;

b) free from interactions, i.e. the connection of the EUT to the measuring equipment shall neither influence the function of the EUT nor the accuracy of the measurement equipment. These requirements may be met by observing the following conditions: measurement level, e.g. the

c) existence of a sufficient signal-to-noise level of the relevant disturbance limit; d) having a defined measuring set-up,

ratio at the desired

termination

and operating

conditions point,

of the EUT; in the case of shall be given

e) having a sufficiently high impedance voltage probe measurements;

of the probe at the measuring

f) when using a spectrum analyzer or scanning receiver to its particular operating and calibration requirements.

due considerations

7

IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 (1996)

2.3.1

Disturbance

not produced

by the equipment

under test

The measurement signal-to-noise requirements. Should the spurious the test report. 2.3.1 .l Compliance testing

ratio with respect to ambient noise shall meet the following noise level exceed the required level, it shall be recorded in

A test site shall permit emissions from the EUT to be distinguished from ambient noise. The ambient noise level should preferably be 20 dB, but at least be 6 dB below the desired measurement level. For the 6 dB condition, the apparent disturbance level from the EUT is increased by up to 3,5 dB. The suitability of the site for required ambient level may be determined by measuring the ambient noise level with the test unit in place but not operating. In the case of compliance measurement according to a limit, the ambient noise level is permitted to exceed the preferred -6 dB level provided that the level of both ambient noise and source emanation combined does not exceed the specified limit. The EUT is then considered to meet the limit. Other actions can also be taken; for example, reduce the bandwidth for narrowband signals and/or move the antenna closer to the EUT. NOTE - If both the ambient field strength and field strength of ambient and EUT are measured separately, it may be possible to provide an estimate of the EUT field strength to a quantifiable level of uncertainty. Reference is made in this respect in annex C of CISPR 11.

2.3.2 2.3.2.1

Measurement Narrowband

of continuous continuous

disturbance disturbance tuned to the discrete frequency under investigation and

The measuring set shall be kept returned if the frequency fluctuates. 2.3.2.2 Broadband continuous

disturbance the

For the assessment of broadband continuous disturbance the level of which is not steady, maximum reproducible measurement value shall be found. See 2.3.4.1 for further details. 2.3.2.3 Use of spectrum analyzers and scanning receivers

Spectrum analyzers and scanning receivers are useful for disturbance measurements, particularly in order to reduce measuring time. However, special consideration must be given to certain characteristics of these instruments, which include: overload, linearity, selectivity, normal response to pulses, frequency scan rate, signal interception, sensitivity, amplitude accuracy and peak, average and quasi-peak detection. These characteristics are considered in annex B.

2.3.3

Operating

conditions

of the EUT under the following conditions:

The EUT shall be operated

2.3.3.1

Normal

load conditions to the

The normal load conditions shall be as defined in the product specification relevant EUT, and for EUTs not so covered, as indicated in the manufacturer's instructions.

2.3.3.2

The time of operation operating time, in

The time of operation shall be, in the case of EUTs with a given rated accordance with the marking; in all other cases, the time is not restricted. 8

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.3.3.3

Running-in

time

No specific running-in time, prior to testing, is given, but the EUT shall be operated for a sufficient period to ensure that the modes and conditions of operation are typical of those during the life of the equipment. For some EUTs, special test conditions may be prescribed in the relevant equipment publications.

2.3.3.4

Supply

The EUT shall be operated from a supply having the rated voltage of the EUT. If the level of disturbance varies considerably with the supply voltage, the measurements shall be repeated for supply voltages over the range of 0,9 to 1 ,l times the rated voltage. EUTs with more than one rated voltage shall be tested at the rated voltage which causes maximum disturbance.

2.3.3.5

Mode of operation practical conditions which cause the maximum disturbance

The EUT shall be operated under at the measurement frequency.

2.3.4 2.3.4.1

Interpretation Continuous

of measuring disturbance

results

a) If the level of disturbance is not steady, the reading on the measuring receiver is observed for at least 15 s for each measurement; the highest readings shall be recorded, with the exception of any isolated clicks, which shall be ignored (see 4.2 of CISPR 14). b) If the general level of the disturbance is not steady, but shows a continuous rise or fall of more than 2 dB in the 15 s period, then the disturbance voltage levels shall be observed for a further period and the levels shall be interpreted according to the conditions of normal use of the EUT, as follows: 1) if the EUT is one which may be switched on and off frequently, or the direction of rotation of which can be reversed, then at each frequency of measurement the EUT should be switched on or reversed just before each measurement, and switched off just after each measurement. The maximum level obtained during the first minute at each frequency of measurement shall be recorded; 2) if the EUT is one which in normal use runs for longer periods, then it should remain switched on for the period of the complete test, and at each frequency the level of disturbance shall be recorded only after a steady reading (subject to the provision that item a) has been obtained). c) If the pattern of the disturbance from the EUT changes from a steady character part way through a test, then that EUT shall be tested in accordance d) Measurements are taken throughout the complete the frequency with maximum reading and as required 2.3.4.2 Discontinuous disturbance disturbance may see CISPR 14. be performed at a restricted number of to a random with item b).

spectrum and are recorded at least at by the relevant CISPR publication.

Measurement frequencies.

of discontinuous For further details,

9

IS 10052 2 1 1999 .~_\.( Part ...--.+ .--CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )
l

2.3.4.3

Measurement of the duration of disturbances

The EUT is connected to the relevant artificial mains network. If a measuring set is available, it is connected to the network and a cathode-ray oscilloscope is connected to the i.f. output of the measuring set. If a receiver is not available, the oscilloscope is connected directly to the network. The time base of the oscilloscope can be started by the disturbances to be tested; the time base is set to a value of 1 ms/div -10 ms/div for EUT with instantaneous switching and 10 ms/div - 200 ms/div for other EUT. The duration of the disturbance can either be recorded directly by a storage oscilloscope or digital oscilloscope or by photograph or hard copy recording of the screen.

.2.4 2.4.1

Measurement introduction

of disturbances

conducted along leads, 9 kHz to 30 MHz

When testing for compliance with emission limits for electromagnetic along leads, the following items shall be considered as minimum, situation (type tests) and at the place of installation (in situ tests):

disturbances conducted both in the standardized

,I.- lyyc;s &.,-a... ", -6 "`3L","LIIIGG'J. rlL`.*r&.#.rrrr. ,l.r..,. a._ ,..#A m-+krAr "I -4 rrlr;ca3"r,,ry -A.-,r,,r;-" _A"A`,_,AA "lJL"lYcIII~=~` rli"+,,rhlnnar a) ,110 `,\lci,0 cI,ci LII" ,lllZ,lI""3 &#"II""~,~" either as a voltage (prevailing method for CISPR measurements) or as a current. Both methods can be used to measure the three types of conducted disturbances, i.e: common differential mode (also called asymmetrical symmetrical mode) mode)

mode (also called mode

unsymmetrical

NOTE - The unsymmetrical mode voltage is primarily measured at the mains network. The common mode voltage (or current) is measured primarily for signal and control lines.

b) the measuring equipment: the type of measuring disturbance properties to be determined (see 2.4.2);

equipment

is chosen

in relation

to the

'

c) the associated equipment: the type of associated equipment, i.e., artificial networks, current probes or voltage probes, is chosen in accordance with the type of disturbance to be measured in accordance with 2.4.1 a). Each type of associated equipment presents RF loading to the measured signals and lines (see 2.4.3); d) RF load conditions of the disturbance source: the measuring set-up will present certain RF load impedances to the disturbance source(s) in the EUT. These impedances are standardized in type tests or might depend on the conditions at the place of installation in the case of in situ tests (see 2.4.3 and 2.4.4); e) the test configuration of EUT: a standardized test configuration shall specify -_~______ ___.._-I IL- ___l.I__ -1 IL#-,,-I---_-:-I-_I FiCX%Surii?g iXjuipi_iiWii reverence grouno, rne poslrlon or rne cu I ZUid assoclawa respect to that reference ground, connections to that reference ground interconnections of the EUT with the associated equipment (see 2.4.4 and 2.4.5). 2.4.2 the
WiGi

and

Measuring equipment (receivers, etc.)
riictinrtinn ",".,I I".I"I

ad rlictlrrhancaa U.." dicrmntinlmllr "r.s_"......"""" 1.1.1.-w..__-. Continuous radio-frequency disturbances are predominantly measured in terms of frequency domain parameters. Discontinuous disturbances are also measured in terms of frequency domain parameters but may need additional time domain measurements.

!!?

nC%nnChl y"`lYl CA,, 2

I

is

rlrawn "I%%..,, hntwmnn ""...""I,

rnntinlmllc ""I..IIIY"""

The measuring sets and other For time domain measurements

measuring equipment specified in CISPR oscilloscopes etc. may be used.

16-1 shall

be used.

1C

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.4.3

Associated

measuring

equipment for conducted disturbance measurement is divided into two

Associated categories: a)

measuring

equipment

voltage

measuring

sensors,

such as artificial

networks

(AN) and voltage

probes; network (ISN).

NOTE - The artificial b) 2.4.3.1 current Artificial measuring networks

network is sometimes referred to as impedance simulation sensors, (AN) such as current probes.

The common mode, differential and unsymmetrical mode impedances of actual networks, such as of power mains and telephones, are location dependent and, in general, time varying. Therefore, type testing of disturbance requires standardized impedance simulation networks, referred to as artificial networks (AN). The AN provides standardized RF load impedances to the EUT. For this purpose, the AN is inserted in series with the terminals of the EUT and the actual network or signal simulator. In this way the AN simulates extended networks (long lines) with defined impedances. 2.4.3.1 .l Types of artificial networks reasons call for another

The ANs specified in CISPR 16-1 shall be used, unless specific construction. In general three types of AN can be distinguished:

a) the V-type AN: in a defined frequency range the RF impedances between EUT terminals to be measured and the reference ground have a defined value, impedance component is connected directly between these terminals. The defines (indirectly) both the differential and common mode voltage measured. there is no limit for the number of EUT terminals, i.e. for the number of measured by V-type ANs;

each of the whereas no construction In principle, lines to be

b) the Delta-type AN: in a defined frequency range the RF impedance between a pair of EUT terminals to be measured and between these terminals and the reference ground have a defined value. This construction defines directly both the differential and the common mode RF load impedances. Addition of a balance/unbalance transformer and asymmetric disturbance voltage; makes it possible to measure the symmetric

c) the T-type AN: in a defined frequency range the common mode RF impedance between a pair of EUT terminals to be measured and a reference ground has a defined value. In general, no defined differential load impedance is included in a T-type AN as such. The defined differential impedance must then be provided by the external circuit connected to the supply (line) terminals of the T-type AN. This type of AN is used to measure common mode disturbance voltages only. 2.4.3.1.2 Minimum requirements minimum requirements:

The AN shall meet the following

a) in a defined frequency range the AN shall provide defined RF impedances between the terminals of the EUT to be measured and between these terminals and the reference ground. By meeting this requirement, the disturbance source to be measured is loaded in a defined manner if, in addition, the test configuration (see 2.4.4) is defined; b) if the AN is intended to separately measure common mode and/or differential mode disturbances (see 2.4.3.1 .l), the rejection ratio of differential to common mode signals, and vice versa, shall be specified in the appropriate frequency range; c) in a defined frequency range there shall normally be an isolation between the defined RF impedances and the actual network (or a signal simulator) so that the loading of the AN by the actual network (or the signal simulator) does not unduly influence the value of any of the defined RF impedances; 11

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

d) the AN shall provide a defined connection (connector) to which the defined measuring equipment can be connected, in order to make a defined test configuration possible. The input connector shall be suitable for measuring equipment with 50 R input impedance as defined in CISPR 16-1; e) the AN shall provide a defined connecting point to which the reference ground can be connected, in order to make a defined test configuration possible; f) the AN shall be calibrated according to a prescribed procedure.
Additional requirements

2.4.3.1.3

The AN shall have the following additional requirements: a) the AN shall contain a decoupling or blocking network to prevent: - damage of the components forming the defined RF impedances voltages of the network, such as the mains voltage, - damage of the components forming the defined produced by the EUT, such as switching transients, RF impedances by the wanted line by peak voltages

- influence of the rated line voltages on the measuring results, for example overload of the input stage of the measuring equipment; b) the AN shall contain a filter to prevent intentional signal simulator influencing the measuring results. 2.4.3.2
Voltage probes

signals on the actual network or the

For standardized voltage probes, see CISPR 16-1. Disturbance voltages on terminals which are not to be measured with an AN can be measured with a voltage probe. Examples of such terminals are connecting jacks for antennas, control lines, signal lines and load lines. In general the voltage probe is used to measure the common mode disturbance voltage. The probe presents a high RF impedance between the terminal to be measured and the reference ground. 2.4.3.2.1
Minimum requirements

a) In a defined frequency range the voltage probe shall provide a high RF impedance between its measuring tip and the reference ground so as not to affect the voltage to be measured. b) The voltage probe shall have a blocking capacitor of such a value to ensure that line voltage cannot damage the measuring receiver. c) The voltage probe shall provide a defined 50 Q connection (connector) to which the standardized measuring receiver can be connected, in order to make a defined disturbance measurement. d) The voltage probe shall provide a defined connection point to which the reference ground can be connected in a defined manner via a lead of defined maximum length unless the reference ground is connected to the EUT in another specified way. e) The voltage probe shall be calibrated according to a prescribed procedure, where this procedure shall account for parasitic effects near the test point, for example unwanted capacitive coupling between the test point and the screening of the probe. The voltage division between probe impedance and input impedance of measuring equipment shall be independent of frequency or accounted for in the calibratioh process. f) The voltage probe name-plate shall state the maximum line voltage. 12

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.4.3.3

Current

probes types of A clip-on

Current probes or current transformers allow the measurement of all three disturbance current (see 2.4.1) on mains leads, signal lines, load lines etc. construction of the probe will facilitate its use.

The common mode current on leads is measured when the current probe is clipped around those leads, regardless of the number of wires. In this situation, the differential mode currents on the leads will induce signals with equal magnitude but opposite sign, so that these signals cancel to a high degree. The latter effect allows the measurement of a common mode current with a small amplitude in the presence of differential mode (operating) currents with large amplitude. For already 2.4.3.3.1 defined Minimum (and standardized) requirements current probes see CISPR 16-l.

a) In a defined frequency range the current probe shall have a defined transfer impedance, that is, a defined ratio of the RF voltage induced in the probe and the known RF current on a single wire running through the probe, as measured in a specified way. b) In a defined frequency range the EUT, shall be less than 1 Q. the insertion loss caused by the current probe, that is of

c) The current probe shall be constructed on the measuring results can be neglected.

in such a way that the influence

of electric

fields

d) The current probe shall provide a defined connection (connector) to which the defined (and standardized) measuring equipment can be connected, in order to make a defined test configuration possible. In addition, the input impedance of the measuring equipment to be used in connection with the current probe shall be indicated. e) The current probe specification saturation effects will take place. f) 2.4.4 2.4.4.1 The current Equipment Disposition probe shall be calibrated test configuration of equipment under test and its connection to the artificial network shall include the maximum current rating before

according

to a prescribed

procedure.

For measurement of the disturbance voltage the equipment under test (EUT) is connected to the power supply mains and any other extended network via one or more artificial network(s) (in general, the V-type network is used for this purpose) (see figure l), in accordance with the following requirements. Other CISPR publications supply additional test details relevant to particular EUTs. An EUT, whether intended configured as follows: to be grounded or not, and which is to be used on a table is

either the bottom or the rear of the EUT shall be at a controlled distance of 40 cm from a reference groundplane. This groundplane is normally the wall or floor of a shielded room. It may also be a grounded metal plane of at least 2 m by 2 m. This is physically accomplished as follows: . place the EUT on a table of non-conducting material which is at least Place the EUT so that it is 40 cm from the wall of the shielded room, or . place the EUT on a table of non-conducting material bottom of the EUT is 40 cm above the groundplane; all other groundplane; conductive surfaces of the EUT shall 13 which 60 cm high.

is 40 cm high so that the 80 cm from the reference

be at least

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

the ANs are placed on the floor as shown in figure 1 in such a way that one side of the AN housings is 40 cm from the vertical reference ground plane and other metallic parts; the EUT cable connections shall be as shown for table-top in figure EUT with 1; only a power cord attached is

the optional test shown in figure 2.

configuration

Floor-standing EUTs are subject to the same provisions as above with the exception that they shall be placed on a floor, the points of contact being consistent with normal use. A groundconnected floor of metal shall be used but shall not make metallic contact with the floor support(s) of the EUT. The metal floor may be used as the reference ground plane and shall extend at least 50 cm beyond the boundaries of the EUT and have minimum dimensions of 2 m by 2 m. For examples of test configurations, see figures 3 and 4. The artificial network impedance connection. is RF bonded to the reference groundplane by a low radio-frequency

NOTE - The "low" radio-frequency impedance value should preferably be less than 10 R at 30 MHz. This can, for example, be achieved if the housing of the artificial network is mounted directly to the reference ground plane or its connection strap has a length-to-width ratio not more than 3:l. The EUT is located so that the distance the artificial network is 80 cm. between the boundary of it and the closest surface of

The power mains leads to an artificial network and the connecting cable from the network to the measuring receiver must be arranged in such a way that their locations do not influence the measurement results. EUTs, which are not equipped with fixed connecting leads, are connected to the artificial network with a 1 m long lead as specified in the relevant equipment documentation. If the EUT is to be connected to a reference ground this shall be done by means of a lead running parallel to the EUT mains lead and of the same length at a distance of not more than 10 cm from it, unless a ground conductor is contained in the mains lead itself. If a fixed lead is attached to the EUT this shall be 1 m long, or if in excess of 1 m, part of the lead is folded back and forth in the shape of a meander, as far as possible so as to form a bundle not exceeding 40 cm in length, and arranged in the form of a non-inductive serpentine in such a way that the total length of the lead does not exceed 1 m (see also figure 5). However, when the bundled lead may influence the measurement results, a shortening of the length to 1 m is recommended. 2.4.4.2 2.4.4.2.1 Procedure for the measurement Disposition of unsymmetric disturbance voltages with V-networks

of equipment with ground connection

For equipment under test which is required to be grounded during its operation, or the conductive housing of which can come into contact with ground, the unsymmetric radio interference voltage of the individual mains lead is measured with reference to the reference metal wall (general mass of the measuring equipment) to which the housing of the equipment under test is connected via its protective ground conductor and the ground connection of the artificial mains network (see the equivalent circuit in figure 6). The parameters clause A.3. determining the interference potential of grounded test units are discussed in

For EUTs with two or more power and safety conductors or special ground connections measurement result depends much on the termination conditions of the mains terminals the grounding conditions (refer also to 2.4.5 on measurement in systems). 14

the and

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR l&2(1996)

As the ground safety conductors in the actual mains power supply installation may have a considerable length, and therefore do not guarantee a ground impedance as low and effective as in the standard test set-up with only a 1 m long ground wire connection to the reference mass, and moreover, since safety conductors need not be used on every product per IEC 364-4, disturbance voltage measurements on pluggable Class I appliances shall be carried out according to 2.4.4.2.2, also without the safety or ground wire being connected (non-grounded measurement). If however for safety reasons it is necessary to maintain the safety function of ground wires, this can be achieved by the use of an RF choke or impedance equal to the network impedance of a V-network in the safety wire path. Exceptions may be made for non-radiating or well screened EUTs which according to special requirements or instructions (see A 2.1 and A 4.1). have to be grounded

2.4.4.2.2

Disposition

of equipment

without

ground

connection

Devices without ground connection comprise electrical devices with protective insulation (protection Class II) and devices which can be operated without ground or safety conductor (device of protection Class III) and also pluggable protection Class I devices connected via an isolating transformer. For these devices, the unsymmetrical disturbance voltage of the individual conductors must be measured with respect to the metal reference ground of the measurement arrangement as shown in the equivalent circuit of figure 7. Since in the long and medium wave bands (0,15 MHz to 2 MHz) the results of measurement can be considerably influenced by the low series capacitance C2 between the EUT and the reference ground, and since it is determined by the specified distance, the arrangement must be exactly followed and other external influence such as body and hand capacitance, for example, should be avoided.

2.4.4.2.3

Disposition

of handheld

equipment

without

a ground

connection. measurements shall

Measurements shall first be made in accordance then be made using the artificial hand described

with 2.4.4.2.2. Additional in CISPR 16-l.

The general principle to be followed in the application of the artificial hand is shown in figure 9. Terminal M of the RC element shall be connected to any exposed non-rotating metal work and to metal foil wrapped around all handles, both fixed and detachable, supplied with the EUT. Metalwork which is covered with paint or lacquer is considered as exposed metalwork and shaH be directly connected to the RC element. The artificial hand shall consist of metal foil wrapped around the case, or part thereof, as specified below. The foil shall be connected to one terminal (terminal M) of an RC element (see figure 8) consisting of a capacitor of 220 pF * 20 % in series with a resistor of 510 Q f 10 %; the other terminal of the RC element shall be connected to the reference earth of the measuring system. The artificial hand is to de applied the following way: but the terminal M

a) when the,case of the EUT is entirely of metal, no metal foil is needed, of the RC element shall be connected directly to the body of the EUT;

b) when the case of the EUT is of insulating material, metal foil shall be wrapped around the handle 6 (figure 9), and also around the second handle D, if present. Metal foil 60 mm wide shall also be wrapped around the body C at that point where the iron core of the motor stator is located or around the gearbox if this gives a higher emission level. All these pieces of metal foil, and the ring or bushing A, if present, shall be connected together and to the terminal M of the RC element; 15

IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16~2(1996)

c) when the case of the EUT is partly metal and partly insulating material, and has insulating handles, metal foil shall be wrapped around the handles B and D (figure 9). If the case is non-metallic at the location of the motor, a metal foil 60 mm wide shall be wra,pped around the body C at that point where the iron core of the motor stator is located, or alternatively around the gearbox, if this is of insulating material and a higher emission level is obtained. The metal part of the body, the point A, the metal foil round the handles B and D and the metal foil on the body C shall be connected together and to the terminal M of the RC element; d) when the EUT has two handles of insulating material A and B and a case of metal C, for example an electric saw (figure lo), metal foil shall be wrapped around the handles A and B. The metal foil at A and B and the metal body C shall be connected together and to the terminal M of the RC element. Disposition of keyboards, electrodes and other equipment sensitive be applied as required to human touch by the product

2.4.4.2.4

In the case of such equipment the artificial hand shall specifications and in general according to 2.4.4.2.3. Disposition

2.4.4.2.5

of equipment with external suppression

components

If interference suppression devices are attached outside the EUT (e.g. in a plug device for cormection to the mains) or as an element inserted in the connecting cable (power cord emission suppression device), or if shielded power cords are used, an additional 1 m long unshielded cable must be connected between the emission suppression device and the artificial network for measurement of the disturbance voltage. The line between the device and the emission suppression device must be placed in the direct proximity of the test object. 2.4.4.2.6 Disposition of equipment having a lead other than the mains lead auxiliary apparatus connected at the end of

NOTES 1 Regulating controls incorporating semiconductor devices are excluded from this subclause; the provisions of 2.4.4.4.1 shall apply. 2 When the auxiliary apparatus is not essential to the operation of the EUT and has a separate test procedure specified elsewhere, this subclause does not apply. The main EUT is tested as an individual EUT. 3 The ultimate decision whether to measure and apply limits is to be made in the relevant CISPR product publication. Connecting leads exceeding 1 m in length shall be bundled in accordance with 2.4.4.1.

Measurements are not required when the connecting lead between EUT and auxiliary apparatus is permanently fixed on both ends and is either shorter than 2 m or shielded, + provided that in the latter case the shielded lead is connected at both ends to the metal housing of the EUT and that of the auxiliary apparatus. Leads with removable plugs and sockets are considered to be extendable to a length of more than 2 m and measurements are required. The equipment under test shall be arranged the following additional requirements: in accordance with previous parts of 2.4.4.2, with

a) the auxiliary apparatus shall be placed at the same height as and at the same distance from the grounded conducted surface and if the lead is long enough, it is to be treated in accordance with 2.4.4.1. If the auxiliary lead is shorter than 0,8 m, its length shall be maintained, and the auxiliary apparatus shall be placed as far away as possible from the main apparatus. When the auxiliary apparatus is a control, the arrangements for its operation must not affect the level of disturbance; 16

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

b) if an EUT having an auxiliary apparatus is grounded, no artificial connected. If the EUT itself is made to be held in the hand, the artificial connected to the EUT and not to any auxiliary apparatus;

hand shall hand shall

be be

c) if the EUT is not made to be held in the hand, auxiliary apparatus which is not grounded and is made to be held in the hand must be connected to the artificial hand. If the auxiliary apparatus is not made to be held in the hand either, it shall be placed in relation to a grounded conducting surface as described in 2.4.4.1. In addition to the measurement on the terminals for the mains connection, measurements are conducted on all other terminals for incoming and outgoing leads (e.g. control and load lines) using a voltage probe connected to the input of the measuring receiver. The auxiliary all provided apparatus. apparatus, control or load is connected to allow measurements to be made under operating conditions and during interactions between the EUT and the auxiliary

Measurements input terminals

are performed of the auxiliary

both on the power apparatus.

input

terminals

of the EUT and the power

2.4.4.3

Measurement of common mode voltages at differential mode signal terminals Measurement using the delta-type network

2.4.4.3.1

The common mode disturbance voltage at the terminals for differential mode signal lines of telecommunication, data processing and other equipment is measured with delta-networks in accordance with 11.6 of CISPR 16-1, in the frequency range 150 kHz to 30 MHz. The deltanetworks specified in CISPR 16-1 could be amended in order to allow signal and d.c. current paths needed for the proper functioning of the EUT as long as the requirements on differential mode and common mode impedances of CISPR 16-1 are complied with. When using the delta network for measurements on signal terminals, the differential mode rejection must be as great as needed not to give erroneous results when measuring a common mode disturbance voltage at the same frequency as the operational differential mode signal. When the EUT is to be measured on its power supply terminals using an artificial mains network all voltage measurements shall be carried out with both networks connected simultaneously. The provisions prescribed in 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.4.2 are to be observed. NOTE - The freauencv ranae of the delta-network can be extended to 9 kHz usina the same network impedance if beco;pling of the connected signal line and coupling to the" measuring receiver are designed accordingly.

2.4.4.3.2

Measurements

using the T-type network 20 in

Alternatively a common mode artificial network, e.g. a T-type network according to clause of CISPR 16-1, can be used for the measurement of common mode disturbance voltages , the frequency range 9 kHz to 30 MHz.

In contrast to the delta-network which provides a differential mode and a common mode termination with equal simulation impedances of 150 Q, the T-network provides only a common mode termination of 150 $2 and almost no loading and high isolation to the differential mode operational signal on the communication line. At the supply side of the operational signal frequency can be connected. These resistance of 100 R - 150 T-type network a signal simulator, load circuits for d.c. or the of the EUT or other circuits needed for the operation of the EUT circuits shall either themselves provide a differential mode RF C2, as required for the particular EUT, or with a termination to 17

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR l&2(1996)

provide this resistance. When no external`circuit resistor of 150 Q shall be connected as differential Figure 11 shows an example of a T-type network.

is specified for the operation of the EUT a mode RF termination to the T-type network.

2.4.4.4

Measurements using voltage probes With an artificial mains network

2.4.4.4.1

In order to test devices and systems with several connected or connectable lines, the disturbance voltage at the line connections, which cannot be measured with artificial mains networks (e.g. for connecting lines between parts of components which are separated from the mains) as well as the connecting jacks for antennas, control and load lines, must be measured with a voltage probe with a high input impedance (1500 a or more) to ensure that the lines are not loaded by the probe. For these cases, however, the primary power input wires must be isolated and RF terminated with the AMN. For the remaining lines, also those not to be measured with the probe, the corresponding conditions of 2.4.4.1 and the operating conditions laid down for the individual devices in the respective product specifications (e.g. CISPR 11 and CISPR 14) must be observed in regard to arrangement and length. The voltage probe is connected to the measuring receiver via a coaxial cable, the screen of which is connected to the ground reference and the case of the voltage probe. No connection shall be made directly from this case to live parts of the EUT. Figure 12 shows an example conductor regulating control. for a test set-up for measuring the interference voltage of a semi-

2.4.4.4.2

Without an artificial mains network

During testing of EUTs which are not to be measured with artificial mains networks, the disturbance voltage is measured across a defined simulation resistance (e.g. artificial fence simulation in 5.4.1 of CISPR 14 or under open-circuit conditions with an exactly defined arrangement and line layout taking into consideration the specifications of 2.4.4.1). The disturbance voltage is measured with a high-impedance voltage probe. This is valid also for e.g. power power supplies or battery devices not to be loaded. electronic devices to which separateiy which are fed from their own separate installed lines are connected which are

In the case of disturbance voltage measurements on separate individual power sources for currents of more than 25 A (e.g. battery, generator, convertor), an impedance measurement must be applied to ascertain that the tolerance of the simulated resistance, in accordance with CISPR 16-1 is not exceeded. The flexible ground connection for probes with an input impedance Rx of more than 1500 R should not be longer than l/10 of the wave-length at the maximum measurement frequency and shall be connected in the shortest possible way to the metal surface serving as reference ground. In order `to avoid additional capacitive loading of the test point by the screening of the probe, the tip of the probe should not exceed a length of approximately 3 cm. The screened connections to the measuring receiver must be arranged in such a way that the capacitance of the test object is not altered with respect to the reference ground.

18

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.4.4.5

Measurements

using current probes

Disturbance current measurements may be useful for several reasons. The first is that in some devices it may not be possible to insert an artificial mains network. This is particularly true when tests are performed on installed systems, or where the EUT has very high currents. A second reason for the use of the current probe is that at the lower end of the frequency range the mains impedance becomes very low, so the disturbance source is a current generator. The measurement of this current can be made by means of a current transformer without interrupting or disconnecting the mains connection. Current probes shall conform to the requirements of clause 12 of CISPR 16-l. of the. mode

Current probes enable the direct measurement of the D common mode components disturbance current by enclosing the cable containing all leads. Therefore, common disturbance currents can be easily separated from differential mode operating currents. If measurements are performed voltage can be calculated. with known load and source impedances,

the disturbance

If only one conductor is enclosed, the superposition of the differential and common mode disturbance current components is measured. If, in this case, any extremely high (above 200 A) operating current exists, there is a risk of false data because the magnetic core of the current probe may saturate. 2.4.5 2.4.5.1

System test configuration for conducted emissions measurements General approach to system measurements
objective of defining a system has the following key points: common mode disturbance which ground test configuration for conducted emission

The general measurements avoiding defining

loops;

a configuration

is easily

duplicated; from the line being measured;

decoupling placing

of lines not being measured decoupling; in 2.4.1

of lines to achieve requirements

duplicating possible.

to 2.4.4

for the system

test to the maximum

extent

Whenever possible, the disturbance voltage on a system line shall be measured with an AN. For currents up to 50 A, ANs can be used quite easily. The AN shall be installed within 80 cm of the system equipment being measured. Each wire of a multi-wire power mains circuit shall be routed through an AN. Each AN shall be terminated with a 50 Q resistor at the measurement terminal. The EUT shall be arranged manufacturer's instructions. and connected with cables terminated in accordance with the

For some measurements, relevant product publications may state a specific load to be used together with load voltage probes, instead of an AN. A voltage probe may also be used for conducted measurements when the mains current is above 50 A and an appropriate AN is not available. In this latter case test results with an AN will take precedence over the results with a voltage probe, however. For some measurements, publication. the use of current probes may'be specified in the relevant product

19

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996)

2.4.5.2

System

configuration

/

The system shall be carefully configured, installed, arranged and operated in a manner that is most representative of the system as typically used (i.e. as specified in the instruction manual) or as specified herein. Equipment that typically operates within a system made up of multiple interconnected units should be tested as part of such a typical operational system. Generally, the system that is tested shall be of the same type that is supplied to the end user. If the marketing information is not available or it is not practical to assemble extraordinary amounts of equipment to replicate a complete product installation, the test shall be performed using the best judgement of the test engineer in consultation with the design engineering staff. The results of any such discussion and decision process shall be documented in the test report. The selection and placement of cables, a.c. line cords, host and peripherals depends on the type of EUT and must be representative of expected equipment installation. Three types are distinguished. First, there are systems normally used entirely on one table top. A second type of system consists of equipment normally used in a floor-standing configuration. These include systems mounted over a specially designed raised floor which facilitates intra-system connection under the raised floor. Equipment making up the floor-standing system can be interconnected with cabling lying on the floor, under the floor in a raised floor installation, or overhead according to normal installation. Third, there are systems that are a combination of floor-standing and table-top systems. The remainder of this clause provides instructions for the testing of each of these systems. In addition, the specific requirements in 2.4.1 to 2.4.4 shall be observed. Equipment in a system, normally being floor-standing, shall be placed on a floor in accordance with 2.4.4.1. Equipment designed for both table-top and floor operation shall be tested only in the table-top configuration. 2.4.5.2.1 Operating conditions

The system shall be operated at the rated (nominal) operating voltage and typical load conditions - mechanical or electrical, or both - for which it is designed. Loads may be actual or simulated as described in the individual equipment requirements. For some systems, it may be necessary to develop a set of explicit requirements specifying the test conditions, operations, etc. to be used in testing a specific system. If the system includes a visual display unit or monitor, unless the product publication specifies otherwise: a) set the contrast control to maximum; or at raster extinction if raster extinction occurs the following operating conditions apply

b) set the brightness at less than maximum c) d) for colour monitors,

control to maximum brightness;

use white letters on a black background or negative of characters

to represent

all colours;

select the worst case of positive

video if both are available; per line so that the maximum number of

e) set character size and number characters per screen is displayed; f) for a monitor pattern consisting

that has no graphics capabilities, of random text shall be displayed;

regardless

of the vraeo

card

used,

a

g) for a monitor with graphics capabilities, even though another video card may be needed to accomplish a graphic display, a pattern consisting of a line of scrolling Hs should be displayed; h) if a monitor has no text capabilities, use a typical 20 display.

IS 10052(Part2):1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.4.5.2.2

Interfacing

equipments,

simulators and cables

Compliance testing is performed with peripheral and cable placement which is judged realistic and likely to be found in the final installation. Figures 1, 3, 4 and 5 describe standardized test set-ups which will provide a basis for repeatability among testing laboratories and is consistent with the requirement for a realistic system and cable orientation. Any deviation from the standard test set-ups shall be documented together with its supporting rationale. Since a system is required to interact functionally with other units, the actual interfacing units should be used. Si'mulators may be used to provide representative operating conditions, provided the effects of the simulator used in lieu of an actual interfacing unit properly represent the electrical, and in some cases the mechanical, characteristics of the interfacing units, especially concerning RF signals, impedances and shield terminations. Because of the ad&d degree of uncertainty when a simulator is used, such use should be avoided if possible. In case of a dispute, measurements made with an actual interfacing unit shall take precedence. If a device is designed to be used only with a specific host computer or peripheral, it should be tested with that computer or peripheral. Interfacing cables should be typical of normal use as supplied with the normal system and at least 2 m long unless the manufacturer's user manual specifies shorter cables. The same type of cable (that is, non-shielded, braided shield, foil shield, etc.) specified in the user manual should be used throughout the tests. Excessive lengths of cable shall be folded into a serpentine-like bundle at the approximate centre of the cable with the bundles 30 cm to 40 cm in length. If shielded or special cables are used during the tests to achieve compliance, then a statement must be included in the test report and in the instruction manual advising of the need to use those types of cables. Interface ports (connectors) shall have a cable connected to one of each type of functional interface port of the system, and each cable shall be terminated in a device typical of actual usage. Where there are multiple interface ports all of the same type, additional connecting cables shall be added to the system to determine the effect these cables have on emissions from the system. Normally, a) b) the loading of similar ports is limited to the following: .

availability

of multiple

loads (for large systems); loads representing a typical installation.

reasonableness

of multiple

The rationale for the selection of the configuration and loading of ports shall be included in the test report; that is 28 % of possible cables were connected and the emissions did not increase by more than 2 dB when one or more cables were added. Additional ports on support units, interfacing units or simulators, other than those associated with the system or the minimum required system, need not be connected or used during testing. 2.4.5.2.3 Mains connection power cords, the point of

If the system is an assembly of equipment each having its own connection for the ANs is determined from the following rules: a) each power cord which terminates in a mains for example) shall be tested separately; supply

plug of a standard

design

(IEC 83,

b) power cords or terminais which are not\ specified via a host unit shall be tested separately;

by the manufacturer

to be connected

21

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

c) power cords or field wiring terminals which are specified connected to a host unit or other power-supplying equipment host unit or other power-supplying equipment, and the terminals other power-supplying equipment are connected to the ANs and

by the manufacturer to be shall be connected to that or cords of that host unit or tested; hardware to

d) where a special mains connection is specified, the necessary connection the AN shall be supplied by the manufacturer for the purpose of the test.

The ground safety conductor of units separately powered shall be isolated from the equipment under test by a 50 pH AN in the frequency range 0,15 MHz to 30 MHz. The normal AN mains input is connected to the reference ground in this use of the AN as a filter.

2.4.5.3

Measurements of interconnecting

lines

In addition to the measurement on the terminals for the mains connection, measurements may need to be performed with a voltage probe on other terminals for incoming and outgoing leads (for example control and load lines). If the function of the equipment under test is affected by the 1500 Q impedance of the probe, the impedance at 50/60 Hz and at radio frequencies may need to be increased (for example 15 kQ in series with 500 pF). In place of a voltage measurement, a current measurement with a current probe may also be used, if required (or offered as an option) in the product specification. During the measurement, the ANs on the mains lead remain in place to provide a defined mains isolation and a defined RF termination. The auxiliary apparatus (control, load) is connected to allow measurements to be made under all provided operating conditions and Measurements are made on the specified during interactions between the equipments. terminals of each equipment. If the connecting lines between equipments are permanently fixed on both shorter than 2 m or shielded, no measurements are necessary, provided that the shielded cable is connected at both ends to the reference ground, that is the equipments. Non-shielded connecting lines with plug(s) or socket(s) are extendable to a length of more than 2 m and therefore must be extended by must be tested. Shielded cables must be at least 2 m long unless the user shorter cables. ends and either in the latter case metal housing of considered to be at least 2 m and manual specifies

2.4.5.4

Decoupling of system components

One of the sources of inaccurate conducted measurements in a system is any ground circulating current. This ground current may be interrupted by installing a 50 pH AN in the frequency range 0,15 MHz - 30 MHz in the ground safety conductor to the EUT. An additional source of circulating currents can be the shields of interconnecting cables between units. Therefore, the ground safety conductor to these units shall also be isolated by a 50 uH AN. The measurement receiver should be referenced to ground only at the measurement point to prevent ground loops. (Caution: shock hazard may exist if the measuring set is not supplied with an isolation transformer.)

2.4.6

In situ measurements

Testing may be performed at the end user's or manufacturer's premises, if the system cannot be set up o.n test site. In this case, both the system and its location are considered as the system tested. The emission results are unique to the installation site because site containment properties affect the measurement. However, where testing of a given system has 22

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996)

been accomplished at three or more representative locations, the results may be considered representative of all sites with similar systems for purposes of determining compliance with emission requirements (if allowed in the procuring or requirement document.) The disturbance voltage shall be measured under the existing conduction conditions with nonreactive pick-up devices (high resistance voltage probes). The conduction conditions and measurement results are affected by: - the existing reference ground or the reference mass used during measurement. Neither a conducting ground plane nor an AN shall be installed for user's installation testing unless one or both are to be a permanent part of the installation; the RF characteristics and loading conditions for the power mains conduction; and

the ambient RF environment;

the input impedance of the pick-up device.

2.4.6.1

Reference ground

The existing ground at the place of installation should be used as reference ground. This should be selected by taking high-frequency (RF) criteria into consideration. Generally, this is accomplished by connecting the EUT via wide straps, with a length-to-width ratio not exceeding 3, to structural conductive parts of buildings that are connected to earth ground. These include metallic water pipes, central heating pipes, lightning wires to earth ground, concrete reinforcing steel and steel beams. In general, the safety and neutral conductors of the power installation are not suitable as reference ground as these may carry extraneous disturbance voltages and can have undefined RF impedances. If no suitable reference ground is available in the surroundings of the test object or at the place of measurement, sufficiently large conductive structures such as metal foils, metal sheets or wire meshes set up in the proximity can be used as reference ground for measurement. The general requirements 2.4.6.2
Measurement

of 2.4.4.2.1 and of annex A should be observed.

with voltage probes

Testing of conducted disturbance voltage is made with the voltage probe. Special precautions must be taken to establish a reference ground for the measurements. Any voltage decrease caused by loading of the circuit to be measured can be determined qualitatively by varying the voltage probe input impedance. If the input impedance of the voltage probe is high compared to the internal impedance of the test point or of the tested network, then only slight differences in the measurement of the disturbance voltage occur when the probe input impedance is increased. The input impedance of the probe can be doubled by series connection of a 1500 G resistor. If the disturbance voltage is reduced by (the predicted) 5 dl3 or 6 dB, then the 1500 G probe can be used to measure the disturbance voltage. 2.4.6.3
Selection of measuring points

Radio disturbance voltage measurements at the place of installation are carried out at the boundaries of the user's premises, of industrial areas, or at points to be specified within the influence area of receiving system. 23

CISPR

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.4.6.3.1

Measurements

on mains and other supply leads
with

In power supply networks it is sufficient to measure the unsymmetric disturbance voltage ,the voltage probe at accessible power outlets near the power entrance to the building.

2.4.6.3.2

Measurements on unshielded and shielded cables

In the case of non-shielded and shielded signal, control and load leads with non-grounded shield leaving the boundaries, the unsymmetric disturbance voltage shall be measured with the voltage probe on the individual wires or the screens against reference ground. In the case of shielded cables with grounded shield, the common mode disturbance current is measured at a distance greater than one-tenth wavelength from the connecting and grounding points using a current probe.

2.5 2.5.1

Measurements General

using the absorbing clamp, 30 MHz to 1000 MHz

Absorbing clamps (see figure 13) are suitable for the measurement of the disturbance power that can be radiated from a cable for some types of equipment depending on construction and size. The precise measuring procedure and its applicability is to be specified in each product specification. If the dimensions of the EUT, without connecting leads, approach a quarter of a wavelength of the measuring frequency, direct cabinet radiation may occur and the absorbing clamp method is not suitable to assess the full radiation capacity of the EUT. In general,, the method is most useful for small EUTs and in the frequency range of 30 MHz to 300 MHz. The disturbance potential of an EUT with a mains lead being the only external lead may be taken as the power it could supply to its main lead acting as a radiating antenna. This power is nearly equal to that supplied by the EUT to the absorbing clamp placed around the lead at the position where the absorbed power is maximum. Equipment having external leads other than a mains lead can radiate disturbance from such leads, shielded .or unshielded, in the same manner as radiation from the mains lead. Absorbing clamp measurements can also be used on these leads for diagnostic purposes. Radiation from leads at frequencies above 300 MHz, up to 1000 MHz, may be measured with a suitable absorbing clamp. Such measurements are also suitable for diagnostics. However, it should be noted that radiation could emanate directly from the equipment as well. Historical background of the absorbing clamp is contained in annex C.

2.52

Measurements

When using the absorbing clamp, the EUT is placed on a non-metallic table at least 60 cm high. The lead to be measured is stretched horizontally in a straight line, to permit variation in position of the absorbing clamp along the lead to find the maximum indication. The lead shall be at least a half-wavelength at the lowest frequency of measurement, plus the length of the absorbing clamp and a possible second absorbing clamp: at 30 MHz the lead length is 6 m and with the second (filtering) absorbing clamp must be at least 7 m. Leads shorter than 1 m ! are not suitable for absorbing clamp measurements.

24

IS 10052(Part2):1999 CISPR 16-2 (1996)

The absorbing clamp is placed around the lead to be measured as shown in figure 13. The position of the absorbing clamp along the lead shall be varied from zero to one halfwavelength distance from the EUT at each test frequency. The maximum indication obtained on the measurement receiver connected to the absorbing clamp is proportional to `the disturbance power available. When measurements are made on an EUT having more than one lead attached, detachable leads shall be removed if operationally possible, at the time when another lead is measured. A lead which cannot be removed shall be isolated by means of lossy ferrite rings or another absorbing clamp put around the lead immediately adjacent to the EUT. The test arrangement for the absorbing clamp is shown in figure 13. No person or metallic objects shall be positioned within 80 cm of the measuring set-up. The required movement of the absorbing clamp may be performed with pulleys and a rope that is operated by a motor that can be operated from a remote location. The power corresponding to the measured receiver voltage indication at each test frequency is derived from the absorbing clamp calibration procedure described in clause 13 of CISPR 18-1. 2.6 2.8.1

Measurement
/r/troducfion

of radiated disturbances

This section sets forth the general procedures for the measurement of the field strength of radio disturbance produced by devices and systems. Experience with radiated disturbance measurements is less extensive than that of voltage measurements. The radiated disturbance measurement procedures are therefore open to revision and extension as knowledge and experience are accumulated. In particular, attention shall be given to the effect of leads and cables associated with the EUT. For some products, it may be required to measure the electric, the magnetic, or both components of the radiated disturbance. Sometimes a measurement of a quantity related to radiated power is more appropriate. Normally measurements should be made of both the horizontal and vertical components of the disturbance with respect to the reference ground plane. The results of measurements of either the electric or magnetic components may be expressed in peak, quasi-peak, average or r.m.s. values. The magnetic component of the disturbance is normally measured at frequencies up to 30 MHz. In magnetic field measurements only the horizontal component of the field at the position of the receiving antenna is measured when using the distant antenna procedure. If the large loop antenna (LLA) system is used, the three orthogonal magnetic dipole moments of the EUT are measured. (Note that in the single antenna method, the horizontal component of the field at the position of the antenna is determined by the horizontal and vertical dipole moments of the EUT, because reflection plays a part.) 2.8.2

Field-strength

measurements

Field-strength measurements may be made on an open area test site, in an absorber-lined shielded enclosure, in a reverberating chamber or using a LLA system. For practical reasons other test sites may have to be specified. 2.8.2.1

Open area test site measurements

/ in clause 16 of CISPR

The open area test site shall conform with the relevant specifications 16-1 for its physical and electrical properties and for its validation.

25

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.6.2.2

General

measurement

method

Figure 14 shows the concept of measurements made on an open area test site with the direct and ground reflected rays arriving at the receiving antenna. The EUT is set up at a specified height above the ground plane and configured to represent normal operating conditions. The antenna is positioned at the specified separation distance. The EUT is rotated in the horizontal plane and the maximum reading noted. The height of the antenna is adjusted so that the direct and reflected rays approach or meet in-phase addition. The procedural steps may be interchanged and may need to be repeated to find the maximum disturbance. For practical reasons the height variation is restricted and hence perfect in-phase addition may not be achieved. 2.6.2.3 Measurement distance

An EUT subject to a radiated disturbance limit at a specified distance should be measured at that distance unless to do so would be impractical because of equipment size, etc. The measurement distance is the length of the projection of the EDTs closest point to the antenna and the midpoint of the antenna onto the ground plane. In some test set-ups the distance is measured from the antenna to the radiation centre of the EUT. For a measurement distance of 10 m either method may be used. A distance of 10 m is preferred at most outdoor sites since at this distance the expected level of the disturbance being measured is sufficiently above the general ambient noise level to permit useful testing. Distances of less than 3 m or greater than 30 m are not generally used. If a measurement distance other than the specified distance is necessary, the results should be extrapolated using the procedures specified in the product standards. If no guidance is given, suitable justification for extrapolation shall be provided. In general, extrapolation does not follow a simple inverse distance law. Where defined possible, measurement should by the following conditions. distance d is selected be made in the far field. The far field region may'be

Measurement

sc that: and magnetic field

a), d 2 h/6. At this distance

E/H = Z,, = 120 IC = 377 R, that is electrical

strength components are perpendicular to each other, and the measurement order of 3 dB if the EUT is regarded as being a tuned dipole antenna; or

error is in the

b) d 2 h, condition for a plane wave, where the error is in the order of 0,5 dB if the EUT is regarded as a tuned dipole antenna; or c) d 2 2dlh, where D is the largest dimension determining the minimum aperture for the illumination where D >> h. 2.6.2.4 Antenna height variation of either the EUT or the antenna of the EUT, which applies to cases,

For electric field-strength measurements the antenna height above the ground plane shall be varied within a specified range to obtain the maximum reading which will occur when the direct and reflected rays are in phase. As a general rule, for measurement distances up to and including 10 m, the antenna height for electric field strength measurements shall be varied I between 1 m and 4 m. At greater distances of up to 30 m, preferably the height shall be varied between 2 m and 6 m. It may be necessary to adjust the minimum antenna height above ground down to 1 m in order to maximize the reading. These height scans apply for both horizontal and vertical polarization, except that for vertical polarization, the minimum height shall be increased so that the lowest point of the antenna dears the site ground surface by at least 25 cm. For magnetic field strength measurements using the single magnetic loop antenna, the height of the receiving antenna may be fixed at a specified elevation (typically 1 m from ground to the bottom of the loop antenna). The loop antenna and EUT shall be rotated in azimuth to maximize the measured disturbance. 26

IS 10052(Part2 ):1999 CISPR 16.2(1996)

2.6.2.5 Product

specification

details measurement method and the disturbance parameters shall include other relevant details as outlined below. to

In addition to specifying the detailed be measured, the product standards 2.6.2.5.1 Test environment

The influence of the test environment of the EUT. Important parameters temperature and humidity.

shall be considered so as to ensure in the physical environment shall

correct functioning be specified, e.g.

The electromagnetic environment needs special consideration to ensure accurate disturbance measurements. The ambient radio noise and signal levels measured at the test site with the EUT de-energized should be at least 6 dB below the limit. It is recognized that this is not always realizable at all frequencies. However, in the event that the measured levels of the ambient plus EUT radio noise emissions are not above the limit, the EUT shall be considered to be in compliance with the limit. For further guidance on ambient levels and resulting measurement error, see 2.3.1 .l. If the ambient field-strength level at frequencies within the specified exceeds the limit(s), the folloMTing alternatives may be used: a) perform measurements which the limit is specified Product standard or shall distances; measurement ranges

at a closer distance and extrapolate results to the distance at The extrapolation formula shall be as recommended by the be verified by measurements at no less than three different bands during hours equipment are lower; when broadcast

b) perform measurements in critical frequency stations are off the air and ambients from industrial

c) compare the amplitude of the EUT disturbance at the frequency under investigation with the amplitude of disturbance on adjacent frequencies in a shielded room or anechoically treated shielded room. The amplitude of the EUT disturbance at the frequency under investigation can be estimated by measuring the amplitude of the adjacent frequency disturbance and making a comparison;
NOTE - The shielded or anechoic room should not be used for compliance determination frequencies unless the anechoic room data is correlatable to the open area test site data. at the other EUT

d) in orienting the axis of an open field area test site, directions of strong ambient signals, so that the orientation site discriminates against such signals as far as possible;

it is desirable to consider the of the receiving antenna on the both

e) for narrowband disturbances from the EUT occurring near an RF ambient, when are within the standard bandwidth, a narrower instrument bandwidth may be useful. 2.6.2.5.2 Configuration of equipment under test

The operating conditions of the EUT shall be specified, e.g., the characteristics signals, the modes of operation, the arrangement of components, the lengths interconnecting cables, etc. The testing conditions: of individual and multi-component systems shall satisfy the

of the input and types of

following

two

a) the system b) the system

is configured is configured

for use in a typical in a manner

manner. disturbances. that are connected to

that will maximize

The term "system" refers to the EUT in combination the EUT and all required connecting cables. 27

with the components

IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16.2(1996)

The term "configuration" refers to the orientation of the EUT, the other components of the system, the interconnecting cables, and the power mains leads that comprise the system. During all measurements, the configuration of the system shall be adjusted so that the above two conditions, the condition a) being satisfied first and followed by condition b), are fulfilled, within the guidelines described in the following paragraphs. The term "typical" is used to describe the arrangement of how the EUT will actually Guidelines for setting up a typical configuration are outlined below. be used.

For equipment designed to be part of a multi-unit system, the EUT shall be installed in a typical system and configured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. It shall also be operated in a manner that is representative of the typical usage for that EUT. During all tests, the EUT and all system components shall be manipulated within the confines of typical usage to maximize each disturbance. Interface cables shall be connected to each interface port on the EUT. The effect of varying the position of each cable shall be investigated to find the configuration that maximizes each disturbance as constrained by its typical configuration in actual use. The number of manipulations may be limited if a few such cable configurations will lead to maximum disturbances over the frequency range investigated. Interface cables shall be of the type and length specified by the equipment manufacturer.

Any excess length of each cable shall be separately bundled in a serpentine fashion at the approximate centre of the cable with the bundle 30 cm to 40 cm in length. If it is impractical to do so because of cable bulk or stiffness or because the testing is being done at a user installation, disposition of the excess cable length is left to the discretion of the test engineer and should be noted in the test report. Different requirements for excess cabling may be specified in the product standard. Cables shall not be placed underneath, on top of the EUT or on system components unless it is appropriate to do so, e.g. a cable is normally routed through overhead cable racks or under the ground plane. Cables shall be positioned adjacent to the exterior cabinets of the EUT and all system components only if typically used in that manner. The EUT should be investigated in different modes of operation. For an EUT normally operated on top of a table, radiated emission tests should be performed with the EUT on a non-conducting table, the top of which is of suitable size. The table should be placed on a remotely controlled rotating platform constructed with non-conducting materials. The top of the rotating platform should normally be less than 0,5 m above the ground plane and the height of the table and platform together 0,8 m above the ground plane. If the rotating platform is at the same elevation as the ground plane, its surface shall be of conducting material and the 0,8 m height shall be measured with respect to the top of the rotating platform. An EUT normally placed on the floor will be tested on the floor. A flushmounted rotating platform is useful in this situation. The EUT shall be grounded in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements and conditions of intended use. If the EUT is operated without a ground connection, it shall be tested ungrounded. When the EUT is furnished with a grounding terminal or internally grounded lead which is to be connected in actual installation conditions, the ground lead or connection shall be connected to a ground plane (or facility for earth ground), simulating actual installation conditions. Any internally grounded lead included in the plug end of the a.c. mains cord of the EUT shall be connected to ground through the mains power service. 2.6.2.6 Measurement instrumentation including 28 antennas, shall conform with the relevant

The measurement instrumentation, requirements in CISPR 16-l.

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.6.2.7

Field-strength

measurements

on other out-door

sites

Out-door test sites similar to an open area test site have to be prescribed for practical reasons for some vehicles. The provisions given in 2.6.2.3 to 2.6.2.6 given in clause 16 of CISPR 16-1 are referred to but 2.6.2.8 (Under 2.6.2.9 (Under 2.6.2.10 Measurements consideration) Measurements consideration) Measurements in. EM ceils in absorber-lined shielded in reverberating chambers

but without any metal ground plane may products, e.g. ISM equipment and motor are valid. Equally, the general provisions not the requirements on validation.

enclosures

(Under consideration) 2.6.3 Substitution method of measurement in the frequency range of 30 MHz to 18 GHz

The method is intended for measuring radio disturbance radiated from the cabinet, including wiring and circuitry inside the cabinet, of an equipment under test. The EUT may be either a self-contained unit with no port for any connection or have one or several ports for power and other external connections. The substitution in the frequency 2.6.3.1 Test site Indoor sites may be used, but may need special part of the frequency range, in order to meet the reflections from the surroundings - for example, a antenna and an absorbing wall behind the EUT. The as follows (see figure 15). method is currently being range 1 GHz -18 GHz. used to measure emissions from microwave ovens

The test site shall be a level area. arrangements, especially in the upper requirements of stable and non-critical corner reflector added to the measuring suitability of the site shall be determined

Two horizontal half-wavelength dipoles (see also 2.6.3.2) shall be placed parallel to each other, at the same height h, being not less than 1 m above the floor and spaced at the measurement distance d. Dipole B shall be connected to a signal generator and dipole A to the input of the measuring receiver. The signal generator shall be tuned to give maximum indication on the measuring receiver and its output adjusted to a convenient level. The site shall be considered suitable for the purpose of measurement at the test frequency if the indication on the measuring receiver does not vary more than +1,5 df3 when dipole B is moved 100 mm in any direction. The test shall be repeated throughout the frequency range at frequency intervals small enough to ensure that the site is satisfactory for all measurements intended. If an EUT requires that measurements be made also with vertical polarizatton (see 2.6.3.3), the suitability test of the site shall be repeated with the two dipoles positioned for vertical polarization.

29

IS 10052( Part 2):1999 CISPR 16-2 (1996)

2.6.3.2

Test antennas

The test antennas A and 6 have been described above as half-wave dipoles. For the frequency range below 1 GHz, this requirement applies primarily to the transmitting antenna 6 for which the radiated power in the direction of maximum radiation must be relatable to the power at the terminals of antenna B. The measuring antenna A should also be a half-wave dipole. Its actual sensitivity will be included in the substitution calibration of the test configuration. In the frequency recommended. 2.6.3.3 range of 1 GHz to 18 GHz linearly polarized horn antennas are

ElJT configuration

The EUT shall be placed on a non-conducting table with provision to rotate in the horizontal plane. The EUT shall be set up so that the geometric centre of the EUT coincides with the point earlier used as centre point for dipole B (figure 15). If the EUT is comprised of more than one unit, each ,unit shall be measured separately. Detachable leads to the EUT should be removed if operation is not affected adversely. Required leads shall be provided with absorbing ferrite rings and be so positioned that they will not influence the measurements. For shielded EUTs, all connectors not used shall be terminated by shielded terminations. 2.6.3;4 Test procedure

With the EUT arranged as described in 2.6.3.3, the horizontally polarized measuring dipole A shall be placed in the same position as when checking the test site. The dipole shall be normal to a vertical plane through its centre and that of the EUT. The EUT is first measured in its normal table-standing position and secondly when tilted 90" to stand on a normally vertical side. In each position it shall be rotated 360" in the horizontal plane. The highest reading Y shall be the characteristic value for the EUT. The measuring system is calibrated by replacing the EUT with a half-wave dipole 8. The centre of this calibrating dipole B shall be placed in the same spot as the geometric centre of the previously measured EUT and parallel with the measurement antenna A, and be connected to a signal generator. The radiated power from the cabinet of the EUT is defined as the power at the terminals of the half-wave dipole B when the signal generator is adjusted to give the same reading on the measuring receiver as the maximum reading recorded earlier (Y), at each frequency of measurement. When measurements are made with both horizontally and vertically dipoles, separate calibrations must be made for the two modes. 2.6.4 (Under 2.6.5 Measurements consideration) Measurement in a loop antenna system of in situ equipment polarized measuring

The loop antenna system (LAS) considered in this subclause is suitable for indoor measurement of the magnetic field strength emitted by a single EUT in the frequency range 9 kHz to 30 MHz. The magnetic field strength is measured in terms of the currents induced into the LAS by the magnetic disturbance field of the EUT. The LAS shall be validated regularly using the method described in clause G.4 of CISPR 16-1, annex G. That annex also gives a complete description of the LAS and a relation between the measuring results obtained with the LAS and those obtained as described in 2.6.2. 30

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2.6.5.1

General measurement

method

Figure 16 shows the general concept of measurements made with the LAS. The EUT is placed in the centre of the LAS. The current induced by the magnetic field from the EUT into each of the three large loop antennas of the LAS is measured by connecting the current probe of the large loop antenna to a measuring receiver (or equivalent). During the measurements the EUT remains in a fixed position. The currents in the three large loop antennas, originating from the three mutually orthogonal magnetic field components, are measured in sequence. Each current level measured shall comply with the emission limit, expressed in dBpA, as specified in the product standard. The emission limit diameter of 2 m. 2.6.5.2 shall apply to a LAS having large loop antennas with the standardized

Test environment
perimeter of the LAS and nearby objects, such as floor and

The distance between the outer walls, shall be at least 0,s m. The currents induced of CISPR 16-1. 2.6.5.3

in the LAS by an RF ambient

field shall be judged

in accordance

with 16.4

Configuration

of the equipment under test

To avoid unwanted capacitive coupling between the EUT and the LAS, the maximum dimensions of the EUT shall allow a distance of at least 0,20 m between the EUT and the standardized 2 m large loop antennas of the LAS. The position of the mains lead shall be optimized for maximum current induction. this position will not be critical when the EUT complies with the conducted emission In case of a large EUT, the diameter In that case: a) the current values of CISPR 16-l; and measured of the loop antennas of the LAS may be increasea In general, limit. up to 4 m.

shall

be corrected

in accordance

with annex

J, clause

J.6

b) the maximum dimensions of the EUT shall allow a distance between the EUT and the large loops of at least 0,l x D m, where D is the diameter of the non-standardized loop.

31

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Section
3.1

3: Immunity

measurements

Immunity test criteria and general measurement procedures
the effect of

Immunity measurements are based upon a judgement of the point when interference on the EUT (equipment under test) has reached a specified level.

immunity measurements are performed in general by the application of a wanted test signal and an unwanted signal to the EUT. The fundamental basis of the measurement is set out in this clause, together with a listing of conditions which need to be specified in the detailed recommendations produced by the CISPR product committees. Clause 3.3 deals with the general principals of conduction methods of measurement for immunity, and clause 3.3 with radiation methods.

3.1.1

General

measurement

method concept upon which all methods of measurement of

Figure 17 sets out immunity are based.

the fundamental

The EUT is set up as specified to represent normal operating conditions. The unwanted signal is applied with increasing severity until the prescribed performance degradation is detected or the specified immunity level is reached, whichever is lower. The unwanted signal may be introduced by direct radiation or by current/voltage injection. In most cases both the direct radiation and injection techniques will be needed to fully assess the immunity potential of EUTs. The injection method is most useful for frequencies under 150 MHz, although direct radiated tests above approximately 30 MHz are used. The direct radiated tests can be performed using fields launched by antennas and intercepted by the EUT. In some cases a "bounded" field is most efficient for EUTs of height less than 1 m. Examples of bounded fields occur with TEM cells, stripline antennas and mode-stirred enclosures. 3.1.1.1 Objective assessment of performance degradation

Objective assessment of EUT immunity signals, audio rectification levels, etc., recording techniques.

is made by monitoring voltages, currents, specific which can be recorded using analogue or digital

As an example of one such assessment of performance degradation, television receivers to AM modulated RF interference is presented below.

the

immunity

of

First the wanted test signal only is applied to the EUT. This produces a wanted audio signal which is measured. The control of the EUT or test set-up is adjusted to set this audio signal at the required level. The wanted audio signal is then removed either by switching off the modulation or the audio test signal. The unwanted signal is applied in addition and its level is adjusted to obtain an unwanted audio signal at the specified level below the wanted audio signal level. The level of the unwanted signal is the measure of immunity of the EUT at the test frequency concerned. Care should be taken in order not to damage the EUT by too high levels of the unwanted signal. 3.1 .1.2 Subjective assessment of performance degradation

Subjective assessment of EUT immunity is made by visual and/or aural monitoring of performance degradation for EUTs with such visual or aural or both presentations. This technique differs from that in 3.1 .l .l in that specific electrical or similar signals and levels are not directly recorded with an analogue or digital format. Instead, performance degradation is not formulated in measurable terms but in human sensory terms, e.g., human audio or visual perception of an annoying effect. The unwanted immunity signals can be the same or similar to those used for objective immunity assessment measurements. 32

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

As an example of one such subjective of television receivers to an unwanted aural presentations, is given below.

assessment of performance degradation, the immunity signal, as perceived by humans as degraded visual and

In the case of picture interference, the wanted test signal produces a standard picture and the unwanted signal produces a degradation of the picture. The degradation may be in a number of forms, such as a superposed pattern, sync disturbance, geometrical distortion, loss of picture contrast or colour, etc. The criterion of what constitutes performance degradation needs to be prescribed, conditions under which the subjective assessment is to be made must be specified. and the

First the wanted signal only is applied to the EUT. The controls of the EUT are set to obtain a picture of normal brightness, contrast and colour saturation. The unwanted signal is then applied in addition and its level adjusted to obtain degradation of the picture as perceived by a human watching the picture. This level is the measure of immunity of the EUT at the test frequency concerned. 3.1 .1.3 Measurement to a limit

The actual measurement of the immunity may not be required, i.e., when it is sufficient to know whether the EUT meets a limit or not. The unwanted signal, instead of being adjusted at each test frequency, is kept at the level of the limit and its frequency swept through the test range. The EUT is considere1.i to meet the limit if no degradation, whether objective or subjective, is observed at any time. This procedure is called a "go/no-go" test. 3.1.2 Immunity degradation criteria

To establish degradation. follows:

reasonable One such

immunity criteria will require defining what is meant by performance view of the progressiveness of performance degradation may be as

a) no degradation: equipment complies with its design specifications. This type of criterion shall be adopted for sensitive health and safety equipment, as well as services with impact on large populations of consumers. It might conceivably be used as an immunity criterion for some critical processes or equipment operation as well; b) noticeable degradation: in this case, the performance has been affected by an EM disturbance. Increased noise in video and audio circuits, decreased signal-to-noise ratio in control circuits, error rates in digital systems approaching an allowable system maximum, or annoying audio or visual disturbances are examples of noticeable degradation. No intervention should be required to continue operator of the electronic use product/equipment. This degradation is generally used for mass produced products. The degradation disappears when the immunity signal is removed; c) serious degradation: in this category, products will not be able to provide continuous satisfactory operation. To correct this, field engineering or customer service representatives will spend considerable time in the field trying to identify and correct the problem. This immunity level should be set so that it occurs on very rare occasions. Operator intervention is required to restore specific operation of electronic product/equipment such as system lockups, resets, indiscriminate writing on floppy disk, and other altering of memory; d) failure/total inoperability: this is the most serious category where the product totally fails and cannot be reset to regain operability. Eventually, mechanical damage will occur. No field repair can be accomplished. This creates a need for complete equipment replacement with an urgent redesign to increase its immunity level. Customer service could be interrupted for an indefinite time dependent on the capability of the manufacturer to produce a satisfactory replacement product. It is the task of the prcduct above conditions. committees to determine 33 the product degradation criteria for the

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

3.1.3

Product

specification

details method product and the means of specifications must

In addition to specifying the detailed immunity measurement determining the degradation of performance acceptable, the include other relevant details as outlined below. 3.1.3.1 Test environment

The needs of the test environment must be considered. The physical environment needs to be specified, e.g., temperature or humidity ranges. Also the EM environment must be specified, in particular, the maximum level of ambient signals. 3.1.3.2 Working conditions of EUT e.g., the characteristics of the wanted

The working input signal, 3.1.3.3

conditions of the EUT must be specified, the modes of operation of the EUT, etc.

EM threat

There are many forms of EM disturbances which may cause the EUT to malfunction. The product committee must consider whether the immunity specification should cover all eventualities, i.e., immunity from transmitted radio waves, from conduction of signals, from spikes/dips/outages/distortions on the mains, from electrostatic discharge, from lightning induced surges, etc. For each potential threat, the mode of coupling must be evaluated so that the appropriate specialized test equipment can be specified together with the covered method of measurement. It will thus be necessary for the product committees to adapt the general measurement principles set out in this clause to their particular product. The characteristics of the unwanted signal must be specified, e.g., amplitude, modulation, direction, polarization, etc. The frequency range of applicability of each method must be defined, e.g., the useful frequency range of the TEM cell is dependent on its width and this in turn is dependent upon the size of the EUT. The EUT must be examined to determine whether operation or for a particular frequency of unwanted 3.1.3.4 Calibration it is particularly signal. susceptible in any mode of

The product specification must address calibration needs, either by referring to a basic standard or including the calibration procedure within the product or product family specification. This should include both the periodic calibration of the test equipment used and particularly the means of calibrating said parameters as the amplitude and homogeneity of the unwanted signal as it is used in direct radiation or injection methods. 3.1.3.5 Statistical assessment it should rule of

The product specification must state the significance of the CISPR limit. In particular, address the question of whether the testing should conform to the 80/80 Recommendation 46/l, and if so, which of the sampling methods should be used.

For immunity testing until a performance degradation occurs, compliance with a CISPR limit for immunity may be judged using a suitable sample size such that a portion of the sample may exceed the permissible limit. For immunity testing performed at the immunity limit to determine compliance, e.g. go/no-go testing, without measuring the margin of immunity, statistical techniques may not apply. 34

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

3.2

Method

of measurement

of immunity

for conducted

signals

The basic method is to inject the unwanted signal into a lead and increase the level until the specified level of degradation is observed or the specified immunity level is reached, whichever is first. The lead may be a signal, a control or mains lead. There are two variants of the method. Current injection is used to assess immunity to common mode (asymmetric) signals, the voltage injection method to assess immunity from differential mode (symmetric) signals. In general current injection is performed as a minimum since that mode is most vulnerable to radiated RF environments. The general principle of the injection measurement is illustrated in figure 18. The effects interference signals induced.into a lead of an equipment in an actual situation are simulated the injection of an unwanted signal through a suitable coupling unit. of by

In the case of current injection for unshielded leads, the unwanted current is injected in common mode into the conductors. In the case of coaxial or shielded cables the unwanted current is injected into the outer conductor or the shield of the cable also in common mode (see figure 18). The current flows through the EUT returning to the generator through the ground capacitance in parallel with the load impedances of the other terminals provided by coupling units. Note that in some cases a portion of the common mode signal is converted into differential mode, thus masking the true common-mode response. This may be a combination of common mode currents which affect the RF potential differences at opposite ends of the lead and cause a degradation of the wanted signal to unwanted signal ratios. In the case of voltage injection, the signal is applied between two wires. Note that frequencies approaching 100 MHz or greater, conducted immunity injection by both methods difficult due to the impedances and resonant conditions of the EUT leads and loads. at is

3.2.1

Coupling

units

The coupling units contain RF chokes, capacitors, and resistive networks for the injection of unwanted signals. The impedance of the unwanted signal voltage source and the load impedances are standardized and the coupling units are designed to provide this impedance. They also permit the passage of the wanted test signal, other signals, and mains supply. Construction details and performance checks of coupling units are contained in CISPR 16-l. 3.2.2 Measurement set-up must be adequately include: specified to

The arrangement ensure accuracy a) b) c) height

used for conducted immunity measurements and repeatability. Particular items to specify ground plane;

of EUT above a specified of excess signal

disposition length

and power leads; coupling unit to signal and power leads; its leads, coupling unit, ground

of leads connecting

d) control of lay-out of all components used, that is EUT, plane, interconnect leads, signal source, etc.; e) quality of leads, that is, shield connections, follow transfer

impedance,

etc. the immunity of TV

More details on such specifications receivers, as an example.

for the case

of measuring

The TV receiver is placed 100 mm above a metallic ground plane of dimensions 2 m by 1 m. The coupling units are inserted into the various leads, respectively. The leads linking the coupling units to the EUT shall be as short as possible, in particular the lead to the antenna input of the EUT shall be not longer than 300 mm. 35

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

The mains lead shall be 300 mm long. If longer, it shall be bundled to a length of 300 mm. The mains lead shall be fixed in a well-defined lay-out which shall be recorded in the test report. The distance between the leads and the ground plane shall be not less than 30 mm. The maximum number of coupling units used in a test shall be six. In the case of EUTs with more than six terminals, coupling units shall be used for at least one of each type of terminals, if present. NOTE - Product committees should include such details in the product specification. 3.2.3 Method of measurement of input immunity

The unwanted signal is applied to the input terminals of EUTs that normally receive radiofrequency signals in that manner. This unwanted signal is mixed with the desired signal. The following subclauses highlight such tests as may apply to sound and television receivers, as examples. Also, see CISPR 13. 3.2.3.1 Measurement of sound receivers and the unwanted signal frequencies shall be specified in`

For these measurements the wanted terms of accuracy, e.g., f 1 kHz.

The ,measuring set-up is shown in figure 19. The unwanted signal generator (1) and the wanted signal generator (2) are interconnected by means of the coupling network (6). To avoid mutual interference between the two generators, the coupling loss can be increased with the attenuators (7). The output of the coupling network, the source impedance of which shall be specified, shall be matched to the input terminal of the EUT by the network (8). The audio output is measured as specified. 3.2.3.2 Measurement of television receivers to the (10) is signal

The measuring set-up is shown in figure 20. The principle of operation is similar measuring set-up of figure 19 and the remarks in 3.2.3.1 apply. The low-pass filter added to prevent influence of the measuring results by harmonics of the unwanted generators.

3.3

Method of measurement of immunity to radiated electric field interference
various methods of measurement of immunity to radiated

The following clauses delineate electric field interference. 3.3.1 Measurements

using the TEM mode

electromagnetic wave under the free space conditions can be simulated by a guided wave of the TEM (transverse electromagnetic) mode travelling between two flat parallel conducting surfaces. In this case the electric field component is perpendicular, and the magnetic field component parallel, to the conductors. TEM devices may be of the open stripline or the closed construction, e.g. TEM or GTEM device. Details of the TEM and stripline devices are given in CISPR 16-1. The description of the GTEM device is under consideration.. 3.3.1 .l Measurement set-up using the open stripline

A homogeneous,

The open stripline consists of two parallel plates sufficiently spaced apart to accommodate twice the electrical height of an EUT. The metallic structure of the EUT in the vertical plane constitutes the electrical height of the EUT. EUTs whose electrical height is greater than half the parallel plate separation may load the stripline and introduce a significant effect on the applied electric field strength. It should be noted that above the cut-off frequency of the stripline, both perpendicular and horizontal electric field strength components are present. 36

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999
CISPR
16-2 (1996)

For the EUTs that meet the above height restriction and for testing the following arrangement and stripline distances are recommended: the base of the stripline floor, and the top conductor when used in a room, longitudinal sides to walls absorbing material shall be walls of the screened room.

generally

under

150 MHz,

shall be placed on non-metaltic supports at least 0,8 m from the plate shall be no closer than 0,8 m from the ceiling; the stripline shall be spaced at least 0,8 m from its open or other objects. When used inside a screened room, RF, placed in the space between the sides of the stripline and the Figure 21 shows the basic arrangements; support, 100 mm high, in the centre of the stripline

the EUT is placed Gee figure 22); -

on a non-metallic

connecting leads to the EUT are inserted through holes in the base conductor plate of the stripline. The lengths of the leads inside the stripline shall be as short as possible and completely surrounded by ferrite rings to attenuate induced currents. The transfer impedance of coaxial cables used shall be not higher than 50 mR /m at 30 MHz; transformer used shall be connected to the EUT with leads

any balanced-to-unbalanced as short as possible; terminals of the EUT shielded resistors matching

not used during the measurement the nominal terminal impedance.

shall

be terminated

.tiith

If an EUT requires another apparatus in order to function properly that additional apparatus shall be considered as part of the measuring equipment and precautions shall be taken to ensure that the additional apparatus is not exposed to the unwanted signal. These precautions may include additional grounding of coaxial shields, shielding, and inserting of an RF filter on, or the application of ferrite rings to, the connecting cables. 3.3.1.1.1 Measurement circuit for receivers

Figure 23 shows the circuit used for measuring the immunity of sound and broadcast receivers. This is an example of the use of the stripline. The wanted test signal is supplied by generator G2 and is connected through a matching network to the input of the EUT. The unwanted signal is supplied by generator Gl and is connected through switch Sl, wideband amplifier Am, and low-pass filter F to a matching network MN of the stripline. The wideband amplifier Am may be required to provide the necessary field strength. The stripline is loaded with a terminating impedance. Care shall be taken with respect to the harmonic level of the RF output of the generator Gl and in particular the output of the wide-band amplifier Am. Harmonics may influence the measurement if they coincide with other responses of the EUT. For the case where the EUT is a TV receiver, such responses from a harmonic may be at the tuned channel or the i.f. channel of the EUT. In some cases provisions shall be made to reduce the harmonic level adequately by inserting a suitable low-pass filter F that can handle the input power from the Am. Specific checks of the suitability of these filters should be made. The audio output 3.3.1.2 (Under 3.3.1.2.1 (Under power levels shall be measured as specified in the product requirements.

Measurement consideration)

set-up using a closed TEM device

Measurement consideration)

circuit

37

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

3.3.2 3.3.2.1

Measurement Introduction

using absorber-lined

shielded

rooms

Absorber-lined shielded rooms are comprised of a standard six-sided shielded room which has some form of RF-absorbent material applied to the four walls and ceiling. Generally, the shielded room floor is untreated and acts as the reference ground plane for measurements. For field uniformity, the floor of the room may also require the addition of absorber material. The absorber material is generally comprised of carbon-impregnated foam. Other material includes ferrite tiles or combinations of ferrite tiles and carbon-impregnated foam. Both materials dissipate the undesirable energy impinging on its surface in the form of heat. For high power immunity levels, due concern for exceeding the heat dissipation rating of the absorbing material should be given. Special fire-retardant treatments are available for the material. 3.3.2.2 Size shielded rooms depends on several factors:

The size of absorber-lined a) test area needed

for the EUT system; the transmitting antenna and its required height(s)

b) volume necessary to accommodate above the ground plane; c) d) e) .size of the absorber separation separation between between material; the antenna

and EUT; from the closest required to give absorbing the material; accuracy and

the EUT and antenna

f) the dimensional sizes of the chamber uniformity of immunity field in the test area.

required

The size of the absorber-lining material needed is a function of the amount of suppression required of the undesired reflections. Such material which is generally pyramidal in shape for carbon foam is effective when the height of the material is a significant fraction of a wavelength. When this fraction is realized, the absorbing material can attenuate the reflected energy by 20 dB or more. The attenuation values increase considerably when the wavelength is less than that of the height of the pyramidal material. Conversely, the attenuation is degraded to a very low level for carbon-foam absorber material height much less than a wavelength. This latter condition is usually the case for most practical sized absorber material (1 m or less in height below 100 MHz). Use of such absorber-lined rooms is thus seriously restricted at these frequencies or lower. The response of absorber lined chambers under 100 MHz can be improved by a suitably chosen layer of ferrite tiles and carbon-foam material. In general, the layering consists of ferrites directly mounted on the shielded room walls and ceiling (and perhaps flooring), a layer of dielectric material, the carbon-foam material, and in case of floor applications, an inert fill between the pyramids and a mechanically strong, load-bearing, non-conductive "walk-on" material. The ferrite yields additional reflection reduction below 100 MHz (if properly selected). It should be noted that such ferrites are non-linear suppression materials. The impact on the absorber room reflective properties as a function of frequency should be characterized before using such material, especially above 1 GHz. 3.3.2.3 Transmitting antenna

There are many varieties of transmitting antennas that can be used to reproduce the desired immunity field inside an absorber-lined shielded room. The most critical parameters for such antennas are the ability to dissipate high powers (up to 1 kW) and to have a beamwidth sufficiently wide to illuminate the EUT test area. If polarization information is necessary, linearly polarized antennas should be used. Typical antennas include high power biconical, log periodic arrays and ridged rectangular horns. These antennas should stand well clear of any absorber material. At least a 1 m clearance is suggested. 38

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

3.3.2.4

Signal generation

No special signal generator requirements other than adequate suppression of signal generator and power amplifier harmonic and spurious outputs are needed when immunity tests are performed inside an absorber-lined shielded room. The signal sources should be capable of producing both CW and modulated RF carrier levels compatible with the input requirements of the power amplifier used to feed the transmit antenna. Since the EUT may respond to several frequencies over a large bandwidth, it is important that the combination of the signal generator and power amplifier adequately suppress harmonic and spurious outputs. The suppression should be 30 dB or more compared to the desired frequency output and to the immunity limit at these harmonics. A high-power low-pass filter which tracks the output signal may have to be inserted between the amplifier output and the transmitting antenna input. 3.3.2.5 Calibration of generated electric field of the field over the test sample

The purpose of field calibration is to ensure that the uniformity is sufficient to ensure the validity of the tests results.

This standard uses.the concept of a "uniform area" which is a hypothetical vertical plane of the field in which variations are acceptably small. This uniform area is 15 m x 15 m, unless the EUT and its leads can be fully illuminated within a smaller surface. In the test arrangement, the EUT will have its front face coincident with this plane. Because it is impossible to establish a uniform field close to an earth reference plane, the calibrated area is established at a height no closer than 0,8 m above the earth reference plane and where possible the EUT is located at this height. In order to establish the severity of the test for EUTs and wires which must be tested close to the earth reference plane or which have larger sides than 15 m x 1,5 m, the intensity of the field is also recorded at 0,4 m height and for the full width and height of the EUT, and reported in the test report. The antennas and cables which have been used to establish the calibrated field shall be used for the testing. Since the same antennas and cables are used, the cable losses and antenna factors of the field generating antennas are not relevant. The exact position of the generating antenna shall be recorded. Since even small displacements will significantly affect the field, the identical placement must be used for testing.
NOTE - The area of the uniform field should be established at 3 V/m by an unmodulated RF signal. Use of an unmodulated signal assures proper indication of any field intensity measuring device.

3.3.2.8

Performance

monitors

Based on the test plan, various sensors should be attached to the EUT to be able to record an analogue or digital signal, which will indicate performance degradation. These sensors and the leads extending outside the absorber-lined shielded room should not affect the performance or immunity of the EUT nor become uncalibrated by the applied immunity field or the presence of the absorber lining. In some cases, the leads from the EUT to the EUT support equipment outside the absorber-lined shielded room can be monitored for performance degradation. The degradation monitors in this case do not have to be immune to the radiated RF energy. They should, however, be immune to any conducted RF currents on the leads outside the room. If visual performance degradation is required, a suitable clear window panel on the shielded room wall or closed circuit television system can be used. The panel area sho&f be converted with an integral shielding material, i.e. wire mesh embedded in glass or conductive transparent material applied to the glass surface. The TV camera should be located embedded inside adjacent pyramidal tips of the carbon-foam material in a position within the room that does not intercept a major reflected EUT signal. Audio degradation can be measured via acoustic couplers or by monitoring the recovered audio modulation of the amplitude modulated RF immunity signal carrier. 39

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

3.3.2.7

immunity

measurement

set-up

3.3.2.7.1 The EUT is set in the centre of the test zone of the absorber-lined shielded room. A uniform test field for small products, that is, the EUT linear dimensions are less than a wavelength, is obtained when the antenna separation is greater than a wavelength away. The field becomes complex for separations closer than a wavelength. For larger products, i.e., where the EUT dimensions are greater than a wavelength, the antenna should be separated by a distance equal to the largest linear dimension of the EUT in metres squared divided by the wavelength of the immunity signal. If measurements are made at closer separations, the receive antenna will be in the complex near field zone. This complexity must be accounted for in such tests to assure repeatability and the prediction of the far field from such near field data.

3.3.2.7.2 Performance monitors are attached to the EUT as required in the test plan. Field strength sensors, if used, should be placed to monitor or provide field levelling only if the field that is being recreated was so measured at the actual product location when used by a customer. All connections should not be affected by the field or absorber material nor change the performance of the EUT.

3.3.2.7.3 The transmitting antenna should be mounted on an antenna positioner capable of varying the polarization, height and location of the antenna with respect to the ground plane and EUT. Narrow beamwidth antennas should be kept pointed at the EUT as they are raised and lowered.

3.3.2.7.4 Provisions should be made to monitor and record the various performance degradations specified in the test plan. It is strongly suggested where possible that subjective visual or aural monitoring by a test__operator be replaced with objective analogue or digital voltage or current EUT response. Thus electrical monitoring technique minimizes tester errors that result due to the tedious and lengthy test cycle nature of immunity measurements.

3.3.2.8

immunity test procedure

The test procedures for immunity measurements inside absorber-lined shielded rooms are generally the same as those inside a regular shielded room. Since the interaction of all the reflected signals normally present in an absorber-lined shielded room are much less, absorber-lined room measurements are more accurate and repeatable. In both cases, the test personnel and test instrumentation (amplifier, signal source, etc.) should be located outside the room. The general test procedure includes the following: field strength, polarization and modulation (if any is

a) establish required);

the calibrated

disturbance

b) configure and operate immunity response;

the EUT as typically

used and orient

the EUT to maximize

its

c) vary the transmitted signal limit at each degradation occurs or at the specified immunity d) scan the frequency range profile or to determine go/no-go

frequency to measure the level, whichever is lower; plan to complete the

level

at which

contained in the test compliance;

EUT

immunity

e) record the performance degradation and the function of frequency and the other test parameters. 40

associated

field

strength

levels

as

a

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

3.3.3 3.3.3.1

Measurements Introduction

using an open area test site (OATS)

Radiated immunity field strength levels are by their very nature significantly higher than radiated emission levels normally regulated by national governments. Typical test levels for much equipment are in excess of 1 V/m. For some EUT systems and large stand-alone electronic equipment, the need to illuminate the entire EUT requires high power, an efficient and wide beamwidth transmitting antenna, and a large test area. The power and antenna requirements are generally independent of the type of test facility used. in some cases the large EUT is not completely functional until all its parts are assembled on site at the user's premises or at a test site that is quite large. One such test site is the same open area test site used for radiated emission measurements. Theee sites are useful over the full frequency range and have particular applicability above 30 MHz subject to the severe restrictions stated in 3.3.3.3.

3.3.3.2

Measurement

site requirements

The open area immunity test site (OAITS) that meets the same requirements for the open area test site (OATS) specified in clause 16 of CISPR 16-1 are physically suitable for immunity tests. Other sites may be used as long as the electric field strength in the volume occupied by the EUT does not vary by more than the specified tolerance. This may require that the transmitting antenna be located on an antenna positioner to change the antenna height and in some cases, polarization, above the ground plane and antenna location. In changing the antenna height, narrow beam-width antennas must be kept pointed towards the EUT. Height change ,would be used to adjust the addition of the direct signal and then reflected from the ground screen so that a specified uniform field is found in the EUT volume as frequency varies. These requirements need only hold for the frequency range specified in the test plan. Absorber material may be required on the ground plane to meet the field uniformity requirement.

3.3.3.3

Interference

to radio services

The potential for causing interference to licensed radio-frequency services in or near the OAITS is generally high due to the very magnitude of the immunity signal. Extreme care should be taken to ensure that the generation of the test field does not adversely affect such RF services, especially in the various safety bands. Fields no higher than needed to measure to the specification limit or to record an EUT performance degradation below that limit should be generated. If generated, they should be applied for very brief time intervals. There may be certain frequency bands where the interference potential is significantly reduced. For example, ISM band frequencies are likely to be unaffected by such measurements. In some administrations it may be required to secure an experimental radio license from the national authority. The license would detail specific frequencies, time of operation, and length of operation for the immunity RF field strength transmission. Generally, experimental licenses for frequencies used for public radio emergency services, commercial broadcast, government channels, standard time and frequency broadcasts, etc. are not granted. Use of ISM frequencies and other industrial use frequencies are generally more likely to be approved. Note, however, that these approval frequencies may be so spaced apart that the true immunity response will not be completely described.

41

IS 10052 ( Part 2 1: 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 199k )

Under far-fielded

conditions

the ambient

interfacing

field E is given by:

&*xJ!2r'2=,p G 1'2
d where U d G is the input voltage is the distance be located; at the tuned antenna radiating antenna with resistance where R; radio receptor may dR[I

between

and the location

a sensitive

is the gain of the antenna

with respect

to a half-wave

dipole.

The factor 2, with an accuracy of 1,5 dB, implies the effect of the total reflection at the ground plane if the height of the transmit antenna is adjusted for maximum field strength. In the case of a vertically polarized transmit antenna, the effective field resulting from the direct and from the reflected field may not be a vertically linearly polarized field.

3.3.3.4 3.3.3.4.1

Measurement Genera/

procedures

Basically, the immunity measurement procedures are the same as those for measurements made using any enclosed test site such as a TEM cell or shielded (absorber-lined or not) room. In the case of the TEM cell the signal is applied between the centre conductor and the outer shell; in the OAITS and other more common shielded enclosures, the immunity signal is fed to a transmitting antenna.

3.3.3.5 3.3.3.5.1

Measurement General

set-up

using the open area test site

The power required to establish an immunity field strength is not small. Hence the closer the EUT is to the antenna, the less power required. Most OAITS measurements are performed using EUT/antenna separation distances less than 3 m. For large EUTs, this distance must be increased so that the antenna can illuminate the entire EUT. Power amplifier expense and avaitability over the frequency range up to 1000 MHz usually limit large system testing. Component or partial EUT testing is substituted in some cases and judgements made as to the overall large system EUT immunity.

42

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 (1996)

Section
4.1 Automated measurements
consideration)

4: Automated

measurements

(Under

Section
5.1

5: Factors

influencing

measurement

accuracy

Factors influencing
errors

measurement accuracy

Measurement -

can occur due to the following: ratio; effects of the measuring receiver;

mismatch insufficient overload calibration presence

(see 2.2.1); signal-to-noise errors; of ancillary equipment; and intermodulation accuracy of extraneous

meter and display

interference.

During measurements in the presence of extraneous interference, ranges of higher sensitivity, which do not comply with the requirements of CEPR 16-l of this standard with respect to the standing'wave ratio and overloading characteristics and which should be marked accordingly, shall not be used. If measurements have to be carried out in these ranges, besides checking for overloading, the extraneous interference voltage superimposed by the noise of the measurement receiver shall be measured when the test object is switched off. During measurements at the place of installation, of the radio interference measurement receiver interferences and the signal to be measured. 51.1 Accuracy of measurements it is recommended to monitor the AF signal in order to distinguish between extraneous

The error for sinusoidal voltages at the receiver input shall not exceed * 2 dB. Additional errors are introduced by ancillary equipment. (Methods to analyze overall measurement uncertainty are under consideration.) 51.2 Avoidance of extraneous signals and effects

a) Maximum permitted level of extraneous signals (see 2.3.1). The measurement error due to extraneous interference shall be less than 1 dB. This requirement has been fulfilled if extraneous interference, measured when the test object is switched off, is 20 dB below the radio interference voltage to be measured, or is not measurable. b) Filtering and shielding measures. In order to avoid ference voltage measurements can be carried out in mains decoupling filter (if necessary with an isolating extraneous interference (also noise of the measurement required signal-to-noise ratio of 20 dB, the extent of shall be recorded in the testing report. extraneous interference, radio interscreened rooms and with additional transformer) (see also 2.3.1). If the received) cannot be reduced to the the extraneous interference voltages

c) Overload and intermodulation check. In the case of radio interference caused by pulses, measurement errors may arise due to overload of the measurement device. Overloading is made evident by an indication of the measured variable whjch is lower than the true value. Overloading is insignificant if the display drops by less than 1 dB when the input voltage attenuator is reduced by a minimum of 10 dB and if the complete i.f. gain is reduced by the same amount after the i.f. amplifier. If the reading drops by more than 1 dB, intermodulation has occurred or there was an insufficient signal-to-noise ratio. This check is not relevant overload protection. for interference measurement receivers with automatically controlled

43

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

I
6 `\

EUT Non-conductive table

60 cm to ground plane

I

b

7

I

40 cm

Conducting groundplane extends at least 0,5 m beyond EUT system footprint

1 Interconnecting forming a bundle table.

cables that hang closer than 40 cm to the ground plane shall 30 cm to 40 rm long, hanging approximately in the middle between

be folded back and forth the ground plane and the may be are

2 l/O cables that are connected to a peripheral shall be bundled in the centre. The end of the cable terminated if required using correct terminating impedance. The total length shall not exceed 1 m. 3 EUT is connected to AMN No 1. Measurement terminals of AMNs must be terminated placed directly on horizontal ground plane and 40 cm from vertical ground plane. 3.1 3.2 4 Cables the host. 5 6 Non-EUT All associated Protective equipment is connected wires to AMN No 2. from associated mouses, equipment are connected as close earth ground (green/yellow)

with 50 R. AMNs

to AMN No 3. as possible to

of hand-operated components

devices, being tested. peripherals,

such as keyboards,

etc. shall be placed

Rear of EUT, including

shall all be aligned from a vertical

and flush with rear of table top. conducting plane that is bonded to the floor ground

7 Rear of table plane.

top shall be 40 cm removed

Figure 1 - Test configuration: table-top equipment for conducted disturbance measurements on power mains (see 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.4.2)

44

IS 10052 (Part2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 (1996)
2
c_

1

6

`\

_

,P

I

I-

Metallic wall 2 m x 2 m EUT Excess power cord (3 cm x 40 cm) (folded back and forth) `V" mains network Coaxial cable Measuring receiver Reference ground connection Measuring receiver input Power to EUT

Figure 2 - Optional test configuration (see 2.4.4.1)

for an EUT with only a power cord attached

(Zazyp*Z

pue

1'vtfz

aas)

vmud!nba

Bu!pueqs-JooIl :uo!lemBguoo
puooes

wal-

8 aJn6!j

`N~V ~lelS!peUJUl! `@.ISl

eul UJOJ) palemod s! $uetud!nbe ~8~10 11~ .eueld punoJ6 eq) uieeueq 041 `NHV WO 01 peW0UUO3 eq lleqs selqleo S! ln3 pu8 ln3 eul eql 6 i: 1

JO 10 dot UO peoald eq U83 NwV punoJ6 e41 tuo~j (WA 0) peuel~oqs el8ydoJdd8

.eueld

~1 01 dn) pelelnsu!

JO 8JWJ00 eql u! pelpunq

eq llaI$J Se(qP:,

SSeox3

eueldpunOJ6

(WIOZ!JOLj

01 p9pUOG

( 966C ) Z-91 kIdSI 6665 : ( Z Wd ) ZSOOCSI

IS 10052 ( Part 2 \ : 1999 CEPR 16:2 ( 199ii)

Rear of EUT to flush with rear of table top

Bonded to gmundplane

/
/

40 cm to vertical gmundplane

' Bonded to gmundplane,

1 The interconnecting cables which hang closer than 40 cm to the ground plane shall be folded back and forth forming a bundle 30 cm - 40 cm long, hanging approximately in the middle between the ground plane and the table. 2 Excess power cords shall be bundled in the centre or shortened to appropriate length. to the vertical reference 3 The EUT is connected to one AMN. The AMN may alternatively plane. All other equipment is powered from the second AMN. 4 be connected

The EUT and the cables shall be insulated (up to 12 mm) from the ground plane.

5 The l/O cable to the floor standing unit drapes to the ground plane and the excess is bundled. Cables not reaching the ground plan8 ar8 dropped to the height of the connector or 40 cm, whichever is lower.

Figure 4 - Test configuration: floor-standing (see 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.5.2.2)

and table-top equipment

47

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Q

$ - _ .~~
Filter

d

N

__I__

_

Filter

Filter

Filter

See note 5

AN
T

AN --

.

AN I_ \1 i \ ,> < 50n loads 500 loads

AN i `_ Seenote

--!' I50R loads :i J 80 cm

CISPR measuring

receiver

See note 3

`I
30 cm to 40 cm

k
See note 1

I

Interface cable(s) to interconnected units - see note 8

Equipment under test

1 The length coiled.

of the EUT power

cord in excess

of 80 cm shall be folded

into a serpentine-like

bundle

and not It shall

2 Connection of the AN to the ground plane shall provide a low impedance path at high frequencies. be made using a solid flat metal conductor that has a length-to-width ratio of not more than 5 to 1.

3
4 5 8

The CISPR measuring of the coaxial cable. Dotted Optional lines represent filter hook-up;

the set shall only be grounded the test set-up replace

to the reference power.

ground

plane

via the outer conductor

for the three-phase if not used.

with shorts to

Interconnected

units may be attached

a single AN via a power junction

strip or box.

7 A table mounted or handheld EUT must be 40 cm from any grounded conducting surface of at least 2 m square and at least 80 cm from any other conductive objects, including devices that are part of the system or instrumentation.

Figure 5 - Schematic of conducted disturbance voltage test configuration (see 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.5.2.2)

48

IS 10052 (Part2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 (1996)

Figure 6a - Schematic

for measurement

and power circuit

'k
II

Figure 6b - Equivalent 1 2 3 4 5 A
80 41 Pll Cl c2 cK D, L2 p2

voltage

source snd measurement

circuit

K L M
RN 4 =1w 4,. ho* =2, U2" u20

Equipment under test (EUT) Power cord `V'power mains network Decoupling circuit (filter) Metallic wall Power input Reference earth connection Power cord connection (100 cm) EUT plug to mains network Stray capacitance within EUT to metallic parts Stray capacitance of EUT to metallic wall (earth) Coupling capacitors within mains network Inductor (choke) for safety ground wire Conductive structural parts of the EUT Inductance of connecting wires Fictitious mid-point of the internal common mode voltages Simulation resistances (50 R or 150 n) Symmetric internal resistance of EUT Common mode resistance of the EUT Internal common mode voltage of the EUT External measurable common mode voltage

Figure 6 - Equivalent circuit for measurement of common mode disturbance voltage for Class I (grounded) EUT (see 2.4.4.2.1) 49

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 (1996)

Figure 7r - Schematic for power and measurement circuit

% D

"2( L
P2 c, !!

"2"

Figure 7b - Equivalent RFI source and measurement circuit

NOTE - Refer to figure 6 for symbols. Figure 7 - Equivalent circuit for measurement of common mode disturbance voltage for Class II (grounded) EUT (see 2.4.4.2.2)

50

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996)

60 mm i

M

220pF 20%

f

510c2+ 10%

p
Metal foil wrapped around case m front of Iron core of motor stator or gearbox

Figure 6 - RC element for artificial hand (see 2.4.4.2.3)

Figure 9 - Portable electric drill with artificial hand (see 2.4.4.2.3)

Metal foil wrapped round handle

Metal body

Metal foil wrapped round handle

Insulated handle Guard

A and 6

: handles of insulating material

Figure 10 - Portable electric saw with artificial hand (see 2.4.4.2.3)

51

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CtSPR 16-2 (1996)

a

/
I
4,7 pF -

-----Y
-I200 n 1 2

P 1 2 *200 n

Ll

L
1 2

A

----? 1

2

i

4,7 pF -

hi-----

T

------d

1 2 A 0 M P

Beginning of winding End of winding Terminals for telecommunication conductors Terminal for ground (metal wall) Terminal for measuring receiver (50 W) Connection to EUT Ll Differential mode inductance, 5 mH to 40 mH for each winding L2 Decoupling inductance (current compensated)

Figure 11 - Schematic diagram for simulation of telecommunication lines (T-l network or telecom impedance simulation network) (see 2.4.4.3.2)

52

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 (1995)

MaIns tefmlnals Artlfwxal ma,nsV-network 5OQEOpH Load terrmnals

Mains

voltage -

Coaxial cable To remote cornponct~t

1
Mcasurlng recewer

I

Switch

positions: measurements connections during load measurements

1 For mains 3 and 4
NOTES 1 2

2 For load measurements Successive

The earth of the measuring receiver shall be connected to the artificial mains V-network. Tfie length of the coaxial cable from the probe shall not exceed 2 m. 1 shall be terminated shall be

3 When the switch is in position 2, the output of the artificial mains V-network at terminal by an impedance equivalent to that of the CISPR.

4 Where a two-terminal regulating control is inserted in one lead ortty of the supply, measurements made by connecting the second suppty lead as indicated in figure 12a.

Figure 12 - Measuring example for voltage probes (see 2.4.4.4.1)

Load termtnals

Regulating control

r z

l

Mains terminals

Load

To remote component

Figure 12a - Measurement arrangement for two-terminal

regulating controls

53

IS 10052(Prrt2):1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996)

1

Absorbing clamp

Absorber (ferriterings)

/
Current transformer

/
Absorber (ferriterings)

cordtoobtainmsx. readingon receiver

I/

Mains

Addiional absorber used to avoid
interferencefmm mains (a second absorbingdamp may be used here)

Specimen interference source

Figure 13 - Test configuration

for absorbing clamp

IS 10952 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Receiving antenna

Supporting table

Groundplane

Figure 14 - Concept of electric field strength measurements made on an open area test site with the direct and reflective rays arriving at the receiving antenna (see 2.6.2.2)

55

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996)

Device under test Dipole A

Geometrtc centre h h Measuring apparatus . 7 ,,,,,,,,/ ,,,,5 ///// //J///////,L///// /,/,,,,,,

a) Measurement

d L Substltuhon dipole B 1 I h 1 A Dipole A

Srgnal generator 1

,

-

b) Calibration

Figure 15 - Method of measurement - Substitution

method (see 2.6.3.1 and 2.6.3.3)

56

IS 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

.I

Diameter:2 m (3x)
lc

Coaxial switch

Measuring equipment LJ / / /

,

F = ferrite absorber

Figure 16 - Concept of magnetic field induced current measurements the loop antenna system (see 2.6.5)

made with

57

IS 10052 (Part2): CISPR 16-2 (1996)

1999

Wanted signal generator (if applicable)

Direct coupling or radiation path

EUT

*

Assessment of EUT performance

!---

Unwanted signal generator

r
concept of immunity

Monitoring path (visual or electrical)

Figure

17 - Fundamental

measurement

(see 3.1 .l)

58

-

Coaxral cable, twisted parr or multr-lead cable (screened or unscreened)

-

Other cables for mains, loud-speakers, etc each terminated with a coupling unit (150 C)

L Coupling Wanted signal generator or auxiliary equipment unit

Equipment

under

test Coupling unit

L
,
W

\ \

cn

I

1 =+=

1Ocm ,,,/,,,,,/,,/,,,,,,,,,,,, /

CD

7////////////P"

I
////,~////////////////

Interference RF signal generator Rrnt + Rl 1500 current

L = isolating inductance C 1, C2 = capacitors with low RF impedance (if ac.dc conditions allow this, capacitors should be replaced by a direct connection)

I =interfererice

Figure 18 - General principle of the current-injection method (see 3.2)

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

2

7

Unwanted signal generator Gl Wanted signal generator G2 Load resistor RL Low-pass filter (see annex 6) Audio-frequency voltmeter (with weighting according to CCIR Recommendation 466) Coupling network Attenuators Matching and/or balancing network Equipment under test (EUT)

network

Figure 19 -

Measuring set-up for input immunity measurement broadcast receivers (see 3.2.3.1)

of sound

60

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

6 7 6 .g 10

Unwanted signal generators Gl Wanted signal generators G2 Load resistor RL Low-pass filter Audio-frequency voltmeter (with weighting aetwork according to CCIR Recommendation 466) Coupling networks Attenuators Matching and/or balaacing network Equipment under test (EUT) Low-pass filter'

* To prevent influence of the measuring results by harmonics of the unwanted signal frequency

Figure 20 - Measuring set-up for input immunity measurement of television broadcast receivers (see 3.2.3.2)

61

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Screened room walls

b

E
3 `4 p 3 5. I M f 6

-_ccLc

0,15 m

11 I

7

-

-.

I10
.-.

3m.p.

-.

`A . 1 I t// 8

E C9 c'

I I 1

i

g---r

1 tc 11: absorbing panels with dimensions of approximately

0.8 m x 0,4 m

Figure 21 -

Example of the arrangement of an open stripline TEM device in combination with absorbing panels inside a screened room with dimensions 3 m x 3,5 m (see 3.3.1.1)

62

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Receiver under test

Ferrite toroids

Standard

mput wanted

signal

Figure

22 - Measuring set-up for the immunity of broadcast receivers to ambient fields in the frequency range of 0,15 MHz - 150 MHz (see 3.3.1.1)

63

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Standard RF signal to receiver G2 c

--I-l

I
Gl

Sl . .

Am

F

device viaMN D
-

Inbferbg

signal to TEM

Figure 23 - Measuring circuit for the immunity of sound broadcast reiceivers to ambient fiekls (see 3.3.1 .l .l)

64

Is 10052 (Part2
CISPR

j

: 1999

16-2 ( 1996)

Annex A (informative) Guidelines to connection of electrical equipment the artificial mains network
(see 2.2) A.1 Introduction

to

This annex is intended to give general guidance in the techniques which can be used to assess the disturbance generated by certain electrical equipment in the frequency range 9 kHz to 30 MHz. It provides information on methods of connection of such equipment to the artificial mains network for the measurement of terminal voltages. A table is provided giving a general presentation of various cases encountered in practice enabling, for such cases, a suitable technique to be selected. The cases described below in A.2 identify propagation mains of the EUT disturbance leads (designated with either: El and I1 in the

a) by conduction along the connected equivalent circuit diagrams), or b) by radiation and coupled equivalent circuit diagrams).

to the connected

mains

lead (designated

with E2 and 12 in the

Whether conducted or radiated disturbance dominates is partly dependent on the arrangement of the EUT with respect to the ground reference (including the type of connection to the reference ground) and of the type of connection from the EUT to the artificial mains network (shielded or non-shielded cable). A.2 A.2.1 Classification Well-shielded of the possible but poorly cases EUT (figures A. 1 and A.2)

filtered

In this case, the conducted disturbance component represented by the current It dominates. The disturbance current /A is fed from the EUT to the artificial mains network Z Consequently, the voltage U1 increases when capacitance C1 between the EUT shield and the ground reference increases (see figure A.l). The voltage U1 is maximized (Ul = Z/j = El) when the impedance of the current return path is minimized by short-circuiting Cl either directly or by using shielded cables to supply the EUT (see figure A.2). (Also, see the discussion in clause A.3.) A.2.2 Well-filtered but incompletely shielded EUT (figures A.3 and A.4)

In this case, the disturbance current fed to the mains is reduced practically to zero, and the voltage across the artificial mains network may be dominated by undesirable radiation either from gaps in an incomplete shield or from a protruding conductor acting as an antenna. Such leakage can be represented schematically by an external capacitor C;! connected between an internal disturbance source of e.m.f. E2 and ground reference. This capacitance C2 passes a current 12. Part of the current 12 which flows through C;! to the ground reference returns via Cl and a part of /2 returns via the artificial mains network. If the supply leads are unshielded (figure A.3) and the impedance of Cl is large compared with the artificial mains impedance Z (ZC, o <c l), then 1'2 is nearly equal to /2 and the voltage U2 is nearly equal to /2Z(U2 = Z/z).

If Cl is increased, Z is shunted and lJ2 will decrease. At the limit, when Cl is short-circuited by supplying the EUT through shielded cables (figure A.4), so that no part of 12 flows through Z, then U2 will be zero. 65

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

A.2.3

Practical

general

case the shielded nor the filtering are perfect; and they are additive. In such conditions, the two preceding the three following

Most usually in practices, neither effects then occur simultaneously cases may be encountered. A.2.3.1 Supply through shielded

conductors

(figure A.5) flows artificial in a circuit mains closed network through and ground and

The current

II caused

by leakage

due to radiation of the

the external surfaces of the screening conductors; it has no effect on Z The voltage U1, which may be measured

of the

supply

across

Z, is solely

due to the current

I1 injected

into

the supply conductors artificial mains network

and returning through the internal surfaces of the screening and these conductors. The voltage U1 is then maximum: U1 =

of the

Zl, = El
conductors (figure A.6)

A.2.3.2

Supply

through

unshielded

but filtered

If a highly efficient low-pass fitter is connected to the input of the EUT, with its screening directly connected to the screening of the EUT, the current /I fed by source El to the mains conductors will be stopped by the filter. As in the case represented . . and the conductors by the radiation. A.2.3.3 Supply in figure A.6, the current 12 due to the radiation across Zis returns through Z

(if ZC1 6.1cc 1); the voltage

U, measured

then produced

solely

through

ordinary

conductors

(figure A. 7)

Should the filter in figure A.6 be removed, the current I1 from source El reappears on the conductors (figure A.7). In comparison to figure A.5 (with the maximum possible value of 11 for the supply of a non-filtered EUT through shielded conductors) the value of /I in figure A.7 (supply reduced referred of a non-filtered to a minimum to its minimum EUT through value value ordinary i.e. unshielded conductors) is, if ZC1 w <c 1, in the ratio of /I (EUT unshielded) / /I (EUT shielded) = ZC1 w (figure A.2). The current 12 is the same as in the previous cases, it passes also through Zand the mains conductors.

but as the conductors

are not shielded,

The voltage U across the artificial mains network results then from the superposition of currents 11 and 12. When electromotive forces El and E2 are themselves produced by a common internal source, these currents are synchronous and the voltage Udepends not only on their values but also on their phases. For certain frequencies, it may occur that currents It and 12 are in opposition and if they are also of approximately the same magnitude, the voltage U may become very small even if /I and 12 are individually quite large. Moreover, if the frequency of the source varies, the phase opposition may not remain constant and voltage U may show rapid and considerable variations. A.3

Method of grounding
to be made through

In the foregoing, the connection to ground of the EUT was assumed connection of shielding of the supply conductors to the ground reference.

This is the only correct solution in order to obtain a grounding allowing a clear distinction between the two kinds of currents I1 and Q, as indicated above. It may be applied, without exception to all frequencies. 66

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

For frequencies below 1,6 MHz practically the same through a straight lead of small length (1 m maximum), not more than 10 cm distant from it.

result may be achieved by grounding running parallel to the mains lead and

For frequencies above a few MHz, this simplified solution should only be used with care, It is then strongly recommended that screened especially at the higher frequencies. conductors be used in all cases. At the higher frequencies, it may be necessary to take into account the characteristic impedance of the conductor. A.4 A.4.1 A.4.1.1 Conditions General General rules of grounding

It appears from the considerations discussed above that the behaviour of the measuring circuit for the voltage across the artificial mains network and, hence, the result of these measurements, is largely dependent on how the frame of the EUT being tested is connected to ground. It is therefore essential to specify these conditions closely. Essentially, the principal effect of grounding possibly to cause opposing variations of their (which measures voltage U across 2). in the body of the EUT to ground, which short-circuits u1 = Z/l through = El, are maximum; this short circuit remarks, on the contrary, and the corresponding general always is to separate the two currents It and 12 and respective actions on the measuring apparatus limiting case of a direct connection from the C,, the values of current I1 and thus of voltage the current voltage 12 due to radiation to zero. passes entirely U2 is reduced

From these A.4 1.1.1

the following should

rules are drawn. be used when testing: yields the

Direct grounding

a) a non-radiating EUT (e.g. a motor) as, in such a case, the measurement maximum value of the disturbance voltage which may be met in practice; b) a poorly filtered wished to measure conductors: radiating EUT when, solely the disturbance the efficiency

without troubling to measure the radiation, it is voltage due to direct injection into the supply (for instance, for the time base circuits

1) either for assessing of television receivers);

of the filter

2) or for assessing, in the laboratory, the actual disturbance produced by an apparatus whose radiation in normal operation will be suppressed by shielding (e.g. a transformer for the ignition system of fuel for boilers). A.4.1.2 Direct grounding

Direct grounding should not be used when testing item 1) of A.4.1.1 .l either for a very wellfiltered EUT which generates considerable radiation (for example, ozonizer, medical apparatus with damped oscillations, arc welders, etc.). In all these cases, the voltage across the artificial mains network becomes very small with direct grounding, while without such grounding the voltage may be quite large or unsteady. The measurement may then be meaningless and it may become necessary to make the grounding through a specified impedance in order to simulate the actual impedance of the safety ground (protective earth) conductor, e.g. by a protective ground choke which additionally provides some RF isolation from the "polluted" and therefore "poor" protective earth ground (see lower part of table A.2).
NOTE - The impedance of such an `electrical long' conductor is in case of an EUT of safety protection Class I normally equal to the mains simulation impedance specified as termination for the mains terminals of the EUT provided by the artificial mains network (constituted by the network of 50 PH + 1 Q which, due to thermal problems in case of high current loads, may be reduced to a network of 50 pH).

67

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

A.4.1.3

No grounding the artificial mains network results from the addition can only be obtained when one of these currents:

Without any grounding, the voltage across of both currents /I and /2. A measurement

is reduced to zero, either with a very well-screened shielded but poorly filtered EUT (e.g. a motor} or with a very well-filtered but radiating EUT (e.g. a television receiver, an ozonizer, etc.).
NOTE - If in case of an EUT of safety protection Class I for the purpose of analysis of 12. for the reduction of I1 the impedance according to the note under A.4.1.2 is not sufficient, a high impedance RF choke (1,6 mH) may be inserted into the ground conductor path.

The measurement usually yields only the value of the total disturbance, without allowing any discrimination, the results being only valid for the conditions used during the test. Such conditions should then be very well defined, namely the values of the capacitance to the ground plane of the various elements of the EUT (for instance, the capacitance of the transmission line from the aerial in the case of a television receiver). Moreover, a single measurement for one arbitrary frequency has no significance if, for this frequency, currents I1 and 12 are in opposition. at a number A.4.2 of frequencies. of typical testing conditions As a matter of principle, then, it is necessary to make measurements

Classification

Tables A.1 and A.2 summarize the various testing conditions and the types of EUTs for which they are suitable. The tables also give the meaning of the measurement, that is, the physical quantity which corresponds to the voltage U measured across the artificial mains network Z and also the precautions to be taken when making the measurement.

68

1s 10052 ( Part 2) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Table A.1 (see A.4.2)

Types of apparatus Method of connection Examples Earthing Motors Electrodomestic Radiation Filtering Weak ModeratE Actual interference (reduced) solely due to injected current Cl The interference depends on CI Essential characteristics

- Quantity measured

Details of the measurement

Arc-welding gtrong Television receivers (time-base) Moderate

the superposition of the two preceding effects (4 and IS) These two effects (I, and /S) may be in phase opposition at certarn frequencies Measurement should be repeated, the frequency being varied

With

Very good

Actual interference produced with an earth connection of usual length

The position of the appliance with regard to earth should be specified in order that RC,- cl

Table A.2 (see A.4.2)
Types of apparatus Details of the measurement

Method of connection

Quantity measured

Examples

when it is desired to measure only the interference caused by current feed to mains

Ozonizers Arc-welding Transfoner for the ignition systern of oil burners Part of a screened assembly separately tested Television receivers Highfrequency industrial apparatus The position of the appliance with regard to earth should be specified in order that zc,<l

Actual interference caused by an appliance which, in normal use, must be carefully screened

Screened filter

_

Poorly filtered appliances when it is desired to measure only the interference // caused by radiation

Check on the efficacy of the screening

7/////////////////f

Actual interference caused by an appliance which, in normal use, must be provided with a good filter

Fluorescent lighting

69

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

EUT

Artificial mains network

Screened cable

Figure

A.1 (see A.2.1)

EUT

Artificial mains network

I `2 I
1

4
5) I I

n
6
Screened cable

`I

n

/

=L, T Cl I I /////////////////////////////////////

_.

Figure

A.2 (see A.2.1)

IS 10052(Part2):1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

EUT J

Filter Artificial mains network 1; t

Figure A.3 (see A.2.2)

Figure A.4 (see A.2.2)

EUT I 1 4 _

AMi&l

mains network

I

I

Figure A.5 (see A.2.3.1)
EUT Ordinary cable

Artificial mains network

Y---

4

I -I //////////////////////////////,,j,,,,/

.=+

G

=G= c,

Figure A.6 (see A.2.3.2)
EUT Ordinary cable `I )

Artificial mains network

L

12 I =+G I
7,/j ,,,,,

-5

1 G+= t,1
;, ,,,, //////////////////////

6

7

Figure A.7 (see A.2.3.3)

71

IS 10052(Part2):1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996)

Annex f3
(informative)

Use of spectrum analyzers and scanning receivers
(see clause i3.1 Introduction and scanning measuring sets, the following characteristics 2.3)

When using spectrum analyzers should be taken into account: B. 2 Overload

Most spectrum analyzers have no RF preselection in the frequency range up to 2000 MHz; that is, the input signal is directly fed to a broadband mixer. To avoid overload, to prevent damage and to operate a spectrum analyzer linearly, the signal amplitude at the mixer should typically be less than 150 mV peak. RF attenuation or additional RF preselection may be required to reduce the input signal to this level. 6.3 Linearity test

Linearity can be measured by measuring the level of the specific signal under investigation and repeating this measurement after an X dB attenuator has been inserted at the input of the measuring set or, if used, the preamplifier (X 1 6 dt3). The new reading of the measuring set display should differ by X df3 not more than f 0,5 dB from the first reading when the measuring system is linear. B. 4 Selectivity specified in narrowband

The spectrum analyzer and scanning measuring set must have the bandwidth ClSPR 16-l to correctly measure broadband and impulsive signals and disturbance with several spectrum components within the standardized bandwidth. B. 5 Normal response t0 pulse8

The response of a spectrum analyzer and scanning measuring set with quasi-peak detection can be verified with the calibration test pulses specified in CEPR 16-1. The large peak voltage of the calibration test pulses typically requires an insertion of RF attenuation of 40 dB or more This decreases the sensitivity and makes the to satisfy the linearity requirements. measurement of low repetition rate and isolated calibration test pulses impossible for bands B, C and D. If a preselecting filter is used ahead of the measuring set, then the RF attenuation can be decreased. The filter limits the spectrum width of the calibration test pulse as seen by the mixer. B. 6 Peak detection

The normal (peak) detection mode of spectrum analyzers provides a display indication which, in principal, is never less than the quasi-peak indication. It is convenient to measure emissions using peak-detection because it allows faster frequency scans than quasi-peak detection. Then those signals which are close to the emission limits need to be remeasured using quasipeak detection to record quasi-peak amplitudes. B. 7 Frequency 8C8n rate

The scan rate of a spectrum analyzer or a scanning measuring set should be adjusted for the CEPR frequency band and the detection mode used. The minimum sweep time/frequency or the fastest scan rate is listed in the following table:

72

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CISPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

I
I

Band A B C&D

I

Peak-detection 100 ms/kHz 100 ms/ MHz

I

Quasi-peak detection 20 s/kHz 200 s/ MHz

I

I

1 ms/MHz

I

20 s/MHz

I

For a spectrum analyzer or scanning measuring set used in a fixed tuned non-scanning mode, the display sweep time may be adjusted independently of .the detection mode and according to the needs for observing the behaviour of the emission. If the level of disturbance is not steady, the reading on the measuring set must be observed for at least 15 s to determine the `maximum (see 2.3.4.1). 9.8 Signal interception

The spectrum of intermittent emissions may be captured with peak-detection and digital display storage if provided. Multiple, fast frequency scans reduce the time to intercept an emission compared to a single, slow frequency scan. The starting time of the scans should be varied to avoid any synchronism with the emission and thereby hiding it. The total observation time for a given frequency range must be longer than the time between the emissions. Depending upon the kind of disturbance being measured, the peak detection measurements can replace all or part of the measurements needed using quasi-peak detection. Re-tests using a quasi-peak detector should then be made at frequencies where emission maxima have been found. ., 9.9 Average detection

Average detection with a spectrum analyzer is obtained by reducing the video bandwidth until no further smoothing of the displayed signal is observed. The sweep time must be increased with reductions in video bandwidth to maintain amplitude calibration. For such measurements, the measuring set shall be used in the linear mode of the detector. After linear detection is made, the signal may be processed logarithmically for display, in which case the value is corrected even though it is the logarithm of the linearly detected signal. A logarithmic amplitude display mode may be used, for example, to distinguish more easily between narrowband and broadband signals. The displayed value is the average of the logarithmically distorted IF signal envelope. It results in a larger attenuation of broadband signals than in the linear detection mode without affecting the display of narrowband signals. Video filtering in log-mode is, therefore, especially useful for estimating the narrowband component in a spectrum containing both. 9.10 Sensitivity

Sensitivity can be increased with low noise RF pre-amplification ahead of the spectrum analyzer. The input signal level to the amplifier should be adjustable with an attenuator to test the linearity of the overall system for the signal under examination. The sensitivity to extremely broadband emissions which require large RF attenuation for system linearity is increased with RF pre-selecting filters ahead of the spectrum analyzer. The filters reduce the peak amplitude of the broadband emissions and less RF attenuation can be used. Such filters may also be necessary to reject or attenuate strong out-of-band signals and the intermodulation products they cause. If such filters are used they must be calibrated with broadband signals. 9.11 Amplitude accuracy

The amplitude accuracy of a spectrum analyzer or a scanning measuring set may be verified by using a signal generator, power meter and precision attenuator. The characteristics of these instruments, cable and mismatch losses have to be analyzed to estimate the errors in the verification test. 73

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) 3999 CEPR 16-2 ( 1996 )

Annex C (informative) Historical background to the method of measurement of the interference power produced by electrical household and similar appliances in the VHF range
(see clause 3.1)

C.l

Historical

detail

Although measurement of field strength is, in theory, the most suitable for determining the interference capability of all types of appliances at frequencies higher than 30 MHz, the methods involved together with the precautions to be taken prove troublesome in application. Consequently, engineers have for a long time used the terminal voltage method, while waiting for something more satisfactory. Several methods have been envisaged to replace those involving field measurements in open air by radiation measurements in the laboratory. Among the most interesting are the stop filter method and the ground current method. These are substitution methods, in which a slotted coaxial filter having negligible losses is used to adjust the radiating length of the supply lead of the source of interference in such a way as to obtain maximum radiation. In these methods, the interference capability of an appliance is defined as the power which a standard generator must inject into a simple aerial of known characteristics in order to obtain the same effect on an aerial connected to the measuring apparatus as that produced by the source of interference. Several more convenient methods have been developed from those just mentioned. The measurement of terminal voltages has been considerably improved by replacing the artificial mains V-network by a Y-network, so as to obtain the true common mode voltage produced by the source of interference. A similar method using a reactive slotted coaxial filter was developed. A method for measuring the power which the source of interference may inject into the supply lead has also been proposed. This method is based on the measurement of the current at the input of an absorbent coaxial device. The advantage of the latter over the terminal voltage method is that it is not necessary to disconnect the supply lead. It indicates values of the interference power corresponding closely with those obtained by the methods in which the radiation of the supply lead is measured in the resonant condition. Although, through their ease of operation, the terminal voltage and the absorbing coaxial device methods were preferable to the stop filter and the ground current methods, it remained to be shown that the results which they gave conformed with those obtained in practice. Statistical measurements on the disturbance sources have shown that the interference measured by the stop filter method agrees more closely than that measured by the terminal voltage method, with the effect of the same sources measured at the input of receivers located in the same building. Measurements made by the absorbent device method gave results intermediate between the two previous ones. Other methods have been compared.

C.2

Development

of the method

In the stop filter method, a value directly related to the current at the centre of a resonant halfwave aerial is measured. The most important thing is not the radiating system but the power that the source of interference is capable of transmitting to the radiating system. The same principle applies to the ground current method. If it were possible to measure this power without measuring a field, all the disadvantages arising from the influence of surrounding objects on the propagation between the radiating elements and the receiving aerial would be removed. The attempt to replace the coaxial stop filter by a ferrite tube showed that a large 74

IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 CEPR 16-2 (1996)

part of the energy produced by the source of interference was dissipated in this tube. It was then thought that the measurement of the current at the input of the ferrite tube might replace, at least in part, the measurement of the field by the stop filter method. This gave rise to the devices described in annex K of CISPR 16-l. The following question was then studied: how do the different methods of measurement compare in the particular case of a shielded source of interference of given available power, with a purely resistive internal impedance when transmitting all its interference energy to the supply lead in the common mode when the size of this source is varied? Experimental investigations showed the remarkable fact that the new device gave results which were practically independent of the dimensions of the source of interference (35 dm3 to 1700 dm3) and which were also more consistent than those obtained by other methods. In fact, one can reduce the absorbing device measuring system to the following circuit: a source of interference of internal impedance Zs supplying a load Zc through a low-loss line of characteristic by the load corresponding impedance Zc passes ZL. If the length (when Zc is of the line is varied different from ZL) of the system. from zero, the power through maxima and absorbed minima

to resonance

and anti-resonance

Neglecting the radiation and other losses is located at a distance corresponding to which the source and the load appear as if Pd is the available power of the source,

of the line and discussing the case in which the load the first maximum, we consider the point in the line at pure resistance Rs and Rc. It can thus be shown that PC the power absorbed by the load and

then P $= This gives for m= 0,l 0,2 0,5 1 2 5 10 20 30 4m (m+1j2

M=lOlg:=
pd

= -4,8

-2,5

-0,5

0

-0,5

-2,5

-4,8

-7,4

-9 dB

It will be seen that the matching of the source to the lead absorbent clamp is used to constitute a load, for example obtained will not be very different from those obtained if the source of interference in the form of a line brought to stop filter.

is not very critical and that, if an of the order of 200 R, the results a load is applied to the output of resonance by means of a coaxial

75

( Continued from second cower) International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard IS 6873 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 Limits and methods of measurement of radio disturbance characteristics : Part 2 Electric motor-operated and thermal appliances for household and similar purposes, electrical tools and electric apparatus ( first revision) IS 10052 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 Specification for radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatusand methods : Part 1 Radiodisturbante and immunity measuring apparatus ( first revision ) Degree of Equivalence Identical

CISPR 14 ( 1993 ) Limits and methods of measurementof radio disturbance characteristics of electrical motor-operated and thermal appliances for household and similar purposes, electric tools and electric apparatus CISPR 16-1 ( 1993 ) Specification for radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus and methods - Part 1 : Radiodisturbance and immunity measuring apparatus

do

The concerned Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following International Publication and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. ITU-R 468 : Measurement of audio-frequency noise voltage level in sound broadcasting Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while adopting it in this Indian Standard.

Bureau'bf Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofhdian Standards&t, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certiflmtion of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. LTD 22 ( 1835 ). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters :

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 3841 337 84 99, 337 85 61 337 86 26, 337 86 62 1 60 38 43 60 20 25 23502 16,2350442 235 15 19,235 23.15 8329295,8327858 8327891,8327892 I

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. 7 Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western`: Manaka?aya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuja, India

