IS 13161

(Part

3 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

SHIPBUILDING-NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD SHIPS
PART 3 MAXIMUM NOISE LEVELS -CODE OF PRACTICE

UDC

629.12 : 628-517-2

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHA-VAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 2 ZAFAR MARG

January 1992

Shipbuilding

Sectional

Committee,

TED 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalised by the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council ( TEDC ). This Indian Standard The other parts are: Part Part Part Part Part is a part of the series of Indian standards on noise levels onboard ships.

1 Glossary of terms 2 Code of measurement 4 Noise exposure limits 5 Requirement for protection 6 Guidelines for controlling noise exposure is to specify noise levels and to device means to reduce exposure

The purpose of this standard to noise in order to:

a) Provide for safe working conditions by giving consideration to the need for speech communication and for hearing audible alarms, and to an environment where clearheaded decisions can be made in control stations, navigation and radio spaces and manned machinery spaces; b) Protect the seafarer from excessive noise levels which may give rise to a noise-induced hearing loss; and c) Provide the seafarer with an acceptable degree of comfort in rest, recreation and other spaces and also to provide conditions for recuperation from the effects of exposure to high noise levels. This standard is intended as a guide and it may not be possible to implement all or any of the it also does not cover detailed technical measures recommended on all ships. Therefore, information needed for putting constructional noise control measure into effect, or for deciding measures appropriate in particular circumstances. assistance has been In the preparation of this standard, 82*05E "Noise levels onboard ships", issued by International derived from Publication No. 814 Maritime Organization ( IMO ).

IS 13161( Part 3 ) : 1992

lndian Standard

SHIPBUILDING-NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD SHIPS
PART 3 MAXIMUM NOISE LEVEL& --%ODE OF PRACTICE

1 SCOPE This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) gives the maximum acceptable sound pressure levels in onboard various ships. Wherever spaces practicable, it is desirable that noise levels levels shall be lower than the maximum specified. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard: IS No. Title are important _

4 NOISE LEVEL LIMITS Limits for noise levels for various spaces be specified as follows. 4.1 Work Spaces Machinery a> manned nuously spaces ( continuously conti) spaces ( not mmanried ) control rooms 110 75 85 work spaces dB(A) and chart 65 70 60 90 shall

dB(A) 90

b) Machinery 4 Machinery

levehi Shipbuilding - Noise 13161 (Part 1) : 1991 onboard ships : Part 1 Glossary of terms Ievels Shipbuilding - Noise 13161 ships : Part 2 (Part 2) : 1992 onboard Code of measurement levels Shipbuilding - Noise 13161 ships : Part 4 Noise (Part 4) : 1992 onboard exposure limits. 3 GENERAL
3.1 The limit specified

4

Workshops

4 Non-specified a) Navigating
rooms

4.2 Navigation Spaces bridge

b) Listening

post, including navigating bride wings and windows ment operating but not producing audio signals ) Radar rooms dB(A)

4 Radio rooms ( with radio equip-

for any work space may be assessed by steady, fluctuating equivalent continuous or etlective sound level measurement for the space. Where the equivalent continuous or effective sound level is used, it shall include all the measurement locations given in IS 13161 ( Part 2 ) : 1992. Where the 24 hour equivalent continuous or effective sound level is used as the basis for compliance with the Code, the limit for this level given in IS 13161 ( Part 4 > : 1992 shall apply. 3.2 Personnel entering spaces with noise levels greater than 85 dB ( A ) shall be required to wear ear protectors. The limit of 110 dB ( A ) given in 4.1 ( b ) assumes that ear protectors such as ear muffs are worn. 3.3 ~Limits are specified in terms of A-weighted sound pressure levels [ see 3.3 and 2.17 in IS 13161 ( Part 1 ) : 19911. 1

4

65

4.3 Accommodation Spaces a) Cabins and hospitaIs b) Mess rooms c) Recreation rooms areas

60 65 65 75 65 dB(A) 75 75

d) Open recreation e) Offices 4.4 Service Spaces

a) Galleys! without food processing eqmpment operating b) Serveries and pantries 4.5 Normally Unoccupied Spaces

dB(A) Spaces not specified [ see 4.1 ( e ) ] 90

IS 13161 ( Part 3 ) : 1992 5 SlJRVEY REPORT 4 The type of voyage,

survey report shall be made for each ship. The report shall comprise information on the noise levels in the various spaces on board. The report shall show the reading at each specified measuring point. The points shall be marked on a general arrangement plan, or on accommodation drawings attached to the report or otherwise be identified. 5.2 A mode1 format for is given in Annex A. 5.3 The mentioned noise survey reports

5.1 A noise

f) g)

h) j)

following particulars shall in the noise survey report: and type of ship; particulars

be main ship

k) m) n)

4 Hull number, name, gross tonnage,
dimensions

b) The

leading machinery;

of

the

the meteorological ship's conditions. sea state and the position during the measurements; * The underkee1 clearance during the measurements, The main operating conditions at sea and in port, including those items on the machinery line which were main operating and the operating condition; The name and address of those carrying out the measurements; The make, type and seria1 number of instrumentation used; Details and date of calibration of instruments; A list of the main noise abatement measures applied aboard the ship; and Any other particuIars of interest. with noise where the a copy of carried on

cl Names of the buiIder and owner of the
ship;

4 Date and time of the measurements,

5.4 Where the ship does not comply levels specified in this standard and use of ear protectors are required, the noise survey report shall be board.

ANNEX

A

( Clause 5.2 )
NOISE SURVEY REPORT A-l SHIP PARTICULARS A-2 MACHINERY PARTICZJLARS

a) Name of ship b) Port of registry c) Name and address of shipowner, ing owner or agent d) Name and address of shipbuilder e) Place of build f ) Builder's number g) Gross tonnage h) Type of ship length breadth depth maximum draught (summer load line) k) Displacement at maximum draught m) Date of keel Iaying n) Date of delivery 2 j) Ship's dimensions manag-

4

Propulsion machinery Manufacturer: Type Maximum continuous rating power Normal designed service shaft speed: Normal service ratingpower: Auxiliary diesel engines Manufacturer: Type output: kW

Number units: kiy rev/min kW

of

b)

Number units:

of

Main c>

d)

reduction gear: Type of propeller ( fixed propeller, controllable pitch propeller, VoithSchneider propeller ) Number of propellers: Number of blades: Designed propeller rev/min shaft speed:

IS 13161 ( Part 3 ) : 1992 A-3 MEASURING INSTRUMENTATION Make Type Serial No. A-5 MEASURING DATA Noise Limits Measured Sound Pressure Levels dB(A) dB(A) a) Machinery Spaces: Control rooms Workshops Propulsion machinery: Turbocharger Top propulsion machinery Auxiliary diesel engines/ Turbogenerators Reduction gears Non specified workspaces and Other b) Accommodation Messes Recreation rooms offices Galleys Serveries and pantries Cabins Navigation C> spaces Bridge Chart room Radar room Radio room Navigating bridge wings d) Open Recreation Area MEASURES EXCEPTIONS Spaces

a) Instrumentation
Sound level meter Microphone Pilter Windscreen Calibrator Other equipment

b) Calibration

of sound level Date Calibration Start Meter - at survey by Competent Authority

Finish

A-4 CONDITIONS Date a>

DURING MEASUREMENT Completion time:

of measurement: Starting time:

b) Vessel's position during measurement cl Type of voyage 4 Conditions during measurement
Draught forward Draught aft Depth of water under keel

4 Weather

conditions -Wind force - Sea state rev/min rev/min

f) Ship speed g> Actual propeller shaft speed: h) propeller pitch:
propulsion machinery speed:

A-6 MAIN NOISE ABATEMENT ( LIST MEASIlRES TAKEN ) A-7 REMARKS ( LIST TO THE STANDARD ) Name Address . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. Place ANY

kW j) Propulsion machinery power: k) Number of propulsion machinery units operating: Number m> operating: n) Number of diesel auxiliary engines

of turbogenerators equipment

operating: operating:

p) Other auxiliary

................................. ..& ......... ..................... ................................. ... . ............................. .*....a........ . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. .. . .. . Date Signature

3

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BEG and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under -the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. TED 17 ( 894 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
!

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 311 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16
6 32 92 95

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI l-10002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CA-LCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113 ( East )

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

t AHMADABAD,

BANGALORE, BHOPAL, F'ARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

PrInted

at Printwell

Printers,

Aligarh.

India

