IS : 12554 ( Part 1 ) - 1988

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

SPECIFICATIONFOR NON-DESTRUCTIVECOATINGTHICKNBSS TESTINGINSTRUMENTS
PART

1 EDDY CURRENT

INSTRUMENTS

UDC

620'179'142'08 : 669'058

0 CopyGght 1989

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 3

July

1989

IS : 12554 ( Part 1 ) - 1988

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR NON-DESTR-UCTIVE COATING THICKNESS TESTING INSTRUMENTS
PART
1

EDDY

CURRENT

INSTRUMENTS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 31 May 1988, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Process Measurement and Control Sectional Committee had been approved by the Elcctrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Thickness as destructive measuring techniques and non-destructive. are classified particle reflected by the sample related to the thickness. Eddy changes inducing is collected and

current instruments measures the in apparent impedance of the coil the eddy currents into the base metal.

The most direct method is to take a cross section of the sample and measurement of the plating under a microscope. In practice, the procedure can be quite time-consuming and tedious. Another a destructive method is the couloThe coating is dissolved metric thickness gauge. anodically ( that is, using a process, the reverse of plating ) and the total electrical charge required to dissolve a known area is determined. Thickness of the deposit is related to the charge. methods of thickness Non-destructive measurement are based on the principles of eddy currents or nuclear particle magnetism, scattering, The methods are quick and nondestructive to facilitate routine testing in mass production. 0.3 Magnetic gauges can be used when the base is magnetic and the coating is non-magnetic. The gauge measures the reduction in magnetic attraction as the coating thickness increase. Magnetic gauges using permanent magnets and Nuclear also electromagnets are available.

0.4 All the above methods except cross-scctioning for microscopic measurement require an empirical calibration of the instrument. In most cases, the signal obtained is not a linear function of the deposited thickness and this can add to the measurement inaccuracies. The inaccuracies are of the order of f5 percent. 0.5 This standard ( Part 1 ) specifies the requirements of instrument which can measure metallic or non-conductive coatings on metallic bases and metallic coatings on conductive bases eddy current provided. The conductivity ratio of coating material and base metal ( and vice-vcrsu ) is greater than 4. 0.6 Part 2 of' this standard specifies the requirements non-destructive coating instruments. ( under preparutiotz ) of magnetic type thickness testing

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied wilh, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test, shall bc rounded off in accordance with IS : 2- 1960*. The number of signilicant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rulei for rounding off numerical values ( revised ),

2. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the eddy current instruments for nleasurement of thickness of a or less conductive coating on base metal. NOW -The cc)nductivity ratio base metal shall be greater than 4. 2. TYPE 2.1 This tyx non-destructive ncss. Two of portable instrument is used for measurement of coating thickmodels are available, each set requirements of non-destructive non-conductive a non-magnetic
of coating and

specifically for combination of coating/coating and base material; direct type for paint, varnish, lacquer, teflon, lead on aluminiurn or copper and indirect type for nickel, zinc, tin, c;tdnlitlu1, chromium on steel. 2.2 This method is particularly i~scl'ul 1`01 measuring thu thickness of an anodic Coating on aluminium alloys. Chemical conversion c~~~tings arc too thin to be mcasurcd by this method. 3. OPERATING PROCEDURE 3.1 The conttng clcctromagnctic 1 PRINCIPLE AND

thickness is dctcrmincd with :in instrument that measures tlm

IS : 12554 ( Part 1 ) - 1988

changes in apparent impedance of the coil inducing the eddy currents into the base metal. The design of the instrument shall be such that variations in apparent impedance, produced by variations in coil to base metal spacing, can be calibrated to indicate the thickness of coatings. 3.2 Procedure 3.2.1 The instrument shall be operated in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer, and consideration to the factors given m 4. 3.2.2 Check the calibration of the instrument at the test site each time the instrument is put into service and at frequent intervals during use to assure proper performance. 3.2.3 Observe the following precautions: thickness Check 3.2.3.1 Basis metal whether the basis metal thickness exceeds the critical thickness. If not, either use the back-up method in 5.4 or make sure that the calibration has been made on a standard having the same thickness and electrical properties as the test specimen. 3.2.3.2 Edge effects - Do not make readings close to an edge, hole, inside corner, etc, of a specimen unless the validity of the calibration for such a measurement has been demonstrated. 3.2.3.3 Curvature - Do not make readings on curved surface of a specimen unless the validity of the calibration for such a measurement has been demonstrated. 3.2.3.4 Number of readings - Because of normal instrument variability, it is necessary to make several readings at each position. Local variations in coating thickness may also require that a number of measurements be made in any given area ; this applies particularly to a rough surface ( see 4.9 >. 3.2.3.5 Surface cleanliness - Before making measurements, clean any foreign matter such as dirt, grease, and corrosion products from the surface without removing any coating material. 4. FACTORS
4.1 Inherent AFFECTING THE MEASURING ACCURACY

not supplied by the manufacturer of the mesuring instrument since it depends on both the measuring frequency of the probe system and the electrical conductivity of the base metal. 4.3.1 General Rule - For a given measuring frequency, the higher the conductivity of the base metal, the smaller is its critical thickness. For a given base metal, the higher the measuring frequency, the smaller is the critical thickness of the base metal. 4.4 Edge Effect - The method is sensitive to abrupt changes in the surface contour of the test specimen. Therefore, measurements made too near an edge or inside corner will not be valid unless the instrument is specifically calibrated for such a measurement. 4.5 Curvature - Measurements are affected by the curvature of the test specimen. The influence of curvature varies considerably with the make and the type of the instrument but always becomes more pronounced as the radius of curvature decreases. 4.6 Surface Roughness 4.6.1 Measurements are influenced by the surface topography of the substrate and the coating, and a rough surface will give individual instrument readings that will vary from point to point. In this case, it is necessary to make many readings at different positions to obtain a mean value that is representative of the average coating thickness. 4.6.2 If the base metal is rough, it may also be necessary to check the zero of the instrument at several positions on a sample of the uncoated rough substrate. If the roughness of the substrate surface is small relative to the coating ,thickness, its effect will probably be negligible. 4.7 Foreign Particles - The probes of eddy current instruments must make physical contact and shall be free of foreign material that prevents intimate contact between the probe and the coating surface. 4.8 Pressure - The pressure with which the probe is applied to the test specimen affects the instrument readings and should, therefore, be kept constant. 4.9 Number of Readings - The precision of the measurements can be improved by increasing the number of readings in accordance with statistical principles. 5. CALIBRATION
5.1 Before OF INSTRUMENTS
USC, each instrument shall be calibrated in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer, employing suitable thickness standards. During USC, the calibration shall be checked at frcqucnt intervals, at least one an hour. Attention shall be given to the procedure described in 3 and to the factors listed in 4.

in the method is a measuring uncertainty that for thin coatings, is constant and independent of the coating thickness, and for a single measurement, not less than 0'5 pm; for thicknesses greater than about 25pm, this uncertainty is proportional to the coating thickness. 4.2 Electrical Properties of the Basis Metal Eddy current measurement are all'ected by the electrical conductivity of the basis metal, which itself is often affected by heat treatment.
- For each measurcmcnt, there is a critical thickness of the base metal above which the measurements will not be affected by an increase in that thickness. Its value should be determined experimentally, if 4.3 Base Metal Thickness

5.2 Calibration of thickness standards ( of known thickness available either as foils or as 2

IS : 12554 ( Part 1 ) - 1988 coated specimens ) used instrument, shall be tested in Appendix A. 5.2.1 Calibration Foils for calibrating by the method the given 6.2 Reading -- Reading direct reading scales. shall be in microns

5.2.1.1 The calibration foils used for the calibration of eddy current instruments are They are advantagegenerally made of plastic. ous for calibration on curved surfaces and are more readily available than coated standards. 5.2.1.2 To prevent measurement errors, it is necessary to ensure that intimate contact is Resiestablished between foil and substrate. lient foils should be avoided if possible. Calibration foils are subject to indentation and should, therefore, be replaced frequently. 5.2.2 Coated Standards - These calibration standards consist of non-conductive coatings of known, uniform thickness permanently bonded to the substrate material. 5.3 The base metal of the calibration standards shall have electrical properties similar to those of the base metal of the coated test specimen. To confirm their suitability, a comparison of the readings obtained with the base metal of the bare standard and that of the test specimen is recommended. 5.4 The base metal thickness for the test and the calibration shall be the same if the critical thickness, defined in 4.3, is not exceeded. When possible, back up the base metal of the standard or of the test specimen with a sufficient thickness of similar material to make the readings independent of the base metal thickness. A way to determine if the base metal thickness to make exceeds the critical thickness is measurements before and after backing up the base metal with copper or aluminium at least 3 mm thick. If there is no difference, between the readings, the critical thickness is exceeded. 5.5 If the test specimen is soft and thin, it is susceptible to indentation by the probe. Because of this, and despite the use of special probes or fixtures, measurements on such specimens are sometimes impossible to make. 5.6 If the curvature of the test specimen to be measured is such as to preclude calibration on a flat surface, the curvature of the coated standard or of the substrate on which the calibration foil is placed shall be the same as that of the test specimen. 6. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

6.3 Power Requirements - Power requirements shall be 230 V ac, 50 Hz. single phase. Power needed shall not exceed 10 W. 6.4 Operating Temperature - Operating temperature shall be 15 to 3O'C. Calibration once set ~111 hold for f5"C variations in ambient temperature. 6.5 Dimensions than 250 mm. The length shall not be specified, more weight

6.6 Weight - Unless otherwise shall be less than 4 kg. 7. SPECIAL APPLICATION

7.1 The instrument is normally used for the preset combination and rang! specified by the manufacturer. However, it IS possible to use the instrument for more precise mcastlrt'nlcnts by suitably scaling and ranging the instrument. 7.2 Range Adjustment 7.2.1 The instrument is made such that the range can be adjusted over a ratio of I : 4 b} using the range pot. For example, if the instrument of maximum sensitivity has a full scale range of, say, O-100 microns, then at its least sensitive position it would be approximately O-400 microns. 7.2.2 Non-standard range is possible by using suitable thickness standard and lower scale, say, O-100 with appropriate multiplying factor. 7.3 A note for nickel Appendix B. 8. MARKINGS 8.1 The following marked on the position. particular instrument shall be clearly in a measured O-30 nonnonmeasurement is given in

8.1.1 Reodiing Range - For cxamplc, micrometre for conductive coatings on conductive bate and 0'250 micrometre for conductive coatings on conductive base. 8.1.2 8.1.3 8.1.4 8.1.5 Accuracy Operating Operating Voltage NII~ Frequency Temperature supplied following Power Requirements

8.2 The instruction manual manufacturer shall have the lion: a) Installation calibration

bv the informndet:liIs of`

6.1 Accuracy - The instrument, its calibration, and its operation shall be such that the coating thickness can bc determined within 10 percent of the true thickness or 1 pm, whichcvcr is greater. this test method NOTE - Although, theoretically, can be used for rneasul-ing non-conductive coatings on a magnetic base metal, its use for coating below 25 pm is not recommended, and the magnetic method shall be used. 3

proccdurc and standard supplictl;

and precnuLions b) Safety rcyuirenient taken during mcasurctncnt; c> Critical thickness of base mct~tl;
PI-occd~re;

to bc

and calibration d) Operation Maintenance proccdurc. e) 8.3 The instrument Standard Mal-k.

and

may also bc markcti

\vith the

IS : 12554 ( Part 1 ) - 1988 NOTE- The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made therexnder. The Standard Mark on producrs covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of and quality control which is inspection, testing devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously rheckcd by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which ;: licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

9.2 High Voltage Test No break-down, arcing or sparking shall occur when 2 kV rms is applied between terminals and enclosure for a period of one minute. 9.3 Accuracy Test

9. TESTS 9.1 Insulation Resistance Test Insulation rcsistnncc bct\veen tern-tinal and enclosure shall bc not less thnn 50 megohm at 500 volts d.c.

9.3.1 The melcr shall be calibrated accorriing to 5 or manufacturer's instruction with the help of thickness standard. The different plating thickness shall be measured and compare each plating thickness within the testing by destructive tester. The dilferencc in reading shall not be more -1710 percent of the reading measured by generalized destructing thickness tester or 1 pm, whichever is grcatcr. The method of checking thickness standards is given in Appendix A.

APPEN

DIS

A

( Clauses 5.2and 9.3.1 )
A TYPICAL METHOD FOR PREPARATION AND THICKNESS STANDARDS will carry a label and CHECKING OF

A-l. Thickness indicating:

standards

a) Plating chemical used : manufacturer brand name of the chemical; b) Current c) Plating density time A/dm2! of and minutes;

e) Four corner measurements are carried out by destructive test ( coloumetric type ) for a circle of approximately 10 mm diameter. A-3. Four point measurement for following reasons: is done essentially

d) Method of checking thickness - destructive - coulometric:

plating

c) Special note - if any, for example, electric conductivity of electroplated metal when different chemical/process is used. A-2. Preparation of Thickness Standard a) Small steel plates of approximately 70 mm x 40 mm x 1 mm are taken. Near mirror finish buffing is carried out. Cleaning agent is used to rernovc any oil contamination.

a) To ensure good average reading; b) To take care of non-uniformity of plating which results due to: I ) anode/cathode area difference, 2) non-parallelism plates, and between anode-cathode

3) concentration of current density at corners of cathode plate. NOTE1 - A central portion of plating is used
for \t:lndar:lizing purpose to avoid reasons given above. NOTE 2 - On one plate only half area is plated in order to ensure that the same plate gives conductivity of bare steel. Otherwise, other MS bare plate may have different conductivity. This is for adjusting zero on deltameter.

b)

Electroplaling is carried out in perspex both of length 150 mm, width 100 mm and height 75 mm. LOW voltage, high current dc power supply is used for electroplating.

chemicals from standard manuC) Plating facturers arc used. The procedure outlined by them is adopted to carry out the required plating. d) The plating either: 1) Microscopic thickness is measured method, by or

4) Destructive circular.

test holes arc 10 mm2

near

with 5) If rending difrerence is more than one micron, rejected.

four points the plutc is

cross sectional

2,) Coulomctric destructive test. NOTE-~ M~croxct)pic examination
tctiiolts method ;ind time is considered 101`plating thickness

being very coulomctric conxun~ing, to be reference method measurement.

of approxi6) The area with diameter mately IO mm is sufficient for standard probe or microprobe to carry out calibration. 7) Destructive tester mcasurcs the thic~kness with chemical etching. Cunductivily of the plated material doe> not 4

IS : 12554 ( Part 1 ) - 1988 play any role in this measurement whereas eddy current base instrument thickness dependent measures the entirely on conductivity of the plated material. 8) Brightness added to solutions while plating, particularly in case of nickel Eddy current affect conductivity. for instrument readings will vary different thickness brightener content the same shown on destructive tester.

9) In fact it is advisable that chemicals and brighteners are used from the same manufacturer. In case the user has standard set process, the sample plated can be destructively tested and used as standard for eddy currcnt instruments.

APPENDIX ( Clause 7.3
NOTE B-l. Nickel plating dependent on method be as follows: FOR NICKEL )

R

MEASUREMENT B-l.4 Semi-Bright Nickel - Semi-bright nickel platings are usually free from sulphur content and, therefore, have much higher conductivity than the bright nickel. Due to this property, it is unlikelv that thickness measurement errors would a&e from the use of chemicals from different manufacturers. B-l.5 Duplex or Semi-Bright Nickel - These plating have a semi-bright nickel coat followed by bright finish. Presently, a standard containing 50 percent semi-bright and 50 percent bright nickel is available. For other percentages, special standards would be required. B-l.6 Plating More Than 30 Microns - ln certain articles, heavy nickel plating that is higher than 30 microns, may be specified. For few such cases, erratic measurement have been observed on the deltameter. Thus a reading less than 10 microns may be obtained even when actual thickness is in excess of 30 microns. Two possible causes of these errors have been suggested. Permanent magnetization of nickel is one possibility. Higher sulphur concentration in the upper layers of the nickel plating is another possibility. So far, no solution is in sight to solve this problem. A suggested approach to overcome this problem would be to measure nickel thickness at other points on the article, say, the undcrsidc where the thickness is known to be much less. If these positions show acceptable thickness, then the whole article may bc accepted.

measurement which is of plating employed, shall

B-l.1 With Copper Flash Undercoat Few microns of copper is sometimes deposited before coating nickel. If the nickel is measured directly, it would give excessive thickness readings. This is due to copper having much higher conductivity than nickel. This error can bc corrected as follows. Calibrate the instrument for nickel as usual. Measure the nickel equivalent of copper, say, 8 microns. Subtract this reading from the total nickel plating reading. For getting approximate copper thickness reading, divide the nickel equivalsnt of copper reading by four. plating B-l.2 Chrome Flash - Bright chrome has one or two micron chromium flash over the nickel. This thin chrome coating does not make significant difference in total nickel thickness reading. If chrome is to be measured accurately, first measure nickel at the same spot. Measure again after chrome plating. Multiply the difference by a factor of two. B-1.3 Bright Nickel - Variety of brighteners are added to the nickel plating bath to get the These brighteners contain sulphur bright finish. which changes the conductivity of the nickel Therefore, if substantial deposit substantially. bright chrome is deviation from the expected observed, it may be necessary to make a special thickness standard for the particular plating process.

BUREAU OF INDIAN
Headquartersr Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 3310131, 3311375 NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices)

Regional Offices! Central : Manak Bhavan, TEastern: Northern gouthern l/14 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW OELHI 110002 CALCUTTA 700054 3310131,

Telephone 3311375 362499 21843, 31641 412442, ( East ), BOMBAY 400093 412519, 412916 6329295

C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH MADRAS 600113 Maroj Andheri

: SC0 445-446, : C.I.T. Campus,

160036

TWestern : Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC,

Branch Offices! `Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg. Khanpur, AHMADABAO 380001 560058 26348, 26349 384955, 384956 66716 53627 781003 500001 63471, 216876, 231083 69832 218292 62305 695035 62104, 62117

Peenya Industrial Gangotri Complex,

Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur 5th Floor, Bhadbhada

Road, BANGALORE

Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 751002 GUWAHATI

462003

Plot No, 82183, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-Lane, 5-8-56C L.N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station

Road ), HYDERABAD

R14 Yudhister 117/418 Patliputra

Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR Nagar, KANPUR Estate, PATNA University

302005 208005

B Sarvodaya Industrial

800013

T.C. No. 14/1421,

P.O., Palyam, TRIVANDRUM

\ Inspection Offices (-With

Sale Point

) : Nagar 25171 52435

Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205A West High Court Road, Shankar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (I:rdia) Building, 1332 Shivaji

Nagar, PUNE 411005

*Sales Office In~kcutta

ir at 6 Chowrlnghee

Approach,

P.0, Princep Street, Calcutte

700072

276800 896629 Delhi (India)

tSales Office in Bombmy is at Novelty

Chambers, Grant Road, Bombay 400007

Prrntefl at Swetmntrs Bharot Prey.

