`I

:4.

IS 13623

( Part 1) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

MEDICALELECTRICALEQUIPMENTSHORT-WAVETHERAPYEQUIPMENT
PART 1 GENERAL AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

UDC

615.471 : 621.31

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

RAHADUR

NEW DELHI 110002

December 1992

Price Group 4

Electromedical

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

MHD $4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electromedical Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. This standard is being issued in two parts. Performance Requirements. Part 1 covers general and safety requirements and Part 2

Correct application of the therapy equipment is considered to be essential for patient safety. The advice given in instructions for use is intended to reduce the risk of burns and to alert the user to possibly adverse effects on other equipment. In normal use, the patient has no conductive connection to the output circuit but may touch the surfaces of applicators and cables. Consequently, these parts are defined as the applied parts of the equipment. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC 601-2-3 ( 1982 ) `Medical electrical equipment - Part 2: Particular requirements for the safety of short-wave therapy equipment', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13523( Part 1 ) : 1992

Indian Standard MEDICAL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT SHORT-WAVE THERAP'Y EQUIPMENT
PART 1 SCOPE This standard ( Part 1 ) specifies general and therap) requirements of short-wave safea equipment hereinafter referred to as equipment, having a rated output power not exceeding 500 W and frequency range 3 MHz to 300 MHz. 1 GENERAL AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

FOR TESTS

4.1 Relevant provisions of IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 shall apply. In addition, the following routine tests shall also be carried out: a) Measurement of operating frequency with the equipment operating under the conditions specified in 4.1 (b). b) Output power test as specified in Part 2 of this standard but only under the conditions [applicator(s), spacings, load resistance] which give maximum output power. c) Measurement of the patient leakage current. 4.2 Sequence The test specified in 9.8.2 shall be performed immediately after the temperature rise test ( 13.1.3 ). 5 CLASSIFICATION 5.1 Relevant provisions of IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 shall apply except the following. 5.2 Class The equipment Class 2. 5.3 Type The equipment shall be Type BF or CF only as the applied part has no earthed conductive part. 5.4 Mode of Operation The equipment operation. shall be capable of continuous AND shall be either Class 1 or

2 REFERENCES The fo!iowing Indian Standards adjc!?cts to this standard:
IS' No.

arc necesszr>

Title
Application Generai electrical guide for medical equipment : Par; 1 reqiirements ai:d installations

i 1478

f Fart 1 ) : 1985 electrical

13456

Medical electrical equipment: ( Part 1 ) : 1992 Part 1 General requirements for safety ( urder print )

3 TERMINOLOGY
3.1 Applied Part

Accessible part of applicators associated connecting cables.
3.2 Ootput Circuit

and

of the

All conductive parts used to couple radiofrequency power from the generator to the applicators including conductive (inaccessible > part of the applicators and their connecting cables. 3.3 Rated Output Power Maximum radio-frequency power averaged over a period of one second which can be delivered to ihe load specified in this standard. 3.4 Short-Wave Therapy Equipment Equipment for the treatment of patient by exposure to electric or magnetic fields produced by the operation of the equipment with frequencies between 3 MHz and 300 MHz. 1

6 MARKING, IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENTS

6.1 Relevant provisions of IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 shall apply except as following. 6.2 Marking on the Outside 6.2.1 Output The following information shall be marked: a) Rated output power in watts and load resistance at which this power is available, and bj Operating frequency in MHz.

IS 13523(Part
6.3 Marking

1):1992 7) The function of certain implanted electrical devices, for example, paceaffected makers, may be adversely treatment with short-wave during In case of doubt, the advice therapy. of the physician-in-charge of the patient should be sought. 8) The function of other patient conneeted equipment may be adversely affected by the operation of short-wave therapy equipment. c) Advice for the user to inspect regularly the insulation of the applicators. 6.5.2 Technical
llescription

on the Inside

In addition, a warning symbol shall be displayed on access covers or adjacent to apertures giving access to components, the adjustment or replacement of which may result in the equipment failing to meet the requirements for interference suppression. 6.4 Marking of Controls
6.4.1 If the figure `0' is displayed at the output power control or on any associated indicator, the output power shall not exceed 2 percent of the rated output power when this position is selected.
NOTE - Even if the figure `0' is displayed, complete de-energization of the output circuit is not required. However, it is necessary to limit the output power to a safe value.

6.5 Accompanying Documents 6.5.1 In addition to the provisions of 1s 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 the instructions for use shall contain the following: .tnforrnation concerning the compatibility of radio-frequency cables in order to prevent the use of unsuitable cables. b) Notes on the application of equipment, drawing the user's attention to certain precautions which are necessary during treatment. In particular, the following advice shall be given: not be 1) Patients should normally treated with short-wave therapy when they have reduced thermal sensitivity over the proposed area of treatment unless the physician-in-charge of the patient is notified. therapy should not be 2) Short-wave applied to patients through clothing. Conductive material should be excluded from the treatment area. 3) Parts of the patient's body containing metallic implants ( for example, a medullary nail ) should normally be excluded from the treatment unless special techniques are used. 4) Hearing aids should be removed. 5) The patient should not be allowed to come into contact with conductive parts which are earthed or which have an appreciable capacitance to earth and which may provide unwanted pathways for radio-frequency current. In particular, beds or chairs having metal frames should not be used. cables should be 6) The applicator positioned in such a way that contact with the patient or conductive or energy absorbing objects is avoided.

The technical description shall additionally contain information on the conditions including the load resistance and electrode spacings under which the rated output power is delivered.
NOTE - As tke conditions for the measurement of rated output power are not specified in detail in this btandard, information on the conditions under which the maximum output porter is measrrrcd, shall be given.

7 POWER

INPUT

7.1 Relevant

provisions of 1s 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 shall apply except as follows.

7.2 The operational settings shall be such that the equipment delivers the rated output power. 7.3 The equipment shall be operated as specified in Part 2 of this standard. 8 OTHER REQUIREMENTS 8.0 The list of primary requirements regarding the protection of life and property against a number of possible hazards is given below: Protection against electric shock hazards a> [see IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 1);

b) Protection c) 4

e>

against mechanical hazards [ see 1s 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 1; Protection against unwanted or excessive radiation [ see IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 1; Protection against explosion hazards [ see IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 1; and Protection against excessive temperatures, fire and other hazards [ see IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 1.

8.1 Basic Safety Requirements

The protection of patient, operator ant'. surroundings shall be realized as far as possible without an inevitable restriction of the normal function of the equipment when this is properly Whil? realizing this, those solutions used. should be preferred which give the best possible protection.

IS 13523 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 The following sequence shall be followed: a) Unconditional Safety Equipment shall be so designed that all means to exclude hazards are incorporated. b) Conditional Safety If unconditional safety is not possible or insufficient special external protective means shall be applied. c) Descriptive Safety If even conditional safety does not lead to the intended goal, the conditions under which safety operation is possible, shall be indicated. Descriptive safety may include indications applying to transport, positioning, mounting, connection and putting into operation and the observance of certain rules applying to application, replacement and maintenance. 8,,2 Removable Protective Means 8.2.1 Protective means should be incorporated as far as possible in the basic design of the equipment. The equipment should be so designed that the absence of protection means which can be removed without the use of a tool becomes obvious to the operator when the equipment is used. Removal of protective means which does not require the use of a tool should at least require a conscious expenditure of effort to accomplish the removal. 8.2.2 If the equipment has special function for which protective means require to be removed, they shall be marked to indicate the necessity of replacing the protective means when the special function is no longer required. The instruction, for use shall also carry a similar notice. 8.2.3 Compliance shall be checked by inspection of the instructions for use. 8.3 Special Environmental Conditions 8.3.1 In case the equipment is subjected to environmental or operational conditions differing from those indicated in this standard, additional safety measures shall be applied after which the basic requirements of this standard shall also be fulfilled even in the special conditions to be expected and known to the manufacturer. 8.3.2 Special conditions may prevail, for example, in environments with explosion hazards or at unusual high or low temperatures or at unusual humidity or at unusual chemical or physical stresses or in oxygen enriched environments or at atmospheric air pressures exceeding the limits of scope of this standard, 3 8.4 Special Measures with Respect to Safety 8.4.1 Equipment may be exempted from some of the basic safety requirements of this standard if are applied which special safety measures are independent of the nature and the function of the equipment, for example, use in locations with restricted access or restriction of use to a limited category of persons familiar with special hazards associated with the proper use of the equipment and with the necessity of suitable measures which can be applied to avoid or restrict these hazards ( for example, in laboratories, testing stations, etc ). 8.4.2 In such cases, the equipment shall be marked to indicate the basic safety features which are absent. 8.5 Single Fault Condition 8.5.1 A single fault condition should become obvious to the operator either by an unmistakable and clearly discernible signal, or it should be detectable by periodic inspection. In this respect, some engineering principles, for example, double or reinforced insulation are comidered as not subject to the requirements that a single fault should become obvious. 8.5.2 The following single fault conditions are the subject of specific requirements or tests: a) The interruption of a single protective earth conductor, b) The appearance of an external voltage in an applied part or in a single input or single output part, c) The interruption of one supply conductor of the equipment, d) Leakage of an enclosed medical gas system, e) Short-circuiting of either of the constituent part of a double insulation, f) Faults of components leading to safety hazard, g) Failure of a mechanical part affecting the safety equipment, and h) Failure of the insulation between the applied part and live parts of the output circuit. 9 PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK HAZARDS 9.1 Relevant provisions of IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 shall apply except as follows. 9.2 Requirements Related to Classification 9.2.1 The equipment only. shall be Class I or Class 2 shall be

9.2.2 Short wave therapy equipment Type BF or Type CF equipment.

IS 13523 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 9.3 Limitation of Voltage and/or Current
2 I'articL!lar of illsulating attention
li?St crAls

should

be paid

to the

_i-~ic:

Relevant provisions of IS 13450 ( Part I ) : 1992 shall apyly. 9.4 Enclosures
and Protective Covers

used in rf circuits ( including appIicators and their cables ) in view of risk Of fai!ure due to excessive dielectric loss in yoml: materials. Attention is drawn to the increase in rf voltage v,hich OCCLI~S 17 !?en the output circuit i: unloaded and is in reson::nt condition

Relevant.proGsions of IS 13450 ( Part 1) : 1992 shall apply except that for the purposes of this clause, live parts include parts which are energized at the operating frequency. 9.5 Insulation
9.51 and Protective Impedances

9.6 Earthing and Potential 9.6.1

Equalization

Relevant provisions of 1s 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 shall apply except as follows.

Generally, accessible conductive parts of Class 1 equipment shall be connected permanently and with sufficiently low impedance to the protective earth terminal.

9.5.2 An applied part shall be separated from Iive parts of the equipment, particularly from the mains part. Deterioration of parts by use and ageing shall be taken into account. In case of a single fault condition or in case of defec ts of thermionic valves and/or semiconductors, wire rupture or disconnection of a component In other parts, the applied part shall not produce a patient leakage current exceeding the allowable value for single fault condition. This requirement can generally one of the following methods: be fulfilled by

A protective earth conductor shall not be fused. The insulation of a protective earth conductor shall be coloured. Functional earth terminals provide protective earthing. Compliance shall not be used to

shall be checked by inspection.

9.6.2 The protective earth terminal or contact shall be connected to an external protective system by either a protective earth conductor in a flexible supply cable or cord and an appropriate plug, or a fixed and permanently installed protective earth conductor. Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by measurement of the continuity of the tarth connection. 9.6.3 A protective earth pathway used to carry functional currents. shall nci? be

a). The applied part is separated from live parts by basic insulation only, but protectively earthed and the applied part has such a low internal impedance that leakage currents flowing to the applied part from other parts are diverted to earth. b) The aDplied Dart is senarated from live parts d$ a p&ectively earthed conductive part which may be a fully enclosed conductive screen. cl The applied part is not connected to protective earth but is separated from live parts by a protectively earthed intermediate circuit which cannot produce excessive leakage current to the applied part. 4 The applied part is separated from live parts by double or reinforced insulation. 4 Protective impedances prevent the flow of a current exceeding the prescribed permissible value to the applied part. f ) The output circuit shall be separatctl from live parts of the rf generator by one of the methods in (b) to (d) above. Any protectively earthed intermediate circuit or conductive screen and its connection to the protective earth terminal shall be able to withstand the short.clrcuit current of the rf generator power supply.
NOTES 1 In order to generate the necessary output power, equipment may incorporate high-power supply voltages. As the output circuit may be accessible under single fault condition, a safe separation from the generator is essential for safety.

9.6.4 Equipment having conductive enciosup: or an enclosure with an accessible conductive part ( not being a rivet, rating plate or yimil`ar component ), and a) of Class 11 with an applied part, or b) with an internal electrical power soilrcs and an applied part, or c) of Type CF shall be provided with a facility for the connection, of a potential equalization conductor if such equipment is also specified for use in medically used rooms where potential equalization is required [ see IS 11478 ( Part I ) : 1985 1. The facility for the connection shall be readily accessible. It shall be such that accidenlai loosening is prevented in normal use and the equalization conductor may be potential detached from the equipment when the cquipment is used outside those medically used roomI; where potential equalization is required. The potential equalization conductor shall not be included in the power supply cable or cord of the equipment. Any potential equalization conductor shall be identified throughout ifs length by green/yellow coloured insulation. Compliance shall be checked by inspection.

.I

5

IS 13523 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

9.6.5 For equipment without a flexible supply cable or cord, the resistance between protective earth terminal and any other part which is connected to it for protective purposes shall not exceed 0.1 Q.
For equipment with a detachable supply cable or cord, the resistance between protective contact in the appliance inlet and any other part which is connected to it for protective purposes shall not exceed 0.1 Q.

9.6.8 An additional protective earth conductor shall comply at least n-ith the requirements fir the normal protective earth conductor. 9.7 Continuous Leakage Currents and Pafieat Auxiliary Currents 9.7.1 General Requirements
9.7.1.1

For equipment with non-detachable supply cable or cord, the resistance protective contact in the mains plug other part which is connected to it for tive purposes shall not exceed 0.2 IR. Compliance test: shall be checked

flexible between and any protec-

The electrical insulation of equipment providing protection against electric shock shall have such a quality that the currents flowing through it are limited to an acceptable value. 9.7.1.2 The continuous values of the earth leakage current, the enclosure leakage current, the patient leakage current and the patient auxiliary current shall be investigated under the following conditions: a) Both at operating temperature and following the moisture preconditioning treatment. b) Under normal conditions and under specified single fault conditions. 78e leakage currents shall be measured with the rf generator disabled but with its power supply voltage(s) present. C>Any high-frequency interference suppressors connected. 4 With normal and reversed connection ?a the supply mains. With the functional earth terminal ( when e> present ) connected or not connected to the earth side of the measuring supply current. f) With the aDolied Dart ( when present, if possible ) `short-dircuiied or loaded' aa prescribed by the manufacturer ( not for the patient auxiliary current). With an F-type isolated applied part or not present ) connected ( when connected to the earthed side of measMing supply circuit ( earth leakage current and enclosure leakage current only ).

by the following

A current not less than 10 A and not exceeding 25 A from a current source with a no load voltage not exceeding 6 V is passed for at least 5 seconds through the protective earthpin in the mains plugs or the protective earth contact in the appliance inlet Gas relevant ) and each accessible conductive part which could become live in single fault condition. Fhe voltage drop between the parts described is measured and the resistance determined from the current and voltage drop shall not exceed the values indicated in this sub-clause. 9.6.5 The maximum permitted resistance of the protective earthing connection foi accessories connected to equipment, if exceeding 0.1 52, &all be determined by the following formula:
Rm < -+ F RT

where &E = resistance of protective earth connection, in ohms ( exceeding 0.1 51); I, = maximum continuous current, in amperes; single fault

s>

I 1':s CI. = allowable value of the enclosure leakage current in single fault condition in milliamperes; and
RT =

The maximum measured values shall not exceed the allowable values. 9.7.1.3 The measurement of enclosure current of Class 1 equipment shall performed: leakage only be

resistance test ( 1 kB ).

in

kilo-ohms

9.6.7 Where an additional protective earth conductor is used, any connector in the addiearth conductor of the tional protective equipment, if provided as a lead separate from the power supply cord, shall be provided with a suitable retaining device to prevent inadvertent disconnection from the equipment during alormal use.
5

a) from each part ( when present ) of the body of the equipment which is not connected to the protective earth term!nal of the equipment to earth, or

0) between

parts ( when present ) at the body of the equipment which are not. connected to the protective earth terminal of the equipment.

IS 13523( Part 1) : 1992 9.1.1.4 The measured:

patient

leakage

current

shall be

9.7.3 Allowable values (Part 1 ) : 1992. 9.7.4.1 General

are given in IS 13450

a) in Type CF equipment, from and to every electrically separate part of the applied part; and b) in Type BF equipment, from and to all electrically separate parts of a single function of the applied part connected together. If the manufacturer specifies alternatives for the detachable part of the applied part ( for example, patient cable and electrodes ), the patient leakage current measurements shall be made with the least favourable specified external part. 9.7.1.5 The patient auxiliary current shall be measured between any single electrode and all other electrodes of the same function of the applied part connected together. 9.7.2 Single Fault Conditions continuous values of the earth leakage current, the enclosure leakage current, the patient leakage current and the patient auxiliary current shall be investigated under the following single fault conditions: a) The interruDtion of one SUPPLY conductor with each at a time. 1 To be perfoiieh supply conductor; The interruption of a single protective earth conductor (not applicable in the case of earth .leakage current ). Not to be investigated if an additional protective earth conductor, or a fixed and permanent1.y installed protective earth conductor 1s specified; C) The short-circuiting in turn of each of the constituent parts of a double insulation; of the insulation 4 The short-circuiting between an applied part and live parts of secondary circuits where the creepage distances and air clearances are not in accordance with the requirements of IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992; and 4 Failure of insulation between the applied parts and live parts of the output circuit ( patient leakage current only ). 9.7.2.2 Additionally, the continuous value of the patient leakage current shall be investigated under the following single fault conditions:
9.7.2.1 The

9.7.4 Testing - [see IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 1. a) The earth leakage current, the enclosure leakage current, the patient leakage current and the patient auxiliary current shall be tested after the equipment has been brought up to normal operating temperature and again after the moisture preconditioning treatment. b) The equipment shall be connected to a supply with a voltage equal to 110 percent of the highest rated mains voltage. If the equipment has an internal mains switch, this switch is put in the `ON'. position. Three-phase equipment which is also c> suitable for single-phase supply is tested as single-phase eq,uipment with three sections connected in parallel. d) Where examination of the circuit arrangement and the arrangement of components and material of the equipment shows no potential hazard, the number of tests may be reduced. 9.7.4.2 Measuring suppiy circuits IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992. are shown in

9.7.4.3 Connection of the equipment with themeasuring supply circuit are given in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992. 9.7.4.4 Measuring arrangement is shown in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992. 9.7.4.5 Measuring device ( MD ) is shown in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992. 9.7.4.6 Method of measurement of earth leakage current is given in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992. 9.7.4.7 Method of measurement of enclosure leakage current is given in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992. 9.7.4.8 Measurement procedure of patient leakage current is given in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) :. 1992. The patient leakage current shall be measured from end to metal foil in intimate contact with the total area of that part of the applicator applied to the patient in normal use. 9.8 Dielectric Strength 9.8.1 General Requirements The dielectric strength shall between: be investigated

a) A voltage equal to 1'0 percent

b)

of the higher rated voltage applied between any signal input or signal output part ( not being an applied part ) and earth; and A voltage' equal to 110 percent of the highest rated mains voltage applied between any F-type isolated ( floating ) applied part and earth.
6

a) the mains part and the body

of theequipment; b) the mains part and conductive parts isolated from the mains part by basic insulation only;

*. i

IS 13523 ( Part 1) : 1992 shall be checked by the following

parts isolated from the mains part by basic insulation only; 4 the mains part and the input part on one hand and the ouput part, the signal input part and the signal output part, in turn, on the other hand; parts of opposite polarity of the mains part or of the input part or of the output part; f) conductive enclosures ( or covers ) lined with insulating material and metal foil applied for testing purposes in contact with the inner surface of the lining if the distance measured through the lining between parts of the mains part and these enclosures or covers is less than the requrred air clearance; d metal foil, not larger than 200 mm x 100 mm, applied in contact with knobs, handles, grips and similar parts, and their shafts or supports if these shafts or supports become live in single fault condition; h) the body of the equipment and either metal foil wrapped around a flexible power supply cable or cord inside inlet bushings, cord guards, cord anchorages and similar parts or a metal rod having the same diameter as the flexible cable or cord, inserted into its place; and j ) a signal input part, signal output part and the body of the equipment, in turn. 9.8.2 insulation Under Stress and High Temperature
9.8.2.1 of the RF Voltage

cl the body of the equipment and conductive

Compliance test:

Each pair of applicator is connected in turn to the equipment using the cables as specified by the manufacturer. The applicator to be tested is suspended or supported so that it is spaced at least 500 mm from all other objects with the exception of the applicator arm of the equipment or similar supporting device. The second applicator of the pair is positioned and spaced 10 mm above an earthed metal plate having dimensions of not less than 300 mm x 300 mm. The arrangement is shown in Fig. 1. The equipment is operated at maximum power and the output circuit tuned to resonance, repositioning the second applicator, if necessary. The test is performed using an earthed metal probe of 8 mm diameter with a hemispherical end, mounted into an insulation rod to form a test handle, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The hemispherical end of the probe shall be applied to the applicator and moved slowly but continuously over the surface of the applicator and the full length of its connecting cable and shall not be allowed to rest at any point. There shall be no evidence of flash-over or breakdown. It is essential that the metal plate used in this test has a low impedance to earth at the operating frequency. 9.8.2.2 The insulation between the output circuit and the body of the equipment shall be able to withstand the hrghest rf voltage of this circuit, with the equipment at the maximum temperature attained in normal use.

The insulation of the applicators their cables shall be able to withstand maximum rf voltage in the output circuit.

and the

\*---

>500 mm

-I

/
LOW IMPEDANCE CONNECTION TO EARTH METAL PLATE

FIG. 1

RF DIBLEC~'RIC STRENGTH TEST
7

IS 13523 ( Part 1) : 1992
HEMIEND

TO EARTH FIG.

2

TEST PROBE
NOTE - Limit5 of electric and ma"ne:ic field strengths of unwanted rf radiation atd c!ectromagnetic compatibiiity arc under consideration.

Compliance tyst:

shall be checked

by the following

Immediately after the temperature-rise test, the equipment is operated for a period of 30 seconds with one applicator positioned near an earthed metal plate as described above and the other applicator and its cable disconnected from the squipment, the output circuit being tuned to resonance as far as possible. This test is repeated for the other side of the output circuit. 9.8.2.3 Each of the constituent parts of any double insulation between the rf generator and the output shall be able to withstand the maxin~um rf voltage of the equipment. Compliance shall be checked as in the preceding test, but with each of the two constituent parts of the double insulation short-circuited in turn. NOTE -The
requirements and tests of this clause taice into account the fact that the insulation of the output circuit is stressed almost exclusively by radiofrequency voltages. The insulating materials must be suitable for the highest temperatures occurring in normal use.

12 PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS EXPLOSIONS IN MEDICALLY USED ROOMS 12.1 Relevant

OF

provisions 1992 shall apply.

cf IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) :

AGAINST EXCES8IVE TEMPERATURES, FIRE AND OTHER HAZARDS, SUCH AS HUMAN ERRORS 13.1 Excessive Temperatures 13.1.1 Equipment and its parts shall not attain temperatures exceeding the values given in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 and no safety hazards shall result when the equipment is operated in the range of ambient temperatures specified in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992.

13 PROTECTION

IS

9.5.3 Test voltage values shall 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992.

be as given in

13.1.2 Equlpment, equipment parts and their environment shall not attain temperatures exceeding the values given in IS 13450 (Part 1 1: 1992 when the equipment is operated during normal use but at an ambient temperature of 27 "C. 13.1.3 The equipmenL is fitted with the smallest capacitive applicators spacified by the manufacturer for use at the rated output power. The electrodes are spaced 25 mm each from the metal plates of the resistive load and the equipment is operated at maximum output setting for the period of time specified in IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992. 13.2 In all other respects, the equipment shall satisfy the requirements of IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) ; 1992.

10 PROTECTION
H4ZARDS 10.1 Relevant

AGAINST

MECHANICAL

provisions 1992 shall apply.

of IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) :

FROM UNWANTED RADIATION I il.1 The equipment

18 PROTECTtON

AGAINST HAZARDS OR EXCESSIVE

shall satisfy the requirements ~:!fIS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1992.

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bar-a of Indim Stmdudr BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the fo llowing reference: Dot : No MHD 19 ( 2221 1

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of lssue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 0131, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS

110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 1 37 84 99, t 37 86 26, 37 85 61 37 86 62

Eastern ; 1 14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola c!ALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

53 38 43, 53 16 40 53 23 84 I 235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 { 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New lndia Printing Press. Khuria. Lodm

