amda ATT IS 15475 (Part 4) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


mR & fara gefa ware A a AA 
ate 
MT 4 Waa, UMA sie Waren sr AAT 
( Teer gastaro ) 


Code of Recommended Practice for 
Amusement Rides Safety 


Part 4 Selection, Training and 
Supervision of Operators 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.200.40 


© BIS 2022 


FRAN Ae St 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Vee HAP HOA, 9 Ieg MS AH AMT, Ae feet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 5 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 6 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


Amusement parks in India are becoming quite common and people visit these parks quite often. In order to ensure 
their safety in amusement parks or while enjoying the rides, an attempt has been made to stipulate safety in the 
form of a National Code. It is hoped that organizers of amusement parks, manufacturers of rides would make use 
of these codes to ensure the overall safety of human beings and equipment at such places. 


This revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international 
practices. This revision incorporates the following major changes: 


a) More safety provisions were added in clauses 4, 5, 6. 


The code of recommended practice for amusement rides safety is in six parts. This standard covers the essential 
requirements relating to the selection, training, and supervision of operators. The other parts in this series under 
the general title are as follows: 


Part 1 General information 

Part2 Safety requirements 

Part3 Design, manufacture and erection 

Part5 Operation and maintenance procedures 

Part6 Performance tests 

The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 


2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values’ (second revision). The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15475 (Part 4) : 2022 


Indian Standard 
CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES 
SAFETY 
PART 4 SELECTION, TRAINING AND SUPERVISION OF OPERATORS 


(First Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) covers specific requirements 
relating to the selection, training, and supervision of 
operators for the safe and proper operation of 
amusement rides and devices. 


General information and safety requirements for 
amusement rides are given in IS 15475 (Part 1) and 
IS 15475 (Part 2) respectively and a reference to 
these standards may be useful during the selection of 
operators. their training and supervision of 
operators/attendants. 


This standard is not intended to contravene any 
provision of any of the existing Government 
regulations. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
code to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and comply with regulatory and statutory 
requirements prior to the use of the ride or device for 
carrying a passenger for amusement. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


15475(Part 1) : Code of | recommended 


2022 practice for amusement rides 
safety — Part 1 General 
information 


15475 (Part 2) : Code of | recommended 


2022 practice for amusement rides 
safety — Part 2 Safety 
requirements 


3 SELECTION 


While selecting operators for amusement/joy rides, 
due regard shall be given to the physical fitness and 
maturity of the applicants and their aptitude for the 
work to be done in line with the following aspects: 


3.1 Ride Operators handle mechanical riding 
vehicles. Key responsibilities for this job include: 


a) Inspecting devices; 

b) Providing instructions to riders; 

c) Making sure patrons are installed safely; 
d) And implementing safety procedures. 


Ride Operators should demonstrate attention to 
safety, device maintenance expertise, customer 
service orientation, communication abilities, and 
teamwork. 


3.2 Ride Operators are trained in a number of 
rides. They are therefore likely to operate different 
rides at different times and should always have 
knowledge of the ride they are operating. To 
become a Ride Operator, one needs to have the 
following characteristics: 


a) A very responsible attitude; 

b) Quick reactions; 

c) Clear communication skills; 

d) Commitment, and flexibility; 

e) Ability to respond in emergency situations. 


3.3 Ride Operator will be responsible for the safety 
of the people, using the ride. Before the ride is used 
each day, they need to carry out the following: 


a) Safety checks to make sure the ride is in 
good working order; 

b) Make sure that the area is clean, tidy, and 
free of hazards; 

c) When allowing people onto the ride, make 
sure that height, weight, or age restrictions 
are followed; 

d) Ensure that safety belts or restraints are 
securely fastened; 

e) If relevant, riders to be reminded to keep 
their arms and legs inside the ride; 

f) On some rides, they may need to give 
announcements or remind riders of rules 


IS 15475 (Part 4) : 2022 


regarding pregnant women or people with 
heart conditions. 


3.4 Ride Operators do not leave the ride while it is 
operating. They need to watch the ride and riders at 
all times. If there is a problem, rides need to be 
stopped and only start again when the problem has 
been sorted out. Any serious safety concerns are 
reported to a Supervisor. 


3.5 Operators are sometimes responsible for basic 
ride maintenance. At theme parks, they are often 
required to do things like pick up litter, assist 
customers with directions and generally be a 
‘friendly face' of the park. 


4 TRAINING OF OPERATORS AND 
ATTENDANTS 


All employers have a duty and a responsibility to 
ensure that workers are trained before starting a job. 
Supervisors have an identical duty and 
responsibility. The employer supervisor or another 
competent person may provide training. The 
employer should retain the proof of training in order 
to reduce the company’s liability. At the very least, 
training should be documented and_ include 
performance testing. 


Admittedly, the leading cause of amusement park 
injuries today is rider misconduct. It should also be 
noted that major accidents happen on roller coasters 
and whirling rides on a more consistent basis than 
with any other ride. Many riders are not properly 
buckled in, and in most cases, they are not following 
the rules. For example, they may lean or stand up 
when it is ill-advised. If these instances are taken 
out, however, it is noted that there are still plenty of 
incidents that happen due to mechanical failure 
where a question of proper training comes to play. 


It is to be noted that improper training for ride 
operators can lead to improper supervision. 


4.1 The owner/operator shall provide training for 
each ride or device operator and attendant of an 
amusement ride or device. The training shall include 
but not be limited to the following: 


a) Instruction on ride or device operating 
proce-dures; 

b) Instructions on specific duties of the 
assigned position; 

c) Instructions on general safety procedures; 

d) Instructions on emergency procedures; 

e) Physical demonstration of the ride or 
device operation; 

f) Physical operation of the ride or device; 

g) Supervised operation of the ride or device; 

h) Additional instructions deemed necessary 
by the owner or operator; and 

j) Maintenance procedures. 


4.2 During the training particular care shall be taken 
to ensure that each operator understands the 
following: 


4.2.1 The dangers and hazards which are known to 
arise in the course of normal working. 


4.2.2 The purpose of the safety guards and safety 
devices provided for the protection of operators, 
maintenance personnel, passengers, and equipment. 


4.2.3 The dangers and hazards liable to arise from 
bad practices, negligence, and misuse. 


4.2.4 Preventive maintenance and lubrication 
schedule recommended by the 
manufacturer/designer. 


4.2.5 The necessity for contacting the person in 
charge if any fault(s) or defect(s) arise and danger to 
the operator/attendant in attempting to correct the 
fault. 


4.2.6 Duties of operator and attendant at a specific 
position and stage of operation. 


4.2.7 Awareness of specific emergency and safety 
devices to be operated or used in the event of 
abnormal condition or on interruption of service. 


4.2.8 Recommended and established reporting 
system. 


4.3 Clear instructions shall be given that guards or 
safety devices (Electrical and mechanical) shall not 
be tampered with, removed, or altered in any way 
and that adjustable guards shall be readjusted only 
by an authorized technical person. 


4.4 The operator’s knowledge on the use of 
amusement rides and the safety precautions to be 
taken shall be periodically checked and necessary 
instructions be issued to operator and attendant 
regarding important and emergency requirements to 
be taken care of while operating the ride and use of 
its devices. 


4.5 Where a worker is exposed to falling from 
heights, they shall be adequately protected by one of 
the following methods of fall protection: 


a) A travel restraint system; 
b) A fall arrest system. 


The travel restraint system allows for the use of a 
full-body harness, or, a safety belt attached by a 
lifeline or lanyard to a fixed support. The full-body 
harness could be attached to a self-retracting device 
that is itself attached to a fixed support. 


The fall arrest system consists of a full-body harness 
attached to a lanyard equipped with a shock 


absorber. The system shall be attached to a fixed 
support. A shock absorber should not be used if, 
wearing or using one could cause a worker to hit the 
ground or an object or level below the work surface. 


Anemployer shall ensure that a worker who may use 
a fall protection system is adequately trained in its 
use and given both oral and written instructions by a 
competent person. A record of training shall be kept 
by the employer. 


4.6 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 


PPE required by workers during set-up and take- 
down is governed by the applicable jurisdiction. 
Ingeneral, safety footwear and hard hats are required 
where there is a danger of injury to the head or feet. 
Selection of PPE must meet national or international 
standards for manufacture and performance. Other 
PPE that may be required includes hand, eye, and 
face protection, fall arrest equipment, and protective 
clothing. Supervisors must ensure that training in the 
use and care of PPE is provided to a worker. 


5 SUPERVISION 


5.1 A ride operator shall be closely supervised by a 
person with thorough knowledge including the 
related regulations and statutory requirements 
relating to amusement/joy rides. The duties of the 
operator shall be closely monitored till he is found 
fully conversant with the work assigned. 


5.2 Regular supervision of ride operators and 
attendants is essential to ensure that safe practices 
are being followed and the ride is working in a safe 
and proper manner. 


5.3 Safety Alert 


This alert is to advise on the matter of appropriate 
supervision of individuals who are accompanied by 
support staff on recreational outings to amusement 
parks, fairs, and carnivals. It is to be ensured that: 


a) All support staff are familiar with and 
adhere to specific individual supervision 
guidelines; 

b) Individuals who use amusement rides are 
aware of safe behavior while on the rides; 

c) All support staff supervises as appropriate, 
individuals entering a ride car or seat, 
paying particular attention to the 
appropriate use of the ride's safety restraint 
feature. 


5.4 Inadequate Ride Supervision 


At amusement parks, waterparks, and carnivals, it is 
the responsibility of the staff to supervise rides and 
make sure that they are running smoothly. 
Inadequate supervision of rides can lead to issues 


IS 15475 (Part 4) : 2022 


such as accidents and injuries. Following are the 
issues where ride operators are responsible for, and 
how inadequate supervision can lead to accidents. 


a) Focus 


Ride operators are hired to make sure that 
rides are properly run. Unfortunately, there 
are many things that might distract a ride 
operator and cause issues with the ride. 
First, the ride operator might be exhausted 
from working long hours. If a ride operator 
is too tired, they might begin to lose focus 
on what they are supposed to be doing. This 
could cause them to push the wrong buttons 
and levers and cause an issue with the ride. 
Or, it can distract them from making sure 
that all riders meet the size and weight 
requirements and are safely strapped into 
the rides. 


Ride operators can also be distracted by 
other things, such as cell phones, other 
employees, or things happening elsewhere 
in the park. To avoid these issues, ride 
operators should be hired carefully, given 
shifts that are not too long, and properly 
trained. 


Ride operators must be physically and 
mentally fit to operate the rides. They 
should maintain weight and general fitness, 
in case need to climb the ride structures for 
inspection or emergency evacuation. Their 
fitness must be checked by the 
management on regular basis. It should be 
part of their general terms of employment. 


b) Improper Height/Weight 


Many rides have the height or weight 
requirements. Ride operators should not let 
a person under the height or weight 
requirements onto the ride under any 
circumstances. 


c) Too Many Riders 


Another issue with ride supervision is 
letting too many riders onto a ride. Again, 
this might happen because the ride operator 
is trying to be cool and purposefully 
breaking the rules. Or, the ride operator 
may not be paying attention and may 
accidentally let too many people onto the 
ride or overlook the total number of people 
who are getting on the ride. 


6 SAFE OPERATING PROCEDURES 


In addition to statutory and other requirements 
relating to the safety of ride in general, specific 


IS 15475 (Part 4) : 2022 


attention of the operators shall be drawn to observe 
the following relating to creation/installation where 
the operator observes any deficiency in these, he 
shall submit the fact report to the 
appropriate/competent authority for immediate 
remedial action: 


a) All stopping and starting controls shall be 
clearly marked. The area around these 
devices shall be kept free of obstruction to 
ensure free access to them and a clear view 
of them at all times; 

b) The area around all loading and unloading 
points on the amusement ride shall be kept 
clear of obstructions at all times; 

c) Use of ride shall be permitted after a 
satisfactory trial run; 

d) No maintenance or repair work shall be 
carried out while a ride is in operation. 
While undertaking the maintenance or 
repairs work, power shall be disconnected 
and the starting control shall be positively 
locked. Shutdown permission shall be 
taken prior to commencing any repair or 
maintenance work; 

e) In case the ride has stopped due to the 
overloading of passengers, the reason for 


2) 


h) 


aD) 


k) 


m) 


stopping shall be ascertained. The starting 
control shall be locked out before excess 
passenger(s) are un-loaded and the 
stoppage is cleared before re-starting; 

No overload and safety control shall be 
removed from the ride and overload and 
safety devices shall be checked on a regular 
basis. Precaution shall be taken to prevent 
anyone excepting a competent authorized 
person from adjusting or tampering with 
the adjustment of such control; 

The operational staff deployed on a ride or 
device shall be conversant with the location 
and operation of stopping control/device; 
At no time shoulda ride to be used for a 
purpose other than one for which it was 
designed and neither shall it be loaded in 
excess of its safe working load; 

Good housekeeping shall be maintained at 
all times; 

Operators and attendants shall not wear 
loose clothing which may cause a trapping 
hazard; 

Operation of Inflatable should be stopped 
during the storm. 


IS 15475 (Part 4) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


Organization(s) 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


CSIR — Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Conveyor and Ropeway Services Private 
Limited, Kolkata 


Desein Private Limited, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanba 


Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur 


Elecon Engineering Company Limited, Gujarat 
Indian Association of Amusement Parks and 
Industries, Mumbai 


Lepton Projects Private Limited, Ghaziabad 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Mcnally Bharat Engineering Company Limited, 
Kolkata 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, 
New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Mineral Development Corporation, 
Hyderabad 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHRA (Chairman) 


SHRI DEBASHISH BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA M. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHKRAVARTY 
SHRI KAMAL KUMAR BOSE (Alternate) 


SHRI H. K. GUPTA 
SHRI ARVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. P. NIJALINGAPPA 
SHRI H M BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI D. B. NAYAK 
SHRI VIJAY YADAORAO BARAPATRE (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI C S SHAH 
SHRI. K.S. KODIA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SHRI ANIL PADWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI PIYUSH RATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY BHATTACHAR 
SHRI AMIT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY MAITI 
SHRI SANDIPAN DAW (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI O. P. KALIA 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR MEHTA 
SHRI S. SURENDER (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE KUM. GHOSH (Alternate) 


IS 15475 (Part 4) : 2022 


Organization(s) 
Polo Amusement Park Lmited, Gurugram 
Project and Development India Limited, Noida 
RITES Limited, Gurugram 
Ropeway and Resorts Private Limited, Kolkata 


TRF Limited (A Tata Enterprise), Jamshedpur 
Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi 
Mumbai 


Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad 


Usha Martin Limited, Ranchi 


In personal capacity (145/4A, South Sinthi 
Road, Kolkata — 700050) 


In personal capacity (BH/V1I/SF, VIP Floors 
Sector 81, DPS Faridabad, Haryana - 121007) 


In personal capacity (F-7B DDA MIG Flats, 
Hari Nagar, New Delhi - 110006) 


In personal capacity (20 D, Dhakuria 
Station Road, Kolkata - 700031) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANTOSH CHAWLA 


SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 


SHRI A.K. KINRA 


SHRIN. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUJOY MATTI 
SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 
SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBRATA DUTTA 
SHRI SANDEEP JAISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI C. K. KARMAKAR 


SHRI ASHUTOSH BHADRA 


SHRI S. C. GANDHI 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD 
(MED) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (18111). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


