ARAL AAF IS 11561 : 2018 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


és urdt s erai enr udrerur — 
fifa afear 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Code of Practice for Testing of 


Water Cooling Towers 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 66.045.5:620.16:006.76 


© BIS 2018 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4$ Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2018 Price Group 3 


Refrigeration and Air-conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Refrigeration and Air-conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1986. The experience gained in the industry necessitated the revision of 
this standard incorporating technological changes during past few decades. 


The major additions in this revision are as follows: 
a) Terminologies; 
b) Conducting test; and 
c) Consistency of test result. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised V’. 


IS 11561 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TESTING OF 
WATER COOLING TOWERS 
( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This Indian Standard describes recommended code 
of practice for performance testing of water cooling 
towers. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 
2.1 Cooling Tower 


A Cooling tower is a type of heat exchanger, in which 
the process water comes in contact with the atmospheric 
air, and heat is rejected to the atmosphere by way of 
evaporation of some percentage of process water. The 
cold water, which is near the wet bulb temperature, is 
returned to the system. 


The water surface is extended by filling, which presents 
a film surface or creates drops due to splashing or by 
spraying which produced droplets. 

2.2 Air Flow 


Total quantity of air flowing through the cooling tower. 
2.3 Inlet Air Wet Bulb Temperature 


Average wet bulb temperature of the air at inlet to the 
cooling tower. 

2.4 Circulating Water Flow 

The quantity of hot water flowing into the cooling 
tower. 

2.5 Hot Water Temperature 

Temperature of circulating water entering the cooling 
tower. 

2.6 Re-cooled Water Temperature 

Temperature of circulating water leaving the cooling 
tower. 

2.7 Cooling Range 

Difference between the hot-water temperature and the 
re-cooled water temperature. 

2.8 Heat Load 


Rate of heat removal from the circulating water within 
the cooling tower. 


2.9 Approach 

Difference between the re-cooled water temperature 
and the inlet air wet bulb temperature. 

2.10 Evaporation Loss 


Water evaporated from the circulating water and 
discharged into the atmosphere by the fan. 


It is represented by the percentage of circulating water. 


2.11 Drift Loss 


Water lost from the cooling tower as liquid droplets 
entrained in the outlet air. It is represented by the 
percentage of circulating water. 


2.12 Purge or Blow Down 


Water discharged from the system to control the 
concentration of salts or other impurities in the 
circulating water. It is represented by the percentage of 
circulating water. 


2.13 Make Up 


Water added to the circulating water system to replace 
water loss from the system by evaporation, drift, purge 
and leakage. It depends upon cycle of concentration. It 
is represented by the percentage of circulating water. 


2.14 Cold Water Basin 

A device underlying the tower to receive the cold water 
from the tower and direct its flow to the suction line or 
sump. 

2.15 Packing or Fill 

The material which forms the heat transfer surface or 
creates droplets of water within the tower and over which 
the water is distributed in its passage down the tower. 
2.16 Water Distribution 

The arrangement whereby the water is conveyed to all 
parts of the packing at the top of the tower. 

2.17 Casing or Cladding 

The facing material which surrounds the packing and 
retains the water within the tower. 

2.18 Tower Pumping Head 


The head of water required at the inlet to the tower 
measured above the basin kerb to deliver the circulating 
water through the distribution system. 


IS 11561 : 2018 


2.19 Fan Power 


The power input to the fan assembly excluding power 
losses in the driver. 


2.20 Fan Drive Assembly 


Components for providing power to the fan, normally 
comprising driver, drive shaft and transmission unit 
and primary supporting members. 


3 TECHNICAL GUARANTEE 


3.1 The object of the test procedure 1s to determine the 
overall operating characteristics of the cooling tower 
and to verify the technical guarantee as agreed between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 


3.2 The guarantee shall cover functional and thermal 
performance of the cooling tower in terms of quantity of 
water, cooling range, approach, and inlet air conditions 
within the conditions of validity specified in 4. 


4 CONDITIONS OF VALIDITY OF TESTS 


In determining the performance and thermal efficiency 
of cooling towers, the following conditions of validity 
shall be fulfilled. 


These conditions may also form the basis for contractual 
agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 


4.1 Conditions of Equipment 


At the time of test all equipment and system shall be 
in proper operating condition and the following checks 
shall be made. 


4.1.1 Water distribution system shall be clear and free 
from foreign materials which may clog or impede 
normal water flow. 


4.1.2 Mechanical equipment shall be in good working 
order and set for design duty. 


4.1.3 Drift eliminators shall be clear and free from algae 
and other deposits which may impede normal air flow. 


4.1.4 Fill Packing shall be level and free from foreign 
material, such as oil, scale or algae. 


4.1.5 Water level in water basin shall be at normal 
operating elevation, immediately prior to the test. 


4.1.6 Wherever possible the make-up and purge should 
be shut off during the test in the interest of simplicity 
and accuracy. 


4.1.7 Appropriate location and facilities must be 
provided to place the measuring equipment including 
the flow meter and thermometer. 


4.2 Conditions of Atmosphere 


The test should be carried out during stable weather 
conditions with the following restrictions. 


NOTE — The test must be carried in the day time and when the 
visibility is good. 
4.2.1 The average wind velocity shall not exceed 
5.0 m/s when measured at a height of 1.5 to 2.0 m 


above local ground level. However for 1.0 min it may 
reach 7.0 m/min. 


4.2.2 The inlet wet bulb temperature should be within 
+ 5°C of the design wet bulb temperature. Readings 
may fluctuate but the rate of change in average wet bulb 
temperature shall not exceed 1°C/min. 


4.3 Variation from Design Conditions 


The following variations of average test readings from 
design conditions shall be permissible. 


4.3.1 Circulating water flow not more than 10 percent 
above or 10 percent below the design value. 


4.3.2 Cooling range not more than 20 percent below or 
20 percent above design. 


4.3.3 Heat load not more than 20 percent below or 
20 percent above design. Total dissolved solids in the 
water shall be within + 10 percent of agreed limits. 


4.3.4 During the hour selected as being representative 
of the test conditions, the difference between maximum 
and minimum readings of circulating water flow, 
cooling range and heat load, shall not exceed 5 percent. 


5 TEST REQUIREMENT 


5.1 Functional Test Requirements 


In order to establish that the cooling tower is fully 
operational and that the mechanical equipment is 
functional in accordance with the design requirements, 
checks should be made on the equipment described in 
5.1.1, 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 as follows: 


5.1.1 Fans 
a) The fan blades are angled for design duty; 


b) The fan is centralized in the fan housing to 
ensure uniform tip clearance within the specified 
tolerances; 


c) The fan rotates in the correct plane, and 
d) The direction of rotation of the fan is correct. 


5.1.2 Fan Drive Assembly 


a) The fan drive is aligned within the specified 
tolerances; 

b) The lubrication is in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s recommendations; 

c) The fan power observed under no heat load 
conditions is within the capacity of the driver; and 

d) There is no excessive mechanical noise or 
vibrations. 


5.1.3 Water Distribution System 
a) All the valves are operating freely; 


b) The system is regulated for even distribution for 
single as well as multi cell towers; and 


c) The water levels are correct with sufficient free 
board. 
5.2 Performance Test Requirements 


5.2.1 Thermal Performance Tests 


To conduct a full thermal performance test, it is 
necessary to take readings of the following quantities: 


SI. No. Parameter Unit 
(1) Q) 8) 
i) Wind velocity m/s 
ii) Wet bulb temperature G 
iii) Dry bulb temperature 2G 
iv) Hot water temperature ut 
v) Re-cooled water temperature aG 
vi) Circulating water flow m/s 
vii) Make up water quantity and temperature — m?/s and °C 
vii) Purge water quantity and temperature m?/s and °C 
ix) Power consumption kW 


5.2.2 Power Consumption 


5.2.2.1 Pumping head 


It is to be checked that total head at the tower inlet is 
correct for design conditions. 


5.2.2.2 Fan power 


It is to be checked that the fan power is in agreement 
with that quoted for design. It should be determined 
by means of voltage, current, and power factor. The 
measurement will be done at the motor terminals and 
proper derating factor to be taken into consideration for 
motor efficiency. 


5.2.3 Amenities 


In the event of the test involving contractual obligations, 
covered by guarantee, observations may be required of 
the following: 


a) Tower noise, and 
b) Drift nuisance. 


6 INSTRUMENTS AND METHODS 
MEASUREMENT 


OF 


6.1 Measurement of Wind Velocity 


The instrument recommended for the measurement of 
wind velocity is a rotating vane type anemometer. 


6.1.1 Calibration of the instrument before use is 
necessary. Measurement shall be made in an open 


IS 11561 : 2018 


and unobstructed location to the windward side of 
the equipment at a horizontal distance sufficient to 
eliminate the influence of the upstream effects of the 
equipment and a vertical distance 1.5 to 2.0 m above 
local ground level. 


6.1.2 The frequency of readings taken should increase 
with wind speed and gust effect, in order to arrive at a 
representative average result. 


6.2 Temperature Measurement 


6.2.1 Measurement of Air Temperature 


The inlet wet bulb temperature shall be determined as 
the arithmetical average of measurements taken within 
1.5 m of air inlets and between 1.5 and 2.0 m above 
the basin kerb elevation on both sides of the cooling 
tower, so as to bracket substantially the air flow to the 
tower. 


The number of stations at which measurements should 
be taken depends upon the size of the cooling tower and 
the existence of neighbouring influences. 


6.2.2 Measurement of Water Temperature 


The location of the temperature measuring instrument 
shall be such that the true average temperature of 
the hot circulating water entering the distribution 
system of the cooling tower and the re-cooled 
circulating water entering the basin is determined. 
Make up and purge water temperature readings shall 
be taken in the piping immediately adjacent to the 
cooling tower. 


6.2.3 Temperature Measuring Instruments 


Temperature measurements shall be made with one or 
more of the following instruments: 


a) Mercury-in-glass thermometers; 
b) Thermocouples; and 


c) Electric resistance thermometers. 


The instrument accuracy shall be within + 0.1 pecent. 


In all measurement of wet-bulb temperature, sufficient 
wetting shall be provided and sufficient time shall be 
allowed for the state of evaporative equilibrium to be 
attained. 


6.3 Water Flow Measuring Instruments 


6.3.1 Volume measurements shall be made with either 
of the following instruments having an accuracy of 
+ | percent of the quantity measured: 


a) Liquid quantity meter, measuring either mass or 
volume; and 


b) Liquid-flow rate meter. 
6.3.2 Liquid quantity meter should employ a tank 


having sufficient capacity to accumulate the flow rate 
for at least 2 min. 


IS 11561 : 2018 


6.4 Measurement of Tower Pumping Head 


The following measurements shall be taken in order 
that the pumping head may be evaluated: 


a) Static pressure above atmosphere measured at 
the centre line of the water inlet to the tower and 
immediately adjacent to the connecting flange; 
and 


b) The height above basin kerb level of the point at 
which the above static pressure is measured. 


6.5 Measurement of Power Input to the Fan 


The power consumption shall be the average power 
consumption in watts measured during head load test. 


The power consumption shall not exceed by more than 
5 percent of the value stated on the name-plate. 


Electrical measurements shall be made with either 
indicating type or integrating type of instruments. 


6.6 Measurement of Drift Loss 


The amount of drift loss may be estimated by taking the 
difference between the quantity of make-up water flow 
and the sum of the purge flow and evaporation loss. 


6.7 Measurement of Tower Noise 


The total noise inclusive of the tower under full water 
and fan load shall be measured and also the background 
noise measured immediately before the test and 
exclusive of fan and water noise. 


6.7.1 Noise level shall be measured by an industrial 
grade sound level meter on ‘A’ scale. 


6.7.2 The microphone of the sound level meter shall 
be located out of doors, at least 1 to 5 m above local 
ground level and in position previously agreed between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 


6.8 Conducting the Test 


The duration of the tests should not less than one 
hour and test conditions should be stable, and also the 
visibility should be good. The number of readings per 
hour should be as given below: 

a) Water flow : 3 


b) Hot water temperature : 12 


c) Cold water temperature : 12 
d) Wind velocity : 12 
e) Wet bulb temperature : 12 


(3 reading should be taken at an interval of 10 s and 
average of 3 reading should be taken as one reading) 


6.9 Consistency of Test Results 
For reasonable test results, the variation in test 
conditions should be within following limits: 
a) Circulation water flow should not vary more than 
2.0 percent; 
b) Heat load should not vary more than 5.0 percent; 
c) Range should be within 5.0 percent; 
d) Wet bulb temperature (WBT) should be within 
1.0 degree during one hour of testing; and 


e) Dry bulb temperature (DBT) should be within 
3.0 degree during one hour of testing. 


7 EVALUATION OF RESULTS 


7.1 The measure ofthe thermal performance of a cooling 
tower is its ability to fulfil guaranteed conditions in 
terms of quantity of water, range, approach and inlet 
air conditions. 


7.2 The reading taken on the site, should be jointly 
signed by the owner and the contactor. 

This can be achieved by a direct comparison between 
the test results and the manufacturer's performance 
curves, and the results must be proved within a month. 


7.3 Since, there is always anxiety about the performance 
of the cooling tower, a thumb rule may be used to assess 
the performance on the site within 5.0 percent error. 


LOADED CMH x RANGE 
RATED CMH x RANGE 


x 100 


Performance = 


Where, 
CMH = Cubic Meter per Hour 
Range = Cooling range (see 2.7) 


IS 11561 : 2018 


ANNEX A 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organisation 
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurgaon 


Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 


Consumer Education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad 


Danfoss Industries Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon 

Directorate of Quality Assurance (Engg. Div.), Pune 

Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 

Electronic Regional Test Laboratory, New Delhi 

Emerson Climate Technologies(India) Pvt. Ltd, Karad 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engg , Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

National Horticulture Board, Ministry of Agriculture , 
Gurgaon 

National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 

Nirma University of Science & Technology, Ahmedabad 


Refrigeration & Airconditioning Mfr Association, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Pnor (Dr) Ravi Kumar (Chairman) 


Suri G. K. PRASAD 
Suri J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI SAURABH DIDDI 
SHRI MANJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


Suni BIMAL TANDON 
Suri D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. R. RAVIKUMAR 
SHRI GUJALA B.BALARAJA (Alternate) 


Ms SwETA MAHAJAN 


SHRI DEEPAK VERMA 
Suri K. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Lr. CoL. MAHENDRA Pnasa (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI DAMAN Kumar GuLari (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
Suri D. P. DEspANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
Dn Nitin Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dn Supr K. Das (Alternate) 


Dn JvoriRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA 


SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
Suri C. M. Patuak (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV KOCHHAR 
Suri S. T. HAQUE Farin (Alternate) 


Dn R. K. SHARMA 
SHRI BRAJENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. K. Jua (Alternate) 


Dn VikKAsH J. LAKHERA 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Suri R. K. Menta (Alternate) 


IS 11561 : 2018 


Organisation 
Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Spirotech Heat Exchanger Pvt Ltd., Bhiwadi 


SRF Ltd 
Symphony Ltd, Mumbai 


The Chemoours India Pvt Ltd., Gurgaon 

The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 

UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 

Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 

Voluntary Organizationn in Interest of Consumer Voice, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL BHARDWAJ 
Suni DwieEsH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RABINDEER N. KAUL 


Suri P. BHATTACHARYA 
Suri Amit Rami (Alternate) 


Suri VIKAS MEHTA 
Suri Nisurir SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri P. S. CHIDAMBARAM 
SHRI GIRISH SETHI (Alternate) 


Suri V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suni RITESH SINGH 
Suri A..D. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. WADHWA 


Suri B. K. MuknorApuvav (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. AGRAWAL 


Suri P. K. MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, 


ScIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Ms KuusuHBu JYOTSNA KINDO 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (11161). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


