4s 7363 :1s93
II

( Reaffirmed ( Reaffirmed 2003 )1998)

<(l14wl~*

hdlan

Standard

INLAND

VESSELS -- TESTS AND TRIALS FOR HARNNJR TUGS

LIDC 629"12-72:62"1"89

BU REAL!
MANA-K

OF

lNDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHA-H ZAFAR 2000111 Price Grrmp 3 MARCI

LUiAVAN,

WEN DELHI March i 993

Inland

and Harbour

Craft.Sectional

Committee,

TED

18

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Trancport Engineering Division Council. This standard lays down tests to be carried out on harbour tugs and was issued in 1974. The present revision of the standard has been taken to align the standard with the current trade practices. With the increase in size of both tankers and bulk carriers and the advent of specialized requiring a short turn around time, it has become necessary to increase the port facilities to these requirements. This directly makes it apparent that reappraisal of the requirements harbour berthing tug is a necessity, developments are under way to equip some of the These special devices are tonnage ships with special devices for manoeuvring and berthing. complementary to the berthing tugs. ships meet of the larger only

The word `tug' is now used universally in the material handling world to cover units for pushing towing and these units are readily adapted to suit specialized application. Nowadays when there is a wide variety of tugs available for selection, performance for acceptance will be extremely helpful to tug owners. The composition Annex A. of Committee responsible for the preparation a basis for assessing

or

their

of this

standard

is given at

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off. it shall be done in accordance with `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`.

if the fmal IS 2 : 1960

IS 7363 : 1993

Indian Standard

INLANDVESSELS-TESTSAND HARBOURTUGS (First Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down tests to be carried out on harbour tugs for assessing their performance for acceptance. 2 TESTS BEFORE Test CONSTRUCTION

TRIALSFOR

construction of tugs shall be produced by the builder to the inspecting authority if so required by the purchaser. 3.2 If desired by the purchaser, the builder shall ensure that the machinery and the equipment installed on the vessel are duly certified to be in conformity with the requirements of statutory authorities and classification societies. 4 TESTS AFTER CONSTRUCTION

2.1 Hull Model

Hull model test shall be carried out (unless/otherwise guaranteed by the builder, based on the proven hull form) in any of the approved experiment tank to: a) confirm the sufficiency of the prime mover with the hull proposed, to obtain the required/ specified free running speed and bollard pull on trials under the limiting condition of draught and displacement proposed and also to consider minor modifications in form likely to increase propulsive efficiency, if necessary, taking into account operations in restricted depths of water. b) determine the most suitable form of bilge keels. and the positions at which they shall be attached to the hull, to reduce the power absorbed to a minimum. c) confirm that the propeller proposed is satisfactory under the light and loaded conditions specified for speed as well as static bollard pull. 2.2 Hydrostatic Data

4.1 Inclining

Experiment

The following information regarding displacement shall be obtained before the construction is started: Estimated a> allowance draught of the tug, with maximum of + 50 mm.

Soon after the completion of construction of the tug, the builder shall carry out an inclining experiment in the presence of the owner's representatives and representative of statutory authorities. The experiment shall be carried out in fair weather and in calm water, preferably in sheltered waters or docks, the tug so placed as to avoid any effects of the wind and waves on the inclination of the vessel. During the experiment, all tanks shall be emptied or accounted for and the bilge shall be dry and no loose weights or materials, liable to shift, shall be on board except the inclining weights and righting weights which may be required to correct any list before the commencement of the inclining experiment. A careful check shall be made of the weights used and a complete record of all the weights including the number of persons on board the vessel, during the experiment shall be maintained. Based on the results of this inclining experiment and the hydrostatic data as per 2.2(c), the builders shall supply the final stability curves (stability booklet including cross curves of stability). 5 DOCK TRIALS

b)

Trim diagram to arrive at actual displacement and draught before and after in service conditions. curve showing the displacement scale, with curves of tonnes/cm, moment to change trim, longitudinal centre of buoyancy and flotation and vertical and longitudinal position of metacentre and also the coefficients. Construction for materials used in the 1

5.1 Before the tug leaves her moorings the deck for basins trials shali be carried out as follows: a) Main and auxiliary machinery running easy for 4 hours for testing, adjustment, flushing of pipe system, etc; generator and compressor unit b) Auxiliary running for two consecutive hours, carrying out specified duties satisfactorily; and c) Testing of electrical installations main and auxiliary generators. including

c>Hydrostatic

3

Test During

3.1 Test

certificates

IS 7363 : 1993 5.2 The following

of trials

indicated

trails may be conducted in 5.1: run at 20 percent trials consisting trials at: full full full full full load load load load load load; of:

in lieu

b)

a) Main b) Diesel

engine

At the termination of the generator tests the insulation resistance of the wiring throughout the vessel shall be checked to ensure compliance with requirements. Fresh water and sanitary systems shall be thoroughly tested over a period of two hours.

generator

cl

i) performance 30 50 80 100 110 percent percent percent percent percent test

1/2h l/2 h lh 2h 2%h

7 SEA TRIALS
7.1 Main Engine Testing

This test shall be carried Six hours a> with fluid

out as follows:

ii) Governor iii) Overload

trip test including

at continuous rated BHP complete couplings, gear boxes and controls;

iv) Testing of paralleling equipment reverse current protection.

b)

One hour at 10 percent overload immediately following eight hours test; between minimum rpm to rated rpm and by throwing off' load; and trip operates shall

c) Auxiliary units like pumps, compressors, centrifuges shall be run for 1 h (or as agreed upon to carry out specified duties satisfactory, d) Steering trial consisting of checking of:

Governor, c>

4

rpm at which overspeed be recorded. Set Testing

i) The operation of the gear and its changeover arrangement. ii) Synchronisation e) Warning 6 HABBOIJB
6.1 Bollard

7.2 Auxiliary

of rudder

indicators.

devices.
TBIALS

The main and auxiliary generator, hydraulic pump and compressor sets shall be tested as complete units with generator, air compressor and hydraulic pump rumiing simultaneously. Derating of diesel engines shall also be effected a similar manner to the main engines. These tests shall include: six a> hours at continuous rated power, test, and including in

Pull Trial

The bollard pull test shall be carried out in still water with the dynamometer secured to bollard by chain and resting on a smooth surface, preferably a steel plate. Length of the tow rope shall be according to requirements. Dynamometer readings shall be carefully recorded. Pull shall be recorded at four engine settings of 70, 80, 90 and 100 percent of specified full load, for specified rpm at full speed the vessel shall swing over from one side to the other until the tow rope is at least 40� on either quadrant. A duration of two minutes shall be taken for each pull with one minute interval in between. The quick release mechanism shall be demonstrated as well as any other tests as deemed necessary by the purchaser's representatives present at the trials. Dynamometer shall be calibrated before and after the trials. 6.1.1 Similar tests shall be carried out for ahead pull. All engine driven auxiliaries which normally run shall be operated during bollard trial. 6.2 Auxiliary
Engine Trial

b) 4
7.2.1

half an hour governor

overload c> testing reverse

trip to be tested: of parallel current trip.

equipment

All main auxiliary equipment shall be run during the test.
Trial

7.3 Speed

The speed trials shall be carried out in the specified loaded condition soon after the completion of the harbour trials and shall consist of: a) four rum over an approved measured distance at 80 percent power, two runs with and two runs against the tide; and b) four runs over an approved measured distance at full power, two runs with the two runs against the tide. 7.4 Manoeuvring
and Turning Trials

All auxiliary engines shall be tested for continuous rumiing at full power as follows:

a) Main and auxiliary generator and compressor
sets, six hours continuous rumiing during which records shall be made of full connected load temperatures, overload release, speed and load regulation. 2

The diameter of the turning circle shall be measured at the maximum speed under 35' of helm both port and starboard. The builder shall provided all necessary

IS 7363 : 1993 instruments for the accurate plotting of the turning circle. The time taken for one complete turning circle each way shall be recorded. Turning circle diameter shall not exceed two and a half lengths. Manoeuvring time for the following operations shall be carefully measured and recorded at loaded conditions. In case of twin screw tugs, the effect on turning/manoeuvring by running either of the screw shall also be recorded. Angle of heel during the turning trial shall also be recorded: a) Ship steaming full speed ahead and the engine rest telegraph pull to full astern: With the vessel at full astern, in which condition the rpm shall be at two-thirds of rpm at full speed ahead, the procedure mentioned above shall be repeated. 7.6 Anchoring The anchoring Trials test shall be carried out as follows:

Lower starboard a> go four lengths hand-brake.

anchor to water line and let of cables (110 m) using the

b)

1) time 2) time

taken to stop engines, taken to reverse engines,

Lower port anchor to water line and let go four lengths of cables (110 m) using the handbrake.

Heave two lengths of port anchor cable. The c> average speed for this operation shall not be less than 9 m per minute .

3) time taken for engines to reach full astern, 4) time taken for vessel to stop, for

4

5) time taken for vessel to gain sternway stationary position, and

Heave remaining two lengths of both anchors simultaneously. Note the time for this operation and the average speed assessed shall not be less than 9 m per minute.

6) time taken for vessel to gain full sternway from stationary position. Engine shall be kept at full astern for 1.5 minutes during which time the effect of the helm upon steering shall be tested.

NOTE - The depth of water may not permit full suspension of the anchor and cable during the tests, in which case the requirements shall be agreed to between the purchaser and the builder.

7.7 Endurance

Trial

b)

On completion of 15 minutes in the astern condition, the procedure shall be reversed and records similarly taken at given in (a) above. trials using the propellers shall be carried out and the diameter of the turning circle measured, along with the time taken under different conditions as considered necessary by the purchaser's representative. Ability of the vessel to maintain a straight course both in `ahead' and `astern' conditions, without using the rudders shall be tested. It may be waived out for river run. Trials

c>Manoeuvring

One to and fro endurance trial trip shall be carried out between two points as agreed to between the builder and the purchaser. During the trial, the record of fuel consumption and temperature shall be maintained. 8 INSPECTION AFTER TRIALS ANI) TESTS

4

8.1 The vessel may bc dry docked for thorough inspection, parts of the main and auxiliary machinery, fittings, etc, dismantled, if necessary, for inspection. All defects noticed during trials and subsequent inspection of the vessel shall be made good by the builder. 9 TESTING OF FIKE FIGHTING AND BILGE PUMPS 9.1 The following timings E~UIPMEN'I

7.5 Steering

With the vessel steaming full speed ahead, time required for the following operations of the helm shall be recorded: Midships Hardover Midships Hardover Hardover Hardover to hardover starboard starboard,

shall be recorded: from set

to midships, port,

a) Time required to pump at full pressure receipt of order, b) Time taken to change of machinery; and over to alternate

to hardover

port to midships, port to hardover starboard starboard, port, and

c) Time taken to fit foam nozzles and deliver foam both for monitors and hoses. 9.2 Bilge pump shall also bc tested for proper running. 9.3 Any other tests deemed necessary may be carried out as agreed to between the builder and the purchaser. Accessibility of all stores and equipment ladder may also be tested. 3

to hardover

Emergency steering/auxiliary to be tried to satisfaction.

steering controls

The timings recorded for the above operations conform to the statutory regulations.

shall

IS 7363 : 1993

ANNEX

A

( Foreword )
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Committee,
Representing

Inland and Harbour Crafts Sectional
Chairman SHRI

TED 18

S.

CHANDRA

Indian Register

of Shipping,

Bombay

Members SHRI S. N.

BASSI SHRI S. N. BASSI SHRI S. DANDAPAT
SHRI S. &ATIA ( AlternateI DIRECTOR (MECHANICAL) ' Ex-ENGINEER (MECH) ( Alternate ) DR J. P. GHOSE DR R. P. G~KRAN ( Alternate ) SHRI P. R. G~VIL SHRI APURBA RANJAN KAR SHRI R. K. KHATTAR SHRI S. P. DEOKULIAR( Altermite ) SHRI MADAN L. KOCHHAR SHRI P. K. BANER~I ( Alternnte ) . SHRI V. KUMAR SHRI P. MITRA ( Alternate ) SHRI M. E. MADHUSUDAN SHRI K. K. TIWARI( Alternate ) SHkI P. MITRA CAPT P. B. PATNAIK SHRI ASHOK DEY ( Alternate ) SHRI D. K. SAHA SHRI S. DU~TA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. SARKAR SHRI A. SENGUPTA SHRI B. R. K. GUPTA( Alternate ) SHRI J. D. GROVER( Alternate ) CAPT D. SENGUPTA SHRI R. Roy CHOUDHURY ( Alternate ) HEAD OF STANDARD CELL HEAD OF FORWARD DESIGNS GROUP I Altertzate j DY - CHIEF S&EYOR SHRI P. B. WARRIER SHRI M. C. BHATIA( Alternate ) CMDE R. K. WING CMDE R. NATH ( Alternate ) SHRI N. S. VUAYARAGHAVAN, Director (TED)

Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, Calcutta Confederation of Engineering Industry, New Delhi Inland Waterways Authority of India, New Delhi Ministry of Surface Transport (Development Kharegpur Wing), New Delhi Wing), New Delhi

Indian Institute

of Technology,

Ministry of Surface Transport (Shipbuilding & Shiprepair Hooghly Dock & Port Engineers Ltd, Howarh Bombay Port Trust, Bombay
American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay

Shipyard Directorate

Association General

of India, Bombay of Technical Development, New Delhi

Alcock Ashdown and Co Ltd, Bhavnagar Dredging Corp of India, Visakhapatnam Central Inland Water Transport Ship Consultants, Calcutta Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Corporation Ltd, Calcutta

Bombay

Calcutta Mazagon

Port Trust, Calcutta Dock Ltd, Bombay

Directorate General of Shipping, Bureau Veritas, Bombay Indian Navy, New Delhi Director General,
Secretary SHRI N. S. JUDGE Director (TED), BIS

Bombay

BIS ( Ex-ofi&

Member )

Port Craft Subcommittee,
Convener SHRI GUATAM SEN Members CDR R. K. BHATIA,VSM CDR S. SUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. BHATIA SHRI K. K. TIWARI( Alternate ) CHIEF SURVEYOR TO THE Govr OF INDIA SHRI A. K. CHOPRA SHRI S. DANDAPAT SHRI M. S. GANAPATHI ( Alternate )

TED 18: 1
Representing

Calcutta

Port Trust, Calcutta

Directorate Directorate

of Naval Architecture, General of Technical

Naval Headquarters, Development,

New Delhi

New Delhi

Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay Inland Waterway Authority of India, Noida (Dist. Ghaziabad)

4

IS 7363 : 1993 Port Craft Subcommittee,
Members
DIRECTOR (MECHANICAL) Ex ENGINEER (MECH) ( Alrenzate ) SHRI S. K. GHO~H SHRI D. ,L. J. PHILLIPS ( Ahmate ) SHRI N. J. GOSAVI SHRI E. J. CARRI ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. KHAT~AR SHRI S. P. DEOKULIAR( Alternate ) SHRI P. SURESH NAYAK SHRI D. K. SAHA SHRI S. D~T~A ( Alternate ) SHRI C. A. SEB.UXIAN SHRI V. RAMDADOSS( Alternate ) SHRI A. SENGUPTA SHRI J. D. GROVER ( Alternate ) SHRI M. K. SENGUPTA CAPT R. K. VIG CDR MANMOHAN SINGH ( Alternate ) Ministry Hoogbly Mazagon Bombay

TED 18:l (Con&L)
Representing

of Surface Docking

Transport,

New Delhi Co, Howrah

& Engineering

Dock Ltd, Bombay Port Trust, Bombay (Goa)

Goa Barrage Owners' Association, Vasco-da-Gamma Central Inland Water Transport Corp Ltd, Calcutta Madras Port Trust, Madras Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay

Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited, Calcutta Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence (NHQ), New Delhi

5

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Br~eau Q/" Ztuliurl Stmtlurtls Act, lY86 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by RIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Stnndards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright No part of these publicdtions may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. the free use, in the any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade course of implementing the standard, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed. it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Doc:No. TED 18 (767) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

I 10002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

331 01 31 I 331 I3 75 Maniktola 37 84 99, 1 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 1 53 23 84 235 02 16, { 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 I6 40 235 04 42 235 23 I5 632 78 58 632 78 92

Eastern

: l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VI1 M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. 1. T. Campus, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, MADRAS Andheri

Northern Southern Western

160036 600113

: Manakalaya, E9 MLDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAlPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printrade,

New Delhi,

India

