**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8252-6 (1976) : Environmental Tests for Aircraft 
Equipment, Part VI: Waterproof ness [TED 14: Aircraft and 
Space Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ud c 629-13-05 : 62Q-193'2 "kKAJHlOki} J99Q*S : 8252 ( Part VI )■ 4976 




( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 
Indian Standard 

ENVIRONMENTAL TESTS FOR AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT 

PART VI WATERPROOFNESS 



O 

CO 

CO 



1. Scope — Specifies tests for waterproofness applicable to equipment in aircraft which is required to 
operate when exposed to conditions where water is sprayed on it, as in driving rain, or where water is 
dripping on it, such as condensation falling from an adjacent aircraft structure. It covers two grades 
of waterproofness. 

2. Grades of Waterproofness — When required by the relevant equipment specification the equipment 
shall be declared as complying with either of the following grades of waterproofness: 

a) Grade A (Spray-Proof) — Equipment which is subjected to driving rain or required to operate 
when water is sprayed on it from any angle. Typical equipment in this grade would be that which 
is installed in the wheel bay of an aircraft where it would be subjected to rainwater being 
sprayed on it from a wet runway. Grade A equipment shall be subjected to the test described 
in 3. 

Equipment which has been demonstrated as being hermetically sealed may be considered 
as waterproof to Grade A requirements provided that any electrical terminals are of a suitable 
design to ensure adequate insulation. 

b) Grade B ( Drip-Proof) — Equipment which is required to operate in conditions when moisture 
droplets may be expected to fall on it, particularly unsealed equipment which may be so located 
that condensation from neighbouring structures, particularly xhe aircraft frame, occurring during 
the descent of a cold aircraft into a humid atmosphere can fall directly upon parts of equipment 
critical to wetting. Grade B equipment shall be subjected to the test described in 4. 

3. Test for Grade A (Spray-Proof) Equipment 

3.1 Test Conditions 

3.1.1 The equipment shall be subjected to this test in its normal mounting attitudes unless specified 
otherwise in the relevant equipment specification. 

3.1.2 All connections to the equipment shall be made as in normal operation or alternatively cover 
plates having equivalent sealing properties shall be fitted. 

3.1.3 If equipment is fitted with removable covers, ietc, these shall be placed in position as in normal 
operation. 

3.1.4 During the test the equipment shall, if required by the relevant equipment specification, be 
operated in the manner most vulnerable to the effects of ingress of water. 

3.2 Initial Examination — The equipment shall be visually inspected and electrically and mechanically 
checked as required in the relevant equipment specification. 

All sealing features shall be checked to determine whether they have been mounted correctly. 

3.3 Test Procedure 

3.3.1 The equipment shall be subjected to a shower of water from the shower head nozzle specified 
in 3.3.3, which shall be directed perpendicularly to the most vulnerable areas of the equipment, as stated 
in the relevant equipment specification. Each of the areas under test shall be exposed to the spray for 
a minimum period of 1 5 minutes. 

Note — If desired, the test may be applied simultaneously to more than one area at a time by using an appropriate 
number of shower heads. 

3.3.2 The shower head shall be located not more than 2'5 metres from the area under test. 



Adopted 27 October 1976 



© January 1977, ISI 



Price Rs 600 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAR© 

NEW DELHI 110002 




15:8252 ( Part VI) - 1976 

3.3.3 The dimensions of the shower head nozzle shall comply with the dimensions specified in Fig. 1 . 
This will provide shower with a divergent cone angle of approximately 35°. 




All dimensions in millimetres. 



A 


B 


C 


D 


£ 


G 


H 


; 


K 


t 


M 


N 


X* 


Y 


Zt 


13*5 


3'7 


19'0 


5'6 


12'7 


13'5 


159 


19 35'7 


2'3 


1-6 


6' 35 


* . 


1'6 


I 



♦IS: 554-1975 'Dimensions for pipe threads where pressure tight joints are required on the 
threads (second revision) '. 

tIS : 2643-1 975 ' Dimensions for pipe threads for fastening purposes '. 
FIG. 1 DIMENSIONS FOR SHOWER HEAD 



3.3.4 The inlet pressure to the shower head nozzle shall be 200 kPa. 

Note — This inlet pressure corresponds to a rate of water consumption of 450/ ±10 percent per hour. 

3.4 Recovery — No recovery procedures are to be carried out at the completion of the test unless 
permitted and stated in the relevant equipment specification. 

3.5 Final Examination — The equipment shall be visually examined for penetration of water and, 
if required, shall be electrically and mechanically checked as prescribed by the relevant equipment 
specification. 



IS: 8252 (Part VI)- 1976 

3.6 Information to be Stated in the Relevant Equipment Specification — When this test is included in the 
relevant equipment specification the following details shall be given, as far as they are applicable: 

Relevant Sub-clause 

a) Attitudes of the equipment, if other than normal 3.1.1 

b) Operation during test 3.1.4 

c) Initial visual examination, electrical and mechanical checks 3.2 

d) Sides to be sprayed, if other than six 3.3.1 

e) Recovery procedures, if permitted 3.4 
f) Final examination, electrical and mechanical checks 3.5 

4. Test for Grade B (Drip-Proof) Equipment 

4.1 Test Conditions 

4.1.1 The equipment shall be suhjected to this test in its normal mounting attitudes unless specified 
otherwise in the relevant equipment specification. 

4.1.2 Ail connections to the equipment shall be made as in normal operation, or alternatively cover 
plates having equivalent sealing properties shall be fitted. 

4.1.3 If equipment is fitted with removable covers, these shall be placed in position as in normal 
operation. 

4.1.4 During the test the equipment shall, if required by the relevant equipment specification, be 
operated in the manner most vulnerable to the effects of ingress of water. 

4.2 Initial Examination — The equipment shall be visually inspected and electrically and mechanically 
cr,eokea as required in the relevant equipment specification. 

4.3 General Description of Test — Water is allowed to drip at a specified rate on to the equipment, from 
a source such that the quantity of water per unit area is controlled and constant. 

4.4 Description of Test Apparatus — The apparatus required shall be a water container of adequate plan 
size having a number of orifices spaced at intervals of 25 mm on a square grid in its base which permit 
the water to drip freely and individually, at the specified rate. The size of the container will depend 
upon the plan area of the equipment to be tested; it may be restricted to such dimensions as to cover 
selected critical areas of large equipment if permitted by the relevant equipment specification. Suitable 
means shall also be provided to maintain the flow and head of water for the specified time (see Fig. 2 ). 

4.5 7es* Procedure 

4.5.1 The equipment shall be subjected to water droplets falling vertically from the dispenser at a 
height of 1 metre. 

4.5.2 Unless otherwise stated in the relevant equipment specification, the water shall be dispensed at 
an overall rate of not less than 350 //(m*/h) for a period of not less than 1 5 minutes. 

Note — This rate approximates to 1 droplet per second from each orifice. 

4.6 Recovery— No recovery procedures are to be carried out at the completion of the test unless 
permitted and stated in the relevant equipment specification. 

4-7 Final Examination — The equipment shall be visually examined for penetration of water, and if 
required, shall be electrically and mechanically checked as prescribed by the relevant equipment 
specification. 

4.8 Information to be Stated in the Relevant Equipment Specification — When this test is included in the 
relevant equipment specification the following details shall be given, as far as they are applicaole; 

Relevant Sub-clause 

a) Attitude of equipment if other than normal 4.1.1 

b) Operation during test 4.1.4 

c) Initial visual examination, electrical and mechanical checks 4.2 

d) Critical areas of equipment to be tested 4.4 

e) Quantity of water and time, if other than as specified 4.5.2 

f) Recovery procedure, if permitted 4.6 

g) Final examination, electrical and mechanical checks 4.7 



IS:8252(PartVI).|976 




N INDENTATIONS 0.8 DEEP MADE WITH A 



ENLARGED VIEW 
OF INDENTATION 



BRASS PLATE, 0.8 



5 MS ROD HAVING A SPHERICAL END 
\RADIUS 5 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 2 TEST RIG FOR DRIP TEST 



N H OLES, 

$ 0.3 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is a part of a series of Indian Standards specifying simulated environmental tests 
to which aircraft equipment is to be subjected to demonstrate that it would function satisfactorily 
under normal aircraft operating conditions. The relevant equipment specification shall define the 
appropriate test severities and the criteria for correct functioning. 

This Indian Standard is based on Draft International Standard ISO/DIS 2655 ' Environmental 
tests for aircraft equipment — Part 2-5: Waterproofness ', issued by International Organization for 
Standardization. 



Printed at Delhi Printers, Delhi, India 



