Wala HTAR IS 18234 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ARa Ud Aah — AAA Weert 
Hara — vreclach Us hamn ait 
CATAL Gat AM HUT 


Media and Entertainment — Event 
Management Services — Vocabulary 
and Categorization of Events and 
Venues 


ICS 03.100.01, 01.020 


© BIS 2023 


YR AH OT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Se Me, SH HM, 9 STK ME STH AMT, Ag feet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 7 


Media and Entertainment Services Sectional Committee, SSD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Media and 
Entertainment Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Services Sector Division Council. 


Event management industry in India has seen a dramatic change in the last decade. It has evolved from just a 
business that is involved in organizing the main event to managing every single step and happening of that event. 
The way events are being envisioned nowadays, individuals as well organizations have acknowledged the need to 
hire professionals for handling their events. Apart from public and private events, events are also playing an 
important part in marketing and communication for businesses. There are further various categories and 
subcategories of events being organized for various purposes including personal, social, business/corporate, 
public, educational etc. Each type of event category has its own characteristics distinguishing it from other similar 
events. 


Further, as the industry has grown, a number of innovative job roles have been created and the existing ones have 
evolved. Event organizers today hire or lease manpower with specific competence and skill set for specific tasks 
rather than relying on a single person or team to handle each aspect of an event. Majority of activities of an event 
are managed by professionals and teams with designated roles and job profile. 


In such a situation, it is very important to understand the exact requirements of the client and services offered by 
an event organizer so that the expectations of a client who wishes to hire professionals for planning and organizing 
events are carefully met and there are no gaps left for misunderstandings and communication errors. Appropriate 
selection of the type of event and unambiguous understanding of the services to be expected from it is very 
important for ensuring success of the event. 


This standard gives definition for common terms being used in the event management industry for a better and 
uniform understanding among all stakeholders. The standard also specifies various categories of events and event 
venues citing their characteristic features that will help in differentiating similar type of events and aid in 
appropriate selection of an event that meets the client’s needs and expectations. It also describes various 
departments typically functioning in an event management agency and handling different activities while planning 
and organizing an event. 


The composition of the committee responsible for development of the standard is listed in Annex A. 


IS 18234 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


MEDIA AND ENTERTAINMENT — EVENT MANAGEMENT 
SERVICES — VOCABULARY AND CATEGORIZATION OF 
EVENTS AND VENUES 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard defines terms and acronyms 
commonly used in the event industry and specifies 
categorization of various types of events and event 
venues. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following terms 
and definitions shall apply: 


2.1 Attendee — An organization or an individual 
that takes part in an event for the primary purpose of 
receiving services or content. 


2.2 Client — A person, a group of persons, or an 
organization that engages an event organizer and/or 
various event components for professional 
consultancy or services related to conducting an 
event and for event management. 


2.3 Event — A planned gathering with respect to a 
time and a place where an experience is created 
and/or a message is communicated. 


NOTES 

1 In relation to the media and entertainment industry, an 
event may be referred to as a restricted or unrestricted 
community assembly or congregation planned for the 
purpose of celebration, education, marketing, or meeting 
scheduled on a particular date, time, and a pre-defined 
place. 

2 The term ‘project’ is used synonymously with the term 
‘event’ in the standard. 


2.4 Event Management Agency — Legal entity 
that employs skilled professional(s) to provide 
professional services to clients in managing stages 
and activities of their event (including products and 
services involved), from research, conception, and 
planning to implementation, review, and post-event 
activities to achieve desired goals. 

NOTE — Event management agencies are also called as 


event management firms or event management 
companies 


2.5 Event Objective — Narrow, significant, and 
tangible possible outcome that is expected from an 
event and provide proper event metrics to determine 
and measure the success of the event. 


2.6 Event Organizer — Entity that produces and/or 
manages all or some aspects of an event. 
NOTES 


1 An event organizer can be a company, a body, or an 
organization. 


2 An event organizer is not necessarily the event owner. 

3 Event organizer can be an individual, a corporate 
manager, a group of people, or an entity that conceives and 
conceptualizes an idea from scratch, including plan 
evaluation and feasibility study for the purpose of 
developing the program for marketing, sales, entertainment, 
education, training, or fundraising purposes etc. which may 
be for restricted people, invitees, public, or community at 
large against entry fee or free of charge. 

4 Event organizer is the owner of the rights for the event 
and may or may not engage an event management agency 
or an event planner to plan and manage the event on 
organization’s behalf. 


2.7 Promoter — An individual or an entity from 
entertainment industry, including music and sports, 
in the business of marketing and promoting live, 
pay-per-view, and similar events such as concerts, 
gigs, sports events, festivals, raves, and other 
performances in events. 


2.8 Departments in an Event Management 
Agency 


2.8.1 Administration Department — Department 
that provides administrative and technical support in 
the areas of human resources, budgetary, strategic 
planning, legal affairs, facilities, and security within 
the organization. The main job responsibility of the 
administration department is to ensure the efficient 
performance of all departments in the organization 
and act as a connecting link between the senior 
management and the employees. An administrator 
provides motivation to the work force and make 
them realize the goals of the organization. 


2.8.2 Business Development Department — 
Department concerned with improving and growing 
a business by establishing and developing 
relationships with clients and other businesses with 
key responsibilities including researching and 
identifying new business opportunities, generating 
leads, cold calling prospective customers, fostering 
and developing relationships with customers or 
clients, thinking strategically, and setting aims and 
objectives to develop and improve the business. 


2.8.3 Client Servicing Department — Department 
that collaborates with other relevant departments of 
the organization to better address client needs, 
providing regular updates to higher management, 
and upselling company products where possible. 
The department also identifies new business 
opportunities through client referrals. 


IS 18234 : 2023 


2.8.4 Content Management Department — 
Department responsible for overseeing the creation 
of multiple forms of content to enhance an 
organization’s credibility and customer-base. Its 
duties include leading a team of content 
professionals, creating content strategies to 
highlight products and services, and reviewing 
competitor content and market trends to identify 
new content ideas. This department also supports 
other teams in developing content for client projects. 


2.8.5 Creative Design Department — Department 
that oversees various creative and design projects for 
an organization. It collaborates with other members 
of design team, ensure projects are cost-effective, 
and maintain an up-to-date understanding of their 
client requirements. 


2.8.6 Finance Department — Department 
responsible for securing and managing funds within 
the organization and planning for the expenditure of 
funds on various resources while ensuring efficient 
financial management and financial control 
necessary to support all internal activities and event 
business activities. 


2.8.7 Marketing Department — Department that is 
involved in promoting the business and mission of 
the agency with its primary job being to reach out to 
prospects, customers, and/or the community, 
coordinating and producing all materials 
representing the business while creating a positive 
image of the agency and mission of the agency. The 
role of the marketing department includes defining 
and managing the agency’s brand, conducting 
digital campaigns for marketing initiatives, 
producing marketing and promotional materials, 
managing website promotions, managing and 
monitoring social media, producing internal 
communications, media liaison and likewise. 


2.8.8 Operations Departments — Department that 
has a constant oversight on the production process 
to ensure that the process is completed from the start 
to finish also making sure that the employees are 
able to perform their assigned tasks systematically. 


2.8.9 Procurement/Purchase Department — 
Department responsible for procurement or 
purchase of all materials, components, and 
equipment required for an event to keep the 
production process running smoothly also ensuring 
that all material and equipment are of the right 
quality and quantity and arrive on time at the event 
venue. 

NOTE — The production and operations department set 


standards and targets for each section of the production 
process. 


2.8.10 Production Department — Department 
responsible for turning requirements into finished 
delivery through a series of production processes 


with quantity and quality of products being closely 
monitored. 


2.9 Terms used as Functions in the Operations 
of the Event Management Agencies 


2.9.1 Client Manager — An individual who follows 
the process of managing, coordinating, and 
overseeing the interactions between an event 
organizer or an event management agency with 
potential clients and existing clients. A client 
manager may build and strengthen relations between 
an organization and its clients. 


2.9.2 Conceptualizer — An individual who 
interacts with clients to ensure clarity in the client 
brief (whenever required) and work in close 
association with the business development 
department to develop new ideas and concepts as 
part of the marketing strategy. A conceptualizer 
devises ideas to create big brands by conceptualizing 
the entire event and providing end to end creative 
solution based on the brief. A conceptualizer works 
closely with the creative design department to take 
the concept to the next level and aid in its 
visualization process. 


2.9.3 Copywriter — An individual involved in the 
process of producing an engaging and clear text for 
different advertising channels such as websites, print 
ads and catalogs, researching keywords, producing 
interesting written content, and proofreading the 
work for accuracy and quality. 


2.9.4 Event Coordinator — An individual or a team 
of coordinators acting as a support to the event 
manager. Their duties include meeting with vendors 
at the venue location to help with the set-up, running 
errands for supplies and decorations, and working 
with staff to ensure completion of a successful event. 


2.9.5 Event Manager — An individual or an entity 
that produces and/or manages all aspects of an event. 
An event manager is not necessarily the owner of the 
event. Event managers may also be referred to as 
project managers who manage the entire event on 
ground with the primary responsibility of putting 
together all requirements as per the detailed project 
plan and manage the event on the event day. 


2.9.6 Event Planner — An individual who manages 
all the activities prior to the actual event. The 
primary role of an event planner is to create an 
experience of the event and develop of a framework 
to be followed once the event starts. This framework 
facilitates the teams to develop ideas, concepts, 
layouts, designs, and production plan and create a 
detailed project report. An organization may or may 
not have a separate event planning specialist. 


2.9.7 Event Promoter — Individual(s), usually part 
time, hired as a support team by the event manager 


for various skilled and unskilled job roles for 
coordinating and managing work at an event. 


2.9.8 Freelancer — An individual who is self- 
employed and not necessarily committed long-term 
to a particular event manager or event management 
agency. Freelancers may sometimes be represented 
by a company, professional association, or a 
temporary agency that resells freelance work to 
clients while others may work independently or use 
websites to get work. A freelancer often provides 
their services by the hour or day or project basis. 


2.9.9 Master of Ceremonies — A stage manager 
who presides over an event, usually a formal or an 
entertainment event, and manages the stage 
activities related to guest introduction, speaker 
announcements, entertainment and likewise. They 
are also referred to as emcee or moderators in panel 
discussion and conferences. 


2.9.10 Service Provider — Third party entity that 
provides products or services related to an event. 
These provisions generally include temporary 
infrastructure, technical equipment, temporary 
manpower, and logistics support to event organizers 
for planning, management, and conduct of an event 
based on rental, custom fabrication, and/or 
production charges for the entire duration of the 
activity. 


2.9.11 Steward/Hostess — A male (steward) or a 
female (hostess) hired to manage guests at an event 
for welcoming, registration, and other similar 
requirements for the welfare of the guests at an event 
venue. 


2.9.12 Talent Manager — An individual, a group of 
individuals, or an entity which manages the business 
of artists, performers, celebrities, specialists, etc and 
serve as a talent provider for events as per 
requirement. 


2.9.13 Vendor — An entity that provides products 
and/or services related to an event. The role of a 
vendor is restricted to selling of the goods and/or a 
service only and not providing professional 
expertise in managing the provided services and/or 
goods at the event venue. 


2.10 Terms used in day-to-day Operations in 
Event Management Agencies 


2.10.1 Client Brief — Summary of the main 
aspects of an event provided by the event organizer 
to a client. It is a broad work framework to be used 
by the event organizer enabling them to design a 
proposal to reach the desired outcome while saving 
time. It includes information related to client 
description, their objectives, target audience, 


IS 18234 : 2023 


positioning, tone, timings, program and its content, 
budget, teams and their responsibilities, social and 
legal aspects, background information, and other 
relevant information. 


NOTE — A client brief is also referred to as an event 
brief. 


2.10.2 Client Feedback Report — Report generated 
at the time of project closure that includes detailed 
feedback from the client what helps in analyzing the 
successes and failures during the conduct of the 
event that were observed by the client. 


2.10.3 Client Presentation — Final proposal 
document incorporating proposed theme ideas, 
thoughts, creatives, and communication. It is usually 
prepared by the conceptualizer and handed over to 
the client manager for final presentation to the client. 


2.10.4 Competence — Ability to apply knowledge 
and skills to achieve intended results. 


NOTES 


1 It can be understood as the consistent application of 
knowledge and skill to the standard of performance required 
in the workplace. It embodies the ability to transfer and 
apply skills and knowledge to new situations and 
environments and the ability of an individual to perform a 
job properly through a combination of training, 
demonstrated skills and accumulated experience. 


2 In context of event management services, it can be 
understood as the ability of demonstrable qualities and 
skills including resilience, self-awareness, communication, 
people skills, organizational skills, creative and flexible 
thinking, risk management skills, financial and budget 
handling skills, technical skills that enable and improve the 
efficiency or performance in successful planning, 
management, and implementation of events and 
exhibitions. 


2.10.5 Concept Development/Conceptualization — 
First step in project development stage wherein the 
allocated team brainstorms together for ideas based 
on client needs and objectives. The concept 
development sessions are usually led by a 
conceptualizer. 


2.10.6 Conference Pack — A complete kit of 
materials related to a conference given to the 
attendees. It usually contains a program, an abstract, 
a name tag, a map of the venue, and sometimes a 
map of the city. It can also contain pen and paper, a 
list of participants, some city guides, and a souvenir. 


2.10.7 Creative Development — Process of 
designing and developing graphics based on the 
ideas and thoughts created by the conceptualizer. 
Creative development is usually led by the creative 
head in coordination with the conceptualizer for the 
development of all creative communications and 
designs. 


IS 18234 : 2023 


2.10.8 Detailed Project Report (DPR) — A detailed 
project document prepared by the operations and 
production team working on the project based on the 
final client presentation developed. The DPR is a 
detailed report of all elements including process of 
production, vendor resources, project expenses, 
project deliverables, and project roadmap. It is the 
final reference document for the event manager for 
execution of the project. 


2.10.9 Event Insurance — Insurance policy that 
protects an event organizer in a specific event that 
has been insured against liability for an injury 
caused to an attendee during the event or damage to 
property at the venue. It may also include cost 
liability for cancellation of event due to force 
majeure or other valid reasons. 


2.10.10 Event Sponsorship — Source of funding or 
provision of products or services in place of funding 
for various kinds of events where a sponsor, that can 
be an individual, company, nonprofit organization, 
small business, etc provides funds, their products or 
services, and/or incentives, in exchange of visibility 
and awareness about their brand at the event. 


2.10.11 Floor Plan — Blueprint or layout of a room 
or exhibition hall, including electrical outlets, doors, 
windows, pillars, and other amenities and how the 
event will be set out within the space. 


2.10.12 Keynote —A speech or presentation that 
tells attendees about the central theme(s) of the 
event. 


2.10.13 Performance License — License obtained 
by relevant authority(ies) for organizing all events 
of the nature of a musical, dancing, dramatic, 
mimetic, theatrical, or other performance for public 
amusement or any public exhibition, diversion, 
game, or any assembly for public amusement. It is a 
legal compliance requirement for such type of 
events. 


2.10.14 Project Checklist — The list of 
requirements, deliverables, and road map extracted 
from the detailed project report with proper 
allocation of manpower and resources for each 
responsibility for the smooth run and management 
of the event. 


2.10.15 Project Closure — Final stage of a project 
that indicates the end of a project after final delivery. 
The team may hold a project closure meeting after 
completion of the project to contemplate on 
successes and failures during the project. This acts 
as an effective method to ensure continuous 
improvement within the organization to enhance the 
overall productivity of the team in the future. 


NOTE — There are times when external talent is hired on 
contract specifically for a project. Terminating these 
contracts and completing the necessary paperwork is one of 
the responsibilities of an event manager for project closure. 


2.10.16 Project Contract — Agreement between 
the event organizer and the client clearly stating the 
specific scope of work with agreed compensations 
(mainly cost and/or any others specified in the 
contract) including terms and conditions. It is 
usually legally bonded and is often a formal and 
written document. 


2.10.17 Project Documentation — Practice of 
collating all documents including pitch documents, 
negotiations, final estimates, DPR, checklists, 
photos and videos, project delivery documents, 
agreements and contracts, mail conversations, etc in 
one file or folder or other advanced documentation 
methods for future references post the completion of 
a project. 


2.10.18 Project Estimate — Document prepared by 
the production team based on the DPR for 
submission to the client. Also called as quotations, 
the project estimates are shared with the client 
manager and is submitted to the client post the 
concept presentation to the client. 


2.10.19 Project Execution — Stage where the team 
implements the actual work and is led by the event 
manager with the prime responsibility to establish 
efficient workflows and carefully monitor the 
progress of work based on the finalized project 
deliverables and project roadmap and to consistently 
maintain effective collaboration and communication 
between all project stakeholders to ensure that 
everyone stays on the same page and that the project 
runs smoothly without any issues. 


2.10.20 Proforma Invoice — Preliminary bill or 
estimated invoice which is used to request payment 
from a client for the goods and/or services provided 
by the event organizers before they are supplied. It 
is not legally binding and is sent to the clients before 
issuing a commercial invoice and the price of goods 
and/or services to be delivered may change before 
the final closure of the event. 

NOTE — The word pro forma means ‘as a matter of form’ 

or ‘for the sake of form’. Such a term is used to describe a 


document that is provided to meet minimum requirements 
or as a formality. 


2.10.21 Quote — An estimated price of a job or a 
service. 


2.10.22 Risk Assessment Management — Assessing 
the possibility of injury or loss to an attendee and 
ensuring that there is adequate insurance covering 
the possible injuries or losses. Event planners are 
often required to provide a detailed risk assessment 
for every event they plan. 


2.10.23 Team Briefing — Subsequent step post 
securing a client brief wherein a team is constituted 
with individuals from various departments including 
planning, creative, operations, and production who 
work closely with the client manager in developing 


the concept, ideas, designs, and implementation plan 
based on the client brief. The client manager 
prepares a team briefing sheet for the team based on 
the client brief to refer to and develop the project. 


2.10.24 Tax Invoice — Commercial document 
issued by the event organizer for the goods and 
services provided to a client. This document 
contains details like the name of the parties 
involved, goods and services supplied, price, and 
quantity to notify the client that the payment is due. 
It is a document that legally binds both the client and 
the event organizer to implement the terms of 
services agreed against such a document. 


2.10.25 Target Audience — A group of people 
identified as being the most likely attendees of an 
event. 


2.10.26 Venue —The physical space or site where 
an event is held. 


2.11 Terms used in Event Technologies 


2.11.1 Hybrid Event — An event that includes both 
live and virtual attendees by integrating the two 
groups into one single event. 


2.11.2 Livestream — Coverage of an event 
broadcast live over the internet, often via social 
media channels. 


2.11.3 Metaverse Event — A gathering in a three 
dimensional virtual world environment providing 
experiences, gaming, and competitions for 
participants from the comfort of their homes or 
computers wherein in participants can create their 
individual avatar and interact, engage, and entertain 
with other virtual participants and attendees. 


2.11.4 Video/Web Conferencing — Using video 
technology to broadcast an event or meeting to 
participants unable to attend in person. 


2.11.5 Virtual Event — An event with no live 
element and only online participants. 


2.11.6 Virtual Trade Show — A trade show that is 
hosted online. It takes the same form as a traditional 
physical trade show and allows attendees to 
communicate with exhibitors through web chats, 
while vendors can showcase their products and 
services at virtual booths. 


2.11.7 Webcast — A media presentation of an event 
that is broadcast live over the internet. 


2.11.8 Webinar — A presentation, session, forum, 
or seminar broadcast over the internet. 


IS 18234 : 2023 


2.12 Acronyms used in Event Management 


2.12.1 AV (Audio Visual) — The suite of 
technology responsible for delivering sound and 
visuals through equipment such as microphones, 
sound systems, music, screens, and other displays. 


2.12.2 BAR (Best Available Rate) — The lowest rate 
of the day that is available for guests to book hotel 
rooms. BAR pricing is an attempt to reduce 
confusion for hotel guests caused by complex rate 
strategies with many different prices. 


2.12.3 B2B (Business to Business) — A transaction 
or a business conducted between one business and 
another, such as a wholesaler and retailer. B2B 
transactions tend to happen in the supply chain, 
where one company purchases products or services 
from another to be used in the event. 


2.12.4 B2C (Business to Consumer) — Marketing, 
promoting, or selling of products or services directly 
to customers, bypassing any third-party retailers, 
wholesalers, or any other middlemen. 


2.12.5 DMC (Destination Management Company) 
— A professional services company with 
knowledge, expertise, and resources local to the 
destination, working in the design and 
implementation of events, activities, tours, 
transportation, and program logistics related to the 
event. They provide services to clients as well as 
event management agencies. 


2.12.6 EMS (Event Management Software) — 
Generic term for a wide range of software products 
that are used in the management of professional and 
academic conferences, trade exhibitions, 
conventions, festivals and smaller events. 


2.12.7 FAM Trip (Familiarization Trip) — A trip to 
a specific city or convention, event venue, or hotel 
property for the event planners and potential clients 
to learn more about the area, hotels, and services a 
destination has to offer for considering to book the 
event. 


2.12.8 F&B (Food and Beverages) — Also known 
as catering service, it refers to the purchasing, 
receiving, storing, issuing, and preparation of food 
and beverages to serve the attendees at an event 
including guests, host(s), organizing teams, and 
other manpower engaged in the conduct of the event. 


2.12.9 MICE (Meetings, Incentive, Conference and 
Exhibition) —The four different segments of 
business travel and tourism aimed at bringing 
together professionals from every sector in an 
enhanced, tailor-made hospitality setting. 


2.12.10 PAX — Each customer or attendee that 
must be accommodated, entertained, fed, or 
otherwise taken into account when making plans for 
the event. 


IS 18234 : 2023 


2.12.11 PCO (Professional Conference Organizer) 
— A company which specializes in the organization 
and management of conventions, conferences, 
seminars, and similar events. They usually provide 
full-service management for conferences including 
conference design, abstract management software, 
program development, registration, site and venue 
selection and booking, audiovisuals, IT support, 
logistics, leisure management, marketing, printing 
and web services, sourcing speakers, funding, 
sponsorship and exhibitor sales, financial 
management, and budget control. 


2.12.12 PO (Purchase Order) — A commercial 
document and first official offer issued by a client to 
an event management agency or by an agency to a 
service provider indicating types, quantities, and 
agreed prices for selected products and/or services. 
It is used to control the purchasing of products and 
services from external suppliers. POs can be an 
essential part of enterprise resource planning system 
orders. 


2.12.13 RECCE (Reconnaissance) — The process 
of visiting a prospective venue and looking around a 
place to find out information related to suitability, 
feasibility, restrictions, access, space availability, 
quality of the property, quality of services, and 
collect proper measurements of the available event 
sites. 


2.12.14 RFP (Request for Proposal) — A formal 
invitation to request proposals from service 
providers or vendors that meet specific business 
requirements and purchasing criteria. Vendors 
interested in pursuing the opportunity responds with 
their approach on delivering the requirements and 
provide a detailed project plan, budget, and relevant 
references. 


2.12.15 ROI (Return on Investment) — The net 
value an event marketer or event organizer gets from 
an event for the net cost that goes into producing it. 
While event profit is expressed as net value minus 
net cost, event ROI is expressed as net value divided 
by net cost. The result is the event ROI percentage. 


2.12.16 TBA/TBC — To be announced/to be 
confirmed. 


2.12.17 TBL (Travel, Boarding and Lodging) — 
Refers to travel to and stay at a destination. 


3 CATEGORIES OF EVENTS 


Evets can broadly be divided into the following 
categories. 


3.1 Business Event 


Business event is organized by industry bodies, 
companies, associations, councils, and other 
organizations for a select group or section of 


business or industry stakeholders for the benefit and 
growth of the company and the industry. Generally, 
event management agencies are tendered the work 
of planning and managing these events either 
through a proper bid process or company or industry 
regulated methods of selection process. The 
different sub-categories of business events are as 
follows: 


3.1.1 Annual General Meeting (AGM) 


A yearly gathering of company directors and 
shareholders, general members and governing body 
of an organization, association, university, school, 
charity, or union providing an opportunity to the 
board to present the organization’s annual reports 
and discuss the future of the organization. 


3.1.2 B2B Event 


An event organized for inter trade promotion within 
the industry, often for dealing with entrepreneurs, 
brand representatives, and executives with business- 
oriented goals. 


3.1.3 B2C Event 


A consumer and public facing event organized by a 
company to promote and create a positive impact 
about its products and/or services. 


3.1.4 Conference 


An organized formal meeting, or series of meetings, 
comprised of groups of representatives belonging to 
a common interest group, in which issues, ideas and 
policies are discussed. A conference tends to have 
specific objectives and is generally designed for 
discussion, problem solving, fact-finding, and 
consultation and may last for several days. 


3.1.5 Convention 


An organized meeting of industry, profession, or 
organization to share knowledge and experience. A 
convention, also known as a congress, is a gathering 
of individuals who meet at an arranged place and 
time to discuss some common interest or decide as a 
group. Conventions are generally organized by an 
organization, club, or a union. In a convention, all 
the attendees are encouraged to speak and share their 
thoughts, discuss, and engage. 


3.1.6 Exhibition 


An event in which products, services or information 
are displayed and disseminated, generally to public. 


NOTES 
1 Exhibition excludes flea market and street market. 
2 Exhibitions is usually organized so that businesses from 
a specific interest or industry can showcase and demonstrate 
their latest products and services, examine recent trends and 
opportunities. 
3 Exhibition is usually temporary and scheduled to open 
and close on specific dates. 


3.1.7 Media Event 


An event, activity, or experience conducted for the 
purpose of media publicity. It may also include any 
event that is covered in the mass media or was 
hosted largely with the media in mind. Media events 
may center on a news announcement, an 
anniversary, a news conference, or planned events 
like speeches or demonstrations. Instead of paying 
for advertising time, a media event seeks to use 
public relations to gain media and public attention. 


3.1.8 Meeting 


A group communication in action around a defined 
agenda, at a set time, for an established duration. 
Meetings may occur face-to-face, or through 
teleconferencing and videoconferencing or using 
any other available digital technology. 


3.1.9 Networking Event 


A socioeconomic business activity by which 
business people and entrepreneurs meet to form 
business relationships to recognize, create, or act 
upon business opportunities, share information, and 
seek potential partners for ventures. 


3.1.10 Press Conference 


An event organized to officially distribute 
information to and answer questions from the media. 
Press conferences are also announced in response to 
specific public relations issue. 


3.1.11 Product Launch 


A planned event to bring a new product to market 
with the goal to make sure that everyone inside the 
company, channel partners and target customers 
know about the new product. Product launch plans 
help in sequencing the events leading up to and even 
past a product launch date. 


3.1.12 Rewards and Recognition Program 


An employee reward and recognition program 
developed by organizations to recognize employees 
for their contributions to the success of a business. 


3.1.13 Seminar 


An organized meeting to discuss specialized and 
focused topics. It is a function of getting together 
small groups usually on a recurring format with a 
structured group discussion that typically follows 
formal lectures or instructions by leaders often in the 
form of a paper presentation on a specific theme or 
subject which applies a method of human interaction 


IS 18234 : 2023 


and intervention with learning and teaching 
experiences. 


3.1.14 Team Building Session 


An event that combines work with pleasure, 
featuring team building activities that let team 
members share experiences together, get to know 
each other in new ways, and build trust and 
communication channels to tap into when 
completing their tasks. 


3.1.15 Trade Fair/Consumer Show 


A B2C exhibition or showcase of products, 
exclusives, and activations designed to attract the 
attention of potential buyers. Visitors usually attend 
consumer shows to shop, see product 
demonstrations, and socialize. 


3.1.16 Trade Show 


Often referred to as an exposition or B2B exhibition, 
a trade show is an event where goods and services 
are exhibited and demonstrated and a specific 
industry meets its peers. 


3.1.17 Webinar 


Webinar is a seminar that is conducted online 
through internet. 


3.1.18 Workshop 


An organized meeting conducted by experts to 
achieve a pre-defined goal that can be accessible to 
interested parties. It can be a single or multiple 
session based certified intensive educational or 
training program for a relatively small group of 
people with a fee or complimentary that focuses 
especially on techniques and skills providing more 
interactive, hands-on experiences for a particular 
pre-defined set of concepts. 


3.2 Community Event 


Community event is organized by individuals, group 
of individuals or an entity with an objective to serve 
a community purpose and may or may not own the 
IP rights for the event. Entry in a community event 
is generally with no charges or at minimal charges. 
The organizer of a community event may or may not 
engage the services of an event management agency. 
Common community events include international 
conferences and events on community causes, 
festivals and concerts, educational events like 
seminars and exhibitions, recruitment events, 
religious celebrations, sports events, fundraising 
events, vaccination drives, and likewise. 


IS 18234 : 2023 


3.3 Gaming Event 


Gaming event is a gathering of competitors centered 
on role-playing games, collectible card games, 
miniatures war-games, board games, video games, 
or other types of games in a physical, virtual or 
hybrid setting. Gaming events are usually conducted 
in college venues, stadiums, or hotel banquets and 
are governed by their own rules and laws based on 
the activity or game. 


3.4 Government Event 


Government event is organized by Government, 
Ministries and its departments and are generally 
planned and managed by event management 
agencies tendered through a bid process. Some 
examples of Government events include national 
events, commemorative events, Ministry and 
departmental events, international and national 
conferences, elections, special community events, 
theatre and folk festivals, tourism promotion events, 
public sector conferences, national awards, 
felicitation ceremonies, and likewise. 


3.5 Performance Event 


Performance event is an act of staging or presenting 
a play, concert, or other form of entertainment by a 
performer or a group of performers. It is the action 
or process of carrying out or accomplishing an 
action, task, or function on a stage viewed by a set 
of an audience. It also includes musical performance 
events with live and/or recorded music or any other 
acoustic presentations usually as a part of the 
occasion and includes music concerts, corporate 
events, product launches, after-conference parties, 
award ceremonies, or any musical performances 
ancillary to social or community events etc. 


3.6 Political Event 


Political event is organized by political groups and 
can be restricted to a group of people or open for 
local community of the city, state, or region with no 
charges for entry. The political group may or may 
not engage the services of an event management 
agency for planning and management of such 
events. Political events include political party 
events, processions and rallies, election 
campaigning, community processions, marches, and 
observing strikes (dharnas). 


3.7 Social Event 


Social event is a private and personal event wherein 
event management agencies may be engaged to plan 
and manage the event for a small or large group of 
people at an indoor or an outdoor venue. Social 
events include weddings and personal celebrations, 
private parties, and closed group events. 


3.8 Sporting Event 


Sporting event is showcase of an athletic activity 
requiring skill or physical prowess, usually 
competitive in nature and governed by a set of rules 
provided by a recognized sanctioning body. A 
sporting event typically includes placing of 
competitors into a fixed order of finish on the 
leaderboard, depending upon their respective 
athletic performance within the rules provided for 
that activity. 


4 TYPES OF EVENT VENUES 
4.1 Amphitheatre 


An open-air venue used for entertainment, 
performances, and sports. It is a circular 
performance venue with panoramic audience view 
with tier seating or multi levels for best exposure of 
the performance area. 


4.2 Arena 


A large enclosed platform, often circular or oval- 
shaped, designed to showcase theatre, musical 
performances, or sporting events. It is composed of 
a large open space surrounded on most or all sides 
by tiered seating for spectators and may be covered 
by a roof. The key feature of an arena is that the 
event space is the lowest point, allowing maximum 
visibility. Arenas are usually designed to 
accommodate a multitude of spectators. 


4.3 Art Gallery/Museum 


A building or a space for the display of art, usually 
from the museum's own collection. It might be in 
public or private ownership and may be accessible 
to all or have restrictions for entry in place. 


4.4 Auditorium 


A large room with rows of seats and often a stage 
which is used for performances for public events or 
meetings, or a building containing such a room. 


4.5 Banquet Hall 


A building or a portion of a building which is rented 
or reserved by individuals, businesses, or groups to 
accommodate private functions including, but not 
limited to weddings, anniversaries and other similar 
celebrations, and such use may or may not include 
kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of 
food, the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises 
consumption by the invited guests, outdoor gardens, 
or reception facilities. 


4.6 Community Center 


Community center or community hall is a public 
location where members of a community tend to 
gather for group activities, social support, public 
information, and other purposes. They may 
sometimes be open for the whole community or for 
a specialized group within the greater community. 


4.7 Convention Center 


A large building that is designed to hold a 
convention where individuals and groups gather to 
promote and share common interests. Convention 
centers typically offer sufficient floor area to 
accommodate several thousand attendees. 


4.8 Exhibition Center 


Premises used for the display, or display and sale, of 
materials of an artistic, cultural, or historical nature. 
It includes a museum or art gallery and associated 
facilities and amenities and may also include other 
infrastructure like parking. 


4.9 Outdoor Event Venue 


A public or private open space or lawn available on 
rent or for free use with no doors and walls for 
organizing events like exhibition, parade, 
procession, carnival, athletic event, commercial 
performance, or a show. 


IS 18234 : 2023 


4.10 Resort 


A self-contained commercial establishment that 
provides most of a vacationer's requirements, such 
as food, drink, lodging, dining, sports, and 
entertainment on the premises. 


4.11 Seminar Hall 


Meeting halls or rooms usually found in educational 
institutes, training centers and corporate offices used 
for the purpose of training and team briefings and 
are generally equipped with audio-visual facilities 
and internet. 


4.12 Stadium 


A place or venue for outdoor sports, concerts, or 
other events that consists of a field or a stage either 
partly or fully surrounded by a tiered structure 
designed to allow spectators to stand or sit and view 
the event. 


4.13 Heritage Property 


Any district, building, structure, archaeological site, 
or ruin located upon or beneath the earth or under 
water that is significant in Indian history and that 
requires preservation because of its historical, 
architectural, cultural, aesthetic, or ecological value. 


IS 18234 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Media and Entertainment Services Sectional Committee, SSD 13 


Organization 
Noida Film City and President - Asian Academy of Film 
and Television, Noida 


Advertising Standards Council of India, Mumbai 


Airtel Digital TV, Gurugram 


Amazon Prime Video India, Mumbai 
Association of Bangalore Animation Industry, Bangalore 


Association of Radio Operators of India, Gurugram 


Central Board of Film Certification, Mumbai 


Children’s Film Society, Mumbai 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Dolby Technology India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Event And Entertainment Management Association, 
New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Film Federation of India, Mumbai 


Film and Television Institute of India, Pune 


Disney Hotstar (Novi Digital Entertainment), Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Mass Communication, 


New Delhi 


Indian Motion Picture Producers Association, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 
DR SANDEEP MARWAH (Chairperson) 


SHRI VINOD BERRY 
Ms MANISHA KAPOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHIT BHATNAGAR 
SHRI AMANPREET SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL JAIN 


SHRI BIREN GHOSE 
SHRIB. S. SRINIVAS (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK NARAYAN 
SHRI UDAY CHAWLA (Alternate) 


REGIONAL OFFICER 
REGIONAL OFFICER (Alternate) 


MS SMITA VATS SHARMA 
SHRI RAJESH (Alternate) 


SHRI GAJENDRA TIJARE 
MS SHALINI SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJ VARTAK 
SHRI HAREENDRANATH DWARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDER SINGH 
SHRI K. J. S. GURNA (Alternate I) 


SHRI DEEPAK PAWAR (Alternate ID) 


SHRI BOBBY BEDI 
Ms LEENA JAISANI (Alternate) 


SHRI FIRDAUSUL HASAN 


SHRI SUMIT KUMAR 
SHRI AMLAN CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI PARITOSH SAHA 
SHRI GAJENDRA TIJARE (Alternate) 


SHRI VIRENDER KUMAR BHARTI 


SHRI T. P. AGGARWAL 


Organization 


Indian Music Industry, Mumbai 


Jagran Prakashan Limited, Kanpur 


Media and Entertainment Association of India, Bengaluru 


Media and Entertainment Skills Council, 


New Delhi 


Ministry of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 


Distribution, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Information and 


New Delhi 


Broadcasting, 


Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, 
New Delhi 


News Broadcasters Federation, New Delhi 


Newspaper Association of India, New Delhi 


Prasar Bharati, New Delhi 


Press Council of India, New Delhi 


Press Information Bureau, New Delhi 


PVR Limited, Gurugram 


Services Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers-India 
Section, Mumbai 


Star India, Mumbai 


IS 18234 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI BLAISE FERNANDES 
SHRI MRIDULA DALVI (Alternate) 


SHRI BASANT RATHORE 
SHRI VIPIN KHATWANI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANKUR BHASIN 

SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR BHASIN (Alternate) 
SHRI MOHIT SONI 

SHRI ARPANESH MANI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPUL BANSAL 
DR BRIJ MOHAN MATHUR (Alternate I) 


SHRI R. P. KANCHAN (Alternate ID) 


SHRI VINEET MATHUR 
SHRI ALOK KUMAR VERMA (Alternate) 


Ms ASHA NANGIA 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 


SHRI B. K. RAY 
COL SANTOSH KUMAR (Alternate I) 
Ms RUCHIKA TANDON (Alternate II) 


SHRI R. JAI KRISHNA 


SHRI VIPIN GAUR 
SHRI VIKAS KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate I) 
DR B THOMAS (Alternate II) 


Ms MITALI CHATTERJEE 
Ms NAVNEET KAUR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH SHARMA 


MS KANCHAN PRASAD MANDLAVS 
SHRI SHAMBHUNATH CHOUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI TARUN KUMAR MAZUMDAR 
SHRI AGNEET KUMAR (Alternate I) 


SHRI PRADEEP BHARDWAJ (Alternate II) 


SHRI CHANDRANSHU AWASTHI 


SHRI UJWAL NIRGUDKAR 


SHRI PARITOSH SAHA 
SHRI K. ARAVAMUDHAN (Alternate) 


IS 18234 : 2023 


Organization 


Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, 


New Delhi 


Yash Raj Films, Mumbai 


Zee Entertainment Enterprises Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (#/498P, 4th Floor, Saraswati 
Kunj II, Sector 52, Wazirabad, Gurugram- 122003) 


In Personal Capacity (#74 Nupur, Gulmohar Cross Road 


No. 4, JUPD, Mumbai - 49) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


MS SAPNA SHARMA 
Ms SHIVANI SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI AKSHAY WIDHANI 
SHRI GAURAV CHOMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITABH KUMAR 


SHRI PRAKASH NARAYANAN 


SHRI DHARMESH THAKKAR 


SHRI S. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (SERVICES SECTOR) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI NEHA YADAV 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(SERVICES SECTOR), BIS 


Composition of Event Management Services Subcommittee (SSD 13:5) 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (# 1498P, 4th Floor Saraswati 
Kunj II, Sector 52, Wazirabad, Gurugram- 122003) 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Event and Entertainment Management Association, 


New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 


Industry, New Delhi 


Media and 
New Delhi 


Entertainment Skills 
National Safety Council India, Mumbai 


Procam International Private Limited, Mumbai 


Scoop Brand Holdings Private Limited, Gurugram 


Teamwork Arts Private Limited, New Delhi 


Council, 


Representative(s) 


SHRI PRAKASH NARAYANAN (Convenor) 


MS SHALINI S. SHARMA 


SHRI DEEPAK PAWAR 
SHRI SHAILENDER SINGH (Alternate) 


MS LEENA JAISANI 


SHRI MOHIT SONI 
SHRI ARPANESH MANI (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR G. PATIL 
SHRI V. S. P. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI MANDAR PANDYA 
SHRI RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ALI SAFDAR ZAIDI 


SHRI RAHUL SEN 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:SSD 13 (18583). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


