RAA Ah IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


wien SATA Woeit we Aah wa 
a surfed surat cat Aai 


AT 1 weet Sea 


Organic Production System and 
Labelling of Organically Produced 
Products 
Part 1 Crop Based 


ICS 65.020.01 


© BIS 2016 


ada AM SRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 aage WHC Art, we feeei-110002 
Veet” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2016 Price Group 7 


Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee, FAD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Agricultural 
Systems and Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Organic crop production system is a holistic production management system which promotes and enhances agro 
eco system health, including biodiversity, biological cycles and soil biological activity. It emphasizes the use of 
management practices in preference to the use of off-farm inputs, taking into account that regional conditions 
require locally adapted systems. This is accomplished by using, where possible, cultural, biological and mechanical 
methods, as opposed to using synthetic materials to fulfill any specific function within the system. An organic 
production system is designed to: 


a) enhance biological diversity within the whole system; 

b) maintain long-term soil fertility by increasing soil biological activity; 

c) recycle wastes of plant and animal origin in order to return nutrients to the land, thus minimizing the use 
of non-renewable resources; 

d) rely on renewable resources in locally organized agricultural systems; 


e) promote the healthy use of soil, water and air as well as minimize all forms of pollution thereto that may 
result from agricultural practices; 


f) handle agricultural products with emphasis on careful processing methods in order to maintain the organic 
integrity and the vital quality of the product at all stages; 

g) become established on any existing farm through a period of conversion, the appropriate length of 
which is determined by site specific factors such as the history of the land, and type of crops to be 
produced. 


India is bestowed with a lot of potential to produce all varieties of organic products due to its various varied agro 
climatic conditions. In several parts of the country, the inherited tradition of organic farming is an added advantage. 


National Standard for Organic Production (NSOP) under the National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) 
is being implemented by Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India for the export market. Organic 
products are gaining importance in the domestic market and their demand is on continuous increase. To meet the 
domestic requirements, Ministry of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) has launched a 
Participatory Guarantee System (PGS). 


In view of the above, this standard is being formulated to prescribe the uniform requirements for organically 
produced crop based and animal based products both for export and domestic markets. This standard is published 
in two parts under the general title organic production system & labelling of organically produced products. 


Part 1 of this standard covers the requirements for crop based organic production system and labelling of organically 
produced products and Part 2 of this standard covers the requirements for animal based organic production system 
and labelling of organically produced products. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from NSOP of the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry. 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


Indian Standard 


ORGANIC PRODUCTION SYSTEM AND LABELLING 
OF ORGANICALLY PRODUCED PRODUCTS 
PART 1 CROP BASED 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the requirements for organic 
production system and labelling of products that are 
crop based, through the process of crop production up 
to packaging and transport of the final product. 


1.2 Organic crop production management shall cover 
all agricultural food, fiber crops, herbal, medicinal and 
aromatic plant crops grown in the country from 
production to processing as well as collection of non- 
timber forest produce from the wild forests. 


2 DEFINITIONS 


2.0 For the purpose of this standard following 
definitions shall apply: 


2.1 Conventional Farming 


Conventional farming shall mean the farming systems 
dependent on input of synthetic fertilizers and/or 
synthetic chemicals and pesticides and synthetic 
hormones or which are not in conformity with the basic 
standards of organic production. 


2.2 Conversion 


Conversion is the process of changing an agricultural 
farm from conventional to organic farm. This is also 
called transition. 


2.3 Conversion Period 


The transition from non-organic to organic farming 
within a given period of time, during which the 
provisions concerning organic production have been 
applied. 


2.4 Farm Unit 


A farm unit is the agricultural farm area managed 
organically, by a farmer or a group of farmers. 


2.5 Grower Groups 


Grower groups are organized group of farmers who 
intend to practice organic farming/engage in organic 
processes in accordance with the requirements of this 
standard. 


2.6 Inspection 


Inspection shall include the site visit to verify that the 
performance of an operation is in accordance with the 
production or processing standards. 


2.7 Labelling 


Labelling shall mean any written, printed or graphic 
matter which is present on the label, accompanies the 
product, or is displayed near the product, including that 
for the purpose of promoting its sale or disposal. 


2.8 Producer 


A producer shall mean an individual farmer or a group 
of farmers or a business enterprise practicing organic 
farming or organic processing. 


2.9 Operator 


A farmer, processor, trader, handler or exporter, who is 
under Organic Certification. 


2.10 Organic 


Organic refers to a particular farming system as 
described in this standard. 


2.11 Organic Agriculture 


Organic agriculture is a system of farm design and 
management to create an eco system, which can achieve 
sustainable productivity without the use of synthetic 
external inputs such as chemical fertilizers, pesticides 
and synthetic hormones. 


2.12 Parallel Production 


Parallel production, a subset of split production, shall 
mean any production where the same unit is growing, 
same crops handling or processing the same products 
both in a certified organic status and a non-certified 
organic status. Similarly a situation with “organic” and 
“in conversion” production of the same product is also 
parallel production. 


2.13 Split Production 


Split production shall mean any production where the 
same unit is growing multiple crops and their handling 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


or processing, both in a certified organic status and a 
non-certified organic status. 


2.14 Part Conversion 


Part conversion is when part of a conventional farm or 
unit has already been converted to organic production 
and a part is still under conventional system. 


2.15 Plant Protection Product 


Plant protection product shall mean any substance 
intended for preventing, destroying, attracting, 
repelling, or controlling any pest or disease including 
unwanted species of plants or animals during the 
production, storage, transport, distribution and 
processing of food, agricultural commodities, or animal 
feeds. 


2.16 Polyculture 


Polyculture is the rearing of two or more species in the 
same production system, and it is desirable to have them 
from different tropic levels. 


2.17 Chemical Fertilizers 


An inorganic material of wholly or partially synthetic 
origin that is added to the soil to supply plant nutrient 
in soluble form to sustain plant growth. 


2.18 Pesticides 


Synthetic pesticide is a poisonous chemical or mixture 
of chemicals that is intended to prevent, repel or kill 
any pest. 


2.19 Risk Assessment 


Risk assessment is process to identify potential risk in 
production and handling systems of organic products 
in order to check the infringement in the entire process 
for maintaining organic integrity of the produce/ 
product. 


2.20 Certification 


Certification shall refer to the procedure which 
demonstrates that the production system of the operator 
has been methodically assessed and conforms to the 
requirements as specified in this standard. 


2.21 Certification Body 


Body that is responsible for certification of the 
operators as per this standard. 


3 REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Crop Production Plan 


The producer shall develop an organic crop production 
plan, which shall include. 


3.1.1 Description of the crops in the production cycle 


(main crop, intercrop and relay crop) as per the agro 
climatic seasons. 


3.1.2 Description of practices and procedures to be 
performed and maintained. 


3.1.3 List of inputs used in production along with their 
composition, frequency of usage, application rate and 
source of availability. 


3.1.4 Source of organic seeds and planting material. 


3.1.5 Descriptions of monitoring practices and 
procedures to be performed and maintained to verify 
that the plan is being implemented effectively. 
Description of practices and procedures to be performed 
and maintained. 


3.1.6 Description of the management practices and 
physical barriers established to prevent mingling and 
contamination of organic production unit from 
conventional farms, split production and parallel 
production. 


3.1.7 Description of the record keeping system 
implemented to comply with the requirements of this 
standard. 


3.1.8 Procedures governing the production in different 
farming systems, their documentation, and for 
preventing ad-mixing of input and products. 


3.2 Conversion Requirements 


3.2.1 There shall be a clear plan of how to proceed 
with the conversion. This plan shall be updated if 
necessary and shall cover all the requirements to be 
met. If the whole farm is not converted, it shall be 
ensured that the organic and conventional parts of the 
farm are separate and capable of being inspected 
individually. 


3.2.2 The requirements of this standard shall also be 
met during the conversion period. All the requirements 
shall be applicable from the commencement of the 
conversion period till its conclusion. 


3.2.3 Simultaneous production of conventional, in 
conversion and/or organic crops or which cannot be 
clearly distinguished from each other, shall not be 
permitted. 


3.2.4 A full conversion period shall not be required 
where de facto the requirements of this standard have 
been met for several years and where the same can be 
verified with documentary evidence. However, this 
conversion period shall not be less than twelve months. 


3.3 Duration of Conversion Period 


3.3.1 In case of annual and biennial crops, plant 
products produced can be claimed as organic when 
the requirements of this standard have been met during 


the conversion period of at least 2 years (organic 
management) before sowing (the start of the production 
cycle). 


3.3.2 In case of perennial plants other than grassland 
(excluding pastures and meadows), the first harvest 
may be claimed as organic, after at least 36 months of 
organic management. 


3.3.3 Pastures, meadows and their products may be 
claimed as organic after 12 months of organic 
management. 


3.3.4 The conversion period shall be counted from the 
date of registration with the Certification Body. 


3.4 Landscape 


3.4.1 Organic farming shall contribute beneficially to 
the ecosystem. 


3.4.2 Areas which are managed organically may 
facilitate biodiversity, inter alia in any one of the 
following or their combination: 


a) In general all areas which are under rotation 
and are not heavily manured. 

b) Extensive pastures, waste lands, meadows, 
extensive grassland, extensive orchards, 
hedges, hedgerows, groups of trees and/or 
bushes and forest lines. 

c) Ecologically rich fallow land or arable land. 

d) Ecologically diversified (extensive) field 
margins (farm boundary and bunds). 

e) Agro forestry system, diversification, mixed 
farming, multi-cropping, inter-cropping and 
relay cropping. 


3.5 Choice of Crops and Varieties 


3.5.1 All seeds and planting material used, shall be 
certified organic. When certified organic seed and 
planting materials are not available, conventional seed 
and planting material (but not treated with chemicals) 
shall be used. 


3.5.2 Species and varieties cultivated shall be adapted 
to the soil and climatic conditions and be resistant to 
pests and diseases. In the choice of varieties, genetic 
diversity shall be taken into consideration. 


3.5.3 Use of genetically engineered seeds, transgenic 
plants or planting material is prohibited. 


3.6 Diversity in Crop Production and Management 
Plan 


3.6.1 The basis for crop production in organic farming 
shall take into consideration the structure and fertility 
of the soil and t he surrounding ecosystem, with a view 
to minimizing nutrient losses. 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


3.6.2 Where appropriate, the organic farms shall 
maintain sufficient diversity ina manner that takes into 
account pressure from insects, weeds, diseases and 
other pests, while maintaining or increasing soil organic 
matter, soil fertility, microbial activity and general soil 
health. For non perennial crops, this is normal, but not 
exclusive, achieved by means of crop rotation 
preferably by leguminous crops. 


3.6.3 Soil fertility shall be maintained through, the 
cultivation of legumes or deep rooted plants and the 
use of green manures, along with the establishment of 
a programme of crop rotation and manuring with 
organic inputs. 


3.7 Nutrient Management 


3.7.1 Sufficient quantities of biodegradable material 
of plant and/or animal origin produced on organic farms 
shall form the basis of the nutrient management 
programme to increase or at least maintain soil fertility 
and the biological activity within it. 


3.7.2 Nutrient management should minimize nutrient 
losses. Accumulation of heavy metals and other 
pollutants shall be prevented. 


3.7.3 Non-synthetic mineral fertilizers and brought-in 
bio fertilizers (biological origin) shall be regarded as 
supplementary and not as a replacement for nutrient 
recycling. 


3.7.4 The total amount of biodegradable material of 
plant or animal origin brought into the farm unit shall 
be declared. 


3.7.5 Non-synthetic fertilizers shall only be used ina 
supplementary role to carbon based materials. Only 
those organic or non-synthetic fertilizers that are 
brought in to the farm (including potting compost) shall 
be used when, the circumstances demand in accordance 
with Annex A. 


3.7.6 Manures containing human excreta (faeces and 
urine) shall not be used. 


3.7.7 Non-synthetic fertilizers shall be applied in their 
natural composition and shall not be rendered more 
soluble by chemical treatment. 


3.7.8 pH of the soil shall be maintained at optimum 
level. 


3.7.9 Use of chemical fertilizers including mineral 
nitrogenous fertilizers and genetically engineered 
organisms and their parts of residue as raw material is 
prohibited. 


3.8 Pest, Disease and Weed Management 


3.8.1 Organic farming production systems shall be 
carried out in a way which ensures that losses from 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


pests, diseases and weeds are minimized. Emphasis is 
placed on the use of crops and varieties well-adapted 
to the environment, fertile soils of high biological 
activity, balanced nutrient management programme, 
adapted rotations, inter-cropping, green manures, etc. 
Growth and development shall take place in a natural 
manner. 


3.8.2 Weeds, pests and diseases shall be controlled 
through a number of preventive cultural techniques 
which limit their development, for example suitable 
rotations, green manures, early and pre drilling seedbed 
preparations, mulching, mechanical control and the 
disturbance of pest development cycles. Measures to 
prevent transmission of pests, parasites and infectious 
agents, shall be in place. 


3.8.3 Pest management shall be regulated by 
understanding and disrupting the ecological needs of 
the pests. The natural enemies of pests and diseases 
shall be protected and encouraged through proper 
habitat management of hedges, nesting sites etc. An 
ecological equilibrium shall be created to bring about 
a balance in the pest predator cycle. 


3.8.4 Products for pest, disease and weed management, 
prepared at the farm from local plants, animals and 
micro-organisms shall be used. 


3.8.5 Thermic weed control and physical methods for 
pest, disease and weed management are permitted. 


3.8.6 Thermic sterilization of soils to combat pests 
and diseases shall be restricted to circumstances where 
a proper rotation or renewal of soil cannot take place. 


3.8.7 All equipment from conventional farming systems 
shall be properly cleaned and shall be free from 
residues before being used on organically managed 
areas. 


3.8.8 The use of synthetic pesticides, herbicides, 
fungicides, growth regulators, synthetic dyes and 
insecticides is not permitted. Permitted products for 
plant pest and disease control are listed in Annex B. 
Documentary evidence of the need to use the product 
shall be kept. 


3.8.9 Off farm inputs shall always be evaluated as per 
the criteria given in Annex C before approval is given 
for use. 


3.8.10 The use of genetically engineered organisms or 
products is prohibited. 


3.9 Contamination Control 


3.9.1 All relevant measures shall be taken to minimize 
contamination from outside and within the farm. 


3.9.2 Buffer zones shall be maintained to prevent 
contamination from conventional farms. 


3.9.3 Polyethylene and polypropylene or other 
polycarbonates coverings such as plastic mulches, 
fleeces, insect netting and silage rapping, only are 
allowed. These shall be removed from the soil after 
use and shall not be burnt. 


3.9.4 The use of poly chloride based products is 
prohibited. 


3.10 Soil and Water Conservation 


3.10.1 Soil and water resources shall be handled in a 
sustainable manner. Relevant measures shall be taken 
to minimize erosion and other forms of degradation of 
soil, excessive and improper use of water and the 
pollution of ground and surface water. 


3.10.2 Clearing of land through the means of burning 
organic matter, for example slash-and-burn, straw 
burning is prohibited. The clearing of primary forest is 
also prohibited. 


3.11 Collection of Non-Cultivated Material of Plant 
Origin/Forest Produces 


3.11.1 The collection of wild plants and parts thereof, 
growing naturally, in natural areas and forest shall be 
accepted as organic production methods provided that 
these areas have not received treatment with products 
other than those permitted for use in organic 
production. 


3.11.2 In case cultivation is carried out in forest area, 
procedures similar to those followed in organic farm 
cultivation shall be followed. 


3.11.3 Organic collection management shall ensure that 
in case of minor forest produce collection, the State 
Government Act shall be applicable and shall not 
exceed sustainable yield of the collected species or 
otherwise threaten the local ecosystem. 


3.11.4 The act of collection should positively 
contribute to the maintenance of natural areas. When 
harvesting or gathering the products, attention shall be 
paid to maintenance and sustainability of the ecosystem. 
Organic operators should collect products only from 
within the boundaries of the clearly defined wild 
collection area. 


3.11.5 Wild harvested products shall only be claimed 
to be organic if derived from a stable and sustainable 
growing environment. Harvesting or gathering the 
product shall not exceed the sustainable yield of the 
ecosystem, or threaten the existence of plant or animal 
species. 


3.11.6 Products can only be claimed to be organic if 
derived from a designated area for collection, clearly 
depicted in the map of the authorized area of collection 
by the forest department or state department, which is 
subject to inspection. 


3.11.7 The collection area shall be at an appropriate 
distance from conventional farming, pollution and 
contamination. 


3.11.8 The collector managing the harvesting or 
gathering of the products shall be clearly identified 
and be familiar with the collecting area in question. 


3.12 Processing and Handling 


3.12.1 Any handling and processing of organic 
products should be carried out in a manner so as to 
maintain the organic integrity of the product. The 
operator shall develop an organic processing and 
handling plan. An organic processing and handling plan 
must include: 


a) Description of practices and procedures to be 
performed. 


b) List of each substance/input used during 
production, processing, storage and handling 
indicating its composition, source, locations 
where it will be used and documentation of 
commercial availability as applicable. The 
approved Food Additives Including Carriers 
for Use in Production of Processed Organic 
Food is given at Annex D. Processing Aids 
and Other Products for use in Processing of 
Ingredients additives used in processing of 
organic products is given at Annex E. 


c) Description of the monitoring mechanism 
followed and maintained to verify that the plan 
is effectively implemented. 


d) Description of the record keeping system 
implemented to comply with the requirements 
of this standard. 


e) Description of the management practices and 
segregation measures established to prevent 
commingling of organic and non-organic 
products during parallel processing and 
handling. 


f) Identification of pollution sources and 
methods adopted to avoid contamination. 


g) Procedure followed for processing and 
handling of organic products separately in 
time or place from the handling and processing 
of non-organic products. 


h) The means and measures followed for 
identification of all products through the 
whole process. 


j) Method followed for decontamination, 
cleaning or disinfection of all facilities 
where organic products are kept, handled, 
processed or stored. 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


3.12.2 Pest Control During Processing 


3.12.2.1 Pests should be avoided by good 
manufacturing practices. This includes general 
cleanliness and hygiene. 


3.12.2.2 A plan for pest prevention and pest control 
should be developed. 


3.12.2.3 For pest management and control the following 
measures shall be used in order of priority: 


a) Preventive methods such as disruption, 

elimination of habitat and access to facilities. 
b) Mechanical, physical and biological methods. 
c) Other substances used in traps. 


3.12.2.4 Irradiation is prohibited. 


3.12.2.5 There shall be no direct or indirect contact 
between organic products and prohibited substances (for 
example pesticides). In case of doubt, it shall be ensured 
that no residues are present in the organic product. 


3.12.3 Ingredients 


3.12.3.1 Ingredients used in processing shall be organic 
except where an organic ingredient is not available in 
sufficient quality or quantity, non organic ingredients 
may be used to an extent of 5 percent only in case of 
technological necessity or for particular nutritional 
purpose. Such non organic raw material shall not be 
genetically engineered. 


3.12.3.2 The same ingredient within one product shall 
not be derived both from an organic and non-organic 
origin. 

3.12.3.3 Preparations of micro-organisms and enzymes 
commonly used in food processing may be used, with 
the exception of genetically engineered micro- 
organisms and their products. 


3.12.3.4 Water and common salt may be used in organic 
products. 


3.12.3.5 Minerals (including trace elements), vitamins 
and similar isolated ingredients shall not be used except 
where use is legally required or where severe dietary, 
or nutritional deficiency can be demonstrated. 


3.12.3.6 Ethylene gas shall be permitted for ripening. 
3.12.4 Processing Methods 


3.12.4.1 Processing methods should be based on 
mechanical, physical and biological processes. 


3.12.4.2 The vital quality of an organic ingredient shall 
be maintained throughout each step of its processing 
methods and shall be chosen to limit the number and 
quantity of additives and processing aids. The following 
kinds of processes are approved: 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


a) Mechanical and physical, 
b) Biological, 

c) Smoking, 

d) Extraction, 

e) Precipitation, and 

f) Filtration. 


3.12.4.3 Extraction shall be with water, ethanol, plant 
and animal oils, vinegar, carbon dioxide, nitrogen or 
carboxylic acids. These shall be of food grade quality, 
appropriate for the purpose. 


3.12.4.4 Filters shall neither be made of asbestos nor 
be permeated with substances which may negatively 
affect the product. 


3.12.4.5 Irradiation is prohibited. 


3.13 Packaging 


3.13.1 Biodegradable, recyclable, reusable systems and 
eco-friendly packaging materials shall be used wherever 
possible. 


3.13.2 Material used for packaging shall not 
contaminate food. Certain additives for use in 
manufacturing of packaging films for packaging of 
organic food stuffs are allowed for restricted use as 
given in Annex F. 


3.13.3 The product shall be packed in a manner to 
prevent substitution or manipulation of the content. 


3.13.4 Only approved packaging material shall be used. 


3.14 Labelling 
3.14.1 General Requirements 


3.14.1.1 Labelling shall convey clear and accurate 
information on the organic status of the product. 


3.14.1.2 When all the requirements of this standard are 
complied with, products shall be sold as “organic 
products”. Organic products in conversion shall be sold 
as “produce of organic agriculture in conversion” or of 
a similar description, when the requirements of this 
standard have been met for at least 12 months. 


3.14.1.3 The label for conversion products shall be 
clearly distinguishable from the label for organic 
products by mentioning the year of conversion. 


3.14.1.4 The name and address of the person or 
company legally responsible for the production of the 
product shall be mentioned on the label. 


3.14.1.5 Additional product information shall be made 
available on request. 


3.14.1.6 Ingredients or products derived from wild 
production shall be declared as such. 


3.14.2 Processed Products 


3.14.2.1 Single ingredient products shall be labelled 
as “Organic” when all requirements of this standard 
have been met. 


3.14.2.2 Multi ingredient products where not all 
ingredients, including additives, are of organic origin 
shall be labelled in the following way (raw material 
weight): 


a) Where a minimum of 95 percent of the 
ingredients are of certified organic origin, 
products shall be labelled “organic”. 

b) Where less than 95 percent but not less than 
70 percent of the ingredients are of certified 
organic origin, products shall not be labelled 
“organic”. The word “organic” may be used 
on the principal display in statements like 
“made with organic ingredients” provided, 
there is a clear statement of the proportion of 
the organic ingredients. 

c) Where less than 70 percent of the ingredients 
are of certified organic origin, the indication 
that an ingredient is organic may appear in 
the ingredients list. Such a product shall not 
be labelled “organic”. 


d) Added water and common salt shall not be 
included in the percentage calculations of 
organic ingredients. 

e) Allraw materials ofa multi-ingredient product 
shall be listed on the product label in order of 
their weight percentage. It shall be clearly 
indicated which raw materials are of organic 
certified origin and which are not. All 
additives shall be listed with their full name. 

f) If herbs and/or spices constitute less than 
2 percent of the total weight of the product, 
they shall be listed as “spices” or “herbs” 
without stating the percentage. 

g) Organic products shall not be labelled as GE 
(genetic engineering) or GM (genetic modifi- 
cation) free, in order to avoid potentially 
misleading claims about the end product. Any 
reference to genetic engineering on product 
labels shall be limited to the production 
method. 


h) The label of a certified organic product shall 
depict the name and logo of the Certification 
Body. 

j) In addition, the organic logo shall also be 
depicted for product categories as stated at 
(a) and (b) above. 


3.15 Storage and Transport 


3.15.1 Organic products shall be stored at ambient 


temperature. The following special conditions of 
storage are permitted 


a) Controlled atmosphere, 
b) Cooling, 

c) Freezing, 

d) Drying, and 

e) Humidity regulation. 


3.15.2 Product integrity shall be maintained during 
storage and transportation of organic products. Organic 
Products shall be protected at all times from co- 
mingling with non-organic products and from contact 
with materials and substances not permitted for use in 
organic farming/processing and handling. 


3.15.3 Where only part of the unit is certified and other 
products are non-organic, the organic products shall 
be stored and handled separately to maintain their 
identity. 


3.15.4 Bulk stores for organic products shall be separate 
from conventional product stores and clearly labelled 
to that effect. 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


3.15.5 Storage areas and transport containers for 
organic products shall be cleaned using methods and 
materials permitted in organic production. Measures 
should be taken to prevent possible contamination from 
any pesticide or other treatment not listed in Annex B 


3.16 Marking 


3.16.1 In addition to the labelling requirements given 
in 3.14, each package of the organic product shall also 
be marked with the following details: 


a) Name of the product; 

b) Net quantity; 

c) Batch or Code No. (whereever applicable); 

d) The words ‘Best before ........... ’ (month and 
year to be indicated); and 

e) Any other requirements as specified under the 
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) 
Rules, 2011 and Food Safety and Standards 
(Food Product Standards and Food Additives) 
Regulation, 2011 and the Rules framed there 
under. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.7.5) 
PRODUCTS FOR USE IN FERTILISING AND SOIL CONDITIONING 


In organic agriculture the maintenance of soil fertility may be achieved through the recycling of organic material 
whose nutrients are made available to crops through the action of soil micro organisms. 


Many of these inputs are restricted for use in organic production. In this Annex “restricted” means that the use of 
these inputs shall be subject to conditions. Factors such as contamination, risk of nutritional imbalances and 
depletion of natural resources shall be taken into consideration and as recommended by the relevant Government 


agencies of the region. 


Inputs Condition for Use 
Matter Produced on an Organic Farm Unit 
Farmyard and poultry manure, slurry, cow urine Permitted 
Crop residues and green manure Permitted 
Straw and other mulches Permitted 
Matter Produced Outside the Organic Farm Unit 
Blood meal, meat meal, bone meal and feather meal without preservatives Restricted 
Compost made from any carbon based residues (animal excrement including poultry) Restricted 
(factory farming sources not permitted) 
Farmyard manure, slurry, cow urine (preferably after control fermentation and/or Restricted 
appropriate dilution) “factory” farming sources not permitted 
Fish and fish products without preservatives Restricted 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


Inputs Condition for use 
Guano Restricted 
Human excrement Not permitted 


By-products from the food and textile industries of biodegradable material of microbial, Restricted 
plant or animal origin without any synthetic additives 
Sawdust, wood shavings, wood provided it comes from untreated wood Permitted 


Seaweed and seaweed products obtained by physical processes extraction with water or Restricted 
aqueous acid and/or alkaline solution 


Sewage sludge and urban composts from separated sources which are monitored for Restricted 
contamination 

Straw Restricted 
Vermicasts Restricted 
Animal charcoal Restricted 
Compost and spent mushroom and vermiculate substances Restricted 
Compost from organic household reference Restricted 
Compost from plant residues Permitted 


By products from oil palm, coconut and cocoa (including empty fruit bunch, cocoa peat Restricted 
and empty cocoa pods) 


By products of industries processing ingredients from organic agriculture Restricted 
Minerals 

Basic slag Restricted 
Calcareous and magnesium rock Restricted 
Calcified seaweed Permitted 
Calcium chloride Permitted 
Calcium carbonate of natural origin (chalk, limestone, gypsum and phosphate chalk) Permitted 
Mineral potassium with low chlorine content (for example sulphate of potash, kainite, Restricted 
sylvinite) 

Natural phosphates (for example Rock phosphates) Restricted 
Pulverised rock Restricted 
Sodium chloride Permitted 
Trace elements (Boron, Ferrous, Manganese, Molybdenum, Zinc) Restricted 
Wood ash from untreated wood Restricted 
Magnesium sulphate (Epson salt) Permitted 
Gypsum (Calcium sulphate) Permitted 
Silage and silage extract Permitted excluding 

Ammonium silage 

Aluminum calcium phosphate Restricted 
Sulphur Restricted 
Stone meal Restricted 
Clay (bentonite, perlite, zeolite) Permitted 
Vermiculite Permitted 
Peat Permitted 
Biodynamic preparations Permitted 
Plant preparations and botanical extracts Permitted 


Microbiological Preparations 
Bacterial preparations (biofertilizers) Permitted 


“Factory” farming refers to industrial management systems that are heavily reliant on veterinary and feed inputs 
not permitted in organic agriculture. 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 3.8.8 and 3.15.5) 
PRODUCTS FOR PLANT PEST AND DISEASE CONTROL 


Certain products are allowed for use in organic 
agriculture for the control of pests and diseases in plant 
production. Such products should only be used when 
absolutely necessary and should be chosen taking the 
environmental impact into consideration. 


Many of these products are restricted for use in organic 


production. In this Annex “restricted” means that the 
use of these inputs shall be subject to conditions. Factors 
such as contamination, risk of nutritional imbalances 
and depletion of natural resources shall be taken into 
consideration and as recommended by the relevant Govt 
agencies of the region”. 


Inputs 


Condition for use 


Substances from Plant and Animal Origin 
Azadiracta indica 
Neem oil 


Preparation of rotenone from Derris elliptica Lonchocarpus, Thephrosia spp 


Gelatin 
Propolis 
Plant based extracts — garlic, pongamia etc 


Preparation on basis of pyrethrins extracted from Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium, 
containing possibly a synergist Pyrethrum cinerafolium 


Preparation from Quassia amara 
Preparation from Ryania species 
Tobacco tea 

Lecithin 

Casein 


Sea weeds, sea weed meal, sea weed extracts, sea salt and salty water 


Extract from mushroom (Shiitake fungus) 
Extract from Chlorella 

Natural acids (vinegar) 

Minerals 

Chloride of lime/soda 


Clay (for example bentonite, perlite, vermiculite, zeolite) 
Copper salts/inorganic salts (Bordeaux mixture, copper hydroxide, copper oxychloride) 


used as a fungicide depending upon the crop. 
Mineral powders (for example stone meal) 
Diatomaceous earth 

Light mineral oils 

Permanganate of potash 

Lime sulphur (calcium polysulphide) 

Silicates, clay (Bentonite) 

Sodium bicarbonate 

Sulphur (as a fungicide, acaricide, repellant) 
Microorganism used for biological pest control 


Fungal preparations (such as Trichoderma spp, Metarhizium, Bauveria, Verticillium, 


Noumeria, etc) 


Bacterial preparations (such as Bacillus spp, Pseudomonas fluorescens) 


Permitted 
Restricted 
Restricted 
Permitted 
Restricted 
Permitted 
Restricted 


Restricted 
Restricted 
Not permitted 
Restricted 
Permitted 
Permitted 
Permitted 
Permitted 
Restricted 


Restricted 
Permitted 
Restricted 


Not allowed 
Restricted 
Restricted 
Restricted 
Restricted 
Restricted 
Permitted 
Restricted 


Permitted 


Permitted 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


Inputs 


Condition for use 


Release of parasites, predators, natural enemies of pest and sterilized insects 


Others 

Carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas 

Soft soap (potassium soap) 

Ethyl alcohol 

Homeopathic and Ayurvedic preparations 
Herbal and biodynamic preparations 
Traps 


Physical methods (Chromatic traps, Mechanical traps, sticky traps and Pheromones 


Permitted 


Restricted 
Permitted 
Not allowed 
Permitted 
Permitted 


Permitted 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 3.8.9) 
PROCEDURE TO EVALUATE ADDITIONAL INPUTS TO ORGANIC AGRICULTURE 


C-0 Annex A and Annex B refer to products for 
fertilising of the soil and control of plant pest and 
diseases in organic agriculture. But there may well be 
other products which may be useful and appropriate 
for use in organic agriculture which may not fall under 
these headings. Annex C outlines the procedure to 
evaluate other inputs into organic production. 


C-1 The following checklist should be used for 
amending the permitted substance list for fertilising the 
soil conditioning purposes: 


a) The material is essential for achieving or 
maintaining soil fertility or to fulfill specific 
nutrient requirements, for specific soil- 
conditioning and rotation purposes which 
cannot be satisfied by the practices outlined 
in 3 of this standard or of other products 
included in Annex A and the ingredients are 
of plant, animal, microbial or mineral origin 
which may undergo the following processes; 

b) physical (mechanical, thermal); 

c) enzymatic; 

d) microbial (composting, digestion); 

e) Their use does not result in, or contribute to, 
unacceptable effects on, or contamination of, 
the environment, including soil organisms; 
and 


f) Their use has no unacceptable effect on the 
quality and safety of the final product. 
C-2 The following checklist shall be used for amending 
the permitted substance list for the purpose of plant 
disease or pest and weed control: 


a) The material is essential for the control of a 
harmful organism or a particular disease for 
which other biological, physical or plant 
breeding alternatives and/or effective 
management techniques are not available. 


b) The substances (active compound) shall be 
plant, animal, microbial or mineral origin 
which may undergo the following processes: 
1) physical 
2) enzymatic 
3) microbial 

c) Their use does not result in, or contribute to, 
unacceptable effects on, or contamination of, 
the environment. 

d) Nature identical products such as pheromones, 
which are chemically synthesised may be 
considered if the products are not available in 
sufficient quantities in their natural farm, 
provided that the conditions for their use do 
not directly or indirectly contribute to 
contamination of the environment or the 
product. 


C-3 EVALUATION 


When an input is to be evaluated it must first be 
investigated to see whether it fulfills the following six 
criteria. An input shall fulfill all the following 
requirements before it can be accepted as suitable for 
use in organic agriculture. 


Inputs should be evaluated regularly and weighed 
against alternatives. This process of regular evaluation 
should result in organic production becoming ever more 
friendly to humans, animals, environment and the 
ecosystem. 


C-3.1 Necessity 


The necessity of each input shall be established. This 
will be investigated in the context in which the product 
will be used. 


Arguments to prove the necessity of an input may be 
drawn from such criteria as yield, product quality, 
environmental safety, ecological protection, landscape, 
human and animal welfare. 


The use of an input may be restricted to: 


a) Specific crops (especially perennial crops) 

b) Specific regions 

c) Specific conditions under which the input may 
be used 


C-3.2 Nature and Way of Production Nature 


The origin of the input should usually be (in order of 
preference): 


a) Organic — vegetative, animal, microbial 
b) Mineral 


Non-natural products which are chemically synthesized 
and identical to natural products may be used. 


When there is any choice, renewable inputs are 
preferred. The next best choice is inputs of mineral 
origin and the third choice is inputs which are 
chemically identical to natural products. There may be 
ecological, technical or economic arguments to take 
into consideration in the allowance of chemically 
identical inputs. 


C-3.2.1 Way of Production 


The ingredients of the inputs may undergo the following 
processes: 


a) Mechanical 

b) Physical 

c) Enzymatic 

d) Action of micro-organisms 

e) Chemical (as an exception and restricted) 


11 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


C-3.3 Collection 


The collection of the raw materials comprising the input 
must not affect the stability of the natural habitat nor 
affect the maintenance of any species within the 
collection area. 


C-3.4 Environment 
C-3.4.1 Environmental Safety 


The input must not be harmful or have a lasting negative 
impact on the environment. Nor should the input give 
rise to unacceptable pollution of surface or ground 
water, air or soil. All stages during processing, use and 
breakdown must be evaluated. 


The following characteristics of the input must be taken 
into account: 


e ~Degradability 
All inputs must be degradable to their mineral form. 


Inputs with a high acute toxicity to non-target 
organisms should have a maximum half-life of five 
days. Natural substances used as inputs which are not 
considered toxic do not need to be degradable within 
a limited time. 


e Acute toxicity to non-target organisms 
When inputs have a relatively high acute toxicity for 
non-target organisms, restrictions for their use is 
needed. Measures have to be taken to guarantee the 
survival of these non-target organisms. Maximum 
amounts allowed for application may be set. When it is 
not possible to take adequate measures, the input shall 
not be used. 


e Long-term chronic toxicity 

Inputs which accumulate in organisms or systems of 
organisms and inputs which have, or are suspected of 
having, mutagenic or carcinogenic properties shall not 
be used. If there are any risks, sufficient measures have 
to be taken to reduce any risk to an acceptable level 
and to prevent long lasting negative environmental 
effects. 


e Chemically synthesized products and heavy 
metals 
Inputs should not contain harmful amounts of man made 
chemicals (xenobiotic products). Chemically 
synthesized products may be used only if identical to 
the natural product. 


Mineral inputs should contain as few heavy metals 
as possible. Due to the lack of any alternative, and 
long-standing, traditional use in organic agriculture, 
copper and copper salts are an exception for the time 
being. The use of copper in any form in organic 
agriculture must be seen, however, as temporary and 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


use must be restricted with regard to environmental C-3.5 Ethical Aspects — Animal Welfare 


impact. £223 
P Inputs must not have a negative influence on the natural 


e Human Health behaviour or physical functioning of animals kept at 
Inputs must not be harmful to human health. All stages the farm. 
during processing, use and degradation must be taken 
into account. Measures must be taken to reduce any 
risks and standards set for inputs used in organic Consumers’ perception: Inputs should not meet resistance 
production. or opposition of consumers of organic products. An input 
might be considered by consumers to be unsafe to the 
environment or human health, although this has not been 
Inputs must not have negative effects on the quality of scientifically proven. Inputs should not interfere with a 
the product — for example taste, keeping quality, visual general feeling or opinion about what is natural or 
quality. organic; for example genetic engineering. 


C-3.6 Socio Economic Aspects 


e Product Quality 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 3.12.1) 


FOOD ADDITIVES INCLUDING CARRIERS FOR USE IN PRODUCTION OF 
PROCESSED ORGANIC FOOD 


International Name of Additive/ Use in Preparation Conditions for Use 

Numbering Carrier of Food Products 

System 

INS 170 Calcium carbonate v Not for use for colouring/calcium enrichment 
of products 

INS 220 Sulphur dioxide v For fruit wines without added sugar 

INS 270 Lactic acid For concentrated fruit/veg. juice & fermented 
veg. products 

INS 296 Malic acid v 

INS 290 Carbon dioxide v 

INS 300 Ascorbic acid v 

INS 306 Tocopheroles, mixed, natural v Antioxidant for fats and oils 

concentrates 

INS 322 Lecithin v 

INS 325 Sodium lactate 

INS 330 Citric acid v For concentrated fruit/veg. Jam, fermented 
veg. product 

INS 331 Sodium citrate v 

INS 333 Calcium citrate v 

INS 334 Tartaric acid v 

INS 335 Sodium tartarate v 

INS 336 Potassium tartarate v 

INS 341 Mono calcium phosphate v For raising flour only 

INS 400 Alginic acid v 

INS 401 Sodium alginate v 

INS 402 Potassium alginate v 


an 
N 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


International Name of Additive/ Use in Preparation Conditions for Use 
Numbering Carrier of Food Products 

System 

INS 406 Agar v 

INS 407 Carrageenan v 

INS 410 Locust bean gum v 

INS 412 Guar gum v 

INS 414 Arabic gum v 

INS 415 Xanthum gum A 

INS 422 Glycerol v For use in plant extracts 

INS 440 Pectin v 

INS 464 Hydroxy propyl methyl cellulose W For encapsulation material for capsules 
INS 500 Sodium carbonate v 

INS 501 Potassium carbonate v For drying of grape resins 

INS 503 Ammonium carbonate v 

INS 504 Magnesium carbonate v 

INS 509 Calcium chloride v 

INS 516 Calcium sulphate v Restricted; For use only as carrier 
INS 524 Sodium hydroxide v 

INS 551 Silicon dioxide v Anticaking agent for herbs & spices 
INS 553 Talc v 

INS 938 Argon v 

INS 939 Helium v 

INS 941 Nitrogen v 

INS 948 Oxygen v 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 3.12.1) 


PROCESSING AIDS AND OTHER PRODUCTS FOR USE IN PROCESSING OF INGREDIENTS 


Product Use in Preparation Conditions for Use 
of Food Products 

Water v Potable water 

Calcium chloride v Coagulation agent 

Calcium carbonate v Coagulation agent 

Calcium hydroxide v 

Calcium sulphate v Coagulation agent 

Magnesium chloride v Coagulation agent 

Potassium carbonate v Drying of grapes 

Sodium carbonate v Sugar production 

Lactic acid 

Citric acid v 

Sodium hydroxide v Sugar production, oil production from rape 


13 


seed 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


Product Use in Preparation Conditions for Use 
of Food Products 


Sulphuric acid v Sugar production 
Hydrochloric acid 
Ammonium hydroxide 
Hydrogen peroxide 
Carbon dioxide 
Nitrogen 

Ethanol 

Tannic acid 


Solvent 
Filtration aid 
Egg white albumin 
Casein 

Gelatin 

Isinglass 
Vegetable oils Greasing, releasing or antifoaming agent 
Silicon dioxide gel 
Activated carbon 
Talc 


KAOLIN AL SASAS R ALLAU 


In compliance with the specific purity criteria 
for food additive 


Kaoline 

Cellulose 
Diatomaceous earth 
Perlite 

Hazel nut shells 
Rice meal 


KOR LORNA AS 


Bee wax Releasing agent 


Flavouring Agents b) Genetically modified microorganisms are 


a) Volatile (essential) oils produced by means of Radea 


solvents such as oil, water, ethanol, carbon 
dioxide and mechanical and physical 


c) Bakers yeast produced without bleaches and 
organic solvents 


processes. Ingredients 
b) Natural smoke flavour. a) Drinking water 
c) Use of approved natural flavouring b) Salt 
preparations. 


c) Minerals (including trace elements) and 
Preparations of Micro-organisms vitamins where their use is legally required or 
where severe dietary or nutritional deficiency 


a) Preparations ofmicro-organisms accepted for 
can be demonstrated. 


use in food processing 


14 


IS 16550 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 3.13.2) 


APPROVED ADDITIVES FOR USE IN MANUFACTURING OF PACKAGING FILMS FOR 
PACKAGING OF ORGANIC FOODSTUFF 


Certain additives for use in manufacturing of packaging films for packaging of organic food stuff are allowed for 
restricted use. In this annex “restricted” means that the use of these inputs shall be subject to conditions. 


SI No. Products Limitation 
1. 4,4’-Bis(2-benzoxazolyl)stilbene Restricted 
2. 9,9-Bis(methoxymethyl)fluorine Restricted 
3. Carbonic acid, copper salt 
4. Diethyleneglycol Restricted 
5. 2-(4,6-Diphenyl-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-5-(hexyloxy) phenol 
6. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, copper salt Restricted 
7. 2-(2-Hydroxy-3,5-di-tert-butyl-pheny1)-5-chlorobenzotriazole 
8. 2-Methyl-4-isothiazolin-3-one Restricted 
9. Phosphoric acid, trichlorocthylester 
10. Polyesters of 1,2 propanediol and/or 1,3-and 1, 4 butanediol and/or Restricted 


polypropyleneglycol with adipic acid, also end-capped with acetic acid or 
fatty acids C10-C18 or n-octanol and/or n-decanol 


11. 1,1,1-Trimethylolpropane Restricted 
12. 3-hydroxybutanoic acid 3-hydroxypentanoic acid, Copolymer Restricted 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 22 (2700). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


