**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 4472-2 (1968) : Methods for identification of application 
classes of dyes on textile materials part-II Wool, silk 
and other protein fibres [TXD 7: Textile Sizing and 
Finishing Materials] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■k^v / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 4472 (P.rt n )-19€8 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 

IDENTIFICATION OF APPLICATION 

CLASSES OF DYES ON TEXTILE MATERIALS 

FART rl WOOL, SILK AND OTHER PROTEIN FIBRES 

[ Second Keprint DECEMBER 1986 ) 



UDC 6TT.Gl6.ii2 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAN Ail &H A VAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZArAR MAftfi 
NEW DKLHl 11M02 
Cr 3 April \W* 



IS:4472 (Part H)- 1968 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 

IDENTIFICATION OF APPLICATION 

CLASSES OF DYES ON TEXTILE MATERIALS 

PART II WOOL, SILK AND OTHER PROTEIN FIBRES 

Oyestuffs Sectional Committee, TDC 38 

Chairman Representing 

Shri B. V. Shah The Atul Products Limited, Atui 

Members 
Dr H. Kaiwar ( Alternate to 
Shri B. V. Shah ) 
Shri C. R. Asnani The Century Spg & Mfg Go Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. R. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. P. Bhattacharya Indian Jute Industries* Research Association, Calcutta 

Shri K. S. Bhujang Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Dr S. Chatter jbe Suhrid Geigy Trading Limited, Bombay 

Shri D. S. Dalai* Chika Limited, Bombay 

Shri T. S. Sambasivan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Dasgupta National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. H. Desai Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmedabad 
Dr R. D. Desai M. G. Science Institute, Ahmedabad 

Shri V. K. Dieshit Indian Dyestufl* Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. G. Parulxar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Dutta The Ahmedabad Manufacturing and Calico Printing 

Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Shri Joginder Singh Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. G. Kapadia Fedco Private Limited, Bombay 

Shri H. C. Khatiwala Arlabs Limited, Bombay 

Dr C. B, Kothari The Textile Association ( India ) Regd, Ahmedabad 

Shri T. A. Subramanyam ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. A. Kulkarni Amar Dye-Chem Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. V. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Mehta I. C. I. ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutta 

Shri Y. H- Desai ( Alternate ) 
Db S. H. Mhatre The Bangalore Woollen, Cotton & Silk Mills Co Ltd, 

Bangalore, and the Buckingham & Carnatic 
Company Limited, Madras 
Shri R. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Nadkarni Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Dr M. V. Nimkar The Millowners* Association, Bombay 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 



IS :4472( Part D) -1968 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

DrJ. M. Rane Hickson & Dadajee Ltd, Bombay 

Shri H. V. Dharwahkar ( Alternate ) 

Shri M. N. Rao The Indian Paint Association, Calcutta 

Shri N. S. Bhartia ( Alternate ) 
Shri Santokh Singh National Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shri N. S. Saraiya The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri K. A. Shah The Sarangpur Cotton Manufacturing Co Ltd, 

Ahmedabad 
Shri K. V. Shenoy Ciba of India Limited, Bombay 

Shri T. Sadasivak ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. O. Shtjkla Rohtas Industries Limited, Dalmianagar 

Dr M. K. Unni National Chemical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Poona 

Shri S. M. Chakbaborty, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Tex ) 

Secretary 
Shri G. S. Abhyankar 
. Deputy Director (Tex), ISI 

Identification of Dyes Subcommittee, TDC 38: 1 

Convener 

Shri N. H. Desai Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmedabad 

Members 
Dr N. F. Desai Sandoz ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Dr C. B. Kothari The Textile Association ( India ) Regd, Ahmedabad 

Shri N, S. Saraiya The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Dr R. V. R. Subramanian The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 



IS:4472 (Part II) -1968 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 

IDENTIFICATION OF APPLICATION 

CLASSES OF DYES ON TEXTILE MATERIALS 

PART II WOOL, SILK AND OTHER PROTEIN FIBRES 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian standard (Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 December 1968, after the draft finalized by the Dyestuffs 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 The methods of identification of dyes on wool, silk and other protein 
fibres prescribed in this standard, are simple and are meant for rapid identi- 
fication of application classes of dyes. Successful identification of application 
classes of dyes depends on experience and familiarity of the dyestuffs. The 
knowledge of a fibre eliminates dyes which are not applicable to the parti- 
cular fibre and the identification is made somewhat easier. 

0.3 The methods prescribed here do not involve the use of microscope, 
however, its use is not precluded if desired. In general, the identification 
of application classes of dyes is not dependent on any single test and final 
confirmation of the identity of an unknown class of dye should preferably be 
made by comparison with an authentic sample. 

0.4 Considerable assistance has been derived from the following: 

Ellis Clayton. Identification of dyes on textile fibres. 1963. Ed 2. 
The Society of Dyers and Colourists, Bradford, UK. 

Koch ( P ). Microscopic and chemical testing of textiles. 1963. Chap- 
man and Hall Ltd, London. 

Identification of dyestuffs on textiles. Textile Industries Journal 
122, 1; 1958; 101-104. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part II) prescribes methods for identification of appli- 
cation classes of dyestuffon wool, silk and other protein fibres. 



IS:4472 (Part O). 1968 

1.1.1 The methods are applicable to types of dyes normally used for dye- 
ing and printing wool, silk and other protein fibres. 

2. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 

2.1 If the sample under test is fibre or yarn, take a tuft of fibre or yarn of 
about 3 cm in length. 

2.2 If the sample under test is fabric, take a 3 x 3 cm test piece. 

Note 1 — In case of multi-coloured woven fabric, the different colours on yarn 
should be identified separately. 

Note 2 — In case of dyed and printed fabrics, the specimens should be taken from 
different coloured portions of the sample. 

2.3 To remove finishing materials, if any, present in textiles, the sample 
should be treated twice with 1 percent hydrochloric acid at boil for 
5 minutes and washed. 

3. REAGENTS 

3.0 Quality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals 
shall be employed in tests and distilled water {see IS: 1070-1960* ) shall 
be used where the use of water as reagent is intended. 

Note — * Pure chemicals ' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which 
affect the test results. 

3.1 Acetic Acid — (a) 5 percent (w/z>); and (b) glacial. 

3.2 Ammonium Hydroxide Solution — prepared by diluting 1 ml of 
concentrated ammonia (sp gr 0*90) to 100 ml with water. 

3.3 Sodium Chloride — solid. 

3.4 Sulphuric Acid — 10 percent {wfv). 

3.5 Sodium Carbonate — (a) 5 percent solution (w/v) 9 and (b) solid. 

3.6 Sodium Nitrate — solid. 

3.7 Sodium Hydroxide Solution— 1,5, 10 and 30 percent solutions. 

3.8 Sodium Hydrosulphite — (a) 10 percent {wjv) freshly prepared, and 
(b) solid. 

3.9 Sodium Bisulphite — 30 percent {wfv). 
3,iq Rectified Spirit — See 18:323-1959+, 

3.11 Hydrogen Peroxide — 3 percent {wjv) ( 10 volumes). 

*Specification for water, distilled quality ( revised ). 
tSpecification for rectified spirit ( revised ) . 



IS:4472 (Part II) -1968 

3.12 Hydrochloric Acid — (a) prepared by diluting 15 ml of concentrated 
hydrochloric acid to 100 ml, and (b) concentrated (sp gr 1-16). 

3.13 Ethylenediamine — sp gr 0*97, b.p. 117°C. 

3.14 Ether 

3.15 Bleached Cotton 

3.16 Scoured Wool (Undyed) 

3.17 Dimethyl Fprmamide — (a) 50 percent (wiv) f and (b) concentrated 
(b.p. 152° to 154°C). 

3.18 Tannin Reagent — prepared by dissolving 10 g of tannic acid and 
10 g of anhydrous sodium acetate in 200 ml of water. 

3.19 EDTA — Glycerine Solution — 4 percent (wjv) solution of disodium 
salt of ethylenediamine tetra acetic acid in glycerine. 

3.20 Paraffin Wax 

3.21 Blank Vat Solution — prepared by dissolving 15 g of sodium 
hydroxide and 20 g of sodium hydrosulphite in sufficient water and made 
to I litre. 

4. PROCEDURE 

4.1 For identification of dyes on fibres, follow the procedure given in 
Appendix A. 

Note — While identifying the dyes used for dyeing pale shades, it is advisable to use 
large specimen and large quantities of reagents and to concentrate the extract before 
making the test. 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS:4472(PartH)-I968 



APPENDIX A 

(Clause 4.1) 

TESTS FOR IDENTIFICATION OF APPLICATION CLASSES OF DYES ON WOOL, SILK AND OTHER PROTEIN FIBRES 



The test specimen is successively treated with (a) 50 percent dime thy lformamide. (b) concentrated dimethy lformamide, and (c) a mixture of glacial acetic acid and rectified spirit ( 1 : 1 , vjv ) at boil for 
3 to 4 minutes with intermediate washing with water and squeezing. 



If dyes of group I are absent, treat the test specimen with 0*1 ml of glacial acetic acid and warm. Add 5 ml of water. 



> 

< 

Urn 






c 
7, 



c 

■= > 

:i s 

— n 






If dyes of groups I and II are absent, take a fresh test specimen and add to it 5 to 10 ml of 1 percent ammonium hydroxide solution. If extract is coloured, remove the stripped 
specimen and divide the extract into two portions, (a) Add to the first portion 30 mg of sodium chloride and 10 to 30 mg each of bleached cotton and secured wool, and 
boil, (b) Neutralize the other portion by adding 10 percent sulphuric acid and few drops in excess. Add bleached cotton and secured wool and boil. 



B5 



* 



a? 



If dyes of groups I, II and III are absent, take a test specimen ( about 5 g ) and ash it completely in a porcelain crucible. Add 200 mg of flux ( equal parts of 
sodium carbonate and sodium nitrate ) and fuse. 



Test for the Presence of Metal 

( Cr or Co present ) 

Metal complex or Mordant dyes 
( chrome } 



Strip the dye in hot 1 percent 
a mmon ium hydroxide. After 
cooling acidify the solution with 
hydrochloric acid. Shake up 
the extract with ether 



Ether is colo- 
ured 

Metal Complex 
Dyes 



Ether is not 
coloured 

Mordant Dyes 
{ Chrome ) 



GROUP I GROUP II GROUP III 



GROUP IV 



If dyes of groups I to IV are absent, take a test specimen ( about 200 to 300 mg ) and add 25 ml of 10 percent sodium hydroxide 
and boil until it is dissolved. Add 25 to 30 mg of sodium hydrosulphite, 20 to 50 mg of sodium chloride and 10 to 15 mg 
of bleached cotton. Keep near boil for 2 minutes and cool. Take out the cotton and place it on filter paper for 1 to 2 
minutes and oxidize with sodium nitrate and acetic acid solution. 






g -a 



no .£ 



n 

c « 



c 

c * T 
c c >* 

Z £ *^ 

8 J 1 
jj Si 



-D 

f £. 



■o-s.fi 



a 



5 
> 



c 



c 

:\ 

2 t 



GROUP V 



> 

o 
o 

< 



ADDITIONAL TESTS 



1 } Basic Dyes 

\) Take a test specimen. Add to it 1 ml of glacial acetic acid and warm. Add 5 ml of water. To the extract add tannin reagent. A coloured precipitate is obtained. 
ii) Take a test specimen, boil it with rectified spirit; a coloured extract is obtained. 

iii) Ta£e a test specimen, boil it in 2 ml glacial acetic acid. Add 30 percent sodium hydroxide till the solution is alkaline. A change in colour or complete decolonization is obtained. 
Acidify the solution with 5 percent acetic acid. The original colour is restored. 



IS r 4472 (P»rtH> 1968 



2} Dvm Djm 



Take a test specimen and boil it -with 5 percent sodium carbonate solution for half a minute in pretence of few pieces of bleached coitoo. The cotton is stained. The stained cotton is 
practically unaffected on treatment with 1 percent ammonium hydroxide solution at boil. 

Nor* 1 — In case of silk dyeings 3 to 10 percent of sodium hydroxide should be used instead of sodium carbonate solution. 

Notk 2 — In the above test, certain dyes which are closely allied to substative axo dyes in chemical structure, stain the cotton to a comparatively slight extent. Identification of such 
dyeings may be achieved by boiling the specimen in I percent sodium hydroxide solution when dull yellowish, colour i» obtained. This yellowish colour may also be obtained on 
boiling the dyeings with 30 percent sodium bisulphite solution. 

3) Acid* Metal Complex and Mordant Djus { Chrome ) 

i) Take a test specimen. Boil it with dimcthylformamide. Bleeding indicates acid djts, slight bleeding indicates metal complex dyes. No bleeding indicates mordant dyes ( chrome }. 
ii ; « Heat a test specimen in solution of EDTA in glycerine. At 144PC: No change — Add and mordant dyes. Rapid change (in 1 to St minutes ) — 1:1 metal complex dyes ( acid 

dyeing t . IS low change ( m 20 trnriuU*s ) — 1:2 metal complex dyer ( neutral dyeing }. Ai ]60°O: Mo change — Acid Dyes, 
iii) Take a te»i specimen. Boil it with dilute hydrochloric acid [ see 3.12(a) ], Take out the specimen and wash and treat it with 10 percent sodium hydrosulphite solution. The 

colour » destroyed, 
iv) Most of the after chrome dyes are not stripped, This fact should be taken as a clue for mordant dyj* ( chrome )'. 

*) Vol and Azoic Dyes 

i) Warm some paraffin wax in a * hi te porcelain crucible until faint vapours appear. Take a test specimen and hold it in molten wax for about a minute. Remove the specimen. 
After cooling any staining of paraffin wax is readily seen against white background of the porcelain. 

it' Take a test specimen and treat it with a blank vat solution at 60°C in a test-tube. Oxidize the specimen with hydrogen peroxide ( 3 percent, »/*)• 

a) Change in colour and original colour restored on oxidation — tot dyes, 

b) Twrt solution becomes yellow. Colour of the pattern usually remains unchanged. Xf the colour is changed original colour not restored on oxidation — azoic dyes. 

tit) Take » test specimen. Warm it with ethylenediamme. Add aqueous solution of sodium hydrosulphite [see 3 J(a) ] to ethyteuedi amine extract. TT*e coloured extract is 
decolourized readily and permanently. 

Not* — Most asoic dyeings on wool aad silk yield slimy residues of the same intense colours as the original dyes, on boiling dyeings in 5 and 10 percent sodium hydroxide solution 
respectively ( distinction from mordant dyes ). Most yellow dyeings and prints change to orange or red colours. 



