**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10843 (1984): Glossary of terms for crushers [MED 17: 
Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621 -926-2/-3 : 00V4 IS : 10843 - 1984 




( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 
Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR CRUSHERS 



E 
a 

o- 

LXJ 

C 



1. Scope — Covers the definitions of terms commonly used in the field of crushing operations. 

2. Definition 

2.1 Access Door— Refers to the covered opening in frame provided for inspection and access to 
interior for maintenance. 

2.2 Attrition — Reduction of material by a grinding or rubbing action between material and/or 
hard surfaces. 

2.3 Automatic Lubrication — Either splash or circulating oil or other lubricant, non-manual lubricating 
system. It may have filter, sight glasses and temperature and pressure alarm systems. 

2.4 Backlash — Total clearance between teeth of pinion and gear at pitch line. 

2.5 Bearing Housing — Enclosure for main bearings mounted on crusher frame. 

2.6 Bearing Retainer — Means of locating a bearing axially. 

2.7 Bearing Seai — Device to retain lubricant and exclude foreign matter. Common types are labyrinth, 
piston ring, lip seals, cap, slinger rings, shrouds. 

2.8 Blocking — A single piece of material too large to enter the crushing chamber. 

2.9 Bridging — Multiple pieces of material wedged or covering the feed opening of the crusher and 
preventing entry of additional material. 

2.10 Check Plate — Replaceable wearing surface for sides of crushing chamber. Usually of manganese 
or abrasion-resistant material. 

2.11 Choke Feed — A condition whereby the feed completely fills the crushing chamber. 

2.12 Circulating Oil System — System in which lubricating oil, after passing through the bearings, is 
returned to a reservior and recirculated for the purpose of cooling or heating and filtering. 

2.13 Closed Circuit Crushing — System in which the oversize material is separated from the product 
and returned to the crusher. 

2.14 Crushing Chamber — The area of the crusher where crushing takes place. 

2.15 Coupling — A device used todirect-connect a crusher to a driving mechanism. 

2.16 Drive — Any device used to transmit rotating force from the power unit to the crusher shaft, such 
as V-belt, flat-belt, $nd coupling. 

2.17 Drive Guard— Safety enclosure for the drive. 

2.18 Expansion Bearing — Free or floating bearing on one end of a shaft to allow for expansion and 
contraction of the shaft. 

2.19 Feed Opening — The inlet opening of the crusher where material enters the crushing chamber. 



Adopted 22 February 1984 



© July 1984, IS! 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10843 -1984 

2.20 Fines — Material having particle size smaller than a specified opening. 

2.21 Finished Product — The resultant material after it has been processed. 

2.22 Flywheel — A heavy, flat or grooved wheel or sheave used to store and release energy. 

2.23 Friable — Material that fractures easily. 

2.24 Grindabiiity — An index for the resistance of material to size reduction. 

2.25 Grizzly — A heavy duty screening surface consisting of a series of spaced bars, rail, or pipe 
members; maybe stationary, rotating of vibrating. 

2.26 Guard — A protective shield covering exposed moving elements of machinery. 

2.27 Lubrication — Usually oil or grease. 

2.28 Mobile Crushing Units — Moveable crushing units with crawler, rail, walking beams or pads, 
rubber, etc. These can be towed or self-propelled. 

2.29 Nominal ' — Term frequently used in describing product size, and denoting that at least 90 percent 
of product is smaller than the size indicated. 

2.30 Oil Retainer — A seal to prevent loss of lubricant. 

2.31 Open Circuit Crushing — One pass through the crusher. 

2.32 Pillow Block — A self-contained bearing housing separate from the frame of the crusher. 

2.33 Plugging— Blockage restricting flow of material. 

2.34 Portable Crushing Units — Units which can be moved on the highway with minimum 
disassembly. 

2.35 Pulley, Flywheel — Usually the large, heavy, driven pulley designed to transmit energy. Often 
grooved to take a V-belt drive. 

2.36 Reduction Ratio — Relationship of the top size of feed to the top size of the crusher product. 

2.37 Regulated Feed — Flow of material when controlled. 

2.38 ROM — Run of mine, 

2.39 ROQ— Run of quarry. 

2.40 Scalping — Removing from crusher feed most of the undersize material. 

2.41 Semi-Portable Crushing Units Skid or Base Mounted — Units which are mounted on a structural 
steel frame having legs or supports to grade. 

2.42 Shear Crushing — Reduction of material by a cutting action between two hard surfaces. 

2.43 Thrust Bearing — Any plain or anti-friction bearing designed to accept thrust loads. 

2.44 Top Size — The largest particle size in feed or product. 

2.45 Tramp Iron — Any uncrushab'e metal in the crusher feed. 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ANSI/CAPP A No. 78 1 979 
'Crusher terminology', issued by Crusher and Portable Plant Association. 



Printed at Prtntrade, New Delhi, India 



