( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS ! 6$37 - 1972

Indian Standard
GUIDE TO THE USE OF TEMPERATURE CONTROL DEVICES FOR CRYSTAL UNITS
Piezo-Electric
Chairman SHRI S. XUMAR Members
SERI R. Y. DESHPANDE

Crystals for Frequency Control and Selection Sectional Committee, ETDC 51
Representing Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore

Indian Telephone SHRI A. K. DUTTA SHRI V. R. GOPAL ( Alternate ) SHRI JOHN FRANCIS SHRI S. K. GANQULY DR J. D. JAIN COL N. S. MATHUR
SHRI R. S. KALE ( Alternate ) SHRI E. G. NAQARAJAN SHRI R. C. MURTHY ( Alternate) SHRI T. V. RAMA~XURTI

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Industries Ltd, Bangalore Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs (Tel.+ communication Research Centre ), New Delhi Civil Aviation Department ( Ministry of Tourism & Civil Aviation ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani Directorate of Coordination ( Police Wireless ) ( Ministry of Home Affairs ), New Delhi Directorate of Technical Development & Production ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR V. N. BINDAL (Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) CMDE K. R. RAMNATH SHRI M. S. NARAYANAN ( Alternate) Wireless Planning & Coordination Wing ( Ministry DR M. K. RAO of Communications ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI P. K. RAO All India Radio, New Delhi RESEARCH ENGINEER Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SBRI M. SANKARALINQAM ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SERI G. R. BHATIA (Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ofEcio Member ) SHRI Y. S. VEN~XATESWARAN, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary SHRI S. MUKHOPAD~YAY Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 1 ZAFAR MARG

Pa:65374972

Indian Standard
GUIDE TO THE USE OF TEMPERATURE CONTROL DEVICES FOR CRYSTAL UNITS

0.
0~1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 January 1972, after the draft finalized by the Piezo-Electric Crystals for Frequency Control and Selection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.

0.2 This standard has been prepared to provide a guide to the use of temperature control devices for crystal units; SO that these devices may be used to their best advantage. 0.3 Although devices are conceivable and may be of use which control the temperature -of a crystal unit according to a prescribed function of the ambient temperature, this guide is restricted to temperature control devices which should stabliize the temperature of the crystal unit within a prescribed range. 0.4 Even temperature control devices of this type do not perfectly smooth out the temperature variations and are subject to certain production Their thermal characteristics, therefore, should be carefully tolerances. considered for each application in connection with those of the crystal unit. 0.5 In addition, there are electrical and mechanical characteristics which may be vastly different depending on the design and should be carefully considered in selecting a suitable temperature control device. 0.6 Since some individual characteristics of temperature control devices are interrelated, certain combination of the characteristics discussed in this guide are impossible to achieve in practice. Individual specifications should therefore be used, as far as possible. 6.7 Considering that the multiplicity of slightly different types is uneconomical and restrict-s interchangeability, preference should be given to the standard types of temperature control devices, especially since standard crystal units fitting them are readily available. 0.8 In this standard the general term ` temperature control devices for crystal units ' is abbreviated to ` TCD ' and as the most widely used TCD's 2

*

IS : 6537- 1972
stabilize referred the temperature by means to as ` crystal oven'. of controlled heating, they are often

0.9 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC/TC 49 ( Central Office) 48 Draft Recommendations for temperature control devices for crystal units -Section 3: Guide to the use of temperature control devices for crystal units, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard explains the importance of principal characteristics of It is shown in this standard how they control devices. temperature determine the ultimate performance in conjunction with the characteristics of the crystal unit.
2. TERMINOLOGY

a2.1 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 5575 (Part I )-1970" shall apply.
3. TEMPERATURE

the

definitions

of terms

given

in

CONTROL

DEVICE

TECHNOLOGY

3.1 Fundamental

the problem of keepPossibilities -Fundamentally, ing the crystal chamber temperature within a prescribed range can be solved in three ways by adopting three fundamental relative positions of the nominal temperature with respect to the ambient temperature range, namely:

4 b)

Nominal temperature higher than the maximum ambient temperature and compensation for the heat loss in the chamber by an automatically controlled heating system; Nominal temperature below the minimum ambient temperature and compensation for the increase of heat in the chamber by an automatically controlled cooling system; and w~ithin the ambient procedures according temperature range and to (a) and (b) above.
procedure (b) yields a lower
L

temperature c>Nominal a combination of the

NOTE 1 -Owing to the lower working temperature, ageing rate for the crystal unit.

NOTE 2 As compared to procedure (a), procedure (c) can bring a marked decrease of the required power. NOTE 3 - At the present time temperature control devices according to (b) and (c) are not yet in large scale use and for this reason this standard deals only with crystal ovens based on procedure (a).

*Temperature and tests.

control

devices

for quartz

crystal

units: Part

I General

requirements

'

3

IS: 6537 - 1972 3.2 Layout 3.2.1 The of Crystal Ovens

layout of crystal ovens as dealt with in this standard is illustrated in Fig. 1. The heating jacket, a sheath of good thermal conductivity surrounds the crystal chamber on all sides if possible, and in general carries the heater element directly at its outer side. The temperature sensor is attached to a suitable point, commonly at or in the The heater element and an external cover are separated heating jacket. by a thermal insulating layer.

.

Cover Crystal chamber Crystal holder Crystal vibrator Heating jacket Heating winding NOTE- The firm line diagram is for type is for types (b) and (c) of 3.2.3. _

8 0"

7 8 9 10 11 12 (a)

Heater terminals Crystal terminals Electrical isolation Thermal capacity and conduction Thermal isolation Temperature sensor of 3.2.3 and the dotted line diagram

FIG. 1

SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATIONOF THE LAYOUT OF A CRYSTAL OVEN 4

IS : 6537 - 1972 3.2.2 The heating jacket, because of its good thermal conductivity, provides a highly uniform temperature level throughout its inner area, that is, the boundary surface of the crystal chamber (controlled space). Its thermal capacity prevents sudden temperature variations appearing on its outer surface (or in its environments) being transmitted to the crystal chamber. 3.2.3 usually: a) b) c) The temperature a bimetallic sensor used for controlling relay, thermometer, resistor. rugged. permit The direct or the heating power is

thermostat

a contact-making

mercury

a temperature-dependent

3.2.3.1 Bimetallic thermostat relays are simple and relatively high load rating of their contacts in general switching of the heating power.

3.2.3.2 Contact-making thermometers usually operate with higher accuracy than bimetallic thermostat relays and thus in general provide crystal ovens of higher precision, but the low load rating of their contacts requires normally an associated circuit in the form of relays or amplifiers. A drawback of these contact-making thermometers is their relatively great mechanical sensitivity, especially to shock during operation. 3.2.3.3 Temperature-dependent resistors are predominantly suited as temperature sensors for continuous control. Especially when arranged in a bridge circuit and in association with suitable amplifiers, the temperaturedependent resistor permits an accurate temperature regulation. 3.3 Mode regulation of Control-There are ovens ) and continuous type of control. oven the temperature with

`on/off'

( two-point
the heating

3.3.1 In an `on/off' in the following way:

sensor regulates

` If the temperature of the sensor drops rature, the heating power is turned on. the temperature of the sensor increases, exceeded and the heating system is turned

below its switching tempeAfter some time, therefore, its switching temperature is off. '

By thermal losses to the environment this process is repeated. This mechanism is schematically represented in Fig. 2 for a `particular type of TCD. It can be recognized in this example that, by the thermal time constants of the crystal oven and the temperature sensor, the heating power i applied in the form of pulses is shaped to sine-like heat waves, the heat waves being shifted in phase with respect to the applied heating power. 5

18:6537-1972
The mean temperature the ambient temperature of the heating. of the temperature by a certain amount sensor lags the changes of to provide proper regulation

A___
EOUS VALUE

___
SWITCH MEAN ON TEMP SENSOR TEM

-m

TIME

2A

Ambient Temperature in the Centre of the Range

28

Ambient Temperature in the Upper Half of the Range

2C

Ambient Temperature in the Lower Half of the Range

FIG. 2 SENSOR TEMPERATURE AND MEAN HEATING POWER AS FUNCTION OF THE AMBIENT TEMPERATURE FOR A CRYSTAL OVEN WITH ON/OFF CONTROL The heat waves still present at the temperature smoothed out on their way to the crystal. sensor are further

If necessary, for more precise application, the temperature ripple at the can be further reduced by additional thermal filter elements. Depending on the arrangement of the temperature sensor, the variation of the mean crystal chamber temperature over the operating temperature range may take place in the same or opposite sense as the variation of the mean sensor temperature.
crystal

An interesting variant of the ' on/off' regulator is the ` change-of-state crystal oven `. The controlled surface of~such an oven is formed by a layer of a specially selected compound with its inner part in one state and the outer part in the other state when warm-up time has elapsed. The ttinsition from one state to the other results in a volume change that, via a 6

IS : 6537- 1972 diaphragm, operates a switch which controls the heating power. The heated level is represented by the interface of the ~two states and the required latent heat provides a highly effective heat buffer action. 3.3.2 In a continuously controlled crystal oven an uninterrupted heating current flows whose magnitude is continuously controlled through an amplifier by the temperature sensor so that the heating power just offsets Continuously controlled crystal the heat loss in the crystal chamber. ovens do not have contacts that may fail and which sometimes cause undesired current pulses. This has also the advantage of providing more precise control. But in general their regulating circuit is more complex than that of the ` on/off' crystal oven. 4. APPLICATION FOR CRYSTAL OF TEMPERATURE UNITS CONTROL DEVICES

4.1 The function of a temperature control device is to keep one or more crystal units, located in its chamber, at a specified constant temperature (see Fig. 3 ). Independently of the means used for temperature stabilization, a temperature control device can be assessed on the basis of its thermal, electrical and mechanical characteristics.

ab7,R FIG.

Without crystal oven With crystal oven Operating temperature

range

3

DEPENDENCE OF THE CRYSTAL UNIT TEMPERATURE ON THE AMBIENT TEMPERATURE

4.2 Rating 4.2.1

and Selection

General

4.2.1.1 Crystal ovens exhibit variations of the crystal chamber temperature (see Fig. 4 ) which, though being small, involve a corresponding : variation of the frequency of the crystal accommodated in the oven. 7

IS t 6537 - 1972
VARIATION OF TEMPERATURE THE MEAN OVER THE CRYSTAL OPERATING

c

,'
/ :

t i ( ' I I I
1

48

Characteristics

of Crystal

Oven, 20 0 -20 -CO -60 -80 -100 -120

-20

0

20

-140

4A

Frequency vs Temperature Characteristics of Crystal Units JJf f-x lo- 8 -

4C

Frequency/Temperature Characteristies of Crystal Units in Crystal Ovens

Frequency variation in 10-O range

TaR FIG.

Operating temperature

4 REDUCTION OF THE RELATIVE FREQUENCY VARLATION OF THE CRYSTALUNIT WHENOPERATEDIN A CRYSTALOVEN

4.2.1.2 In order to meet a desired frequency tolerance, it is necessary that the characteristics of the crystal oven and the associated crystal are For this reason, the significance of the main characconsidered jointly. teristics of a crystal oven and, as far as necessary, those of the associated crystal are explained as follows: `Taking into account the thermal properties of the crystal unit and the crystal oven, the relative frequency variation of the crystal in the crystal oven is given to a first approximation by the product of the variation of the crystal chamber temperature and the temperature 8

IS : 6537 - 1972
coefficient (tcf) of the crystal. Frequency variations due to ageing of the crystal unit and the crystal oven should be taken into account separately. '

4.2.1.3 The frequency variation of the crystal unit resulting from temperature changes is minimized if the ' turnover point ' (for example, maximum or minimum ) of the frequency vs temperature curve of the crystal unit (see 4.3 of IS : 2935-1964* ) coincides with the mean operating temperIn the case of temperature controlled crystal units the frequency ature. variation is minimized if the turnover point coincides with the mean crystal chamber temperature, examples of the dependence of the characteristic considered are illustrated in Fig. 4.
Curve `a' of Fig. 4A shows the frequency us temperature characteristics of a crystal unit which presents an almost optimally small frequency variation and a suitable relative position of the turnover point for a nontemperature controlled crystal over the considered ambient temperature In Fig. 4C the related curve `(I ' reveals, however, a very large range. frequency variation when this crystal is operated at an elevated temperature in a crystal oven.

of a crystal which is ideal for operation in a crystal oven whose characteristic
is given in Fig. 4B. performance obtained Curve `b' in Fig. 4C shows the much improved from this crystal when operated in this oven.

Curve ` b ' of Fig. 4A shows the frequency

US

temperature

characteristics

4.2.1.4 However, in practice the crystal turnover point cannot be exactly positioned at a specified temperature. In addition, there are crystal cuts ofa type for which the turnover point is restricted to certain temperTherefore, the user of crystal ovens should consider the use ature ranges. of crystals whose temperature coefficient (Q) is less than a specified maximum value over the total range of the variations of the crystal chamber temperature.

.

4.2.1.5 A typical curve for a crystal of this kind-which corresponds best to the conditions prevailing in actual practice-is curve (c' in Fig. 4. Apart from the unit-to-unit spread of the crystal units, consideration should, also be given to the unit-to-unit spread of the mean crystal chamber temperature within a production series of crystal ovens. This example shows that, in general, a crystal unit well designed for operation over wide ranges of ambient temperature is unlikely to give optimum results when it is operated in a TCD.
4.2.1.6 In applications requiring extreme frequency accuracy, a separate consideration of the various factors affecting the crystal chamber temperature is advisable. *Guide for use of quartz oscillator crystals.

9

IS : 6537 - 1972 4.2.2 Factors Affecting~the Crystal Chamber Temperature

4.2.2-l The selection of the nominal crystal chamber temperature of the crystal oven is based on the operating temperature range of the crystal oven, which differs in general from the specified operating temperature range of the equipment. It is, for instance, necessary to choose the nominal temperature of TCD's that works only in connection with heating slightly higher (not less than 5�C) than the maximum anticipated operating temperature. The characteristic of the TCD describes the dependence of the mean crystal chamber temperature on the ambient temperature (see Fig. 5). b --TtlR_ /

)
PMBIENT aTEMPERATURE AMBIENT TEMPERATURE With linear dependence of the crystal chamber temperature on the ambient temperature (I~- Undercompensated os - Overcompensated lC,,, - Mean crystal chamber temperature - Operating temperature range 78

*
of the mean crystal chamber temperature within the operating temperature range b - With non linear dependence ofthe crystal chamber temperature on the ambient temperature b, - Undercompensated b1 - Overcompensated

A-Variation

FIG. 5

TYPICAL PRACTICALLYENCOUNTERED CRYSTAL OVEN CHARACTERISTICS

The mean crystal chamber temperature value of the crystal oven specified by the user ( nominal crystal chamber temperature ) can only be adjusted within a predetermined crystal chamber temperature calibration tolerance. In addition, variations of the crystal chamber resulting from: a) variations of the ambient temperature, temperature occur

b) cl 4

changes of the operating voltage, ageing phenomena (mainly due to long term changes of the temperature sensor ), and the regulating process which often causes a ripple on Gystal chamber temperature. 10

IS : 6537 - 1972 The calibration tolerance and the ageing tolerance [see 2.2.4 and 2.2.5 of IS: 5575 (Part I)-1970*] respectively provides a minimum limit to the fixed and to the slowly varying deviations from the nominal crystal chamber temperature. In applications requiring particular frequency accuracy, the influence of these two effects can often be minimized by periodic `pulling' of the crystal frequency (see 4.5.3 of IS : 2935-1964t). 4.2.2.2 Variation of the mean crystal chamber temperature over the operating temperature range-Basically, the effect on frequency of the variation of the mean crystal chamber temperature over the operating temperature range The variation of the mean crystal chamber tempercannot be eliminated. ature over the ambient temperature range is approximately the quotient of the operating temperature range and the reduction factor or the product of operating temperature range and the ratio of control of the crystal oven In so ( the `ratio of control ' is the reciprocal of the ` reduction factor ' ). computing the variation of the mean crystal chamber temperature over the operating temperature range, it should be noted that the reduction factor of the crystal oven depends in general, on the position of the operating point The algebraic sign of the oven within the operating temperature range. of the reduction factor may be positive, negative or alternating (see Fig. 5 ). 4.2.2.3 Crystal chamber temperature ripple-The temperature ripple of a crystal oven is a property from which no direct conclusion can be drawn as to the resulting frequency variation of the crystal unit. The air space between the controlled surface and the crystal holder as well as the gas (or vacuum) space between holder wall and crystal element act as a double thermal system in conjunction with the thermal capacities of the holder and crystal element. The smoothing of the temperature ripple by the filter system is better, the higher the switching rate of the crystal oven. On the other hand, a higher switching rate entails the drawback that the switching contacts, if any, wear out more rapidly. Hence, the frequency variation of the crystal resulting from the temperature ripple of the crystal oven depends to a large extent on the crystal frequency, design, and gas or vacuum filling used as well as the amplitude and the duration of one cycle of the temperature ripple. It should also be noted that the temperature ripple is not a constant but a function of both the applied voltage and the ambient temperature. The user should take these facts into account when assessing the suitability of a TCD for any particular purpose. _-__ *Specification for temperature control devices for quartz crystal units: Part I General requirements and tests. *Guide for use of quartz oscillator crystals.

IS : 6537 - 1972 4.2.2.4 Rate of change of crystal chamber temperature - It should be noted by the user that due to the rate of change of the crystal chamber temperature, frequency variations, greater than would normally be expected from an examination of the steady state crystal frequency temperature coefficient characteristic and the crystal oven characteristics, can occur. This is due to thermal gradients set up in the quartz plate and in applications requiring extreme frequency stability (less than O-1 ppm ) this effect may ,be of consequence and should be considered. For further information on this effect the user is recommended to seek advice from the crystal supplier. The amplitude of the crystal chamber TCD's with ON/OFF control the switching the determining factors of the rate of temperature. temperature ripple and for rate of the crystal oven are change of crystal chamber

4.2.2.5 Warm-up time - The remarks made concerning the temperature ripple also apply to the warm-up time or the warm-up rate. The warmup time for the frequency of the crystal unit to reach its specified tolerance is in general longer than that for the crystal chamber temperature of the crystal oven. 4.2.3 Power supply - In general, the maximum power is the sum of the maximum heating power and the power ~for the regulating circuit ( if any ) with maximum heating power. With the aid of the heat loss per unit temperature, which is a measure of the heating power to be expended per degree overtemperature, the average heating power can be calculated for any desired point of the operating temperature range and hence an efficient power supply can be designed. NOTE - Overtemperature, as understood in this standard, is the difference between
the crystal chamber temperature and the ambient temperature.

4.3

Notes on Installation

and Wiring

4.3.1 General -All specified parameters of the crystal oven relate to operation in motionless air. If, however, the crystal oven is incorporated in a unit so that this reference condition is not complied with, for example, as a result -of air draft or incident thermal radiation, the thermal behaviour of the crystal oven may change considerably. 4.3;2 Auxiliary ApparatusThe operation of a switching type oven may require external components such as relays or lamps. components used (for example, relays, contact-thermometers) important that their voltage and current ratings are not exceeded. The life of the contacts (especially when involved) is longest when the load placed on reduces the sparking, which may give rise to communications equipment. The sparking may use of appropriate spark quenching device. 12 crystal For all it is

c

high switching rates are them is small. This also interference in connected be further reduced by the

IS : 6537 - 1972 43.3 Effect of the TCD on the Electrical Proper&s of the Crystal Unit - The influence of the TCD on the electrical properties of the crystal unit shall It should be considered, in particular that the capacinot be neglected. tances of the leads between the TCD base and crystal unit inside the TCD may largely contribute to the load capacitance of the crystal unit. In order to minimize, on the one hand, these undesired residual capacitances and on the other, the heat leakage from the crystal chamber along these Since the resistance wires, their diameter is made as small as possible. of these wires is added to that of the crystal unit, the latter may at times In certain frequency regions the-inductance ofthese be noticeably increased. leads may also be troublesome, as may be the effects of the additional TCD's especially distributed capacities encountered in multi-position when it is considered that these additional distributed capacitances may In order to vary according to the number of crystal units fitted in TCD. obtain optimum performance from a combination of crystal (s) and a TCD, it is, therefore, necessary to consider these two items in common.
4.4 Ordering Data involved, the following a) -b) c) Ed) If the order for a crystal oven of known data will essentially be necessary: layout is

Layout of the crystal oven, Nominal crystal chamber temperature, Operating temperature range, and Operating voltage. by the manufacturer,

If the type of crystal oven is to be selected the following data should be specified: a) b) c) d)

Crystal holder used; Nominal crystal chamber temperature; Operating temperature range; Permissible deviation of the crystal chamber temperature from the nominal crystal chamber temperature (if necessary, the individual requirements relating to the crystal chamber temperature should be stated ); e) Operating voltage; and f) Further parameters according to the sample article sheet if they are important for the specific application. with crystals,

If the manufacturer is to supply crystal ovens additional data for the crystal become necessary, such as:

a) nominal frequency ( frequencies) or nominal frequency range; b) frequency tolerance (if necessary, the individual requirements should be stated ) ; c) circuit data, load capacity; d) drive level: e) special requirements, if any; and f) marking. 13

INDIAN
ON

STANDARDS

Piezo-Electric
IS: 1885 ( Part V )-1965 2916 (Part 2916 ( Part

Crystals

for Frequency

Control

and Selection

Electrotechnical

vocabulary:

Part V Quartz crystals Part I General requirements

Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: I )-1969 and tests II )-1972 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Quartz crystal units used in oscillators:

Part II Type AA-01 Part III Type AA-02 Part IV Type AA-03 Part V Type AA-04 Part VI Type AA-05

2916 ( Part III )-1972 2916 (Part 2916 (Part 2916 ( Part 2935-1964 4570-1968

IV )-1972 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: V )-1972 VI )-I972 Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: Quartz crystal units used in oscillators: crystals

Guide for use of quartz oscillator Crystal holders

Temperature control devices for quartz crystal units: Part I General 5575 ( Part I )-1970 requirements and tests 6133 ( Part I )-1971 Piezo-electric filter for use in telecommunication equipment: Part I General requirements and tests 6537-1972 Guide to the use of temperature and measuring

control devices for crystal units

