( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS:10439-1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PATENT GLAZING

Building Construction

Practices

Sectional

Committee,

BDC 13

Chairman C 4/38, Safdarjung Development New Delhi Members SHRI P. D. A~ARWAL
SHRI C. P. MALE

Area,

Representing of Ltd,

Department, Public Works Government Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI'R. K. MATRUR ( Alternate ) Housing & Urban Development Corporation SRRI SURAJ S. J. BAHADUR New Del hi Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI D. R. BATL~VALA Indian Institute of Architects. New Delhi SHRI J. R. BHALLA
CHIEF ENGINEER ( NORTH ) Crrr;nyA~ ( BLDCS

),

PW D,

Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chan$$ykt Department, Government of Public Tamil Gadu, Madras

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (SPECIAL BUILDING CIRCLE ), PWD, MADURAI ( Alternate ) Department, CHIEF ENGINEER-CUM-ADDITIONPublic Works Rajasthan, Jaipur AL SECRETARY, TO THE GOVERNMENT ( B & R ) EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( DESIGNS & SPZCIFICACentral Public Works Department, CHIEF ENGINEER ( TRAINING ) SUPERINTENDING SURVEYOR OF WIRERS ( TRAINING ) ( Altwzate )

Government

of

TION ) ( Alternate)

New Delhi

DIRECTOR RDSO

( ARCHITECTURE ),

Railway

Board, Ministry of Railways

JOINT DIRECTOR ( ARCHITECTURE ), RDSO ( Alternate ) State Bank of India, Bombay SHRI R. G. GOKHALJZ Builders' Association of India, New Delhi SHRT M. RARTIKAYaN

( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1983 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10439- 1983
( Continuedfrom @age 1 ) Representing

Members SHRI J. S. KOHLI

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi SHRI M. G. VIRMANI ( Alternate ) Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi SHRI R. L. KUMAR SHRI V. G. PATWARDKAN ( Alternate ) Tata Consultinq Engineers, Bombay SHRI M. Z. KURIEN Hindusran Prefab Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. K. MAJUMDAR SHRI H. S. PASRICRA ( Alternate ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR), SHRI R. C. MANOAL Roorkee SHRI M. P. JAISIN~H ( Alternate ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI B. V. B. Par SHRI P. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay SHRI R. K. PANDARE ENQINEER DEPUTY CHIEF

SHRr$ yRpTnI:;61Altefnate )
SHRI T. K. SARAN

. .

Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Finance

SHRI S. S. KAIMAL ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR New Delhi Research Institute Central Road PROF C. G. SWAMINATHAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi Public Works & Housing Department, Bombay Sm~r S. R. TAMBE Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI B. T. UNWALLA Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Roads Wing ) SHRI G. VENKATESULU SHRI PRAFuLLA KUMAR ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&i0 Member ) SHRI G. RADIAN, Director ( Ci; Engg )

Secretary SHRI S. SXNGUPTA Assistant Dircclor ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Coverirlg Convener SHRI J. R.
BHALL.4

Veneering

and

Glazing

Subcommittee,

EDC

13

: 10

Indian Institute of Architects, New Delhi

Members ARCHI~`ECTTO GOVI~RNMENT Public Works & Housing Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay SHRI N. D. CHANEKAR ( Alternate ) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI K. C. BANERJEE The Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI E. M. BENJAMIN SRRI P. SR~NIVASAN( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 21 )

2

IS : 10439 - 1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PATENT GLAZING

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1983, after the draft finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The `Patent Glazing' is considered as a generic term applied to a system of glazing in which glazing compounds or putty is not usually incorporated. The term is usually applied to those forms of glazing that rely for their efficiency upon some means of collecting and removing water in channels or grooves incorporated in the glazing bar, as distinct from putty or other glazing compounds that provide a sealed joint. Unlike putty glazing where the glazing compound is applied to a metal or timber surround already fixed in position, patent glazing involves fixing ( directly to purlins or columns that are an integral part of the main structure ) of all the components necessary to cover open areas of a It is employed for all types of roof lights and for vertical wall building. where areas to be glazed are large and which are glazing in buildings, generally not easily accessible. The advantages of such a system are that it reduces maintenance and replacement, secures weather tightness, permits free expansion and contraction of glass, provides maximum amount of light, takes care of reasonable'amount of shock and vibration and ensures adequate strength in construction. 0.2.1 This code is intended to provide guidance regarding materials design, and techniques to be followed for fixing patent glazing ( sloping and vertical ) in buildings. 0.3 The code represents the practice being followed in the country in this field and due weightage has also been given to the need of international coordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance

IS : 10439- 1983 with IS : 2-1960*. The rounded off value should standard. number of significant places retained in the be the same as that of the specified value in this

1. SCOPE 1.1 This code covers all systems of dry or puttyless vertical, both single and double, for roofs, external generally known as ` patent glazing `. glazing, sloping and and internal walls,

1.2 This code provides recommendation on glazing bars, type of glass, and ancillary components for various conditions and information on related matters such as fire resistance, thermal insulation, weather proofing and use of special glasses. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2-o For the purpose ( see Fig. 1 ). of this code, the following definitions shall apply

EXCCUOER
FlXlNG BOLT

'H'MUNTIN
SECTION

\

SHOE

STOP I BOTTOM1

1A Component Parts of Patent FIG. 1

Glazing

TYPICAL PATENT GLAZING -

Contd

*Rules

for rounding

off numerical

values

( rcuised ).

4

IS : 10439 - 1983 which supports, secures in position and 2.1 Glazing Bar - A member makes it weather-tight, i.e. a load bearing element plus any associated capping or filling. 2.2 Capping or Cover Strip or Weathering - A performed metal or plastic strip fitted externally to a glazing bar to form a barrier to penetration of water and to restrain the glass from being lifted due to suction forces. 2.3 Storm Clip - A fitment fixed, externally the glass against suction pressure. 2.4 Depth extremities to a glazing bar to restrain bottom

of Glazing - The distance between the top and the of the glass measured in the plane of the glass.

2.5 Draught Excluder - A strip to fill the space between the under side of the glass and the structural member to prevent the penetration of driving rain or snow. 2.6 Flashing - A strip of flexible, impervious material usually metal or plastic used to exclude water from the junct~ion between glazing and adjacent part. 2.7 Pitch horizontal. The angle of inclination of the glazing bar with the

2.8 Shoe Stop - A fitting secured acting as a stop to the glass. 2.9 Span bar. 2.10 Pane glazing. The distance ) between A piece

to the lower end of a glazing bar and the points of supports of a glazing

( Square

of glass of shape, cut to size ready for

2.11 Muntin Section - A light bar of suitable material, such as thin preformed aluminium strip or plastic section in the shape of the letter `h' or `Z' to weather horizontal but joint between two panes of glass held vertically in the same plane by glazing bars. 2.12 Lead Wing - A projecting lead fur forming an integral part of a glazing bar, it is dressed down to the glassto form a barrier against penetration by water. 3. MATERIALS 3.1 Glass 3.1.1 Transparent Sheet Glass conform to IS : 2835-1977". Transparent sheet glass for glazing shall

*Specification for flat transparent sheet glass ( second revision ). 6

IS : 3.1.2 1969*.
Wired and Figured Glass -

10439 - 1983
to IS : 5437to

These

shall

conform

3.1.3 Laminated IS : 2553-1971t.

and Toughened

Safe@ Glass -

These shall conform

3.2 Glazing Bar - All patent glazing bars and ancillary components shall be made from materials as given in 3.2.1 and shall be capable of nrotected resistance to corrosion and degradation in the conditions in which they are'to be used. 3.2.1
Materials for Load Bearing Element 3.2.1.1 Steel bar - Steel used for the fabrication of bar or core shall conform to IS f 2062-1980$. After fabrication the steel bar should be protected by hot dip galvanizing according to the practice as recommended in IS : 6159-1971s. -_

3.2.1.2 Aluminium bar - Aluminium bar shall be extruded to the requisite profile from aluminium alloy preferably of 63400 WP Grade conforming to IS : 733-197511. 3.2.1.3 Wooden bar - Wooden bar used shall be manufactured from structural timber conforming to IS : 3629-19661. The timber shall be seasoned and preserved in accordance with IS : 1141-1973** and IS : 4011967??. sheaths shall be extruded from unplasticized 3.2.2 Sheath -Plastic polyvinyl chloride ( see IS : 9766-1981$: ) or any other suitable grade. External and internal surfaces of the sheath shall be clean, smooth and reasonably free from grooving and other defects. 3.2.3 Cap/&$ and Wings - Cappings and wings shall be made from either aluminium or zinc or copper or plastics conforming to relevant Indian Standards. 3.2.4 Fittings - All fittings shall be of materials which does not allow severe, bimetallic corrosion in service; and their nature shape and thickness shall be adequate. 3.2.5 Fastenings - Nuls, bolts and screws shall be of either aluminium or steel or brass and shall conform to, relevant Indian Standards.
*Specification for wired and figured glass. jSpecification for safety glass ( secondrevision ). #Specification for structural steel ( fusion welding quality ) ( second rcuision ). $Recommended practice for design and preparation of material prior to galvanizing. ISpecification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloy bars, rods, and sections ( for general engineering purposes ) ( second r~uision ). T(Specification for structural timber in buildin . **Code of practice for seasoning of timber ( $ rst r&ion ). ftCode of practice for preservation of timber ( second reuisien ). $&Specification for flexible PVC compound.

.7

IS : 10439 - 1983 4. NECESSARY INFORMATION
for proper the glazing exchange of informations and all others whose work

4.1 Arrangements shall be made -between those engaged in laying will affect or will be affected.

4.2 Information supplied should be sufficient to provide those responsible for the patent glazing with full knowledge of the atmospheric and other conditions. This information shall include the nature of adjacent coverings and positions of lights in relation there to, and shall indicate whether the building is new or existing and in latter case, if it will be unoccupied during the glazin g operation and any special difficulty of access. 4.3 For the efficient design and construction of the work, detailed ination with regard to the following is necessary: a) The number and dimensioris of the openings, fixing of the areas to be glazed; whether details; in roof or walls; b) The position c) Details infor-

of cons'truction,

d) Span and spacing or roof principale or in the case of side glazing, the spacing and size of stanchions, piers, etc; e) Pitch f) Height g) Kind h) Details j) Type of roof when glazing from ground of glass; bf \fentilatidn and weight required and method of operation; and of flashing. occurs therein; is to be fixed; at which the glazing

4.4 The detailed treatment of flashings and fixing shall be agreed upon Those who will be responsible for drillat an early stage in the design. pockets in concrete or rebating timbers or for ing steel work, forming other preparatory work for securing the glazing and the gearing for any shall be supplied with details of all such work and it is opening lights, preferred that the same be done by the.structurai or general contractor. Figured dimensions should be given on the drawings and the dimensions shall be checked on the site. Where fixing is to the steel work, the steel work contractor shall be supplied with details of all drilling required well in advance, and the manufacturer should supply proper shop drawings if required. 5. DESIGN

CONSIDERATIONS

5.1 Functions of a Patent Glazing Bar - The patent glazing bar shall support and retain the .glass and provide a weather tight joint without the aid of glazing compounds. It shall be strong enough to preserve the glass under the prescribed design loading. The essential features of a glazing bar shall be:
8

IS : 10439- i983

a) A b)

load bearing supports;

member

which

shall

provide

continuous

edge

Capping weather

cover strip or weathering penetration;

to retain which

the glass and impede penetrate beyond or for the

C>Channels 4
Fittings retention

to dispose off the water the cappings or cover strips; and

may

for attachment of the glazing of glass or both. patent Loads expressed

to the structure

5.2 Loading - The purlins or side rails. such members are:

glazing. is supported by and attached to to be taken into consideration for designing as a pressure; as a pressure; for which an

a) Wind

loads,

b) Dead

loads of bars and glass expressed loads, pressure

C) Maintenance
equivalent

usually expressed as a load but is assumed in calculations; expressed as a pressure.

4

Snow loads usually

The design shall take into consideration the most severe of loads given above which is likely to occur in service.

combination

gust speed 5.2.1 Wind Loads - Wind loading is based on the highest likely to be encountered and shall be in accordance with the recommenThe calculation shall include consideration dations of IS : 875-1964*. of the site location, slope and height of the glazing above the prevailing ground level, its proximity to eaves, gables and other parts of the building, the shape of the building, its proximity to other buildings and its openings. 5.2.2 Dead Loads - The component of average weight per unit area of bars and glass perpendicular to the plane of the glazing shall be calculFor the purpose of this calculation, the weight of single glazing ated. may be taken as 240 N/m2 and of double glazing 430 N/m2. cases where the glazing bars are sub5.2.3 Maintenance - In special jected to the load of ladder, plank or scaffolding and persons, the load shall be assumed as 535 N applied centrally or distributed load of 1 070 N.
*Code of practice for strhctural safety of buildings: Loading standards ( revised ).

9

IS : 10439 - 1983
5.2.4 Snow - The pressure can be derived with sufficient Ps = 800 Ps= where A = Angle of the slope of glazing ( degrees ) to the horizontal. to the 18(60-A) perpendicular to the plane accuracy as follows: of the glazing

IOA, where A is 30" or less, and w h ere A is more than 30" but less than 60",

of the pressure due to snow, P, = Component plane of the glazing ( N/m2 ).

perpendicular

5.2.4.1 If the angle of the slope of glazing to the horizontal is more than 60", the snow loading is insignificant and need not be considered, 52.5 Perm.anent Zmposed Loads - Where any other permanent loads, such as walkways and ventilators are to be carried by the glazing bars, separate consideration shall be given to each and the bars and fastenings shall be designed to have the necessary additional strength and stiffness. 5.3 Bar Spacing - The exact spacing of the glazing bar varies slightly with different types and strength of glass. But normally the bars shall be spaced to suit glass of 610 mm width in case of 6.4 mm thick glass. Allowing for expansion of the glass and the width of the glazing bar, which varies according to the system used, a bar spacing of approximately 630 mm centre to centre may be taken. In general, the thinner the glass, the lesser the spacing and thicker the glass, wider spacing may be permitted to the extent to which the glass will safely resist transverse bending. 5.4 Bar restrict: Stiffness The glazing bars shall be of sufficient than stiffness of to the

a) Deflection which span, and b) Longitudinal 5.5 Bar Strength permanent bending ( 5 ) of the,glazing -

shall not be greater

one-ninetieth

stresses in the glass to a safe value. Glazing bars shall be of sufficient or yielding of their material. The bar shall be calculated as follows: strength section to avoid modules

5 = where 5 = Section

Pn d,s?.
8f 106

modulus

of the glazing 10

bars in mma,

IS : 10439 - 1983
P2 =

Working strength

pressure for use in calculations of the glazing bars N/m2, span between bars mm, and glazing

involving

the

d= Actual unsupported .f=2 Span of the glazing

bars in mm,

f =

0.1 percent proof stress of aluminium alloy or the yield A value of 154 N/mm2 for stress of steel ( N/mma ). aluminium alloy and 246 N/mm2 for steel is recommended.

5.5.1 Table 1 gives the section modulus of glazing bars of aluminium alloy ( Grade 63400 WP ) for different working forces and spans. 5.6 Choice of Glass - While for patent glazing the following selecting the most suitable shall be considered: type of glass

a) Light Transmission, b) Weather Resistance,
Durability, c>

4 Fire Resistance, e) Strength, and f-1Thermal Transmittance.
5.6.1 The properties of the various types Appendix A to assist in the choice of the glass. tion levels to be achieved shall be in accordance of glasses are given in The minimum illuminawith IS : 2440-1975".

5.7 Retention of Glass - All glazing bars shall have shoes or stops to prevent sliding of the panes. A continuous and independent initial capping or cover strip shall be provided to secure the glass on the bars and to prevent the entry of water. The glass is thus held between the seating and the capping or wings without impeding thermal movement. The capping or cover strip shall be designed to check capillary attraction and shall make contact with glass throughout its length, in order to exclude In the exposed situation where there is a danger of glass being weather. lifted owing to internal pressure or where the glass is subjected to mechanical vibration, continuous capping or storm chps shall be bohed to bars. 5.8 Protection of Glass - Wherever the glazing is exposed to falling obJects, guards preferably made of aluminium alloy or galvanized steel mesh may be provided to protect the wired glass which itself is unable to provide protection in such situation.
*Guide for daylighting of buildings ( second revision ).

11

TABLE 1 SECTION MODULUS OF GLAZING
( Clause 5.5. I )
SL No. TOTAL WORKING FORCE ON G&AZ.
Ih`C

BARS

SECTION MODULES ~-.-------_-___~-__---~__---c--------------?

(z)

FOR ALC.\IINIU~\IALLOY GLAZING B-hRs FOR SP-ms

BAR

1.0 m

1.2 m

1*4in

l*Gm

1,8m

Z*Om

2.2 m

2.4 m

2.6 m

2,8 m

3.0 m

3.2 m 3.4 m

WN)

(1) i)
ii) iii) iv) Y w v) vi) vii)

(2)
170
1.5 2*0 2-5 3.0 3.5 4.0

(3)
O-61 l-21 I.GO 2.0 2.4 2.8 3-2

(4) 0.97 I.50 1.90 2.4 2-9 3.4 3*9

(5) 1.1 1.7 2.3 2.8 3.4 4.0 4.5

(G) 1.3 1.9 2.6 3.2 39 4'5 5.2

(7) 1*5 2.2 2.9 3.7 44 5.1 5.8

(8) 1% 2.4 3.2 40 4.9 5.7 65

(9) l-8 2.7 3.6 4.5 5.4 6-3 7.1 by 103.

(10) 1.9

(11)

(12) 2.3 3,4 4.5 5.7 6-8 8.0 9.1 the value

(13) 2.4 3.7 409 6-l 7.3 8.5 97

(14) 2% 3.9 5.2 6-5 7.8 9.1 10

(15) 2.8 4.1 5.5 6.9 8.3 9.7 11

2.1 3-2 42
5.3 6.3 7'4 8.4

2.9 3.9 4.9
5.8 6.8 7.8

NOTE 1 -The value of < given in the table are to be multiplied ing to a force of ?5 KN and a span of 2 m is 4 x lo3 = 4 000 m3. NOTE 2 -

For example, values.

of < correspond-

The section

modulus

for steel bars,

shall be one-third

of the above

IS t 10499 - 1983 5.9 Weather Resistance following points shall receive To ensure attention: adequate weather resistance, the

4

Water Channels - Water channels or grooves shall be provided in the glazing bars in order to drain off to the outside of the roof any water which may get under the external wing or capping of the bar. - A continuous support for the edge of the glass shall be provided along full length of the bar preferably by means of oiled asbestos cord, PVC or similar cushions. is recommended that the pitch shall not be less

b) Seating

Pitch - It than 20".

Bottom Overhang - A glass overhang of at least 20 mm should be provided beyond the lower edge of the member supporting the glazing bars at the bottom of the glazing.

4 f) 9)

Lap - In the lapped glazing, the upper overlap the lower tier by at least 50 mm.

tier

of

glazing

should

Draught Excluder - Draught excluder should be used between the glass and the lower support to prevent the penetration of driving rain or snow, wherever necessary. Flashings glass.

flashings should extend at least 75 mm over the passage of water by capillary action, flashings shall not be dressed into close contact with the extreme upper edge of squares.
To prevent
flow

All

h) 3

of rain water from Rain Water - Concentration other sources shall on no account be allowed to glazing.

down pipes or over patent

Pollution - Excessive dust, grit or dirt from sources such as the main stack of a solid fuel burning boiler house or stone or cement works is liable to silt up the water channels. In such cases consideration may be given to the sealing of the wings or cappings to the glass. depends mainly on used in the patent

5.10 Durability - The durability of patent glazing the conditions of exposure and on the materials glazing.
of'

of exposure, any type 5.10.1 Glazing Bars - Under normal conditions In determining the type of bar best suited glazing bars may be used. to the conditions, consideration should be given to atmospheric pollution in and around the building. Aluminium should not be used when 13

IS : 10439 - 1983 For ifisect proof airtight glazing alkaline pollution may be expected. special double cushioned or similar type of bar may be used. No two metals shall be used in proximity which may set up marked bi-metallic corrosion. Copper or its alloys must not be situated so that rain falling or running upon them subsequently reaches aluminium or zincbased alloys. 5.18.2 Fastenings - Fastening devices such as screw, totters and clips must have a corrosion-resistant finish. Where glazing is subject to vibration from machinery within a building, nuts, screws or washers which resist slackening should be used. Bare sheraridized steel fastenings should not be used where their appearance is important are unsightly staining of aluminium could occur. 510.3 Glass - Glass that conforms to the requirements resistance to corrosion. shall have high

5.11 Fire-Resistance - The patent glazing is usually incombustible and does not directly increase fire risk, the bars may however under the influence of heat, distort and collapse and so tend to increase draughts. There may also be risk of fire entering the building through the glazing. The use of wired glass will help to prolong resistance to collapse of glass, thus preventing the passage of flame or smoke although the glass may crack by heat ( see IS : 1642-1960* ). 5.12 Heat Gais Through Glazing - The thermal conductivity of glass is substantially the same as that of brick work or concrete. But the thickness of the sheets used, gives relatively high transmittance values of 6w/m2K hr "C for vertical glazing and 7w/m2K hr "C for sloping glazing. The use of either double glazing with ordinary glasses or heat insulating glass is single gla&ig.will have nearby half of these values. 5.13 Effect of Solar Heat - Large areas of roof glazing exposed to the sun will admit enough heat to ,give serious discomfort and it will be generally best used only in limited areas. Solar heating may be reduced by obscuration, or by the use of heat-absorbing or heat-insulating glass. Heat-absorbing glass also absorbs some light but it becomes so hot that special allowance for expansion shall have to be made. Shadows cast upon part of the glass may also cause cracking due to uneven expansion. Primarily, roof glazing ( except northlight glazing ) in ordinary workshop The benefits from obscuration and factories is not recommended. ( white wash ) is derived mainly due to the reflection of effective solar heat therefore, the wash shall be as white as possible. It is generally preferable to apply the wash outside and during early summer; by the time the summer is over and obscuration is no longer required the greater
*Code of construction.

practice for fire safety of buildings ( general ): Materials and details of 14

IS : 10439 - 1983 part may have been removed by weather and the remainder may be cleansed off easily. White wash shall be applied in accordance with the Care shall be taken to keep the white details given in IS : 6278-1971** wash clear of glazing bars, as this diied deposit is liable to impair the also, if the glazing bars are of efficiency of the weathering and aluminium or any of its alloys, there may be a risk of corrosion in the bars. 5.14 Condensation - Condensation will occur on any surface, the temperature of which is less than the `Dew Point' of the atmosphere near the surface. Thus when the climatic conditions cause the temperature of the inner surface of patent glazing to fall low enough or the interior specific humidity is increased sufficiently, condensation will occur. Inside buildings, the humidity is commonly increased by the release of process moisture ( including that from cooking.) and by the moisture from It may reach high values where ventilation is inadequate. inhabitants. Provided that the pitch of the glazing exceeds 30" and condensation is not severe, the condensate will generally run down the glazing, though in some circumstances with dirty or patterned glass the condensate may Provision shall be made for water running drip at much steeper angles. down the glass to be released at the draught excluder. The less the depth of the glazing the less is the ,tendency for droplets of condensate to fall, and consequently, where the day lighting requirements indicate considerable depths of glazing it shall be provided in two or more tiers or in separate runs. Where the interior atmosphere is warm and humid and the glazing is at low pitch and the possibility of falling droplets cannot be allowed, double glazing shall be used. Under extreme conditions the parts of glazing bars in contact with the interior atmosphere In such circumstances it may be covered with an insulating material. may be advisable to separate .aluminium glazing bars from the supporting steel structure by\ application of suitable non-metallic backing or . coating. 5.15 Maximum Size of Glass - For safety and convenience in handling, the length of a square of glass should not exceed two metres. If greater depth is required it is recommended to use `two glasses with an intermediate muntin section. This muntin section may be made out of the thin aluminium sheet preferably of 0.45 mm thickness so that the ends may be safely covered by capping, in case of vertical glazing. In, case of inclined glazing, lapped glazing is preferable. 5.16 Ventilation provide ventilation a) Ojwzing opening The following in patent glazing: methods should be adopted to

Lights - Single lights of patent

pane or multiple glazing construction

pane. which

Top hung are usually

*Code of practice for white washing and colour washing. 15

IS : 10439- 1983 one or two panes wide but of which a larger number may be arranged as a continuous opening light. Considering of accessibility and weight, operation of any of these may be by hand ( cord or pole ) mechanical, electrical hydraulic. b) = ouvers - Fixed louvers may be provided where the risks of dust, driving rain or snow can be ignored and these may be suitably provided in vertical glazing only. c) Permanent aperture at to@ or bottom of glazing - This arrangement is only suitable where risk of dust, driving rain or snow can be ignored. 5.17 Jalhousie Louvers - Pivoted and adjustable louvers commonly known as jalhousie should be provided and fixed. These may be * mechanically operating arrangement provided with hand operating O. depending on the size of the panel as well as accessibility for maintenance. It is recommended that the details for the ventilating arrangement should ensure weather resistance and condensation. 5.18 Gutters - Valley and parapet gutters adjoining patent glazing should be at least 250 mm wide and strong enough so as to allow sufficient space for a man to work without causing injury to him or damage to glazing or the adjacent roofing. - Regular cleaning of daylighting should be facilitated 5.19 Walkways by the provision of walkway where no other means of access is available. External walkways should have standards of durability similar to those Structural members shall be of galvaof the glazing bars and fittings. nized steel and should be further protected by plating, specially in aggressive chemical atmosphere. Vertical glazing should be accessible from both inside and outside and if necessary walkways on both sides Roof walkways may be supported at intervals of should be provided. 1.8 m by specially designed glazing bars having the following maximum requirements: Second moment of area, I : 120 x 104 mm4 Section modulus, 5 : 27 x 103 mm3 6. WORK AT SITE

6.1 It is advantageous to prepare all patent glazing components of the site according to the desired measurements. The glazing bars and glass shall be delivered ready for fixing.. 6.2 Storage - All glass should be stacked in a dry, protected place and no glass should stand or lean against, materials that may damage its edges or surfaces. Condensation of moisture on the glass should be 16

IS : 10439 - 1983 avoided at this could collect between the sheets and cause alkaline attack on the glass. In removing glass from the crates, great care shall be taken to avoid damage. The glass shall be lifted and stored on its long edge and shal1 be put into stacks of not more than 25 pane, supported at two points by fillets of wood at 300 mm from each end. The first pane laid in each stack shall be so placed that its bottom edge is about 25 mm from the base of the wall or other support against which the stack rests. All glazing bars and its components shall be stored and handled in such a manner as to protect their coating or covering. below and at end of 6.3 Preparation for Glazing - All roofing glazing shall be completed and all gutters fixed before glazing is comJoints shall be racked out and chases cut or other preparations menced. made as required to take the flashing to the glass. 6.3.1 All structural members shall be The structural members shall is fixed. which secure the patent glazing and also other fittings. During patent glazing members shall not be cut nor any other might impair the strength of the structure of the engineer-in-charge. painted before patent glazing be prepared to receive the bolts to receive the fixing brackets or work, steel, concrete or timber preparatory work done which be carried out without approval

6.3.2 When the roofs are glazed on one slope only ( for example northlight ) the sheeting on the unglazed slope shall be fixed in advance to On a sheeted and glazed prevent glass from being disturbed by gales. roof slope, the glazier shall begin his work as soon as the sheets below the glass are fixed so that he may dress down his flashings on the sheets. The sheets above the glass should not be laid until the glazier has fixed the glazing and held the top flashings. bars should be fixed by screws 6.4 Fixing of Glazing Bars -Glazing or bolts or any corrosion-resisting materials in some cases. It is recommended that the advice of manufacturer should be obtained for any in the purlins for fixing the bar. drilling or plugging required One screw or bolt is usually sufficient to secure each bar at each purlin, but special fixing arrangements may be necessary in windy localities. Bearings of not less than 40 mm at the top and 50 mm at the bottom should always be provided so that the bars may be properly secured. The lower end of each bar should be raised on a washer or other suitabIy shaped fitting, clear of the purlins, to prevent the collection of condensation. Reinforced concrete glazing bars are normally employed with reinforced concrete purlins and the method of fixing the bars usually varies according to the design of the roof structure. 17

IS : 10439 - 1983 6.5 Fixed to the glass contractor receive the the glazier - It is recommended that the fixing of flashings Flashings be done by the glazier. Where it is not possible, the general but these should be turned back to may fix the flashings, glass and subsequently to be dressed down on to the glass by to complete the work.

including the fixing of 6.6 Fixing of Glazing - All patent glazing, glazing bars, draught excluders and glass shall be carried out by the It is undesirable to allow access to the areas patent glazing contractor. beneath the glazing in course of erection. If, however, it is impossible to keep this area clear, protective measures shall be adopted. The correct spacing and and alignment of the glazing bars shall be carefully maintained to ensure adequate support for the glass and freedom of movement of the glass under changes in temperature. Where the two surface of glass differ, it shall be laid with the smoother surfaces outermost to minimize the collection of dirt on the glass surface. After the shall be provided at the periphery of glass has been fixed, flashings glazing, and shall be carefully dressed down on the glass. 7. INSPECTION 7.1 General unsatisfactory AND TESTING to avoid checked

During the erection, the work shall be inspected construction and the following points shall be particularly after the completion of the work: a) Glazing bars shall be undistorted shall be undamaged; and the protective

coating

if any

b) Tightness of all nuts and screws shall be checked fixing of the glazing bars to the structure; c) Lead or aluminium down; d) Storm or plastic flashing where shall specified;

and so also the dressed

be properly

clips shall be provided

e) Glass shall be free from cracks f) Capping or close contact g) The glass proof. 7.2 Testing for effective

and scratches; cushions installation shall make weather

independent cover strips and with the glass throughout; and be clean and the whole

shall

- Gearing for opening and easy operation.

iights shall be inspected

and

tested

18

IS : 10439 - 1983 8. MAINTENANCE 8.1 General - Inspections shall be arranged periodically to prevent entry of moisture, to replace the faulty and damaged glazing materials and to replace the cracked and broken glass. cleaning of the glass shall be carried out to 8.2 Cleaning - Periodical avoid serious loss of light due to accumulation of dirt on glass surface. While cleaning the glass care should be taken not to disturb cappings or flashings. The use of strong acid or alkali for cleaning of glass shall be avoided even if the glass could not be cleaned by normal cleaning In such cases the advice of the glazing contractor may be methods. obtained.

APPENDIX A ( CZause 5.6.1 )
GENERAL A-l. ROUGH PROPERTIES CAST OF VARIOUS TYPES OF GLASS

A-l.1 It is low cast general purpose glass which gives a useful diffusion of direct sunlight with approximately 80 percent transmittance. A-2. WIRED GLASS

A-2.1 Two patterns of wire mesh are generally incorporated which prevent displacement of cracked glass and thereby prevent falling. The presence of wire weakens the glass to some extent, especially in resistance to thermal stresses. In case of fire, however, use of wired glass will help to prolong the resistance to collapse of glass, thus preventing the passage of flame or smoke although the glass may crack due to heat. It will give a useful diffusion of sunlight with approximately 75 percent transmittance. A-3. SHEET A-3.1 It is a transparent glass in normal use in patent glazing but shows a slight distortion of vision and deflection. It can only be used where there is no danger from falling glass or for special use in horticultural glass houses, etc, where diffused light is not required. A-4. CLEAR PLATE

A-4.1 Where transparency is required together with undistorted vision or undistorted reflection or both, clear plate is essential. It allows 85 percent transmittance of light. 19

IS:10439 A-5.

- 1983 ABSORBING GLASS

HEAT

A-5.1 It usuahy has a greenish tint and shall not be used in situations where the colour distortion involved is objectionable. The heat transmission which is obtained by the use of heat absorbing glass is accompanied by some reduction in light transmission. Because of the heat absorbing properties of this type of glass, care shall be taken to minimize abrupt and persistent shadow demarcations on the glass which tend to set up local temperature differentials causing cracks. Special allowance should be made for expansion. Heat absorbing glass with damaged edges shall not be used. A-6. FACTORY MADE DOUBLE GLAZING UNITS

A-6.1 There are types of double glazing units available in which the two panes are either fused together at the edges or joined with a composite seal. Where the latter are to be used for patent glazing the manufacturers shall be consulted. The use of double glazing with ordinary glass has approximately half the thermal conductivity of single glass, The insulation value of double glazing improves as the air space is increased up to 20 mm. No further movement is obtained by increasing the air space beyond this amount. Double glazing also reduces the sound transmission. Use of these units may entail variation of the design considerations.

20

IS : 10439- 1983
( Continuedfrom page 2

)
Representing

Members SfrRI S. K. CHANDA

Public Works Department, Government of West Bengal, Calcutta CHIEF ARCHITECT Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Se ARCHITECT ( H & TP ) II ( Alternate ) SIERI G. K. DAMANI Alumilite Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI V. Misntta ( Alternate ) SHRI T. N. Gupr.4 Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee Hindustan-Pilkington Glass Works Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. P1 GUP!CA SHRI C. V. CHAT,A~X( Alternate ) SHRI R. L. KUMAR The Institution of Surveyor, New Delhi SHRI D. S. NARAYAN Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. M. R:\JW.WIS ( Alternate ) Snttr B. NATAR~JAN Kent Ceramic Tiles & Co Pvt Ltd, Madras Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun SHXI K. S. PHUTHI SH'nt H. K. RAKHI`LA Engineer-in.Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi SHRT J. RAXAMURTY ( Alternate) SHKI K. S. SltlNlV.4S.4N National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI A. K. LAL ( Alternate ) S IU<ISURR .<TO Rw Balmer Lawrie & Co Ltd, Calcutta

21

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM
UNIT metre kilogram second

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

SYMBOL m kg S A K cd mol

Length
MZlSS

.

Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Units Amount of substance Supplementary
QUANTITY

ampere kelvin candela mole

UNIT

SYMBOL rad ST

.

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
QUANTITY Force

radian steradian

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal force

SYMBOL N 1 1

DICFINITION N = 1 kg.m/:a J = 1 N.m

Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress

J
W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 W = 1 J/s 1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/m
C/S (S-I)

i Hz = 1 V=

S = 1 A/V 1 W/A

1 Pa = 1 N/ms

