NAT 1% IS 17681 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


siraersia rer {агач — fats 


Bottled Water 
Dispensers — Specification 


ICS 27.200; 97.130.20 


© BIS 2022 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, +ç {И — 110002 


MN asia МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2022 Price Group 6 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Refrigeration 
and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


A water dispenser is commonly known as bottled water dispenser. The machine cools and/or heats up and dispenses 
water with an optional refrigeration unit. 


The standard specifies suitable material for the storage tank which are non-toxic, corrosion resistant, 
non-absorbent, and durable. 


The classification of the various types of bottled water dispensers has been aligned with the practices prevailing 
in other countries. 


This standard specifies two climate classes, namely Normal (N) and Tropical (T) class suitable for operating at a 
wide temperature range of 16 °C to 43 °С. 


The outlet water temperature specified in this standard is based on international data. 


In view of the prevailing energy scenario in the country, the Government of India is laying emphasis on the 
energy conservation through various means by emphasizing the use of energy efficient products. The bottled 
water dispenser market in india is anticipated to show considerable growth in coming years and hence specific 
requirements of energy consumption has been incorporated in this standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17681 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
BOTTLED WATER DISPENSERS — SPECIFICATION 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the safety and performance 
requirements of bottled water dispensers based on a 
vapor compression refrigeration system for dispensing 
cold and hot water including water at room temperature. 
It covers a bottled water dispenser with a rated voltage 
not exceeding 240 V a.c., 50 Hz for a single-phase and 
the rated cooling capacity up to and including 8 I/h and 
heating capacity up to and including 5 l/h. 


1.2 The following types of bottled water dispensers are 
covered in this standard: 

a) Bottom load water dispenser; 

b) Table-top water dispenser; and 

с) Freestanding water dispenser. 


1.3 The product covered in this standard can have one 
or more combinations for dispensing cold water, hot 
water, and water at room temperature as follows: 


a) Cold and hot; 

b) Cold, hot, and room temperature; 
c) Hot and room temperature; 

d) Cold and room temperature; and 


e) Water dispenser with an in-built refrigerator 
cabinet. 


1.4 This standard does not apply to the following: 
a) Peltier-based bottled water dispenser; 


b) Self-contained water coolers covered in 


IS 1475 (Part 1); and 


с) Point-of-use water dispensers (connected directly 
to the water line from the overhead water tank or 
connected through a direct water pipeline). 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. АП 
the standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Cold and Normal Water Storage Tank — A 
thermally insulated food-grade stainless steel or a 
food-grade plastic material tank intended for storage of 
cold and normal water. 


3.2 Ambient Temperature — The measured 
temperature in the space surrounding the water 
dispenser under test. 

NOTE — It is the arithmetical average value of temperatures 


measured at three points, located at 300 mm from the two sides 
and front side of the water dispenser (see Fig. 5 at Annex B). 


3.3 Hot Water Storage Tank — It is a food-grade 
stainless steel tank that is fitted with a heater. It shall 
be constructed by sheathing material which should be 
copper or food-grade stainless steel. 


3.4 Refrigeration Compartment/Cabinet — А 
floor-standing type water dispenser where the bottom 
space is fitted with a refrigeration compartment 
physically separated from the dispenser unit and an 
integral part of the dispenser to store beverages, cans, 
etc., at a temperature comparatively lower than the 
room/ambient temperature. 


3.5 Overall Dimensions (Unit Without Bottle Loaded 
on Top) — Measurement of the outside rectangular 
dimensions over the horizontal base within which 
the water bottle is inscribed to include the complete 
appliance. 


NOTE — The dimension of water bottles varies from 
manufacturer to manufacturer and hence not included. 


3.6 Overall Space Required for Use — Overall space 
necessary for the free circulation of the cool air when 
the appliance is in service, plus the space necessary to 
allow door opening (in case of a refrigeration cabinet 
models). 


3.7 Floor Standing — Appliance in which the 
minimum height must be maintained in such a way that 
user can take the water freely as shown in Fig. 1. It 
may contain a storage compartment, or the bottle can 
be placed in the cabinet as shown in Fig. 2 and 3 for 
refrigerated cabinets. 


3.8 Table Top — Appliance in which there is no storage 
volume compartment normally and can be placed on 
the table as shown in Fig. 4. 


3.9 Pull-Down — It is the capability of water 
dispensers to achieve the water temperatures within the 
prescribed time when the appliance is operated under 
normal operating condition. 


IS 17681 : 2022 


BOTTLE ON TOP 


FRONT PANEL 


FRONT PANEL 
BOTTLE AT BOTTOM 
DOOR PANEL 
DOOR PANEL 
Fic. 1 FLOOR STANDING — BOTTLE ON ТОР Fic. 2 FLooR STANDING — BOTTLE AT BOTTOM 
BOTTLE ON TOP 
FRONT PANEL 


FRONT PANEL 


DOOR PANEL REFRIGERATION CABINET 


Fic. 3 FLOOR STANDING — WITH REFRIGERATION CABINET Fic. 4 TABLE ТОР 


NOTE — The definition and the figure as explained above. The figure is for reference only. 


2 


3.10 Climate Class — The classification of the test 
room climate according to the dry bulb temperature and 
relative humidity. 

The manufacturer shall mention the climate class of the 
product as per the table given below. In case of class 
other than mentioned below, the manufacturer must 
take adequate measures to communicate the effective 
temperature class to the customer through declaration 
in the user manuals/stickers or any other suitable means. 


51 No. Condition Ambient Temperature ( C) 
(1) Q) 3) 
1) Tropical (T) 16 — 43 
i) Normal (N) 16 – 32 


3.11 Stable Operating Conditions — Condition in 
which the appliance mean temperatures and energy 
consumption comply with the relevant stability 
requirements as defined in this standard. 


3.12 Energy Consumption — Energy consumed by 
the water dispenser over a specified period of time or 
for a specified operation stated in kWh (kilowatt-hour). 


4 CONSTRUCTION 


4.1 General Design 


The water dispensers shall have adequate mechanical 
strength and be constructed to withstand handling 
and transportation. There shall be no sharp edges or 
corners liable to cause injury to the user in the normal 
conditions of use. 


4.2 Materials 


Materials used in the construction of the cabinet shall 
comply with relevant Indian Standards wherever 
applicable, except where such requirements are 
modified by this standard. They shall be free from 
defects that are liable to cause undue deterioration or 
failure. Under normal conditions of use, the materials 
used shall not shrink, warp or cause odour and shall be 
resistant to attack by local vermin and destructive pests. 


Where liable to be exposed to moisture, chemically 
active substances, and beverages, they shall be suitably 
resistant and shall not contaminate stored products 
placed in contact with them. Sealing materials used shall 
not lose in service, any oftheir essential properties, such 
as adhesiveness, plasticity, and moisture resistance, due 
to aging, temperature, and humidity variations. 


4.2.1 The material used for the storage tank shall 
be either of stainless steel conforming to IS 5522 or 
IS 6911 or of plastic conforming to IS 10146 or 
IS 10151 or IS 10910. 


4.3 Finish 


The interior and exterior finish shall be durable and 
capable of being cleaned effectively and hygienically 
without undue physical deterioration. 


IS 17681 : 2022 


4.4 Thermal Insulation 


The quality, thickness, and application of the 
insulating material shall be such that insulation of the 
water storage tank or cabinet is effective and efficient 
to maintain the required temperature inside the water 
storage tank and cabinet. There shall be proper 
sealing against moisture penetration by diffusion or 
condensation. Detachable plates and covers in the tank 
shall be provided with suitable sealing to prevent the 
ingress and trapping of moisture into the insulation. 
Highly thermal conductive external or internal surfaces 
shall be separated by suitable insulating material. As 
far as possible, no part of the frame shall penetrate and 
cause damage to the insulation layers. 


The thermal insulation for the cooling unit, connections 
therefrom to the outlets, and for suction pipe of the 
condensing unit shall be of vapour-proof materials or 
covered with an external vapour-proof barrier. The 
insulation shall have no interior air gap and shall be 
of sufficient thickness to prevent condensation on the 
exterior cold surfaces. 


4.5 Hardware 


The structure fitted with fasteners and hinges shall 
be smooth and positive in action and designed to 
maintain their proper function without undue wear 
under normal conditions of service. Screws and all 
other hardware shall be adequately protected from 
corrosion. 


4.6 Disposal of Waste Water 


The appliance shall be suitably designed at the water 
dispense area, such that the wastewater must be stored 
for a certain quantity without any spillage or have a 
provision of proper disposal through a drain. 


4.7 Hot Water Tank 


The thermostat is connected to the tank in such a way 
that it controls the required temperature and cuts off 
the heater power supply once the required temperature 
is achieved. 


4.8 Hermetically Sealed Compressor 

The compressor shall comply with the requirements 
of IS 10617. 

4.9 Protective Guards 


АП moving parts shall be protected by suitable guards, 
shields, or screens of adequate strength and durability 
to avoid the possibility of making inadvertent contact 
therewith during normal service conditions. 


5 REFRIGERATION SYSTEM 


5.1 Pipes and Connections/Fittings 


The pipes and fittings shall be so arranged and installed 
so as not to foul or transmit vibration to other parts. 


IS 17681 : 2022 


The pipes including their fittings shall be securely fixed 
which shall be of sufficient length to avoid any failure 
during vibration. It shall also be ensured that the piping 
connection does not foul with any adjacent parts which 
can be detrimental to the normal operation of the water 
dispenser. 


The water dispenser shall have no ragged or sharp 
edges, other than those necessary for the functioning of 
the appliance, which could create a hazard for the user 
in normal use or during user maintenance. 


5.2 Control of Operation 


The operation of the compressor shall be controlled 
with the help of an electronic thermostat or thermistor 
to maintain the water temperature within the limits of 
application. A suitable capacity strainer or dehydrator 
shall be provided in the refrigeration circuit for the 
smooth functioning of the refrigeration cycle in 
presence of contaminations. 


6 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 General 
The water dispensers shall comply with the 


safety requirements given 8, 10, 11, 13, 16, 27, and 
28 of IS 302-2-24. The equipment shall be capable of 
working at an operating voltage of 230 V: 10 percent 
in case of a single phase. 


6.2 Electrical Accessories 


АП internal electrical fittings, such as indicators, water 
lifting pumps, and switches, shall be provided with 
suitable guards for protection against mechanical 
damage and shall be suitable for operation at the lowest 
air temperature likely to occur. 


6.3 Salt Mist Test 


All metal parts used inside or outside the water 
dispenser which are exposed to moisture or ambient 
conditions shall be corrosion resistant or adequately 
protected against corrosion as per IS 9000 (Part 11) for 
72 h. 


7 SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL 


The water dispenser shall not have a sound pressure 
level of more than 55 dBA. 


The water dispenser shall be placed centrally in the test 
chamber with a background noise of less than 45 dBA. 


With the help of calibrated sound meter/analyser/ 
recorder, the sound level is to be measured at a distance 
of 1.1 m from the front side. 


8 GENERAL CONDITIONS OF TESTS 


8.1 Water Dispenser Installation 


The tests are carried out as supplied and installed as 
per the manufacturer's instructions. Unless otherwise 


4 


specified, the test shall be conducted on the water 
dispenser installed for normal use. 


82 Electrical Power Supply 


The tests shall be conducted at the rated voltage as 
indicated on the nameplate. If the water dispenser 
specifies two or more distinct rated voltages, the tests 
shall be carried out at the most unfavourable voltage. 


When a voltage range is indicated on the nameplate, the 
test voltage shall be as follows: 


a) The highest and the lowest values of the range 
when voltage range is in excess of 10 percent of 
the mean of the range; and 


b) The mean of the upper and lower limits when the 
voltage range is 10 percent or less of the mean of 
the range. 

All the tests specified in this standard shall be carried 
out at the rated frequency. For a water dispenser where 
the rated frequency is not specified, the tests shall be 
carried out at 50 Hz. 


8.3 Limits of Voltage Variation 


The variation in the voltage shall not exceed 1 percent 
of the test voltage while carrying out the tests specified 
in this standard. While taking the current and wattage 
readings, the voltage shall be the test voltage. 


8.4 Test Room Ambient 


The test room shall be capable of being maintained up to 
the maximum temperature class declared within + 1 °С. 


The vertical ambient temperature gradient from the 
platform to a height of 2.1 m shall be within 1 °С for 
every 1 m of vertical distance. 


The water dispenser shall be placed on a solid platform 
the way it shall be installed under normal use. The water 
dispenser shall be so placed or shielded as to prevent 
direct radiation from the test room heating equipment. 


8.5 General Operating Conditions 


Before starting the first test, the unit shall be drained of 
all water and the interior ofthe tank shall be emptied and 
dried. Units shall be switched ON after all the internal 
parts have achieved the ambient temperature of the test 
after a minimum soaking period of 2 h. Stable operating 
conditions are deemed to be reached when during a 
time of 2 h the mean temperatures measured at the same 
position of the control cycle do not vary by more than 1 
°С from the final regulated figure. 


8.6 Stable Operating Conditions 


The water dispenser shall be kept running till equilibrium 
conditions are achieved. The average temperature shall 
be within +2 °C. The dispenser shall be kept under 
this condition for minimum 30 min and water 
temperature shall be recorded at an interval of 5 min to 
establish this. 


8.7 Humidity 


Unless otherwise specified, the relative humidity of 
the test room shall be kept between 45 percent and 
75 percent. 


9 MEASUREMENT 


9.1 Measuring Instruments 


9.1.1 Temperature measurement shall be made with one 
or more of the following instruments: 


a) Mercury-in-glass thermometers; 
b) Thermocouples; 
c) Electric resistance thermometers; or 


d) Electric resistance measuring instruments having 
accuracy 0.2 percent of the scale. 


9.1.2 Accuracy of measurement shall be within 
— 0.25 ?C. Electrical measurements shall be made 
with indicating instrument. The accuracy of indicating 
instruments shall be within 0.5 percent of the full-scale 
reading. 


9.1.3 Volume measurement shall be made with one or 
more of the following instruments: 


a) Liquid quantity measuring device, measuring either 
volume or weight; or 


b) Liquid flow meter. 


Accuracy of measurements shall be within +1 percent. 
The smallest division on the scale of any instrument shall 
not exceed twice the specified accuracy for it. 


9.1.4 The temperatures shall be measured with 
thermocouples, or other temperature measuring probes, 
which are inserted in the centre of a circular copper mass 
weighing 25 g and of minimum external area (diameter 
and height = 15.2 mm). Temperature measuring 
instruments shall have an accuracy up to +0.5 °С. 


9.1.5 Relative humidity shall be measured either by 
means of ventilated psychrometers having thermometers 
of accuracy of +3 percent or with recording apparatus 
of equivalent accuracy. When psychrometers are used, it 
shall be necessary to measure at regular intervals. 


9.2 Temperature Measurement Conditions 


9.2.1 Ambient Temperature 


The ambient temperature shall be maintained within 
+] °C of the specified value and shall be measured at 
300 mm from left/right and front of the water dispenser 
and at the height of the geometric centre of the front and 
sides. This condition shall be maintained during both the 
stabilization and test period. 


The ambient temperature shall be measured and recorded 
at one of the above positions preferably with a recording 
instrument. If an indicating instrument is used, reading 
shall be taken at intervals not greater than 5 min. 


IS 17681 : 2022 


The temperature-sensitive element of the temperature 
measuring instrument shall be separated from any 
heat-conducting surface by at least 13 mm of air space. 
Connections from the measuring instruments shall be 
arranged in such a manner as not to interfere with the air- 
seal of the storage compartment. 


АП instruments used for measurement shall be calibrated 
against master instruments duly calibrated from an 
accredited calibration agency. 


10 PERFORMANCE TESTS 


10.1 Cooling Capacity Test 

As per the climate class. 

10.1.1 Cooling Capacity Test — Table Top, Floor 
Standing Without Refrigeration Cabinet 


Table 1 Cooling Capacity Test — Table Top, Floor 
Standing without Refrigeration Cabinet 


( Clause 10.1.1) 


SI Test Condition Unit Requirement Requirement 
No. (T Class) (N Class) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Ambient °C 35+1 28+1 

temperature 

ii) Inlet water "C 30+1 25+1 

temperature 

ii) Test voltage — Rated voltage Rated voltage 
iv) Water out flow lh As per rated As per rated 

rate cooling/heating | cooling/heating 
(cold/hot/normal) capacity capacity 


(as applicable) (аѕ applicable) 


10.1.1.1 7est Procedure 


a) The water dispenser shall be operated continuously 
at rated voltage for a minimum of 60 min or till 
the steady-state condition is achieved without 
withdrawing water (see 8.6); and 


b) 3 min after the steady-state, at the interval of 
10 min the cold water shall be withdrawn at the 
rated cooling capacity. The minimum and maximum 
temperature of withdrawn water shall be recorded. 
For example — if the rated capacity is 3 1/ h, withdraw 
500 ml in each cycle. Repeat this cycle 6 times. 
NOTE — During the water withdrawal if the compressor 
trips then wait for 3 min. The compressor off time shall not be 
considered in the test time. 

After the test, the water dispenser shall comply with the 
following requirements: 


1) Mean outlet water temperature shall be < 16 °C 
in each cycle readings; and 


2) If outlet water temperature is less than 16 °C 
in all the measurements, the dispenser qualifies 
the cooling capacity. However, if any of the 
readings is more than 16 ?C, the dispensers shall 
be deemed not conforming to the requirement 
of the cooling capacity test. 


IS 17681 : 2022 


10.1.2 Cooling Capacity Test — Floor Standing with 
Refrigeration Cabinet 
Table 2 Cooling Capacity Test- Floor Standing 
with Refrigeration Cabinet 


( Clause 10.1.2 ) 


SI Test Condition Unit Requirement Requirement 
No. (T Class) (N Class) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Ambient °С 35 +1 281 
temperature 
ii) Inlet water °C 301 25+1 
temperature 
ii) Test voltage = Rated voltage Rated voltage 
iv) Water out flow rate lh As per rated As per rated 
(cold/hot/normal) cooling/heating cooling/heating 
capacity capacity 
(as applicable) (аѕ applicable) 
10.1.2.1 Test procedure 
a) The product shall be installed as per the 


manufacturers instructions; 


b) Before commencement of the test the thermostat 
shall be short circuited or disconnected from the 
electric circuit; 

c) The temperature sensor shall be placed in the 
cabinet to record the cabinet temperature; 

d) The water dispenser shall be operated continuously 
for a minimum of 60 min or till the steady-state 
condition is achieved without withdrawing water; 
and 


e 


x 


After the steady-state condition, at the interval 
of 10 min the cold water shall be withdrawn at 
the rated cooling capacity. The minimum and 
maximum temperature of withdrawn water shall 
be recorded. For example — if the rated capacity 
is 3 ]/ h, withdraw 500 ml in each cycle. Repeat 
this cycle 6 times. Also, the inside air temperature 
of the refrigeration cabinet shall be measured and 
maintained lower than the ambient temperature in 
all the cycles. 


After the test, the water dispenser shall comply with the 
following requirements: 


1) Outlet water temperature shall be < 16 °C 
and the centre of the refrigeration cabinet 
air temperature shall be lower than ambient 
temperature (Min 5 ?C) in all the readings; and 


2 


w 


If outlet water temperature is < 16 °C and 
refrigeration cabinet temperature is lower than 
the ambient temperature in all the readings 
then the dispenser qualifies for the cooling 
capacity test. If any of readings of outlet water 
temperature is >16 °C and the refrigeration 
cabinet temperature is more than the ambient 
temperature, then the dispenser shall be 
deemed not conforming to the requirement of 
the cooling capacity test. 


10.2 Maximum Operating Condition Test 


(Environmental) 
10.2.1 Climate Class —Tropical (T) 


10.2.1.1 Temperature 
Ambient temperature 43 °C and 
Water temperature 35 °C. 


10.2.1.2 Method of test 


a) After stabilizing as mentioned in 8.6, the dispenser 
shall be operated at a full capacity of the storage 
tank drawn from the bottle and cold drink/water 
bottles in cabinet (8 bottles of 500 ml each); 


Cold and plain water shall be withdrawn at regular 
intervals of 10 min at rated cooling capacity and 
the temperature shall be recorded; and 


b 


— 


c 


ме 


Simultaneously the temperature drop of one of 
the bottles in the cabinet shall be recorded by the 
suitable temperature measuring device (see 9.1.1). 
10.2.1.3 Outlet cold water temperature 


The cold-water temperature shall be less than or equal 
to 23 *C at rated outlet flow. 


The refrigeration cabinet air temperature shall be 
minimum 5 ?C less than ambient temperature. 


10.2.2 Climate Class — Normal (N) 


10.2.2.1 Temperature 
а) Ambient temperature 32 °С; and 
b) Water temperature 28 °С. 


10.2.2.2 Method of test 


a) The dispenser shall be operated for at least 4 h at a 
full capacity of the loaded bottle in the main tank 
and cold drink/water bottles in cabinet (8 bottles 
of 500 ml each); 


Cold and plain water shall be withdrawn at regular 
intervals of 10 min at rated cooling capacity and 
the temperature shall be recorded; and 


b 


wm 


c 


ме 


Simultaneously the temperature drop of one of 
the bottles in the cabinet shall be recorded by the 
suitable temperature measuring device (see 9.1.1). 


10.2.2.3 Outlet cold water temperature 

The cold-water temperature shall be less than or equal 
to 23 *C at rated outlet flow. 

10.3 Maximum Operating Condition Test (Voltage) 


10.3.1 At High Voltage 


Afterstabilizationaspertheclimatecondition, thebottled 
water dispenser shall be operated at high voltage that 15, 
+ 10 percent of rated voltage for 2 h. If the compressor 
trips, the voltage shall be reduced gradually at the rate of 
10 V/min. 


The supply voltage at which the compressor starts without 
tripping shall be recorded. 


The compressor shall not trip at the target voltage. 
10.3.2 At Low Voltage 


Five min after stabilization as per the climate condition, 
the bottled water dispenser shall be operated at low 
voltage that 15, — 10 percent of rated voltage for 2 h. If the 
compressor trips, the voltage shall be increased gradually 
at the rate of 10 V/min and the test shall be repeated. 


The compressor shall not trip during the test. 


10.4 Heating Capacity Test 


The purpose of the test is to validate the water heating 
performance of the dispenser. 


10.4.1 Test Procedure 


a) The dispenser shall be installed at ambient 
temperature and inlet water temperature as per 
Table 1 and 2. After establishing the stabilised 
conditions as mentioned in 8.6, it shall be operated 
continuously for heating at rated voltage until the 
thermostat trips without the withdrawal of water; 
and 


b 


== 


Immediately after tripping of the thermostat water 
shall be withdrawn at an interval of 5 min (417 ml 
for 5 I/h). The minimum and maximum temperature 
of withdrawn water shall be recorded. Repeat this 
cycle 12 times. 


10.4.2 Outlet Water Temperature 


In each cycle, the mean outlet water temperature shall 
be within 80 + 5 °С. However, if any of the readings 
does not meet the criteria, the dispensers shall be 
deemed not conforming to the requirement of the 
heating capacity test. 


10.5 Annual Energy Consumption Test 


The water dispenser shall be operated under the loaded 
condition at an ambient temperature and inlet water 
temperature as per Table 1 and 2 before commencement 
of the test. 


10.5.1 Test Procedure — For All Types of Units 


The dispenser shall be switched ON after the cooling 
capacity test and at same conditions without drawing 
water. It shall be ensured that the compressor and heater 
(if applicable) are switched ON. The measurement shall 
be taken under ON condition till 24 h. 


IS 17681 : 2022 


10.5.2 Calculation 


Equation 1: Normalize the no water draw energy 


Ox, water draw e 1 440 


No draw 1 


Qu, = 


where 


Qu = 


normalized 24 h 
consumption (Wh); 


energy 


energy consumption during the 
ON mode with no water draw 
(Wh); 


О water draw 


T dy — duration of the ON mode with no 
water draw (in min); and 
1 440 = number of minutes in 24 h. 


Annual Energy Consumption = Q,,, х 365 


24h 
10.6 Freeze-up Test 


The dispenser shall be operated for 24 h at ambient 
temperature and inlet water temperature as per Table 1 
and 2 without withdrawing any water. 


After 24 h, 3 cups of 100 ml cold water is withdrawn, 
and then normal water is withdrawn. The normal water 
temperature shall not be less than 25 °С and there shall 
not be any frosting on the outside of the water tank. 


10.7 Door Opening and Closing Test 


The bottled water dispenser with refrigeration cabinet 
shall be subjected to 3 000 cycles of the door opening 
and closing of a minimum 15 min cycle. Each cycle 
shall comprise of 1 opening and 1 closing. After this 
test, the dispenser shall qualify the door seal test 
(see 10.8) and there shall be no failure of the hinges. 


10.8 Door Seal Test 


This test is applied for the bottled water dispenser with 
refrigeration cabinet. 


The purpose of this test is to ensure that the gasket of 
the door of the water dispenser adequately prevents 
any ingress of the surrounding air. This test shall be 
conducted with bottled water dispenser at rest or when 
not under operation. 


A strip of paper 50 mm wide, 0.08 mm thick, and of 
suitable length shall be inserted at any point of the 
seal and the door shall be closed normally. The strip of 
paper shall not slide freely. 


IS 17681 : 2022 


Table 3 Pull Down Test 
( Clause 10.9 ) 


SI No. Condition Ambient Temperature (*C) Inlet Water Temperature (*C) Pull Down (°С) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Tropical (T) 43 35 Outlet cold water temperature: < 23+1 
li) Normal (N) 32 28 Outlet cold water temperature: < 18+1 


10.9 Pull-down Test 


The water temperatures as per the climate conditions 
shall be as specified in Table 3. 


10.9.1 Test Procedure 


The product is installed as per the cooling capacity test. 
The cold-water storage tank shall be filled with water as 
per the conditions mentioned in Table 3. The dispenser 
shall be operated at rated voltage and frequency. The 
water temperature and time shall be recorded. 


10.9.2 Requirements 


The measured water temperature shall be as per 
Table 3 within 30 min. At any condition maximum pull 
down time shall be 60 min. 


11 MARKING AND INSTRUCTION 


11.1 Marking on Bottled Water Dispenser 


Each bottled water dispenser shall have the following 
information marked in a permanent and legible manner 
on one or several locations where it is readily accessible: 
a) The manufacturer’s name, address and/or the 
trade-mark; 
b) The model (or commercial designation) and 
serial number; 


с) The rated capacity (cooling and heating) in l/h; 


d) The name of the refrigerant used in system and its 
quantity; 

e) Rated power input for cooling and heating in 
watts; 

f) Rated voltage and rated frequency; and 

g) Country of manufacture. 


11.1.1 Each bottled water dispenser shall be 
accompanied with the instructions for its use and 
maintenance printed on strong paper/cardboard or 
similar material. These instructions shall at least 
provide information related to the following: 


a) Installation requirements; 

b) Conditions of operation (starting and stopping); 

c) Use of various control devices (thermostat, 
defrosting, etc.); and 


d) Maintenance and cleaning the bottled water 
dispenser. 


11.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS No. 


302-2-24 : 1994 


5522 : 2014 


6911 : 2017 


9000 (Part 11) : 
1983 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2.) 


LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Safety of household апа 
similar electrical appliances: 


Part 2 Particular requirements, 
Section 24 Refrigerators, food 
freezers and ice makers 


Stainless steel sheets and strips 


for utensils — Specification 
(third revision) 
Stainless steel plate, sheet 
and strip  — Specification 
(second revision) 
Basic environmental testing 


procedures for electronic and 
electrical items: Part 11 Salt mist 
test 


IS No. 


10146 : 1982 


10151 : 2019 


10617 : 2018 


10910 : 1984 


IS 17681 : 2022 


Title 


Specification for polyethylene 
for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 


Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and 
its copolymers for its safe use 
in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water — Specification 
(first revision) 

Hermetic compressors — 
Specification (second revision) 


Specification for polypropylene 
and its copolymers for its safe 
use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water 


IS 17681 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 3.2 ) 
MEASUREMENT OF AMBIENT TEMPERATURE 


| 


4 100 mm OR DEFINED BY 
MANUFACTURER 
N 
А 
@----------------------------------[------==--------------о ос з-551------------------------------------------ ө 
ТІ T3 
a 
Y 
NE Um 
S 
W/2 e 
T2 
TOP VIEW 350 
« » 
WOODEN PARTITION 300 
ye mm THICKNESS d 
300 
в 
"ENTE n ТЕЕ T ERR i 
TI 1 ji T3 
сї e 
= = 
— A v 
|_| Ez] А 
SOLID TOP PLATFORM = 
For FREE AIR CIRCULATION e 


FRONT VIEW 


T1, T2, T3 ambient measurement sensor's location 


АП dimensions are in mm 


Tolerance on dimension are+ 10 mm 


FIG. 5 MEASUREMENT OF AMBIENT TEMPERATURE 
10 


IS 17681 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 

BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 

Blue Star Limited, Mumbai 

Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 

Carrier Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Limited, 
Gurugram 

Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 

Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 

Emerson Climate Technologies(India) Pvt. Ltd, Karad 

Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Limited, 
Mumbai 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engg, Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Bengaluru 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Refrigeration & Airconditioning Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


11 


Representative(s) 


ProF (DR) RAvI KUMAR (Chairman) 


SHRI С. К. PRASAD 
SHRI J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
SHRI BALASUBRAMANIAN ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
SHRI D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


DR P. CHANDRA SEKHAR 
SHRI GUJALA B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
SHRI K. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate I) 
Suri M. N. S. V. KIRAN KUMAR (Alternate П) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI D. P. DESPANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI BURZIN J. WADIA 
SHRI A. A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
DR NITIN KARWA (Alternate) 


DR D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
DR Supe K. Das (Alternate) 


DR JvoriRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. VENKANNA 
SHRI J. GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI MAYUR KARMAKAR 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
SHRI С. M. PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
SHRI RAJAT SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


SHRI D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
SHRI S. K. ЈНА (Alternate) 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Suri R. K. МЕНТА (Alternate) 


IS 17681 : 2022 


Organization(s) Representative(s) 


SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Suri D. К. MUDGAL 
SHRI S. DHIMAN (Alternate) 


Sierra Aircon Private Limited, Gurugram 


SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
SHRI NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 


The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru SHRI V. MANJUNATH 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Voltas Ltd, Mumbai SHRI SRINIVASAN MOTURI 


SHRI A. D. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI H. S. WADHWA 
Suri B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Voice, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur SHRI P. К. MUKHERJEE 
Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) SHRI J. K. AGRAWAL 


BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “Е” AND HEAD (МЕР) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 
Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Panel on Bottled Water Dispensers 


Organization Representative(s) 


Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 
Blue Star Ltd, Mumbai 


SHRI SRINIVASU Мотой! (Convener) 


SHRI SUNIL JAIN 
SHRI SHAILESH Monop (Alternate) 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


SHRI С. M. PATHAK 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Usha International Limited, Gurugram 
Veeline Media Ltd, Surat 


SHRI PRAMOD TRIVIDI 


SHRI PRASHANT HANWANTE 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (15203). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 СІТ. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


