( Reaffirmed 1996 )

IS:6106-lW1

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR TABLES, OPERATION, HYDRAULIC,
Chairman DR A. RAMDAS RepIctrnting of Railways

MINOR

Hospital Equipment Sectional Committee, CPDC 14
Ministry

Members DR J. K. CHAU~HURY ( Aftcmate to Dr A. Ramdas) Gansons Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. N. BANBRJEE National Steel Equipment Co, Bombay SHRI D. A. BHATHENA SHRI K. D. I-L~TXIRAM ( Alternate ) Adaii Dutr & Co ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta Sxuu G. BHATTACHARYA SHRI D. LAHIRI ( Alremate ) Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi DR P. P. GOEL Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi SHRI P. c. hPUR Tempo Industrial Corporation, Bombay SliRt ARvIh.3 .' I(ASAROOD Directorate General of Technical Development, SXRIV. KRR~W@~~RTEW New Delhi -Dcpa;;Tay; )of Defence Production ( Ministry of ?`&J S. K. MXTRA SHRI H. C. MUKHXRJEB Chief Inspectorate of General Stores [Ministry of Defence ( DGI )] Directorate of Industries, Government of Snsu P. M. NPJK Maharashtra Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, HRl s. RAcuivrNi New Delhi Directorate General of Armed Forces and Medical RIO K. R. RAMA RAO Services ( Ministry of Defence ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) HRI v. K. %mihawfi Directorate General of Armed Forces and Medical CAJ V. P. SEServices ( Ministry of Defcnce ) Elpro International Ltd. Poona HRI A. G. SHRINOARPURE SHRI S. S. MOTAFRAM ( AIiema& ) SHRI P. K. PRADHAN( Al&m& ) All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers %IRI P. M. TRXVEDI Association, Bombay SHRI. S. R. TALPME ( Alfematc ) ULTRADENT Private Ltd, Bombay 8-1 R. N. VI0 SHRI D. N. VIO ( Altema&) Directorate General, IS1 ( Ex-o,$cio Member) SWFUA. B. RAO, Director ( Consr Prod ) Se67etaty Sxuu D.K. AGARWAL Ansistant`Dircctor ( Coorr Prod ) , IS1 ( Conrinurd an#ge 2 )

INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI

INSTITUTIO-N
SHAH ZAFAR MARC

9s : 6106 - 1971
( Conlinuedffompuge 1 )

Operation Tables Subcommittee,
Convener
BRIG IL.

CPDC 14 : 2
and Medical

Reprcsrnting Directorate General of Armed Forces Services ( Ministry of Defence )

R. RAMA RAO

Members Directorate General of Health Se&car, New Delhi DR P. P. GOEL DR G. BHAT~ACHARJEE ( Alteraute) Trichur Surgicals, Trichur SHRI C. K. KU~~AN SWRI V. M. SUUMAN ( Alternate ) Janak Manufacturing Cs, Bombay SHRl#.J. MEHTA I-I. Mukerjee & BanerJee Surgical Private Ltd, SHRI SVDHIRKAJAR MVKERJI Calcutta Chief Inspectorate of General Stores [Ministry of SHRI H. C. MIJKHERJEE Defence ( DGI ) J Quality Instruments, Sakinaka, Bombay Sriar M. D. PAFZKH National Surgical Instruments Co, Bombay Srrm VINOOBHAI SHAH SHRI MAHESH M. SHAH ( Alternate ) Elpro International Ltd, Poona SHRI A. G. SHRINGARPURE SHRI S. S. MOTAPRAM( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. PRADHAN(Alternate) Central Engineering Organization, Howrah SHRI R. SINHA SWKIDILIP KUMAR GANGULY (Alternate) Bengal Surgical Co, Bombay SHRD~ATX R.~RIVASTAVA SHRI ROOP K. SIRCAR ( Alternate ) ULTRADENT Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI D.N.VIG SHRI R. N. VIC ( Alternate )

2

IS : 6106- 1971

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR TABLES, OPERATION, HYDRAULIC, 0. FOREWORD MINOR

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 April 1971, after the draft finalized by the Hospital Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products Division Council. 0.2 This is one of the series of Indian Standards on hospital equipment formulated at the instance of the Advisory Committee for the Development of Surgical Instruments, Equipment and Appliances, Government of India. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressoff in accordance with ing the result of a test, shall be rounded The number of significant places retained in the rounded. IS : 2-1960". off value should be the same as that of the specified value En this standard.

I. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down constructional and performance of manually controlled, hydraulic, minor operation tables.
2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard the fol!owing definition shall apply, requirernents

2.1.1 klinor Operation TableA surgical operation table fitted with a hydraulic pump to raise and lower the table top, and having a side end control for positioning of the table top during surgical operatio`:s. 3. MATERIALS 3.1 The materials used in the manufacture of operation either corrosion resistant or shall have a protective finish. 3.2 The raising column and the gearing system shall materials which resist wear during normal manipulation.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised
).

tables be

shall be from

made

3

IS t 6106- 1971 3.3 The handles provided shall be made from well-seasoned wood free from defects, ebonite or phenol formaldehyde moulding powder of Grade 1 or Grade 2 ( see IS : 1300-1966* ). 3.4 If stainless steel is used9 it shall be according to Designation 04Crl9Ni9 or 07Crl9Ni9 of schedule V of IS : 1570.1961t. 3.5 Antistatic used. rubber tread castors according to IS : 4034-1968: shall be
of the table

NOTE - When antistatic rubber tread is not available, the construction shall otherwise ensure transmission of static charge to the earth. 4.

DIMENSIONS

4.1 Table Top - The overall length of table top shall be 180 cm, Mitt, with the head section drawn in and 195 cm, Min, with the head section drawn out. The overall width of the table top shall be 50 to 55 cm. 4.2 Height - In the lowest position ( without mattress ), the table top shall have a height between 80 f 5 cm and at the extreme lifted position between 95 f 5 cm, subject to limitations given wit out mattress) L55 . . 5. CONSTRUCTION 5.0. A typical design of minor operation table is shown in Fig. 1. 5.1 Base - The base shall be solid and mounted on castors so situated as to give stability to the operation table ( see also 6.2 ). The base shall have non-skid compensating floor-locks actuated by a pedal. The base may also have foot-rails for providing comfortable foot-rest for the surgical team.. 5.2 Table Top - The table top shall have a minimum of three sections, namely, head, trunk and leg sections. The head section shall be detachable. As for leg section, it is left to the manufacturer to make it detachable also The entire table top shall have a jerk-free if so required by the consumer. vertical movement, where `jerk ' is defined as the sudden change in speed. In case of multiple cylinder hydraulic systems, the sudden change in speed (jerk ) as a result of cylinder diameter differences shall not be in excess of Further: ` n - 1 `, where ' n ' is the number of cylinders. a) the entire table top shall be capable of being tilted to 30 f trendelenburg and reverse trendelenburg positions;
*Specification for phenolic moulding materials (second revision). tschedules for wrought steeis for general engineering purpok. ZSpccification for castors for hospital equipment.

lo

4

W

`""'R"' ---'=&J

IS : 6106 - 1971

b) 4 4

it shall have arrangements direction;

for a lateral

tilt of 20 f

2" in either

the wheels used for making trendelenburg, and lateral positions shall have scales sweep; and the table top drainage tray. may be provided with

reverse trendelenburg for measuring angular a perineal cut out for

5.2.1 Head and Leg Sections - The head section shall be capable of being raised to 40" to 45" and in its reverse position to 90" from the trunk portion. The leg section shall be capable being lowered to at least 90" from the trunk so as to enable the table to be used as a chair and also for obtaining other positions. The head section and the table top shall have controls capable of positioning during operation'and the controls shall be situated The various controls may be so as not to interfere with the surgical team. independent, and on sides of the table with removable type or folding type handles.

of

5.3 Hydraulic Lift - The table shall have a hydraulic pump encased in the base for controlling the lift of the table. It shall operate by a pedal. The table lift shall be between 15 to 25 cm. All controls shall have easy access and various component parts of the controls and the table shall All parts intended to be removed by the be easy to clean and maintain. user shall be easy to replace with parts of the same make and difficult to assemble incorrectly. 6. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

6.1 Hydraulic Lift - The hydraulic lift shall give a vertical jerk-free and smookh movement to the system. When the hydraulic pressure is released, the table top shall take not less than 10 seconds and not more than SO seconds to travel from the maximum height to the bottom most posityon. The downward movement shall be smooth and subject to limitations in 5.2. When the table top is held in any position by hydraulic actirm alone, and loaded with 150 kg in the trunk portion, it shall not sink by mart: than 3 mm in a period of four hours. 6.2 Base - The base shall be stable on the castors and on the non-skid floor-locks. On castors, the table shall be capable of moving on a smooth cemented floor, when a pull of maximum 120 N ( I2 kgf ) is applied in its static position and capable of propulsion with pull of 70 N ( 7 kgf) MI/X, after it is set in motion. The floor-locks shall give rigidity to the table and the table shall not move in any direction when a force of 500 N ( 50 kgf ) is applied to the base in any direction. 6

IS : 6106 - 1971 6.3 Table
position

obtainable

Top -

It shall satisfy by the hydraulic

the requirements lift:

given

below

in any

When a force a> extreme edge

of 500 N ( 50 kgf) is applied vertically on the of the head section drawn in completely, the leg When a load of 5 kgf section shall not lift by more than 15 mm. is dropped from a height of 150 mm on to the extreme end of the head section ( with the head section drawn in ) the head section shall not get detached.

b)

When the head section is pulled out with a 250 N ( 25 kgf) pull along its plane, the head section shall not come off, when locked. normal the accessories conditions. are clamped, there shall be no wobble under

Cl Once

7. WORKMANSHIP

AND FINISH

various components shall be made accurately to give smooth operation and other performance requirements laid down in 6. All surfaces shall be well finished and shall not have surface defects, such as pin holes, blisters, and blow holes. All edges shall be rounded off. All the three sections comprising the table top, in their normal positions, shall be in one plane approximately when tested with a spirit level. The sweeps of the head and leg sections shall be true. All welded joints shall have welds fully penetrating and shall be well finished. All non-corrosive metal surfaces ( aluminium and stainless steel ) shall be matt finished. Corrosive surfaces like steel castings for base cylinder, and pedal shall be painted to the shade which reflects the least, say sea green, or as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. Prior to painting, the surface shall be degreased, rust-proofed by phosphating and then suitably protected by an anticorrosive primer, either by brushing or spraying and then finished by spraying in stove enamel or air-drying enamel of the specified shade. In every instance, each coat shall be separately stoved or air-dried, as the case may be. The resulting finish shall be hard and shall not readily chip or flake. Brass parts and mild steel parts ( which are plated chromium over nickel ) ; shall conform to Service Grade 2 of IS : 4827-1968* and IS : 1068-1968-t respectively. The handles shall have an easy grip and shall not impart colour or stain to the hand. Wooden handles, if provided, shall be linsed oil coated or varnished. *Specification for electroplated coatings of nickel and chromium on copper and copper alloys. $$ecification for electroplated coatings of nickel and chromium on iron and steel
(Jirst rcvisivn

7.1 The

).

7

IS : 6106 - 1971 8. ACCESSORIES

`$

8.1 The table shall be provided with the following,accessories:

4 Foot-extension; b) Shoulder supports, =I Anaesthetic screen; 4 Leather wristlets;

side supports with antistatic rubber pads;

Pair of knee crutches or lithotomy leg holders; and e> 25 f ) to 50 mm sponge antistatic rubber mattress.
NOTE - When antistatic rubber is not used, the construction of the table shall, otherwise, ensure transmission of static charge to the earth.

8.2 The following shall be optional: a) Neck elevator or shoulder bridge, table top for radiography with cassette tray and b) Permeable necessary guide, C) Stainless steel transurethral tray with wire-mesh screen, d) Instrument tray, e) Neurosurgical attachment, f) Intravenous arm board with mattress, g) Active kidney bridge, and 11) Lateral cassette holder. 9. INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE AND MAINTENANCE by instructions manual giving the

9.1 The table shall be accompanied following information:

a) Brief instructions for installation and maintenance, b) Range of hydraulic lift, and c) Instructions for correct operation of the table. 10. MARKING 10.1 Each table shall have a name plate fixed to it showing the following: a) Manufacturer's name, initials or registered trade-mark; b) Any special instructions for safe handling of the table; and c) Words ` Made in India `. 8

IS : 6106- 1971 10.1.1 Each table may also be marked with the ISI Certification
Mark.

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer has the fixther safeguard that the products as actually marketed are continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under \irhich a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

10.2 Each table shall have a transfix label fixed to it listing areas of caution, wherever possible. 11. PACKING
table shall be packed in a well cushioned sturdy case to stand rough handling during transit. The case shall be waterproof inside. The hydraulic oil shall be supplied in sealed tins and hydraulic system and gear system encased in suitable dustproof material.

11.1 Each operation

9

AMENDMENT NO.

t
TO

SEPTEMBER 1984

IS:6106-1971 SPECIFICATION FOR TABLES, OPERATION, HYDRAULIC, MINOR Alterations d--v-(Page 4, oh48e 3.5) - Substitute

the follovfng

for the existi= clause: '3.5 Castor wheels shall be made fraa anti-static nylon, anti-static rubber or steel. Castora shall satisfy the requirements of IS:403-1979$. Rote - When antistatic rubber or nylon vheels are not available, the construction of the table shall otherwise ensure transmission of static charge to the earth.' Addenda ---(Page 4, C&UUN? 4.2, tine 3) - Add the word 'preferably' between the vords '(vithout mattress)' and 'between 95 z 5 cm'.

(rtzge 4, foot-notethth '$'mzrk) -Add the
vords `(ftht equipment'.
PeUi&~)'

after the words 'hospital

Reprogra@y

Unit,

ISI, I&ZVDelhi, India

NO. 2 JANUARY 1996 TO IS 6106 : 1971 SPECIFICATION FOR TABLES, ,OPERATION, HYDRAULIC, MINOR
(Page 3, clause 1.19

AMENDMENT

-Substitutethe following

for the existing clause:

`1.1 This standard lays down constmctional and performance requirements of manually controlled height adjustment, minor operation tables.' (Pizge 3, &use 2.1.19

-Substitutethe following for the existing clause:

`2.1.1 Minor Operuling Table -A surgical operation table fitted with hydraulic pump or mechanical device (or electro-mechanical device9 to raise and lower.' (Page 4, cl&se 33) -Substitute the following for the existing clause:

`3.3 The handles provided shall be made from ebonite or phenol formaldehyde.'

5.2(c) ] - Delete. ( Page 6, clause 5.3 9- Substitute
[ Page 6, ckse following:

the first and second sentenceS with the

`The table shall have a hydraulic pump or mechanical device (or electro-mechanical device) lifting/lowering device fitted with the base of the table. It shall operate by a padel or a handle.'

(MM)149

Rcpvphy Unit,BIS,New Dolhi, Itdii

Ii5 6106: 1971 SPEClFICATtON FOR TABLES, OPERATION, HYDRAULIC MINOR ( Page 7, chse
7.1, hsr sentence ) Dclctc. ,

(MHD14)
Reprography Unit, BIS, NW Dcll~i.~

