за? Ah IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


пе AI ат & ятятенев AECE 
аа 
ат 5 өтт Тана! 
(FEM чта ) 


Methods for Quantitative Description 
of Discontinuities in Rock Masses 


Part 5 Wall Strength 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.060 


© BIS 2023 


за ня э] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


ЖЕШ ЧИШ пее чач, 9 SEITE IE THK AMT, E Тесей - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2023 Price Group 6 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, СЕР 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


A series of Indian Standard on test methods for assessing the strength characteristics of rocks and rock masses 
are being developed/revised in view of recent advances in the field of rock mechanics. The majority of 
rock masses, in particular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, 
with the discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that structure 
of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete 
and unified descriptions of rock masses and discontinuities. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of 
in-situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 


Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity іп а госК mass, along which the rock mass has 
zero or low tensile strength. Itis the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistosity 
planes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe 
discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number 
of sets and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on 
the discontinuities. 


It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described 
for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard, covering various parameters to describe 
discontinuities in rock masses. 


This standard (Part 5) covers the methods for quantitative description of discontinuities in rock masses for wall 
strength. This standard (Part 5) was first formulated in 1987. This revision incorporates the latest advancement 
and modifications based on the experience gained in the use of this standard. The other parts formulated in the 
series are! 


Part 1 Orientation 
Part 2 Spacing 
Part 3 Persistence 


Part 4 Roughness 

Part 6 Aperture 

Part 7 Filling 

Part 8 Seepage 

Part 9 Number of sets 

Part 10 Block size 

Part 11 Core recovery and rock quality designation 
Part 12 Drill core study 


Wall strength describes the equivalent wall strength of the adjacent rock walls of a discontinuity. Wall strength 
may be lower than rock block strength due to weathering or alteration of the walls. Wall strength is an important 
component of shear strength in contact. If rock walls are in contact. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF 
DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 


PART 5 WALL STRENGTH 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5) covers the method for 
evaluation and description of the compressive 
strength of the rock comprising the walls of a 
discontinuity in rock mass. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contains provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitutes 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards: 


ISNo. Title 


IS 11315 Method for the quantitative 
(Part 4) : 1987 description of discontinuities in 
rock mass: Part 4 Roughness 


IS 11358: 1987 Glossary of terms and symbols 
relating to rock mechanics 


IS 12608 : 1989 Method for determination of 
hardness of rock 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 11358 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 The compressive strength of the rock comprising 
the walls of a discontinuity is a very important 
component of shear strength and deformability, 
especially if the walls are in direct rock to rock 
contact as in the case of unfilled joints. Slight shear 
displacement of individual joints caused by shear 
stresses within the rock mass often results in very 
small asperity contact areas and actual stresses 
locally approaching or exceeding the compressive 
strength of the rock wall material, hence the 
asperity damage. 


4.2 Rock masses are frequently weathered near the 
surface, and are sometimes altered by hydrothermal 
processes. The weathering (and alteration) generally 
affects the walls of discontinuities more than the 
interior of rock blocks. This result in a reduction of 
wall strength by some fraction of what would be 
measured on the fresher rock found in the interior of 
the rock blocks, for example, that sampled by drill 
core. A description of the state of weathering or 
alteration, both for the rock material and for the rock 
mass is, therefore, an essential part ofthe description 
of wall strength. 


4.3 There are two main results of weathering — one 
dominated by mechanical disintegration, the other 
by chemical decomposition including solution. 
Generally, both mechanical and chemical effects act 
together, but depending on climatic regime, one or 
other of these aspects may be dominant. Mechanical 
weathering results in opening of discontinuities, the 
formation of new discontinuities by rock fracture, 
the opening of grain boundaries, and the fracture or 
cleavage of individual mineral grains. Chemical 
weathering results in discolouration of the rock and 
leads to the eventual decomposition of silicate 
minerals to clay minerals; some minerals, notably 
quartz resist this action and may survive unchanged. 
Solution is an aspect of chemical weathering and is 
particularly important in the case of carbonate and 
saline minerals. 


4.4 The relatively thin ‘skin’ of wall rock affects 
shear strength and deformability can be tested by 
means of simple index tests. The apparent uniaxial 
compressive strength can be estimated both from 
Schmidt hammer tests and from scratch and 
geological hammer tests, since the latter have been 
roughly calibrated against large body of test data. 
The detail of Schmidt hammer is given in IS 12608. 


4.5 Mineral coatings will affect the shear strength of 
discontinuities to a marked degree if the walls are 
planar and smooth. The type of mineral coatings 
should be described, where possible. Samples 
should be taken when in doubt. 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


4.6 Strength of rock walls of a continuity in rock 
mass is governed by the state of weathering (and 
alteration) of the rock mass Table 1 and rock 
material Table 2. Quantitative estimates of strength 
of rock can be made by manual index tests Table 3 
and Schmidt hammer tests (Fig. 1). 


4.6.1 Schmidt hammer test is recommended for 
obtaining estimates of wall strength for subsequent 
calculation of shear strength when utilizing the wall 
roughness coefficient as described in Part 4. 


4.7 Equipment required for evaluation of wall 
strength in rock mass survey consist of geological 
hammer with one tapered point, strong pen knife or 
similar sharp tool, Schmidt hammer (L type) with 
conversion table (table generally supplied by the 
manufacturer) to correct for orientation and graph 
(see Fig. 1) to convert corrected rebound number to 
an estimate of uniaxial strength, and equipment for 
measuring dry density of small rock samples, for 
example, oven, balance, pycnometer, beaker, etc. 


Table 1 State of Weathering of Rock Mass 
(Clauses 4.6 and 5.1) 


SI No. Term Description Grade 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Fresh No visible sign of rock material weathering: perhaps slight I 

discolouration on major discontinuity surfaces 
11) Slightly Discolouration indicates weathering of rock material. All the rock П 
weathered material may be discoloured by weathering and may be somewhat 
weaker externally than in its fresh condition 
iii) Moderately Less than half of the rock material is decomposed and/or Ш 
weathered disintegrated to soil. Fresh or discoloured rock is present either as 
a continuous framework or as core stones 
iv) Highly More than half of the rock material is decomposed and/or IV 
weathered disintegrated to soil. Fresh or discoloured rock is present either as 
a discontinuous framework or as core stones 
у) Completely All rock material is decomposed and/or disintegrated to soil. The У 
weathered original mass structure is still largely intact. 
vi) Residual soil All rock material is converted to soil. The mass structure and VI 


material fabric are destroyed. There is a large change in volume, 
but the soil has not been significantly transported 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


Table 2 State of Weathering of Rock Material 


(Clauses 4.6 and 5.2) 
SI No. Term Description 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Fresh No visible sign of weathering of the rock material 
Discolouted The colour of the original fresh rock material is changed. The degree of 

change from the original colour should be indicated. If the colour change is 
confined to particular mineral constituents this should be mentioned 

ii) Decomposed The rock is weathered to the condition of a soil in which the original material 
fabric is still intact, but some or all of the mineral grains are decomposed 

111) Disintegrated The rock is weathered to the condition of a soil in which the, original fabric 


1s still intact. The rock is friable, but the mineral grains are not decomposed 


NOTE — The stages of weathering described above may be subdivided using qualifying terms, for example, “slightly discoloured, 
“moderately discoloured”, “highly discoloured”, etc. 


Table 3 Strength of Rock by Manual Index 
(Clauses 4.6 and 5.3) 


Grade Description Field Identification Approximate Range of 
Uniaxial Compressive 
Strength (MPa) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

51 Very soft clay Easily penetrated several inches by fist < 0.025 

52 Soft day Easily penetrated several inches by thumb 0.025-0.05 

53 Firm clay Can be penetrated several inches by thumb 0.05-0.10 
with moderate effort 

54 Stiff clay Readily indented by thumb but penetrated only 0.10-0.25 
with great effort 

55 Very stiff clay Readily indented by thumb-nail 0.25-0.50 

56 Hard clay Indented with difficulty by thumb-nail > 0.50 

RO Extremely weak rock Indented by thumb-nail 0.25-1.0 

КІ Very weak rock Crumbles under firm blows with point of 1.0-5.0 
geological hammer, can be peeled by a pocket 
knife 

R2 Weak rock Can be peeled by a pocket knife with difficulty, 5.0-25 
shallow indentations made by firm blow with 
point of geological hammer 

R3 Medium strong rock Cannot be scraped or peeled with a pocket 25-50 
knife, specimen can be fractured with single 
firm blow of geological hammer 

R4 Strong rock Specimen requires more than one blow of 50-100 
geological hammer to fracture it 

R5 Very strong rock Specimen requires many blows of geological 100-250 
hammer to fracture it 

R6 Extremely strong rock Specimen can only be chipped with geological > 250 
hammer 


NOTE — Grades S1 to S6 apply to cohesive soils, for example, clays, silty clays, and combinations of silts and clays with sand, generally slow draining. 
Discontinuity wall strength will generally be characterized by grade RO to R6 (rock) while S1 to S6 (clay) will generally apply to filled discontinuities. 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH (0. ) ROCK SURFACE MPa 


400 
350 


300 


250 


200 


150 


100 
90 
80 


70 
60 
50 


40 


30 


20 


10 


AVERAGE DISPERSION ОҒ STRENGTH 
FOR MOST ROCKS (MPa) ROCK DENSITY 


32 31 
30 


+ 200 


29 


28 


+ 100 


27 


26 


25 


24 


23 
22 


21 


20 


kN/m 3 


HAMMER VERTICAL DOWNWARDS 


10 20 30 40 50 
SCHMIDT HARDNESS (г), L- HAMMER 


SCHMIDT HARDNESS (r), L-HAMMER 


FIG. 1 CORRELATION CHART FOR SCHMIDT (L) HAMMER RELATING 
ROCK DENSITY, COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH AND REBOUND NUMBER 


60 


5 PROCEDURE 


5.1 The grade of weathering (or alteration) of the 
rock mass as a whole is described first. Table 1 gives 
the general terms and descriptions and may be 
modified to suit particular situations. 


5.2 The grade of weathering (or alteration) of the 
rock material comprising of the walls of individual 
discontinuities or of the walls of a particular set of 
discontinuities (for example, an unfavorably 
orientated set of joints) should be described 
according to terms and descriptions shown in 
Table 2. 


NOTES 


1 Distribution of weathering grades in a rock mass may be 
determined by mapping natural and artificial exposures. 
However, it should be borne in mind that isolated natural 
exposures of rock and excavations of limited extent are not 
necessarily representative of the whole rock mass, since 
weathering can be extremely variable. The nature of any 
joint set at a location are to be observed at several possible 
places for alterations, filling, if any, before concluding 
about the value. The same joint set and even the same joint 
is likely to have different value in its different part. The 
most representative value to be reported. 


2 Furthermore, all grades of weathering may not be seen in 
a given rock mass and in some cases a particular grade may 
be present to a very small extent. Distribution of various 
weathering grades of the rock material may be related to the 
porosity of the rock material and the presence of open 
discontinuities. In logging cores the distribution of 
weathering grades of the rock material may be recorded, but 
the distribution of weathering grades of the rock mass from 
which the cores were obtained can only be inferred. 


3 Rock masses which are weathered due to exposure to or 
infiltration from surface agents should be distinguished 
where possible from those that are altered as a result of 
infiltration of hydrothermal solutions. However, in many 
instances the effects of alteration are not easily 
distinguished from those brought about by weathering. 


4 An abundant class of rock materials, notably those with 
high clay content, are prone to swelling, weakening or 
disintegration when exposed to short term weathering 
processes of wetting and drying nature. Special tests are 
necessary to predict this aspect of mechanical performance. 


5.3 The manual index tests detailed in Table 3 
should be performed on the walls of discontinuities 
or on material representative of the walls. The 
choice and number of test locations will depend on 
the details required. The approximate range of 
strength for the walls of a critical set of joints may 
be sufficient. Alternatively, a single critical 
discontinuity may need to be characterized in 
details. The manual index tests can be performed on 
hand-sized pieces of freshly broken rock if the 
strength of intact rock bridges is of interest. 
Alternatively, the results of point load tests, if 
available, may be used to estimate the strength of the 
intact portions of any potential failure surface. 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


NOTES 


1 The manual index tests are preferred to conventional 
tests on carefully prepared rock cylinders because a very 
large number of discontinuities can be sampled, thereby 
giving a more representative picture of the condition of the 
walls. Furthermore, conventional tests cannot be applied to 
the thin skin of wall rock or mineral coatings that dominate 
the shear strength and deformability of the rock mass. 


2 The manual index tests for determining grades 51 to 56 
can be replaced by more accurate assessment using a 
standard soil mechanics pocket penetrometer. This contains 
a stylus which is pressed into the sample at a constant rate. 
The maximum resistance can be read off a scale which is 
calibrated to show the maximum compressive strength of 
the sample. [This value is equal to twice the undrained shear 


strength = 5 (о, — 03)] 


5.4 The Schmidt hammer is applied in a direction 
perpendicular to the discontinuity wall of interest. 
The rock surface should be tested under saturated 
conditions to give the most conservative result. Ifthe 
surfaces are unavoidably dry, this fact should be 
reported in the results. The surface should be free of 
loose particles, at least under the hammer position. 


5.4.1 If the impulse from the spring-loaded 
projectile of the Schmidt hammer is sufficient to 
move the surface being tested, the resulting rebound 
will be artificially low. Such test results can 
normally be heard, since there is a ‘drummy’ sound. 
These results should be ignored. For the above 
reason this field index test is unsuitable in a loose 
rock mass containing very closely spaced 
discontinuities. (In such cases small block samples 
can be removed and tested when clamped rigidly to 
а heavy base). 


5.4.2 Each surface of interest should be tested a 
number of times to ensure a representative set of 
results. It is suggested that tests are performed in 
groups of 10 (for example, 10 tests per discontinuity 
or 10 tests per unit area of a large critical 
discontinuity), applying the hammer to a new part of 
the surface before each impact. The five lowest 
readings of each group of 10 are discarded and the 
mean value, (r) of the five highest readings is 
quoted. 


5.4.3 The mean values of the Schmidt rebound (r) 
and rock density (y) for a given discontinuity are 
used to estimate the value of the joint wall 
compressive strength (JCS) using Fig. 1. 


5.4.4 The Schmidt hammer test can be performed on 
the surfaces of or on material obtained from the 
freshly broken rock when the strength of the intact 
rock bridges (ос) is of interest. Alternatively, the 
results of point load tests, if available, can be used 
to estimate the strength of the intact portions of any 
potential failure surface. 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


5.4.5 Discontinuities with thin mineral coatings that 
appear quite persistent over a given surface and 
which would probably prevent initial rock to rock 
contact should be tested with the Schmidt hammer 
as above applying the hammer to the surface of the 
mineral coating. Depending upon the thickness of 
the mineral coating and its hardness, the estimate of 
JCS may or may not be relevant for estimation of 
shear strength. In all such cases of mineral coatings, 
the mineralogy should be described, for example, 
calcite, chlorite, talc, pyrite, graphite, kaolinite, etc 
samples should be taken when in doubt. An estimate 
ofthe area extent of Ше coating + 10 percent and the 
range of the thickness of the coating (mm) should be 
included. 


NOTES 


1 The Schmidt hammer rebound number ranges in practice 
from about 10 to 60. The lowest number applies to ‘weak’ 
rocks (uniaxial compressive strength о, < 20 MPa), while 
the highest number applies to ‘very strong’ and ‘extremely 
strong’ rocks (о, > 150 MPa), ‘very weak’ rocks and 
‘extremely weak’ rocks cannot be tested with the L- 
hammer. Manual index tests must therefore, be resorted to 
for rock weaker than 15 MPa to 20 MPa. 


2 For a given strength of surface, the rebound number is 
minimum when the hammer is used vertically downwards 
(rebound against gravity) and maximum when used 
vertically upwards to vertical downwards tests only. The 
corrections given in the Table 4 should be applied when the 
hammer is used in other directions. 


3 Block movement (drumminess) in closely jointed rock or 
crushing of loose grains are some of the reasons for 
unexpectedly low rebound numbers in a given set of results. 
Unexpectedly high readings are seldom obtained. The 
following two sets of actual results Illustrate the suggested 
method of obtaining a realistic mean value: 


a) rough, planar iron-stained joints in granite 
44, 36, 38, 44, 32, 44, 44, 40, 34, 42 
(mean of highest 5 : г = 44) 
(mean of 8 sets of 10 tests : г= 43); and 


b) rough undulating calcite-coated joints in hornfels 
28, 28, 30, 30, 28, 24, 24, 28, 30, 20 
(mean of 3 sets of 10 tests : r = 30). 


4 The Schmidt test is one of the few tests (with the 
exception of scratching tests) which takes into account the 
mechanical strength of the thin band of weathered wall 
material close to a discontinuity surface. Since it is this wall 
material which (in combination with roughness) controls 
the shear strength, it is of considerable importance as an 
index of rock quality. The joint wall compressive strength 
(JCS) is often as low as 25 percent of the adjacent intact 
rock strength (c) due to weathering effects. 


6 PRESENTATION ON RESULTS 


6.1 The weathering grades of recognizable 
weathering domains in the rock mass should be 
recorded on simplified sketches and/or vertical 
sections, with a clear key indicating the different 
weathering grades I, II, Ш, etc. 


The weathering grade of the rock material of 
individual discontinuities or of specific 
discontinuity sets should be described, ‘joint set 
No. 1: majority of walls moderately discoloured, 
approximately 20 percent fresh’. 


6.2 The strength of the wall rock material of 
individual discontinuities or of specific 
discontinuity sets should be noted together with the 
assumed range of uniaxial compressive strength, 
“joint set No. 1: majority medium strong 
(R3, 25 MPa to 50 MPa), approximately 20 percent 
strong (R4, 50 MPa to 100 MPa)‘. 


Values that are pertinent to the discontinuity walls 
should be carefully distinguished from any values 
that might have been recorded for the material 
representing the fresher rock within the rock blocks. 


6.3 The mean rebound (r) for the wall rock material 
of individual discontinuities or of specific 
discontinuity sets should be noted together with the 
mean rock density (y) and the estimate of wall 
strength (JCS) in MPa. One set of 10 results should 
be selected to show the typical range of rebound 
values. 


Values that are pertinent to the discontinuity 
walls should be carefully distinguished from any 
values that might have been recorded for the 
material representing the fresher rock within the 
rock blocks. 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


Table 4 Corrections for Reducing Measured Schmidt Hammer Rebound (r) 
when the Hammer is not used Vertically Downwards 


(Clause 5.4.5) 
SI No. Rebound Downwards Upwards Horizontal 

r х =- 90 х=- 45 х= +90 х= + 45 х= 0 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
1) 10 0 - 0.8 - - -3.2 
ii) 20 0 —0.9 - 8.8 - 6.9 -3.4 
iii) 30 0 - 0.8 - 7.8 — 6.2 -3.1 
iv) 40 0 —0.7 — 6.6 -5.3 -2.7 
v) 50 0 — 0.6 —5.3 -4.3 — 2.2 
vi) 60 0 - 0.4 - 4.0 — 3.3 — 1.7 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Technologies, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organisation, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 


Dhanbad 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology-ISM, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 


Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Representative(s) 
DR М. К SAMADHIYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


LT COL ANIL RAJ 


SHRIG. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI DEV 
SHRI MAHABIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
DR S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


SHRI DARPAN TALWAR 
М. 5. HARSHITHA (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


DR J. K. MOHNOT 
DRR. D. DWIVEDI (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRIR. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 
SHRI D. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 


PROF R. AYOTHIRAMAN 
PROF PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


PROF A. K. MISHRA 
DR К. К. SINHA (Alternate) 


DR С. 5. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


Organization 
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 
National Highways & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 


National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurugram 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


In Personal Capacity, (Flat No. 4123, Tower4, ACE 
Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida - 201310) 


In Personal Capacity (Naimex House, A-8, Mohan 
Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 
New Delhi - 110044) 


In Personal Capacity (Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21-C, 
Faridabad - 121001) 


In Personal Capacity (A-125. Prodhyagiki Apartment, 
Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi - 110059) 


In Personal Capacity (С-1004, Park View City-2, Sector- 49, 
Gurugram - 122018) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 11315 (Part 5) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


JS (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate I) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYA К (Alternate ЇЇ) 


DR A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH RAWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT J AIN 
SHRI VIJAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 


SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. GOEL 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


DR MANOJ VERMAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (19668). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Хо. Е-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. РАМТРАТ. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


