UDC 629.13' 042

.

I,,

IS : 9624 - `I980
( Reaffirmed 2005 )
Indian Standard

DESIGN

CRITER~IA FOR AIRCRAFT SEATS A~ND BERTHS

PASSENGER

1. ScopeSpecifies the design criteria, minimum performance and safety requirements end aft facing seats and berths to be installed in certificated aircrafts. I~.1 This standard covers all types the following categories : Type 1 Transport Normal of passenger load) seats and berths for use in civil

for forward

aircraft

in

(9g forward

Type 2 2. Material

and utility '

and Workmanship

2.1 Material shall be of a quality -which experience and/or tests have' demonstrated to be suitable for use in aircraft seats and berths. Workmanship shall be consistent with high ~grade aircraft Scat design shall incorporate the requirements of interchangeability, easy manufacturing practice. removability, maintainability and reliability. 2.14 All corners and edges shall be rounded off and deburred. All moving parts of the seat shall operate'with a firm positive action. All pivot points shall be fitted with replacable bushings. All adjustment features shall be of the positive locking type. The seat diaphragms, if used, shall be of one-piece construction. 2.1.2 Protecticn -- All members of the structure shall be protected against deterioration or loss of st,ength in service due to weathering, corrosion, abrasion, or other causes where the type of material used required such protection. Suitable precaution should be taken in the selection cf materials and design of seat components to prevent damage from condensation and human pe:spiration. Drain holes shall be provided where moisture is likely to collect. 2.1.3 Fire prctection - The seat cushions, upholstery, moulded and thermo-moulded parts, electrical conduits, wire trims, trim strips, and all other exposed materials used in seat or berth assembly shall have fire resistant properties. If ash receivers are installed in or attached to the seat or berth, they shall be of self-contained, completely removable type. Fastenings, with positive locking devices. shall not loosen the fasteners during Special attention shall be given to seat belt attachment fasteners to assure complete service. security without creating a binding condition. These fastene a shall be readily accessible for inspection. All fasteners used near upholstered areas shall be installed to preclude snagging. The use of retaining rings shall be restricted only when it is absolutely necessary for practical Welded joints shall be. used only where sufficient area exists to provide a safe considerations. weld joint in accordance with accepted standard aircraft manu,facturing procedures. 2.1.4 Fasteners Threaded fasteners shall be secured

used at pivot joints shall be such that the movement produced

2.1.5 All seats shall be equipped with the infinite position seat back reclined lock. The maximum recline shall be capable of being restricted to specific positions between full up-right and fullreclined for configuration purposes. Means shall be provided to manually lock-out the reclined mechanism in the up-right position in case of inflight failure of the mechanism. A manual over;ride feature shall be incorporated to manually position the seat back to the vertical poslThe mounting of the recline locks shall be such that the fastetion from any recline angle. ners attaching it shall not loosen or back out in service. All recline angles shall be measured from the lumbar support reference line in the back support in relation to the vertical. 2.1.6 Armrests - Where armrests are of the ' fold up ' type, a friction device shall be incorporated into it to hold the armrest in the `up position'. A hinge point and the down stops for these armrests shall Fe designed to preclude pinching passenger or his clothing. 2.1.7 Ash receivers - Ash receivers, if installed on seat assembly, shall be provided one for A snuffer shall be provided inside the ash tray cup. Receivers shall each passenger place. be designed to preclude in either the open or closed position. The function of the receiver lid shall be readily apparent to the passenger. A detent shall be provided in the aah receiver
Adqpted 28 October, 1980 I @ ?ulerch 1981, ISI

.

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

.,

IS : 9624

- 1980
a

well to prcjvent inadvertent dislodgement during the turbulance. Ash receivers shall incorporate pouch to prevent the contents spilling out in the ' up position ' of the fold-up armrests.

2.1.8 Integral food tray tables ( when provided j - Each seat shall be equipped with a folding self-contained food tray table. The table, if -ieat back mounted, shall stow flush with seat back. The table shall function independently of the seat back in any reclined position and shall allow full utilization of the tray table while the seat back i..s in fully reclined position. 2.1.9 Underseat baggage restraint - Each seat shall be equipped with a baggage restraint device -mounted aft of the seat nose to prevent carry-on articles stowed under the seat from sliding forward or sidewards. It shall effectively restrain articles whose~minimum dimensions are 75x 300x 425 mm and weight of 9 kg. The device shall permit thorough and easy cleaning under seats. The device shall be readily removable without special tools. The device shall not interfere with life jacket stowage. 2.1.10 Floatation means - On all seat assemblies meant for over-water operations prpvision shall be made for installation of a ' life jacket ' in an easily accessible and visible location for each seat position, unless seat bottom cushions by themselves qualify as floatation devices. 3. General 3.1 Design 3.1 .l Genera/ - The seat shall be so designed that in any of its adjustable positions and when installed facing in specified direction or directions, it shall provide protection for the occupant. It is also recommended that the seats should be designed with a view to absorb as much energy as possible before failure in crash. 3.1.1.1 Accommodation for parachutes - Type 2 seats shall be designed to accommodate passenger wearing seat type parachutes. However, Type 2 seats designed specifically for normal cateao:y aircraft need not comply with this requirement, but shall be identified in the market required in 3.3 as ` For Normal Category Aircraft Only '. 3.1.1.2Aft facing seats - The seat back heights shall be sufficient to provide 925 mm support for the occupant as measured from the point of maximum seat cushion depression to the top of the seat back. This dimension may be determined with the seat Statically subjected to the loads specified in Table 1. Padding for the back of the head should prevent ` bottoming ' on the seat structure unless this structure is designed to absorb the remaining energy. 3.1.2 Strength - All seats and berths intended for single occupancy shall be designed for the ultimate acceleration factors specified in Table 1. The load shall be considered acting separately and shall be based on a passenger weight of 77'5 kg for Type 1 seat and 86'5 including parachute for Type 2 seats. The weight of the seat or berth times the appropriate acceleration factor shall be added to obtain test loads specified in 3.4.1. For seats intended for multiple occupancy, the loads shall be increased accordingly. Ultimate loads are 1'5 times the limit loads. Requirements

..~

TABLE

1

ULTIMATE

ACCELERATION

FACTORS

( Clauses Load Direction Forward Sideward Upward Downwardt Aitward

3.1.1.2, 3.1.2, 3.1.3 and 3.4.1 Type gg 1

)
Type 99 2*

39
2g 6g 1'5 g

39
39 7g

Note - Throughout this specification, ' forward `, ` sideward `, ` upward ' and ' downward ' are used relative!y to ths airplane and not to the seat. `Regulatory authority requires use of parachute in ' Utility Category Aircraft ' operated in acrobatic flight. tThe reason for the downloads exceeding those prescribed in the emergency landing condition of th3 a33lic141? regulatory authority requirements is to provide for the reduced weight~gust-load-factor or special landing raquiraSn3atr which in some cases may be greater than the emergency landing loads.

2

IS : 9624 - 1980T
3.:.2.1 In addition to the tests in 3.1.2, the seats should for secondary structure : Seat Backs Aft Side
Amrests

be tested to the following

ultimate

loads

15 g ultimate, l-5 g ultimate,

267 mm from seat base 267 mm from seat base

Outer

Down 90 kg ultimate Side 30 kg ultimate

-Note

-

All armrests

loads to be applied

at 150 mm from armrest

free end.

Food Table Down Stewardess Step Down Baggage Restraint Forward forward where N is the number of the occupants in seat assembly. vertical position located located load load 61 N kg in conjunction with 9 g 115 kg ultimate 60 kg ultimate uniformly distributed

( see 3.1.2 ) uniformly

distributed.

Back Rests Loads - The back rest of rearward facing seats when in the most shall withstand the following airplane forward load supplied separately.

over the seat back with the centre of gravity Type 1 (Shaft ) Seats - 697 5 kg distributed at 267 mm up from the base of the seat back as described in 34.2. over the seat back with the centre Type 2 (Shaft ) Seats - 779'5 kg distributed at 267 mm up from the base of the seat back as described under 3.4.2. of gravity,

3.1.2.2 Casting factors - If castings are used in the construction of the seat the casting shall have a factor of safety of 2.0 where only visual inspection is employed except that it need not exceed A safety factor of 1.25 is satisfactory if the casting 125 with respect to bearing stresses. is substantiated by testing at least 3 samples and ~if visual and radiographic inspection is employed on all production castings to that they are at least equivalent to the test specimens. The samples shall withstand ultimate loads multiplied by the 1'25 factor and the limit loads multiplied by Diecasting shall not be used in the the factor of 1.15. These loads should be applied separately. primary structure of the seat without 100 percent radiographic inspection. Casting factors other than those specified above shall be acceptable if they are found to be appropriately related to tests and to inspection procedures. positions, when 3.1.2.3 Ultimate toad strength - The seat or berth in any of its adjustable installed facing in a specified direction or directions and when occupied by maximum number of occupant shall be capable of withstanding ultimate loads without failure for at least 3 seconds. 3.1.2.4 Limit load strength - The seat or berth in any of its adjustable. position shall be capable of withstanding the limit loads without suffering deterimental permanent deformation. At all loads up to the limit loads the deformation shall not be such as to prevent the seat fulfilling its proper function or such as might trap or injure the occupant or to interfere with the safe operation of the airplane. Note - Thislimit
condition. load requirement is not applicableto the forward or the 3 g side loading since Tt is an emergency

of the seat or 3.1.3 Attachments - For Type 1 and Type 2 seats and ~berths the strength berth attachments to the airplane structure and safety belt or shoulder harness attachments to the seat or structure shall be 1'33 times the ultimate loads specified in Table 1 except that the down load need not be considered for the safety belt or shoulder harness attachments. When 3

IS :9624 - 1980
anchorages for safety belts are provided, they should be of a type which of the belt or fitting. For berth belt attachments the factor shall be 1'15. shall permit self aligning

3.1.4 Projections - The surfaces of the seats shall be free from sharp edges or projections which Projections, sharp corners and other may chafe the safety belts or the shoulder harness webbing. hazardous features against which the seat occupant may be thrown during a crash shalt be avoided as far as possible. Any unavoidable features of this nature shall be padded to Prevent serious head, neck or chest injury to the occupants. 3J Safety Considerations shall be designed to fold forward approximately The fold forward force shall be 13'5f2'25 kg. 90" from upright to

X2.1 The seat backs within armrest periphery,

3.2.2 Food tables ( if used ) shall fold and be positioned in the seat back `and shall be Table legs shall be shaped and/ constructed to absorb energy in the event of a head strike. or rounded and padded as much as possible and should be designed to break without leaving Any complete failure should be down near dangerous spears attached to the seat in a crash. the pivot point. The latch 3.2.3 The table latch shall be recessed to prevent head injury. to Prevent dislodgment of the table during a survivable crash condition. 3.2.4 The head injury. aft end of armrests shall be padded or so shaped and will be strong enough

softened

as to

preclude

3.2.5 The seat bottom might Penetrate the cushion 3.2.6 All to occupant

structure shall be designed during vertical movement. shall be free of

to

eliminate

any

protrusions

which

areas of passenger contact or damage to clothing, Each seat name; or name; or berth shall

projections

which

might

Cause

injury

3.3 Marking information :

be legibly

and permanently

marked

with the

following

Manufacturers' a>

b) cl d)

Model

number

Type of seat; Seat and facing direction ( that is, `forward', and `aft', `sideward' or `swivel' );

e) Serial number and date of manufacture;
f) Number of this standard.

3.4 Qualification Test ( Prototype Seats ) a) that the seats or -berths permanent deformation;

Tests

shall be conducted of supporting shall the

as necessary limit loads

to demonstrate: deterimentat with the the

are capable

without

b) that at all loads up to limit loads, the deformation safe operation of aircraft; and

be such as not to interfere for at least three

c) that the structure is capable of supporting, without failure ultimate loads specified herein when applied separately.

seconds

If it can be shown that failure of an armrest~on a seat assembly does not reduce the degree of safety afforded to the occupant such failure may not be a cause for rejection. 3.4.1 Test loads The test load ( TL ) shall W)kg be calculated using the following formula :

TL =1*2*F(77,5N+

*A fector included to allow for the fact that a limited number of seats would be tested. Its value 1s equal to 1'2 when one seat is tested. This factor may be reduced suitably when more than one seat Is to be tested.

4

IS :9624 - 1980
where Tf = test load in kg, F = appropriate design acceleration factor as given in Table N = number of occupants for which a seat is designed, W = weight of the fully upholstered seat in kg.
Example

1,

: Fbr a 9 g forward ( 77'5x1

loading

at a 9 kg single

occupancy

seat, test load is :

TL = 1-2x9 3.4.1.1 or welded absorption

+ 9) = 934 kg

If local ultimate failure occurs before general failure ( that is, local failure of a rivet lug joint before considerable distortion of the seat structure has provided some energy , ) then that failure shall not occur at a load corresponding to less than 12 g.

3.4.2 Detailed qualification test requirements - The seat berth shall be loaded in tests such that the loads imposed on the seat or berth by the occupant(s) in conjunction with the safety belt or belts and their attachments are accurately simulated by means of a block or frame or dummy which is restrained in the seat or berth by belt or belts attached to their fittings. The tests may be conducted in a jig simulating installation conditions. The ultimate loads, when applied separately shall serve to simulate the loads imposed by the occupant.
Load Forward Facing Seat Rearward Facing Seat

Down load Side load*

Evenly over seat bottom 267 mm from base block and about 215 mm forward from the back of block do do

Evenly over seat bottom 267 mm up from base of block and about 215 mm forward from the back of `block do do

Up load* Forward

3.4.2.1 The simplified

refined or accordingly,

body block shown in Fig. 1 is satisfactory for test purposes. It may be modified if desired. However, the application of all test loads should be modified if necessary.

A P

SECTION

AA
All dimensions FIG. 1 In millimetres. BLOCK TEST

*These dimensions for the location of load application assume that the seat sand back cush'on are in place and that the seat cushion is compressed 50 mm. If cushixm are removed for the test or if the seat cushion compression varies from 50 mm, the location for applying the load shall be changed accordingly.

5

IS

:

9624

-

4980 adjustable

3.4.2.2. When testing for a particular load condition of a vertically or horizontally seat, the most critical seat position associated with that load shall be used for the test.

3.4.2.3 Where the safety belt or belts or harness are not attached to the seat or berth structure the seat or berth shall be tested for loads which would be imposed on such installation. 3.5 Accaprancs Tests ( Production Seats )

35.1 Examination of production - Each seat shall be carefully examined to determine conformance to this standard and to the manufacturer's drawings with respect to materials, workmanship, design, standard parts, protective treatment, adjustments, locking mechanisms,`dimensions, finish, markings and general acceptability. 3.5.2 Sample size

3.5.2.1 One seat out of first 50 production seats drawn at random, shall be tested to 9 g forward Subsequently one seat out of 50 production seats ultimate load test and interchangeability test. selected at random shall be subjected to proof load and interchangeability tests. 3.5.2.2 Interchangeability nent parts and the complete sample parts. 3.512.3 subjeciing Conformance to the requirements for interchangeability of composeat assembly shatl be determined by means of suitable jigs and

Proof load - Conformance the seat to the proof load. load shall

to

the

strength

requirements

shall

be

determined

by

The proof

be = 2/3 F ( 77'5 N + W) kg

Where F, IV, Wshall be as defined in 3.4.1. No part of the seat shall show a permanent set as a result of proof tests. One of the first production seats shall be taken as a test specimen and shall be ultimate load test. Ultimate forward test load subjected to 9 g forward equal to F ( 77'5 N I- W ) kg. Failure of any seat to pass the sampling tests shall be cause for the rejection If in the opinion of the inspecting authority such failure is attributable lot represetited. workmanship or other defects not Fkely to occur throughout the lot, three additional seats Failure of any one of these additional seats shall at random from the lot may be tested. for final rejection of the entire lot.represented. 0 of entire to faulty selected be cause

EXPLANATORY
In the preparation publications : of this standard, considerable

NOTE
assistance has been derived Federal Civil from th3 Aviation Aviation

following

US Department T.S.O. -C 39 `Aircrafts seats and berths'. Administration, Washington 25 D.C., USA. Speci-fcation Authority, No. 3 Issue 2, Tests Board of Trade, UK. for seats with safety

of Commerce, belts attached,

6

Sharda

Enterprises,

New Delhi

India

