( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS I 7318 (Part 1) - 1974 (~supersodias IS : 1181-1967)

Indian Standard
APPROVAL TESTS FOR WELDERS WHEN WELDJNG PROCEDURE APPROVAL IS NOT REQUIRED
PART I FUSION WELDING OF STEEL

Welding General Sectional Committee, SbfDC 14
Chairman SHRIR. GHOSH Repesenting Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta

Members SHR~ J. K.
hiLUWALU SHRI M. M. GHOSH

Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta (Alternate)
National Test House, Calcutta Binny Ltd, Madras Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam Braithwaite & Co (India) Ltd, Calcutta National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), Jamshedpur Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute (CSIR) , Durgapur

SHRI N. C. BAGCHI SHRI B. C. BISWA~ (Alterwte) pH;`,;.$p
SHRI S. BALASUFIRAHUNYAM SHRI K. BALMANOHAR

.

.

SHRSS. P. DA~~UPTA

SHRI B. SEN (Alternate) DIRECTOR RESEARCH AND DESIGN, Public Works Department, Government of Haryan?, Chandigarh B & R BRANCH,CHANDIQARH EXECUTIVEENGINEER (ELECTRICAL), Central Publrc Works Department, New Delhi ELECTRICAL DIVISION No. 1, NEW DELHI EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (ELECTRICAL), CENTRAL ELECTRICAL DIVISION No. 1, CALCUTTA(Akrnatc) SHRI H. D. GOVINDARAJ Philips India Ltd, Bombay DR J. VAID (Al&&) SHRI S. K. HARI Malik Electricals Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. K. SINHA (Alternate) DR J. JAIN Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur PROF A. P. JAMBULINGAM Indian Society for Technical Education, New Delhi

(Contintudon psgc 2) Q Copyright 1974
This publication reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

' INDIAN STANDARDS INS-I-ITUTION is protected under the Indian Copyright ACZ( XJ.V of 1957 ) and

is t 7318(Para I) - 1974
(Cmfinucdfrom Pogr 1) MCmhS R@resenlbIg Ministry of Railways JOINT Dmxcroa (M&C), RDSO, LUulNOW CHEMIST AND METALLURGIST. ICF, Pa-ur) (Allcmals I) ICF, P~~~AAUIU~ (Altmak Stisu M. V. D. KAl#ATH `SuatM.T.I(ANILE
PRODUCTION ENOINEER (SHELL),

II)

SHRI S. N. Brsu (Al&m&) Bharat Heavy Plater& Vessels Ltd. Visakhapatnam G. S. KODIICAL SHRIA. P. SI~YAL (Alkmak) SHRIA. C. MUKHERJEE Power Cables Pvt Ltd, Bombay Snru A. M. LoTHE (Alkmk) SHRXj.V. NAD-NI Advani-Oerlikon Private Ltd, Bombay (Alkmak) SHRI P. S. VESWANATH SHRIK. M. Porx Walchandnagar Industries, Walchandnagar SHRI G. D. APTB (Afkrnok) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHFUH. L. pruSri~Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar SHRIJ. R. PllABHBR Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters Smlr s. s. RAOHAVAN SHRI K. S. HANK (Alkmak) Ministry of Defcnce (DGI) SHIU P. B. RAO Central Boilers Board, New Delhi Srim S. C. ROY Miig & Allied Machinery Corpn, Durgapur &tat V. V. SATktYANAILAYANA SHRI S. K. BANBRJ~ (Almn&) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI S. K. SENOUPTA SHRI V. V. KAvrswm IAlkmaki ' ' Direc~to;t;epl of Technical Development, Srrm H. K. SI&UlbIA
&RI

Indian Engineering Associition, Calcutta Directorate General of Su plies & Disposals (Inspection Wing), New g elhi

SIIRI K. c. SIIAIWA (AI&rack) Sum A. Samtv~u SHRI

Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiichiipalli

Smu R. K. SRI~WAVA Mukand Iron and Steel Works Ltd, Bombay Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta SIIRX V. R. SUBRAYANIAN ' SHIU T. C. ACHM$A (Afkrnak~ SmuS. S&DARESAN . . Directorate General of Employment & Training,

B.PATMBHIRAMAN (Alkmak)

$JF'EIlINTENDINO tiOINEBR, tiNYRAL Public Works Department, Government of Tamil
MxoxiANIoAL CmcLa, MAnRAs Sriat C. R. RAMA RAO, Diiector (Strut & Met) Nadu, Madras Director General, IS1 (&&ic _ &r&ry ^ __ Member)

New Delhi

Deputy Director (Strut & Met), IS1 Subcommittee for

SHRI M. S. NAOARAJ

Training and Testing of Welders; Handbooks and Other Publications, SMDC 14:4
Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta Indian Institute of Technology, Madras Indian Society for Technical Education. New Delhi . Power Cab& Pvt Ltd, Bombay Advani-Ocrlikon Private Ltd, Bombay

CO?WtIt7 SHRI s. v. sAbmAMuRTI SIIRI J. K. AHLVWALU SHRI GAJENDER SINQII

Members

PIZOY A. P. 1AMINJLINoAM SHRI A. C. "MUICHERJEE SHRI S. V. NADYAJLNI

2

IS : 7318(Part I) - 1974

Indian Standard
APPROVAL TESTS FOR WELDERS WHEN WELDING PRIOCEDURE APPROVAL IS NOT REQUIRED
PART I PUSION WELDING OF STEEL

0.

FOREWORD

O.,l This Indian Standard (Part I) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 March 1974, after the draft finalized by the Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard is the fitst of a series of Indian Standards on the approval testing of welders and welding procedures, the latter having a ~bearing on the former for certain applications. This link has been used as a means of arranging the series of sta?dards into: a) welder approval when the welding procedure is not required to be. approved (for either technic%1 or contract reasdns}, b) approval testing of welding procedures, and c) welder approval when welding p_rocedure approval is required. The simple approval of welders on sheet, plate and pipe* when no welding procedure approval. is required is covered by this standard .and as such it supersedes IS : 1181-1967t. It is assumed, however, that persons being tested according to this standard have already been trained and tested as welders in accordance with the procedure specified in IS : 817-1966:. 0.3 To complete the philosophy behind this series of standards, it is considered useful to give details of the practices relating to welding procedure approval even though they are not strictly relevant to this standard. Depending upon the emphasis placed on quality control in the production of welded components, so may the approval ~ofwelding procedures be administered in several ways, namely: a) each individual contractor (or sub-contractor) should prove by actual test pieces every weld form he wishes to use, in every thickness and material; or
*In this standard the word `pipe', alone or in combination, is used to mea* `pipe' or `tube' or `circular structural hollow section', although these terms are often used for different

categories of product by different industries. tQualifying tests for metal-arc welders (engaged in welding structures other -than pipes) (Jirst rcvlion) . SCode of practice for training and testing of metal arc welders (reuiscd).

3

IS I 7318 (Part I) - 1974
each individual contractor (or sub-contractor) should prove by actual test pieces_, a set of welds representathe on a group basis, of all the various thicknesses and materials to be used in production; or cl each individual contractor (or sub-contractor) need not make procedure test pieces provided he can prove by authentic documentation of an independent nature that he has previously welded the type of joint and material in question giving satisfactory service behaviour; or d) a contractor need not make procedure `test pieces provided it is established that exactly similar joints have been welded in that country using the same materials and methods; or 4 provided it can be shown bn an international basis, that a procedure has been proved by independent tests or service, experience, a contractor need not weld any test pieces to that particular procedure. At the present time, it is considered that (a) and (b) above represent the most practical basis for procedure approval, bearing in mind that the tests, once certified, need never be repeated unless there is a change in certain varhbles.

b)

0.4 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from BS 4872: Part 1: 1972 `Specification for approval testing of welders when welding procedure approval is not required : Part 1 Fusion welding of steel' issued by British Standards Institution. -03 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE
to be engaged on the manual or semi-automatic fusion welding of those structural or austenitic steel fabrications for which the welding procedure does not itself have to be approved.
-This link to the non-mandatory approval of the welding procedure will result NOTE in the use of this standard becoming defined more closely in respect of the particular fabrication, for example, with regard to material, thickness, joint configuration.

1.1 This standard specifies requirements for the approval testing of welders

I.2 Thisstandard is applicable to the following manual-and semi-automatic
welding processes : a) Manual-metal-arc, b) Inert-gas tungsten arc (TIG),

*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revircd).

4

I8 : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 c) Gas-metal arc (MIG or CO,), d) Submerged-arc, land e) Gas welding.
2. INFORMATION TO BE GWEN TO THE WELDER

2.1 The welder shall be provided with written instructions and information onhow to make his test welds. Details of the following shall be given: a) Parent metal ; b) Welding process or combination of welding process and polarity; c) Welding consumables (electrode or filler material specification, type of flux, shieldinggas composition) ; d) Welding position ; e) Metal thickness and, for pipe, the diameter; f) Joint type; and g) Weld dimensions required. 3. TEST WELDS*

3.1 General - The welder shall make the test weld, or welds, selected from the following according to which is most representative of the type of work on which he will be employed. The welder shall make a further test weld, or welds, whenever the work on which he will be employed changes s&icientlyin respect of the items listed in 2 to make the test weld, or welds, on which he has already obtained approval no longer representative of the new work. 3.1.1 Tack welds shall be made from the side to be welded. No other method of restraint shall be used. Distortion or misalignment caused by tacking may be corrected before the test weld is made. The test piece shall be so positioned that the work bench or any other material does not act as backing. 3.13 Tack welds shall be rounded before depositing the test weld unless they conform to the same requirements as for final welds. The extremities of tack welds shall be dressed by grinding or chipping to facilitate proper fusion when they are incorporated in the final weld. 3.2 Test 1 -B&t Weld-in Sheet

3.2.1 A~plicabili~ of Test and Test Cbndifions - The applicability of this test shall be a$ follows provided that the test conditions listed have been met.
*The test welds given in thii standard permit the use of whatcvcr siza of nut&al arc readily availabic. The type( of joint, however. are not ncc~riiy tbc #me 1~ those that are met in practice.

5

IS s 7918(Part I)`- 1974
Applicability of Test
Parent metal, weldingprocess and welding consumables As to be used for work on which welder will be employed and to bespecified in accordance with 2

Only material, welding pro-

cess and welding consumables of types used for the test except that approval using a basic coated electrode includes approval for a rutile covered electrode

Flat (F) VerticaLtIp (V)

Flat (F) Flat and vertical& (F and V)

WeMing position*

Vertical~up and horiaontalvertical (V and H) (2 test welds) Vertical-up and overhead V vtnt) &\ test welds) (P, !I , Vertical-down (D)

Flat, hoiizontal-vertical and vertical-up (F, H and V) Flat, horizontal-vertical, vertical-up and overhead (F, H, V and 0)

I Verticaldown I o-75 f to 1.5 t

(D)

i-llicbeas, t
Joint type

3.mm Max
Square butt as in Fig. I

Any butt weld in sheet in shove thickness range

t=3mm MAX

150mm

1
FIG. 1 6

1

TESTPIECE FOR BUTT WELD IN SHEET

iIf a combination of test positions other fhan those specified is used, the welder is approved only for that combination.

I3 t 7318 (Part I) - 1974 and 3.2.2 De@s&~ of lest Weld-The test weld shall be -stop manual restarted within the central 50 mm of its length. In the case o p"d metal-arc welding the restart shall be made with a fresh electrode. A sealing run on the reverse side is not permitted. 3.3 Test 2 - Butt Weld One Side) in Plate (Without ticking, Welded &om

3.3.1 Applicabili~ of Test and Test Conditions-The applicability of this test shall be as given below provided that the test conditions listed have . been met.

Test Condifions Parent metal, weldingproccss and welding conrumablcs As to be used for work on which welder will be employed and to be specified in accordance with 2 F

ApprLabitiQ of -rod
3nly material, welding pr+ ccss and welding consumables of types used lbr the test F

fi

vt
Welding position* V and H (2 test welds) V and 0 (2 test welds) D At least 6 mm, 12 mm but less than

FandV
F,HandV F, H, V and 0 D

Thickness,

I

12 mm or thicker Joint type Single-V butt as in Fig. 2:

8mmandttlicka

hokintbcmainpip

*ICa combination oftat positions other than those specified is used, the welder is approved only for that combination. tFor MlG welding the root runmay be dcpositcd in the vertical-down position. ~Thc~dimcnsions of the weld preparations arc typical for manual metalwelding in the !;dytton but for other processes or positions it may be necessary for modifications to k . In all cases thcdctailsshah bcrccordcd (ur2and Appendix B).

7

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 33.2 Depotition of T&t Weld - Each run of the test weld shall be stopped and restarted within the central 50 mm of its length. In the case of manual
A sealing run on the reverse side is not permitted.

metal-arc welding the restarts shall be made with fresh electrodes.

NOTE -See 3.3.1 far plate thickncs 9'.

FIG. 2 TEST PIECE FOR BUTT WELD IN PLATE (WITHOUT BACKING,
WELDED FROMONE SIDE)

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 3.4 Test 3 - Butt Weld in Plate (Welded from Both Sides) 3.4.1 A#&cability of Test and Test Conditions - The applicability of thl. test shall be as follows provided that the test conditions listed have been

Test Conditions Parent metal, welding processand welding consumables LS to be used for work on which welder will be employed and to be specified in accordance with 2

Applicobili~

of Test

Inly material, welding process and welding consumables of types used for the test, except that ap roval using a basic cover ecIrelectrode includes approval for a rutile covered electrode

Fit a Vt Welding position*

side

Second side 0 Vt F, 0 and H VandF V, H and F 3 ! N V, 0, F and H

ut
K Vt 0

vt
H Vt F ID

_~~~
D

1

D 0*75rto1~51 8 mm and thicker For plate in above thickness ranges : a) Any double side butt weld preparation b) Any single sided butt weld preparation welded from both sides with back gouging

Thickness, t

At least 6 mm, but less than 12 mm 12 mm or thicker

Joint type

Double-V butt as in Fig. 3$

*If a combination of test positions other than those specified is used, the welder is approved only for that combination. tFor MIG welding the root Nn may be deposited in the verticaldown position. $The dimensions of the weld preparation are typical for manual metal-arc welding in the fiat and overhead positions, but for other processes or positions it may be necessary for modifications to be made. In all cases the details shall be recorded (see 2 and Appendix B).

9

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 3.4.2 Deposition of Tesl Weld - Each run of the test weld shall be stopped and restarted lvithin the ceritral 50 mm of its length. In the case of manual metal-arc welding the restarts shall-be made with fresh electrodes.
The back of the first run shall be gouged out by suitable means to clean sound metal before welding is started on the gouged out side.

60�- 65O m ,2+,.5

* I
FIG. 3

it WELD TO BE STOPPED AND RESTARTED WITHIN CENTRAL 50mft1

i
225

NOTE. - See 3.4.1 for plate thickness `1'. Al1 dimrrlsiorls iri millimctrcs. TEST PIECE FOR BuI?. WELD IK PLATE (WELDED FROM BOTH SIDES)

10

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 3.5 Test 4 Butt Weld in Plate (wit% Backing)

3.5.1 Applicability of Test and Test Conditions-The applicability of this test shall be as follows provided that the test conditions listed heve been met.
Test Conditions Parent metal, welding process and welding consumables As to be used for work on which welder will be employed and to be specified in accordance with 2 Only material, welding proccss and welding consumables of types used for the test, except that approval using a basic covered electrode includes approval for a rutile covered electrode F V and F V, H and F V, 0, H and F D 0.75 t to 1.5 t

-

F'

vt
Welding position* Vt and H (2 test welds) Vt and 0 (2 D At least 6 mm, but less than 12 mm 12.mm or thicker Joint type Single-V butt, with backing, as in Fig. 41

test welds)

Thickness, t

8 mm and thicker Any single sided butt weld preparation with backing in plate in above thickness ranges

3.53 Deposition of Test Weld - Each run of the test weld shall be stopped and restarted within the central 50 mm of its length. In the case of manual metal-arc welding the restarts shall be made with fresh electrodes.
*If a combination of test positions other than those specified is used, the welder is approved only for that combination. tFor MIG welding the root run may be deposited in the vertical-down position. ZThe dimensions of the weld preparation are typical for manual metal-arc welding in the E;dytton but for other processes or positions it may be necessary for modifications to be . In all cases the details shall be recorded (see 2 and Appendix B).

11

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974

1*2t
* I
L
I

* 1
225

I
---+

b---loo
NOTE-See

4

l----100

I-

i

35.1 for plate thickness 9'.

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 4 TEST PIECE FOR BUTT WELD IN PLATE (WITH BACKING)

12

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 3.6 Test 5 Fillet Weld in Sheet

3.6.1 Ajplicability of Test and Test Conditions - The applicability of this test shall be as given below provided that the test conditions listed have been met.
Test

Coaditions

Applicability of Test
Only material, welding process and welding consumables of types used for the test except that ap roval using a basic covere B electrode includes approval for a rutile covered electrode FandV F, H and V F,HandO F,H,VandO

Parent metal, welding process and welding consumables

As to be used for work on which welder will be employed and to be specified in accordance with 2

H

v
Welding position* 0 VandO (2 test welds) D Thickness, t Joint type 3 mm, Max 7 fillet as in Fig. 5

D O-75 t to l-5 t Any fillet weld in sheet in above thickness range

3.6.2 Deposition of Test Weld - The test weld shall be made in a single run on only one side of the joint, with equal leg lengths of about 4 mm. The weld shall be stopped and restarted at about 75 mm from one end. In the case of manual metal-arc welding the restart shall be made with a fresh electrode.

*If a combination of test positions other than those specified is used, the welder is approved only for that combination.

13

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974

WELD TO BE STOPPED AND RESTARTED, ABOUT 75mm FROM END

225 _____-__I

CUTTING

LINES FOR

--&-t

=3 MAX

OF FRACfURe

WEt.0

THIS SlDE

All dimensions

in millimeues.

FIG. 5

TEST PIECE FOR FILLET \VELD IN SHEET

14

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 3.7 Test 4 Fillet Weld in Plate

3,7.1 Ap,blicability of Test and Test Conditiom - The applicability of this test shall he as given below provided that the test conditions listed have been met.
Test Conditions Abbhbility of' Tut

Parent metal, welding process and welding consumables

AsKto be used for work on which welder will bc employed and to be specified in accordancr with 2

Only material, welding process and welding consumables of types usrd for the test except that approval using a basic covered clectrodc includes approval for a rutile covered electrode

II ~..__

F and H

vt
Welding position* 0

F, H and V

F, H and 0

Vt and 0 (2 test welds)

F, H, V and 0 D

D

Thickness,

1

At least 6 mm, 12 mm

but less than

o-75 f to 1.5 t

12 mm or thicker

8 mm and thicker

Joint type

I joint as in Fig. 6

Any fillet weld in plate above thickness ranges

in

3.7.2 Deposition of Tes! Weld-The test weld shall be made with at least three runs on only one side of the joint, with equal final leg lengths corresponding to about the thickness t. Each run shall be stopped and restarted at about 75 mm from one and the same end. In the case of manual metal-arc welding the restarts shall be made with fresh electrodes. *If a combination of test positionsother only for that combination.
than those specified is used, the welder isapproved position.

tFor MIG welding the root run may bc deposited in the vertical-down 1`5

P : 7318 (Part II- 1974

225

!
DIRECTION FRACTURE

WELD TO BE STOPPED AN0 RESTARTED AEOUT 75mm FROM EN0

CUTTING LINES FOR SPECtMENS

OF FORCE

SIDE

NOTE

-

See 3.7.1

for plate thickness `1'. All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 6 TEST PIECE FOR FILLET WELD IN PLATE

16

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 3.8 Test 7 - Butt Weld in Pipe (Without Backing) 3.8.1 Apjhkability of Test and Test Conditions - The applicability of this test shall bz as given below provided that the test conditions listed have been met.
Test Condihms Parent metal, process and consumables welding welding As to be used for work on which welder will be employed and to be specified in accordance with 2 AppliGaaility of Test Only material, welding process and welding rxnsumables of types used for the test except that approval using a basic covered electrode includes approval for a rutile covered electrode F F,VandO _.$ .z F, V and 0 F and H

Axis horizontal-pipe tating

ro-

Axis horizontal-pipe fixed (vertical-upt) 3 Position* :Z g .& Axis horizontal-pipe f&ed @e&al-down) A& vertical

Ax; inclined pipe fixed upt)

& S _ ;ij at r15"- `i; (vertical$

F, H, V and 0

Axii hc%ontal-pipe fixed (vertical-up?) and axis vertical (2 test welds) Thickness. t Less than 20 mm 1 20 mm or thicker Dieter, D Less than 165 mm: 165 mm or larger Joint type Single - V butt as in Fig. 75 o-75 t

to 1.5 t

15 mm and thicker 0.50 to l-5 D 80 mm &nd larger For pipe in above thicknear and dnuneter rangen: a) Any butt weld in ipe with or without bat fl ng b) Any branch joint with a hole in the main pipe

*If a combination of test pipe positions other ~than those specified is used, the welder is approved for the welding positions derived only from that combination. $For MIG welding, the root run in a multi-run weld or a single run weld for 9 thin pipe may be deposited in the vertical-down position. In the case of the single run weld approval would then be for the vertical-down position. $For MIG welding the test pipe diameter shall be at least 100 mm. SThe dimensions of the weld preparation are typical for manual metal-arc welding, but for other process it may be necessary for modifications to be made. In all cases the details shall be recorded (see 2 and Appendix B).

17

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974

NOTE-~

3.M for dimensions`t' and `D'.
All dimensionsin millimetres.

FIG.

7 TEST PIECE FOR BUTT WELD IN PIPE (WITHOUT BACICING)

18

IS : 7318~(Part
3.9

I) - 1974

Test 8 -

Batt Weld in Pipe (with Backing)
applicability of this test shalt listed have been met.
A#licabi&y Test

3.9.1 Applicability of Test Cotlditions - The be as follows provided that the test conditions
Test Conltions Parrnt metal, weldingprocess and welding consumables

is to be used for work on which welder will be employcd and to be I ified in accordance with f=

-1Lxii
1

Only matrrial, welding proccss and welding consumable of types used for the test, except that approval using a basic covered clectrade includes approval for a rutilc covered electrode F 0, V and F

horizontal-pipe

rotating fixed fixed

&is horiaontal-pipe (vertical-upt)

1

his horizontal-pipe (vertical-down) Axis vertiad Axis inclined at fixed (vertical-upt)

F, D and 0 H?nd F

Position*

45'-pipe

0, V, H and F

Axis horizor%-pipe fixed (vertical-up?) and axis vertical (2 tests welds) Thickness, L Less than 20 mm 20 mm or thicker Less than 165 mm: 165 mm or larger -Joint type Single-V butt with as in Fig. 84 backing, Any butt weld in pi backing in above tEck%! _ and diameter ranges 0.751tol.51 15 mm and thirkcr O-5 D to I.5 D $0 mm and larger

Outside diameter dimension, D (for rc: tangular hollow section D is dimension of smal Icr side)

I

llf a combination of test pipe positions other than those specified is used, the wcldrr is approved for the welding positions derived only from that combination. tFor MIC welding, the root run in a multi-run weld or a single run weld for thin pipe may be d+ositcd in the vertical-down position. In the case of the single run nr.ld approval would then be for the vertical-down position. ZFor MIG welding the tat ipc diameter shall be at lust 100 mm. $Thc dimensions of the WC d preparation arc typical for manual metal-arc welding but P for other proccsws it may be necessary for modifications to be made. In all cam the dctaib shall be rccordcd (ICC2 and Apncndix B).

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974

NOTE'- Se 3.9.1 for dimensions `t' and `D'. All dimensions in miliimetrcs.

FIG. 8

TESS PIECE FOR BUTT WELD IN PIPE (WITH BACKING)

20

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 3.10 Test 9 - Fillet Weld (Branch Joint) in Pipe 3.10.1 A#dicability of Tqst and Test Condilionc- The applicability of this test shall be as given below provided that the test conditions listed have been met.
Itst Parent metal, welding process and welding consumables CmkiiGons

&hbility

of Test

As to be used for work on which welder will be employed and to be specified in accordance with 2

Only material, welding process and welding consumables of types used for the te+, except that approval usmg a basic covered electrude includes Ps-val "p for a t-utilecovered e ectrode F,HandV

Axis of main and branch horizontal-fixed during weldin but branch turned ~IKO udr 180" (vertical-up?) (s6s ryt 9B

:Z
Position*

2

Axisof main horizontal, axis
of branch vertical-fixed

I _

F,HandO

i%uisofmainandbrancb horizontal-fixed (vertical-upt) 8 3 Axis ofmain and branch hori- $ zontal-iixed (verticaldown) Less than 20 mm

F, H, V and 0

F, H, V and 0

i o-75 t to l-5 1 15 mm and thicker O-5 D to l-5 D

Thickness, t
20 mm or thicker L.esstban 165mmS Diameter, D

I

Joint type

*If a combiition of test pipe positions other than those specified is used, the welder is ed for the welding positions derived only from that combination. "p""For MC wehiing, the root run in a multi-run weld or a single run weld for thin pipe MY be deposited in the verticai-down ptxition. In the case of the single run weld approval would tbcn be for the verticaldown position. $Fw MIG welding the test pipe dsameter shall be at least 100 mm.

21

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 t

I?---rT
I

200mm

I-7"'
' I I I ' I I
_----_-___-__-i-35Omm _--w_-

~I
I

I
I I

L,

__________ =----i _-_e.____---_______ e-4 lo

t

t

SECTION X 4A ) JOINT CONFIGURATION

A .-.-.-._.

em.

_t

. B J

FIRST HALF OF EACH RUN DEPOSITED IN POSITION A RUN COMPLETED IN POSITION B ( B)MAIN AND BRANCH HORIZONTAL, BRANCH TURNED THROUGH 180:
NOTE See3.10.1 for dimensions ol't' and `D'.

FIG. 9

TEST PIECE FOR FILLET WELD (BRASCH JOIST) IN PIPE

22

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974 3.10.2 Deposition of Test Weld - The test weld shall change gradually from a fillet weld at the crotch to a butt weld at the flank. The fillet weld at the crotch shall have equal leg lengths corresponding to about the thickness t or 4 mm whichever is the greater. 4. SUBMISSION OF TEST WELD

4.1 If the welder realizes that for some reason the test weld he has made is likely to fail the subsequent examination and testing, he may withold the submission of the test piece and make a second test weld. If the welder does choose to make a second test weld, it is the second test piece that shall be examined and~tested, the first test piece being scrapped. 5. EXAMINATION AND TESTING

51 Visual Examinn tion - Each test piece shall be -examined visually on completion of welding, and before sectioning for destructive testing. The following points shall be assessed bearing in mind whether full or toe grinding is to be applied to the production work on which the welder will be engaged. 5.1.1 Weld Confour

a) The weld metal shall be properly fused with the parent metal. The weld toes shall blend smoothly with the parent metal. b) Fillet welds shall be of approximately equal leg length and free from overlap at the toes. The leg length dimensions shall be as specified for the test and the throat thickness shall be approximately O-7 times the leg length. c) Butt welds shall show uniform external reinforcement weld metal not exceeding 10 percent of the parent metal thickness. 5.1.2 Undnnrt - Any intermittent undercut shall not exceed 10 percent of the material thickness of 1 mm whichever is the smaller. 5.1.3 Smoothness of Joints Where Welding is Restarted - The stop/start position of each run shall merge smoothly and shall show no pronounced hump or crater in the weld surface. 5.1.4 Penetration in Butt Joints (Without Backing, Welded from One Side only) (see Fig. 10) a) There shall be penetration into the root face but intermittent Jack of penetration to the full depth of the root face is not cause for rejection, provided that it does not extend for a total length of more than 25 percent of the joint length. b) A slight penetration bead may be present, provided that it does not protrude more than 3 mm. 5.1.5 Surface DeJects -The porosity, cavities and trapped weld slag. surfaces shall be free from cracks,

'

23

IS t 7318 (Part 11.1974

(a) ACCEPTABLE

(b) ACCEPTABLE PROVlDEO THAT THE TOTAL LENGTH OF INCOMPLETE PENETRATION DOES NOT EXCEED 25 % OF JOINT LENGTH

(c)

UNACCEPTABLE IRRES?ECTIVE OF LENGTH OF INCOMPLETE PENETRATION BECAUSE OF NO PENETRATION INTO ROOT FACES

(d) UNACCEPTABLE IF PROTRUSION EXCEEDS 3mm

FIG. 10

EXAMPLESOF ACCEPTABLEAND UNACCEPTABLE PENETRATION

5.2 Destructive Tests 5.2.1 7cst Specimens - The test pieces produced in accordance with this standard shall always be tested destructively. The following test specimens are required: Test 1 - One macro-section at the stop/start position Test 2 - One bend test specimen (root or side depending on thickness) Tests 3 and 4 - One macro-section at the stop/start position Tests 5 and 6 - Three fillet weld fracture test specimens, with the end face at the stop/start position used for macro-examination Tests 7 and 8 - Two root bend test specimens Test 9 - Four macro-sections (One at each crotch and flank) 5.2.2 Macro-c.~aminntion -The the material at the welded joint specimen shall be the full and the excess weld metaiand thickness of penetration

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974
bead shall be left intact. The specimen shall contain a length of the joint' of at least 10 mm and shall extend on each side of the weld for a distance that includes the heat affected zone and some parent metal. For Tests 3 and 4 the end face of the fillet weld fracture test specimen at the stop/start position shall be used for macro-examination before the specimen is fractured. The face of the specimen containing the weld cross section shall be prepared, polished and etched using an approved method and etching solution (see Appendix A). The etched face shall be examined visually, in conjunction with a hand lens of magnification not greater than 5 if required. The macro-section shall show good penetration and freedom from significant defects. 5.2.3 Root Bend Test (for Plate less than 10 mm Thick and for Pipe Butt Weld) The specimen shall be a parallel strip cut transversely to the weld, its width being at least 30 mm. The specimen shall be the full thickness of the material at the welded joint and the upper and lower surfaces of the weld shall be dressed flush with the uriginal surface of the material. The edges of the specimen shall be rounded to a radius not exceeding 10 percent of the specimen thickness. The specimen shall be bent through at least 90" over a former ofa diameter eqa to about four times the spec :-err thickness such that the root of the weld is in tension. If the specimen `bends through 90" without failure, slight opening-out (1.6 mm, MUX) at the corners or on the tension surface shall not be cause for rejection. If the specimen fails across the surface in tension, it shall be broken open and assessed in accordance with the requirements of 5.2.6. 5.2.4 Side Bend Test (for Plate at least 10 mm Thick) - The specimen shall be a parallel strip cut transversely to the weld containing a length of the joint of at least 10 mm. The width of the specimen shall be the full thickness of the material at the welded joint and the upper and lower surfaces of the -weld shall be dressed Rush with the original surface of the material. The edges of the specimen shall be rounded to a radius not exceeding 10 percent of the specimen thickness. The specimen shall-be bent through at least 90" over a former of a diameter equal to about four times the specimen thickness such that the cross section of the weld is in tension. If the specimen bends through 90" without failure, slight opening-out (1.6 mm, MUX) at the corners or on the tension surface shall not be cause far rejection. If the specimen fails across the surface in tension, it shall be broken open and assessed in accordance with the requirements of 5.2.6. 5.2.5 Fillet Weld Fracture Test -The test piece shall be cut to give three test specimens of equal length. To ensure fracture in the weld a central saw cut 2 mm deep shall be made along the length of the weld surface. The specimens shall be fractured by bending or by blows applied in the direction indicated in Fig. 5 and 6. 25

IS t 7318 (Part I) - 1974 5.2.6 Assessment of Destructive Tests - The presence of any of the following defects as revealed by, and not due to, destructive testing shall be sufficient cause for rejection unless it can be established that the defects are the result of metallurgical or extraneous causes and are not attributable to the welder's workmanship:

4 b) 4

4 4

Any type of crack. Any lack of fusion, ;xcept that in Test 6 slight lack of root fusion at the flank position shall not be cause for rejection. Slag inclusions and wormholesexceeding 10 mm in length or 3 mm in width. The total length of such defects shall not exceed the thickness of the parent metal except when the distance between imperfections exceeds 6 times the length of the longest single defect in the group. Copper inclusions. Stop/start or general porosity attributable to welder manipulation.

5.3 Repeat Tests - If the test piece fails to meet any of the requirements of 5.1 or 5.2.6, two further test pieces shall be welded and subjected to the same tests. If either of these additional welds does not meet the required standard, the welder shall be regarded as not capable of meeting the requirements of this standard without further training. -6. STATEMENT OF RESULTS

6.1 A statement of the results of assessing each test piece, including repeat tests, shall be made for each welder. The items required under 2 shall be included together with details of any features that would be-i-ejectable by the requirements of 5. If no rejectable features are found, a statement that the test piece made by the particular welder satisfied the requirements of-this standard in respect of that type of test weld shall be signed by the person conducting the test. 6.2 The employer should hold and regularly maintain adequate records of all approval tests for each welder. A typical record sheet is shown in Appendix B.

7. RE-APPROVAL

OF WELDER

7-l The re-approval of a welder shall be required if any of the following apply : a) The welder changes his employer without the transfer of his test records. b) Six months or more have elapsed since the welder undertook any welding process. c) There is some specific reason to question the welder's ability. -26

IS : 7318(PartI)1974 APPENDIX ( Clause 5.2.2 )
SUGGESTED A-Q. GENERAL A-O.1 The following method of preparing etched specimens is suggested for convenience and is in no way intended to be a rigid requirement of this standard. A-l. PREPARATION OF METHOD OF PREPARING ETCHED SPECIMENS

A

SURFACE FOR ETCHING

A-l.1 The surface should be filed with a coarse file until all deep marks are removed. It should then be filed at right angles to the original coarse file marks with a smooth file. The smooth filed surface should be polished down with successively finer grades of waterproof silicon carbide paper,' for example, 280, 320, 400, 500, the direction of polishing being at right angles to the marks made by the previous paper in each case, polishing being continued until the scratches of the previous paper have been removed before proceeding to the next finer grade. This procedure is indicated in order to show the means by which a first-class finish may be obtained. A-2. ETCHING FOR MACRO-E XAMlNATION:

A-2.1 In general for steel a 400-grade finish will be smooth enough for a satisfactory etch ko be obtained .for macro-examination. Suitable etching solutions are as follows: a) For Ferritic Steels: 10 to 15 ml nitric acid (70 percent m/m) (16N) 85 to 90 ml alcohol (industrial spirit)
Nope - Great care should be exercised in the preparation of this solution as the mixing of concentrated nitric acid and alcohol can be extremely dangerous. The acid should be added slowly to the alcohol and the mixture should be constantly stirred. The solution should be stored in a stoppered container to avoid concentration by evaporation.

b) For Austenitic Steels: 40 ml hydrochloric acid (36 percent m/m) (11N) 30 ml nitric acid (70 percent m/m) (16N) 30 ml water

27

IS : 7318 (Part I) - 1974

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.2 ) TYPICAL WELDERAPPROVAL
NOTE -

B
TEST RECORD

One sheet should be completed for each test.

Welder's Name.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Welder's Identity Card No,. . . . . . . _~ ~~~ ~~~ Date of Test .................... Approval Test No ................... Welding process and polarity Parent material: Type ................... Thicknes ............... Diameter (pipe) Welding position ......... Type of joint. ........... Welding consumables: Electrode or filler material specification ........ ............ Type of Pux or electrode covering ........................... Shielding gas composition. ..... Pipe position ................ Weld dimensions required. ....

APPROVAL

TEST RESULTS

(State: Satisfactory, Unsatisfactory or Not Applicable) Visual Examination : Weld contour Undercut Stop/Start Penetration Surface defects Assessment of Destructive Tests: Cracks Lack of fusion Slag inclusions and wormholes Copper and tungsten inclusions Stop/Start porosity Result of test (passed or failed) Employer's certifying signature 28 Date

