атг Ah IS 10613 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


wrgfener — тее h Тете чт afi 
татат этте 
(ат Чтй&т) 


Cycles — Safety and Performance 
Requirements for Bicycles 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 43.150 


© BIS 2023 


STRTS 99% SERT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 SER SITE sit AMT, Ag 18 - 110002 
Nee” МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in ^ www.standardsbis.in 


April 2023 Price Group 19 


Bicycles Sectional Committee, TED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Bicycles Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1983 and revised in 2004 and 2014. This third revision was undertaken on 
the request of the Bicycle Industry Association as a prerequisite for subsequent migration to minimum mandatory 
safety requirements with an aim to develop structured manufacturing, fair trade and safer cyclists’ eco-system. 
This apart, to safeguard the Indian bicycle market from becoming a dumping ground for cheaper/substandard 
bicycles and to make exports globally competitive. 


In this revision, the following significant changes have been made: 


a) Three more categories of bicycles are included namely; Young Adult Bicycles, Mountain Bicycles and 
Racing Bicycles; 

b) Fatigue, static and impact tests for various bicycle and parts like frame, fork, handle, saddle and pedal 
etc. incorporated; and 

c) Higher load and more number of test cycles for high end or fancy bicycles. 


It is expected that compliance of this standard shall ensure that bicycles manufactured will be as safe as is 
practically possible. The tests have been designed to ensure the strength and durability of individual parts as well 
as of the bicycle as a whole, demanding high quality throughout and consideration of safety aspects from the 
design stage onwards. The scope has been limited to safety considerations and has specifically avoided 
standardization of components. 


For the purposes of improving repeatability and reproducibility, and considering the applicability to all types of 
bicycles and the size and influence of the operator, the machine test method reflects today’s state of the art and is 
preferred to the track test method. Unless evidence of improvement of the test track method in the future, take this 
method informative. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Not with standing what is stated in this standard, applicable National, State, Local bodies’ regulations shall apply. 
In case of exports corresponding regulations of exporting countries shall apply. 


The composition of the technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex N. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


CYCLES — SAFETY AND PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR BICYCLES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies safety and performance 
requirements for the design, assembly, and testing of 
bicycles and sub-assemblies of Young Adult 
Bicycles with maximum saddle height ranging 
between 635-750 mm, City and 
Trekking/Roadster/SLR Bicycles, Mountain 
Bicycles and Racing Bicycles that have a maximum 
saddle height of 635 mm or more including folding 
bicycles (see also Table 1 and Fig. 1). It also lays 
down guidelines for manufacturer’s instructions for 
use and care of such bicycles. 


Specialized types of bicycles, such as, Delivery 
Bicycles, Recumbent Bicycles, Tandems, BMX 
Bicycles and bicycles designed and equipped for use 
in severe applications such as sanctioned 
competition events, stunts or aerobatic are beyond 
the scope of this standard. 


NOTE — For bicycles with a maximum saddle height of 
435 mm or less, see ISO 8124 -1 and with a maximum 
saddle height of more than 435 mm and less than 635 mm, 
see IS 15533/ISO 8098. 


Table 1 Maximum Saddle Height of Bicycles 


(Clause 1) 
SI City and Trekking/Roadster/SLR Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) 635 or more 635-750 635 or more 635 or more 


АП dimensions in millimeters 


Key 
H Maximum saddle height; 
] Minimum insertion-depth mark; and 


2 Ground plane. 


FIG. | MAXIMUM SADDLE HEIGHT 


IS 10613 : 2023 


2 REFERENCES 


A list of references, which, through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard is 
provided at Annex A. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 Aerodynamic Extension — Extension (or 
extensions) secured to the handlebar or stem, to 
improve the rider’s aerodynamic posture. 


32 Band Brake — Brake in which a 
circumferential band is wrapped around the exterior 
of a cylindrical drum which is attached to or 
incorporated in the wheel-hub. 


3.3 Bar End — Extension secured to the end of a 
handlebar to provide an additional hand grip and 
usually with its axis perpendicular to the axis of the 
end of the Handlebar. 


3.4 Bicycle — Two-wheeled vehicle that is 
propelled solely or mainly by the muscular energy 
of the person on that vehicle, in particular by means 
of pedals. 


3.5 Bolted Joint — Components joined together 
with threaded fasteners. 


3.6 Brake Ever — Lever that operates a braking 
device. 


3.7 Braking Distance — Distance travelled by a 
bicycle between the commencement of braking and 
the point at which the bicycle comes to rest. 


3.8 Braking Force, Fer — Tangential rearward 
force between the tyre and the ground, or the tyre 
and the drum or belt of the test machine. 


3.9 City and Trekking/Roadster/SLR Bicycle — 
Bicycle designed for use on public roads primarily 
for means of transportation or leisure. 


3.10 Commencement of Braking — Point on the 
test track or test machine at which the brake- 
actuating device operated directly by the rider’s 
hand or foot or by a test mechanism starts to move 
from its rest position. On the test track, the first 
brake-actuating device (front or rear to operate 
determines this point. 


3.11 Composite Material Component — 
Component that is entirely or partially made of a 
non-metallic matrix material which is reinforced by 
metallic or non-metallic materials such as short or 
long fibers, fabric, or particles. 


3.12 Composite Wheels — Wheel assembly 
containing any composite material. 


3.13 Crank Assembly — Assembly for fatigue 
testing consisting of the drive side and the non-drive 
side crank arm, the pedal-spindle adaptors, the 
bottom-bracket spindle, and the first component of 
the drive system. 


Example: 
The Chain-Wheel Set 


3.14 Delivery Bicycle — Bicycle designed for the 
primary purpose of carrying goods. 


3.15 Disc Brake—Brake in which pads are used to 
grip the lateral faces of a thin disc attached to or 
incorporated in the wheel hub. 


3.16 Drive Belt — Seamless ring belt, which is used 
as a means of transmitting motive force. 


3.17 Exposed Protrusion — Protrusion which, 
through its location and rigidity, could present a 
hazard to the rider either through heavy contact with 
it in normal use or should the rider fall onto it, in an 
accident also it is the protrusion that can be 
contacted by the central 75 mm of the lateral surface 
of a cylinder 250 mm long and 83 mm in diameter 
(simulating a limb) (see also Fig.3). 


3.18 Dummy Fork — Test fork manufactured to 
specific characteristics either which can be 
substituted within a test for the fork supplied by the 
manufacturer or where a fork has not been supplied. 


3.19 Folding Bicycle — Bicycle designed to fold 
into a compact form, facilitating transport and 
storage. 


3.20 Fracture — Unintentional separation into two 
or more parts. 


3.21 Fork Steerer (Fork Stem) — Part of a fork 
that rotates about the steering axis of a bicycle frame 
head tube. It is normally connected to the fork crown 
or directly to the fork legs and is normally the point 
of connection between the fork and the handlebar 
stem. 


3.22 Fully Assembled Bicycle — Bicycle fitted 
with all components necessary for its intended use. 


3.23 Highest Gear — Gear ratio which gives the 
greatest distance travelled for one rotation of the 
crank. 


3.24 Hub Brake — Brake which acts directly on the 
wheel hub. 


3.25 Hub Generator — Electric generating device 
built in the wheel hub. 


3.26 Lowest Gear — Gear ratio which gives the 
shortest distance travelled for one rotation of the 
cranks. 


3.27 Maximum Inflation Pressure — Maximum 
tyre pressure recommended by the tyre or rim 


manufacturer for a safe and efficient performance. If 
the rim and tyre both indicate a maximum inflation 
pressure, the maximum inflation pressure is the 
lower of the two pressures indicated. 


3.28 Maximum Saddle Height — Vertical distance 
from the ground to the point where the top of the seat 
surface is intersected by the seat-post axis, measured 
with the Seat in a horizontal position and with the 
seat-post set to the minimum insertion-depth mark. 


3.29 Minimum Insertion-Depth Mark — Mark 
indicating the minimum _insertion-depth of 
handlebar stem into fork steerer (fork stem) or seat- 
post into frame. 


3.30 Mountain Bicycle — Bicycle designed for use 
off-road on rough terrain, on public roads and on 
public pathways, equipped with а suitably 
strengthened frame and other components, and, 
typically, with wide- section tyres with coarse tread 
patterns and a single or wide range of transmission 
gears. 


3.31 Off-Road Rough Terrain — Coarse pebble 
tracks, forest trails, and other general off-road tracks 
where tree roots and rocks are likely to be 
encountered. 


3.32 Pedal Tread Surface — Surface of a pedal that 
is presented to the underside of the foot. 


3.33 Primary Retention System — System that 
keeps the front/rear wheel securely attached to the 
frame/fork dropouts while riding. 


3.34 Public Pathway — Any designated and 
adopted road, path, or track on which a Bicycle is 
legally permitted to travel where motorized traffic is 
excluded. 


3.35 Public Road — Any designated and adopted 
road, pavement, path, or track on which a bicycle is 
legally permitted to travel and, on most though not 
all such public roads, bicycles will share use with 
other forms of transport including motorized traffic. 


3.36 Pulley — Rotating wheel mounted on an axle 
that contains, around its circumference, teeth or 
grooves over which a belt can pass to transmit 
power. 


3.37 Quick-Release Device — Lever actuated 
mechanism that connects, retains, or secures a wheel 
or any other component. 


3.38 Quick-Release Pedal (Clip-Less Pedal) — 
Pedal that contains a device for the attachment of a 
rider’s foot/shoe that can be released by foot 
movement alone. 


3.39 Racing Bicycle — Bicycle intended for high- 
speed use on public roads and having a steering 
assembly with multiple grip positions (allowing for 
an aerodynamic posture), a multi-speed 
transmission system, tyre width not greater than 28 


IS 10613 : 2023 


mm and a maximum mass of 12 kg for the fully 
assembled bicycle. 


3.40 Recumbent Bicycle — Bicycle that places the 
rider in a laid-back reclining position. 


3.41 Rim-Brake — Brake in which brake shoes act 
on the rim of the wheel. 


3.42 Screw Thread Locking Devices — Devices 
attached or applied to the threads of a nut or bolt, so 
that they do not unintentionally become unlocked 
e.g., lock washers, lock nuts, thread locking 
compound or stiff nuts. 


3.43 Seat-Post — Component that clamps the 
saddle (with a bolt or assembly) and connects it with 
the frame. 


3.44 Secondary Retention System — System that 
retains the front wheel in the fork dropouts when the 
primary retention system is in the open (unlocked) 
position. 


3.45 Simulated Ground Plane — Plane used to 
orient a test part or assembly in a way that represents 
the cycle's alignment to the ground in a fully 
assembled cycle. 


3.46 Suspension Fork — Front fork incorporating 
controlled, axial flexibility to reduce Ше 
transmission of road shocks to the rider. 


3.47 Suspension Frame — Frame incorporating 
controlled, vertical flexibility to reduce the 
transmission of road shocks to the rider. 


3.48 Tandem — Bicycle with saddles for two or 
more riders, one behind the other. 


3.49 Toe Clip — Device attached to the pedal to 
grip the toe end of the rider's shoe but permitting 
withdrawal of the shoe. 


3.50 Visible Crack — Crack which results from a 
test, wherein that crack is visible to the naked eye. 


3.51 Wheel — Assembly or combination of hub, 
spokes or disc, and rim, but excluding the tyre 
assembly. 


3.52 Wheel Base — Distance between the axis of 
the front and rear wheels of an unladen Bicycle. 


3.53 Young Adult Bicycle — Bicycle designed for 
use on public roads by a young adult with maximum 
saddle height ranging between 635-750 mm. 


3.54 Tread Surface (Pedal) — It is the surface of a 
pedal that is presented to the underside of the foot, 
the design of which incorporates a slip-resistant 
characteristic. 


3.55 Ferrous Component — It is the component, 
composed of structural members made entirely from 
ferrous materials excluding any jointing medium 
such as brazing materials or adhesives. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


3.56 Non-Ferrous Component — It is the 
component, composed of structural members made 
entirely from non-ferrous materials excluding any 
joining medium such as adhesives. 

NOTE — For the purposes of the choice of fatigue test 


forces, any component made from a mixture of ferrous and 
non- ferrous members shall be classified as non-ferrous. 


4 REQUIREMENTS OF SUB-ASSEMBLIES 
4.1 General 
4.1.1 Sharp Edges 


Exposed edges that could come into contact with 
the rider’s hands, legs, etc, during normal riding or 
normal handling and normal maintenance shall not 
be sharp, for example, deburred, broken, rolled, or 
processed with comparable techniques. 


4.1.2 Toxicity 


All items which come into intimate contact with the 
rider shall comply with the toxicity requirements as 
specified in Annex B. 


4.1.3 Protrusions 


These requirements are intended to address the 
hazards associated with the users of bicycles falling 
on projections or rigid components (for example, 
handlebars, levers) on a bicycle possibly causing 
internal injury or skin puncture. Tubes and rigid 
components in the form of projections which 
constitute a puncture hazard to the rider should be 
protected. The size and shape of the end protection 
has not been stipulated, but an adequate shape shall 
be given to avoid puncturing of the body. Screw 
threads which constitute a puncture hazard shall be 
limited to a protrusion length of one major diameter 
of the screw beyond the internally threaded mating 
part. (see Fig. 2) 


NOTE — These shall apply when L is greater than 8 mm. 


FIG. 2 EXAMPLES OF MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF EXPOSED PROTRUSIONS 


4.1.3.1 Exposed protrusion 


Any rigid, exposed protrusion shall not exceed 8 mm 
(see L in Fig. 2) after assembly, with the exception 
of: 


a) The front gear-change mechanism at the 
Chain-wheel; 

b) Therear gear-change mechanism below 
the Chain-stay; 

c) The rim- brake mechanism at the front and 
rear wheels; 

d) Alamp-bracket fitted on the head-tube; 

e) Reflectors; and 

f) Toe-clips and toe straps. 


Exposed protrusions shall terminate at a radius, R of 
not less than 6.3 mm. Such protrusions shall have a 
major end dimension, A of not less than 12.7 mm 
and a minor dimension B, of not less than 3.2 mm, 
(see Fig. 2). 


4.1.3.2 Exclusion zone, protective devices and 
screw threads 


There shall be no protrusions on the top tube of a 
bicycle frame between the saddle and a point 300 
mm forward of the saddle, with the exception that 
control cables no greater than 6.4 mm in diameter 
and cable clamps made from material no thicker than 
4.8 mm may be attached to the top tube. Foam pads 
attached to the bicycle frame to act as protective 
cushions are permitted, provided that the bicycle 
meets the requirements for protrusions when the 
pads are removed. А screw thread that is an exposed 
protrusion shall be limited to a protrusion length of 
one major diameter of the screw beyond the 
internally threaded mating part. 


4.1.3.3 Location of exposed protrusions 


The location of exposed protrusions shall be 
established using a test-cylinder (simulating a limb) 


conforming to the dimensions shown in Fig. 3 
maneuvers the cylinder in any convenient attitude 
toward any rigid protrusion on the bicycle. If the 
central 75 mm long section of the test cylinder 
comes into contact with any protrusion, that 
protrusion shall be considered an exposed 


IS 10613 : 2023 


protrusion and shall comply with the requirements 
of 4.1.3.1 and 4.1.3.2. 


Examples of exposed protrusions which do, and do 
not, need to comply with the requirements of 4.1.3.3 
are shown in Fig. 4. 


АП dimensions are in millimeters. 


FIG. 3 EXPOSED PROTRUSION TEST CYLINDER 


6 


a) Needs to comply 


Key 
1 Test cylinder 


D 


b) Does not need to comply 


FIG. 4 EXAMPLES OF EXPOSED PROTRUSIONS 


4.2 Lighting Systems and Reflectors 
4.2.1 Lighting Systems 


The provision of front or rear lamps, or of a 
complete lighting system, is not mandatory but 
where fitted shall comply with the requirements of 
ISO 6742-1. When a wiring harness is fitted, it shall 
be positioned to avoid any damage by contact with 
moving parts or sharp edges. All connections shall 
with stand a tensile force in any direction of 10 N. 


4.2.2 Reflectors 


These devices shall comply with the provisions in 
force in the Country in which the product is 
marketed. If there are no forced provisions of these 
devices, the Retro-Reflective devices shall comply 
with the requirements of IS/ISO 6742-2. 


4.2.2.1 Rear reflectors 


A bicycle equipped with a rear light, shall be 
additionally equipped with a rear wide-angle 


IS 10613 : 2023 


reflector, or conventional reflector. A Bicycle that 
has no such rear light shall be equipped with a wide- 
angle reflector. Rear reflectors shall be red in colour. 


4.2.2.2 Side reflectors 


A bicycle shall be equipped with two side reflectors 
each visible from both sides. The reflectors shall be 
either. 


a) Wide angle reflectors fitted on the front 
half and on the rear half of the bicycle. At 
least one of these shall be mounted on the 
spokes of the wheel. Where a bicycle 
incorporates features at the rear wheel other 
than the frame and mudguard stays, the 
moving reflector shall be mounted on the 
front wheel; 


b) A continuous circle of reflective material 
applied to both sides of each wheel within 
10 cm of the outer diameter of the tyre; and 


c) АП side reflectors shall be of the same 
colour, either white (clear) or yellow. 


4.2.2.3 Front reflectors 


A bicycle shall be equipped with a front wide-angle 
reflector of white (clear) in colour. 


4.2.2.4 Pedal reflectors 


Each Pedal shall have reflectors, located on the front 
and rear surfaces of the pedal. The Reflector 
elements shall be either integral with the 
construction of the pedal or mechanically attached, 
but shall be sufficiently recessed from the edge of 
the pedal, or of the reflector housing, to prevent 
contact of the reflector element with a flat surface 
placed in contact with the edge of the pedal. Pedal 
reflectors shall be yellow in colour. 


4.3 Safety-Related Fasteners 
4.3.1 Security of Screws 


Any screws used in the assembly of Suspension 
systems, bracket-attached electric generators, Brake 
mechanisms, and Mudguards to the Frame or Fork, 
and the Saddle to the Seat-post shall be provided 
with suitable locking devices, e.g., Lock-washers, 
Lock-nuts, Thread locking compound, or stiff nuts. 
Fasteners used in assembly of Hub and Disc brakes 
should have Heat-Resistant Locking devices. 


NOTE — Bolts and Nuts used may be as per IS 1367 (Part 
3)/ISO 898-1and IS 1376 (Part 6)/ISO 898-2 respectively. 


4.3.2 Strength of Screws 


The minimum failure Torque of bolted joints for the 
fastening of Handlebars, Handlebar stems, bar ends, 
Saddle, and Seat-Posts shall be atleast 50 percent 
greater than the manufacturer's. recommended 
tightening Torque. 


4.4 Brakes 
4.4.1 Braking Systems 


A Bicycle shall be equipped with at least two 
independently actuated Braking systems. At least 
one shall operate on the Front Wheel and one on the 
Rear Wheel. The Braking Systems shall operate 
without binding and shall be capable of meeting the 
Braking Performance requirements of 4.4.10. Brake 
Blocks containing asbestos shall not be permitted. 


4.4.2 Hand-Operated Brakes 
4.4.2.1 Brake lever position 


The Brake Levers for Front and Rear Brakes shall be 
positioned according to the legislation or custom and 
practice of the country in which the Bicycle is to be 
sold and the Bicycle manufacturers should state in 
the manufacturer’s instructions which Levers 
operate the Front and Rear Brakes. 


4.4.2.2 Brake lever grip dimensions 
a) The brake lever similar to type A or type B. 


The Dimension ‘d’ measured between the outer 
surfaces of the Brake Lever in the region intended 
for contact with the rider’s fingers and the Handlebar 
or any other covering present shall cover a distance 
of not less than 40 mm as shown in Fig. 5 (a) and 
Fig. 5 (b) and conform to the following: 


1) On Bicycles on which the minimum 
intended height of the Saddle is 700 mm or 
more, ‘d’ shall not exceed 90 mm; 


2) On Bicycles on which the minimum 
intended height of the Saddle is less than 
700 mm, ‘d’ shall not exceed 75 mm; and 


3) The Maximum Grip dimension, d, 
measured between the outer surfaces of the 
Brake Lever and the Handlebar, or the 
Handlebar grip or any other covering where 
present, shall not exceed 90 mm between 
points A and B, and 100 mm between 
points B and C [see Fig. 5 (b)]. 


The range of adjustment on the Brake Lever should 
permit these dimensions to be obtained. 
Conformance shall be established by the method 
detailed in 4.4.3.1.1; the range of adjustment on the 
brake lever should permit these dimensions to be 
obtained. 


b) The Brake Lever similar to Type C 


It shall be possible to fit the dimension gauge shown 
in Fig. 6 over the Brake Lever (or a secondary brake 
lever) and the handlebar grip or any other covering 
in atleast one position between points B and C 
indicated in Fig. 5 (c), without causing any 
movement of the Brake Lever towards the 
Handlebar. The dimension ‘d’ shall not exceed 100 
mm. Conformance shall be established by the 


IS 10613 : 2023 


method detailed in 4.4.3.1.2; the range of adjustment on the Brake Lever should permit these dimensions to be 


obtained. 


а) Type A 


Applied tarte 


с) Type С 


Кеу 
1 Pivot; 


a Distance between the last part of the Lever intended for contact with the rider’s fingers and the end of the Lever; 


A Reference point; 
B Point of L/2; 


C Point of 20 mm (in case of an extension Brake Lever, 15 mm) from the end of the lever; 


d Brake lever grip dimension; and 


L The distance between the center of the lever pivot and the Lever tip end method detailed in 4.4.3.1.2; the range 
of adjustment on the brake lever should permit these dimensions to be obtained. 


FIG. 5 BREAK LEVER GRIP DIMENSIONS 


4.4.3 Test Method 
4.4.3.1 Brake lever grip dimensions 


4.4.3.1.1 Test method for the brake lever similar to 
type A or type B. 


Fit the gauge illustrated in Fig. 6 over the Handlebar 
Grip or the handlebar (when the manufacturer does 
not fit a grip) and the brake lever as shown in Fig.7 
so that face A is in contact with the handlebar or 


grip and the side of the brake lever. Ensure that face 
B spans an area of that part of the brake lever which 
is intended for contact with the rider’s fingers 
without the gauge causing any movement of the 
brake lever towards the handlebar or grip. Measure 
the distance, a, the distance between the last part of 
the lever intended for contact with the rider’s fingers 
and the end of the lever. The measurement should be 
conducted only on a fully assembled bicycle. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


All dimensions are in millimeters 
FIG. 6 BRAKE LEVER GRIP DIMENSION GAUGE FOR TYPE A AND TYPE B 
Key 


A Face A; 

B Face B; 

C Rod; and 

D 75 mm or 90 mm. 


a) Type A 


IS 10613 : 2023 


b) Type B 


FIG. 7 METHOD OF FITTING THE GAUGE TO THE BRAKE LEVER AND HANDLEBAR 


4.4.3.1.2 Test method for the brake lever similar to in contact with the Handlebar or Handlebar grip and 
type C the brake lever. Put the face of cylinder bin contact 
with the part of the grip intended for contact with the 


Be ieee ve тылуы rider’s hand and check if the requirements are met. 


and brake lever as shown in Fig. 9 so that face A is 


Key 


A Face A; 
B Face of cylinder; and 
C Rod. 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 


FIG. 8 BRAKE LEVER GRIP-DIMENSION GAUGE FOR TYPE C 


IS 10613 : 2023 


FIG. 9 METHOD OF FITTING THE GAUGE TO THE BRAKE LEVER AND HANDLEBAR FOR TYPE C 


4.4.4 Brake Levers — Position of Applied Force 
4.4.4.1 Type A and B brake levers 


For the purposes of braking tests brake levers similar 
to Type A or Type B, the test force shall be applied 
at a distance b, which is equal to either dimension ‘a’ 
[see Fig.5 (a) and (b)] as determined in 4.4 3.1.1 or 25 
mm from the free end of the brake lever, whichever 


is the greater [see Fig.10 (a) and (b)]. 
4.4.4.2 Type C brake levers 


For the purposes of braking tests brake levers similar 
to Type C, the test force shall be applied at a distance 
of 25 mm from the free end of the brake lever [see 
Fig. 10 (c)]. 


b) Type B 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 


F applied force; and 
р> 25 тт. 


FIG.10 POSITION OF APPLIED FORCE ON THE BRAKE LEVER 


4.4.5 Attachment of Brake Assembly and Cable 
Requirements 


Cable pinch bolts shall not sever any of the cable 
strands when assembled to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. In the event of a cable failing, no part 
of the brake mechanism shall in advertently inhibit 
the rotation of the wheel. 


The cable end shall either be protected with a cap 
that shall withstand a removal force of not less than 
20 N or be otherwise treated to prevent unraveling. 
The screws used to attach a brake assembly to the 
Frame; Fork or Handlebar shall be provided with 
suitable locking devices, for example, a Lock- 
washer, Lock-nut or Stiff-nut. 


4.4.6 Brake-Block and Brake-Pad Assemblies — 
Security Test 


The friction material shall be securely attached to the 
holder, backing plate, or shoe and there shall be no 
failure of the braking system or any component 
thereof, and the brake shall meet the performance 
requirements of 4.4.10 when tested by the method 
specified in 4.4.6.1. 


4.4.6.1 Test method 


Conduct the test on a fully assembled bicycle with 
the brakes adjusted to a correct position with a Rider 
or equivalent mass on the Saddle. The combined 
mass of the bicycle and rider (or equivalent mass) 
shall be 100 kg. 


Actuate each brake lever with a force of 180 N 
applied at the point specified in Fig. 10 or a force 
sufficient to bring the brake lever into contact with 
the Handlebar grip, whichever is lesser. Maintain 
this force while subjecting the bicycle to five 
forward and five rearward movements, each of 
which is not less than 75 mm distance. 


Then conduct the test described in 4.4.8.1 or 4.4.9.2 
as appropriate, depending on the style of brake, and 
then the test described in 4.4.10. 


4.4.7 Brake Adjustment 


Each brake shall be equipped with an adjustment 
mechanism, either manual or automatic. Each brake 
shall be capable of adjustment with or without the 
use of a tool to an efficient operating position until 
the friction material has worn to the point of 
requiring replacement as recommended in the 
manufacturer's instructions. Also when correctly 
adjusted, the friction material shall not contact 
anything other than the intended braking surface. 


The brake blocks of a bicycle with rod brakes shall 
not come into contact with the rim of the Wheels 
when the steering angle of the handlebars is set at 
60°, nor shall the rods bend, or be twisted after the 
Handlebars are reset to the central position. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


4.4.8 Hand-Operated Braking-System — Strength 
Test 


When tested by the method described in 4.4.8.1, 
there shall be no failure of the braking system or of 
any component thereof. 


4.4.8.1 Tests method 


Conduct the test on a fully assembled bicycle. After 
it has been ensured that the braking system is 
adjusted according to the recommendations in the 
manufacturer’s instructions, apply a Force to the 
brake lever at the point specified in Fig. 10. This 
force shall be 450 N, or such lesser force as is 
required to bring 


a) A brake lever into contact with the 
handlebar grip or the handlebar where the 
manufacturer does not fit a grip; 


b) A brake extension lever level with the 
surface of the handlebar or in contact with 
the handlebar; and 


с) A secondary brake lever to the end of its 
travel. 


d) Repeat the test 10 times on each brake 
lever, secondary brake lever, or extension 
Lever. 


4.4.9 Back-Pedal Braking System — Strength Test 
4.4.9.1 General 
If the back-pedal braking system is fitted, the brake 


shall be actuated by the operator's foot applying 
force to the Pedal in a direction opposite to that of 
the drive force. The brake mechanism shall 
function regardless of any drive gear positions or 
adjustments. The differential between the drive and 
brake positions of the Crank shall not exceed 60°. 
The measurement shall be taken with the crank held 
against each position with a pedal force of at least 
250 N. The force shall be maintained for 1 minute 
in each position. The brake shall be actuated by the 
operator's foot applying force to the pedal in a 
direction opposite to that of the Drive force. The 
brake mechanism shall function independently of 
any drive-gear positions or adjustments. The 
differential between the drive and brake positions 
of the Crank shall not exceed 60°. The 
measurement shall be taken with the crank held 
against each position with a torque of at least 14 
Nm. 


4.4.9.1.1 Requirement 


When tested in accordance with 4.4.9.2 there shall 
be no failure of the brake system or any component 
thereof. 


4.4.9.2 Test method 


Conduct the test on a fully assembled bicycle. After 
it has been ensured that the braking system is 
adjusted, and with the Pedal cranks in a horizontal 
position, as shown in Fig. 11, apply a vertically 
downward force to the center of the left-hand Pedal 
spindle. Increase the force progressively to 1 500 N 
and maintain fully for 1 minute. 


Fic. 11 BACK-PEDAL BRAKE TEST 


Key 

1 Chain; 

2 Hub sprocket; 

3 Non-drive side crank; 

4 Cycle chain wheel and pedal crank; 
5 Point of force application; and 

6 Pedal 


4.4.10 Braking Performance 
4.4.10.1 General 


Two test methods are specified to determine braking 
performance and experience has shown that either 
method is suitable and either can be used. One test 
method is the track test in which braking distance is 
measured directly with the progressive 
characteristics of the brakes being self-evident. The 
alternative test method is a machine/rig base test in 
which braking force is measured and, from which, 
braking performance values are calculated. The 
progressive characteristics of the brake are 
determined by linearity measurements. A final, 
simple track test checks for smooth, safe, stopping 
characteristics. 


Whichever method is used, there shall be 
compliance with 4.4.10.2 or 4.4.12. See 4.4.13.7 (h) 
Test Method — Simple track test. 


4.4.10.1.1 Test bicycle 


Conduct the braking Performance test on a fully 
assembled bicycle after the brakes have been 


IS 10613 : 2023 


subjected to Strength test detailed in 4.4.8 and 4.4.9. 
Before testing the bicycle by either method, inflate 
the tyres and adjust the brakes according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. In the case of rim- 
brakes, adjust it to the maximum clearance specified 
by the manufacturer. 


4.4.10.1.2 Secondary brake levers 


Where a bicycle is fitted with secondary brake levers 
attached to brake levers, bar-ends, or aerodynamic 
extensions, separate tests shall be conducted for the 
operation of the secondary brake levers in addition 
to tests with the normal levers. Where a bicycle is 
fitted with extension levers, separate tests shall be 
conducted for the operation of the extension levers. 
In addition to tests using the normal levers to which 
the extensions are attached. 


4.4.10.2 Track test 
When tested in accordance with 4.4.10.2.1, the 


bicycle shall fulfill the requirements shown in Table 
2. 


Table 2 Brake Test Velocities and Braking Distances 
(Annexes 4.4.10.2, 4.4.10.7, 4.4.10.11 and 4.4.10.12) 


Sl Bicycle type Condition | Velocity | Brake in Use Maximum Corrected 
No. (km/h) Braking Distance, (m) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) |City and trekking апа Dry 25 Both 7 
roadster/SLR bicycles Rear only 15 
Wet 16 Both 5 
Rear only 10 
ii) | Young adult bicycles Dry 25 Both 7 
Rear only 15 
Wet 16 Both 5 
Rear only 10 
iii) | Mountain bicycles Dry 25 Both 6 
Rear only 10 
Wet 16 Both 5 
Rear only 10 
iv) | Racing bicycles Dry 25 Both 6 
Rear only 12 
Wet 16 Both 5 
Rear only 10 


4.4.10.2.1 Track test method 

a) Use an indoor test track if possible. If an 
outdoor test track is used, pay special 
attention to ambient conditions throughout 
the test; 


b) The gradient of the track shall not exceed 


0.5 percent. If the gradient is less than 
0.2 percent carryout all runs in the same 
direction. If the gradient lies between 
0.2 percent and 0.5 percent, carry out 
alternate runs in opposite directions; 


c) The surface shall be hard, of concrete or 


IS 10613 : 2023 


fine asphalt, and free from loose dirt or 
gravel. The minimum coefficient of 
friction between the dry surface and the 
bicycle tyre shall be 0.75; 


d) The track shall be essentially dry at the 
commencement of tests. When testing to 
the requirements of 4.4.10.7, the track shall 
remain dry throughout the tests; and 


e) The wind speed on the track shall not 
exceed 3 m/s during the tests. 


4.4.10.3 Instrumentation 


The test bicycle or the test track shall be 


instrumented to include the following: 


a) A calibrated Speedometer or Tachometer 
(accurate to within + 5 percent) to indicate 
to the rider the approximate speed at the 
commencement of Braking; 


b) A velocity-recording device (accurate to 
within + 2 percent) to record the velocity at 
the commencement of braking; 


C) A distance recording system (accurate to 
within + 1 percent) to record the braking 
distance; 


d) A water spray system, to provide wetting of 
the braking surface, consisting of a water 
reservoir connected by tubing to a pair of 
nozzles at the front wheel and a pair of 
nozzles at the rear wheel. A quick-acting 
on/off valve shall be included for control 
by the rider. Each nozzle shall provide a 
flow of water at ambient temperature of not 
less than 4 ml/s. Details of the positions 
and directions of nozzles for rim brakes, 
hub brakes, band brakes, disc brakes, and 
back-pedal brake are given in Fig. 12 to 18; 
and 


e) A brake-actuation indicating system to 
record independently when each lever or 
pedal is actuated. Fig.12 and Fig.13 for rim 
brakes show side-pull calipers but the same 
arrangements apply to center-pull calipers 
and cantilever brakes. 


rider and 


4.4.10.4 Mass of 


instrumentation 


bicycle, 


a) The combined mass of the bicycle, the 
rider, and the instrumentation shall be 
100 kg; 


b) When wet condition braking tests are 
performed, the combined mass can 
decrease throughout the test due to water 


consumption, but it shall not be less than 
99 kg at the end of the valid test runs; 


c) Where a manufacturer specifies that their 
bicycle can carry a mass such that the sum 
of that mass plus the mass of the bicycle is 
in excess of 100 kg (60 kg for young adults) 
to some value “М” apply ‘M’ as total 
weight. 


d) Any extra weight shall be positioned above 
the rear wheel and in front of the rear axle. 


4.4.10.5 Force applied to the brake levers 


a) Magnitude and position of force on brake 
levers. 


Apply a handgrip force not exceeding 180 N at the 
point as specified in Fig. 10. Check before and after 
each series of test runs to verify the lever force. 


b) Optional brake-force application device. 


It is permissible to use a test mechanism to operate 
the brake lever, and when such a device is used, it 
shall meet the requirements of (a) above and shall 
additionally control the rate of application of the 
brake lever force such that 63 percent of the 
intended lever force is applied in not less than 0.2 s. 


4.4.10.6 Running — In the braking surfaces 


A running-in process shall be conducted on every 
brake before performance testing is carried out. 
Apply the Brakes for not less than 3 s to maintain 
steady deceleration while the bicycle is being ridden 
at a speed of approximately 16 km/h. Repeat this 
operation 10 times. 


4.4.10.7 Test 
dry conditions 


method — Test runs under 


Pedal the test bicycle until the specified test velocity 
is attained (see Table 2). Then stop pedaling and 
apply the brakes. The bicycle shall be brought to a 
smooth, safe stop [see 4.4.14 (a)]. 


4.4.10.8 Test 


wet conditions 


method — Test runs under 


The method given in 4.4.10.7, with the addition that 
wetting of the brake system shall commence not less 
than 25 m prior to the commencement of braking 
and shall continue until the bicycle comes to rest. 
Excessive amounts of water can be swept from the 
test track surface between runs. 


4.4.10.9 Number of valid test runs 


If the gradient of the track is less than 0.2 percent, 
the following runs shall be made: 


a) Five consecutive valid under 


dry conditions. 


runs 


IS 10613 : 2023 


b) Two acclimatization runs under wet conditions with alternate runs in opposite 
conditions (results not recorded). directions. 
e) Two acclimatization runs under wet 
c) Five consecutive valid runs under conditions (results not recorded). 
wet conditions. f) Six consecutive valid runs under wet 
If the gradient of the track lies between 0.2 percent conditions with alternate run in opposite 
and 0.5 percent, the following runs shall be made: directions. 


A rest period not exceeding 3 minute can be taken 
d) Six consecutive valid runs under dry between successive runs. 


Key 

1 Water nozzles; 

2 Fork crown; 

3 Front tee-piece; 

4 Wheel rim; and 

5 Direction of the wheel rotation. 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 
FIG. 12 WATER NOZZLES FOR RIM-BRAKE (FRONT) 


15 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 

1 Water nozzles; 

2 Rear tee-piece; 

3 Bicycle frame; 

4 Wheel rim; 

5 Brake assembly; and 

6 Direction of the wheel rotation. 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


FIG.13 WATER NOZZLES FOR RIM-BRAKE (REAR) 


2, f 2 i 
NE ; Аб а 
v IN / м, 
1/7 / M 
WY A B 
ah. ge 
| иеа 
4 2 4 


Кеу 
1 Water nozzle; 
2 Two water nozzles; 
3 Hub brake; and 
4 Direction of the wheel rotation. 
All dimensions are in millimeters 


FIG. 14 WATER NOZZLES FOR HUB-BRAKE. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


— 


Key 


Water nozzle; 

Bicycle Frame; 

Rear tee-piece; 

Band brake 

Rear hub; and 

Direction of the wheel rotation. 


олом н 


All dimensions аге in millimeters 
FIG.15 WATER NOZZLES FOR BAND-BRAKE 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 

Front hub; 

Water nozzles; 

Flexible pipe; 

Suspension-fork leg; 

Y-joint; 

Brake-disc; 

Direction of the wheel rotation; and 
Disc-brake caliper. 


ooo un RUN 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 
ЕС. 16 WATER NOZZLES FOR DISC-BRAKE (FRONT) 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 

1 Water nozzles; 

2 Bicycle frame; 

3 Rear hub 

4 Y-joint; 

5 Brake disc; 

6 Disc-brake Caliper; and 

7 Direction of the wheel rotation. 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 
FIG. 17 WATER NOZZLES FOR DISC-BRAKE (REAR) 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 

1 Water nozzles; 

2 Rear tee-piece; 

3 Bicycle frame; 

4 Brake hub; and 

5 Direction of the wheel rotation. 


FIG. 18 WATER NOZZLES FOR BACK-PEDAL BRAKE 


4.4.10.10 Velocity/distance correction factor 


A correction factor shall be applied to the measured 
Braking distance if the velocity as checked by the 
timing device is not precisely as specified in 
4.4.10.2. 


The corrected braking distance shall be determined 
from formula (1): 


Se= [5 x Sm 


Vm 
where 


S. = Corrected Braking distance (m); 

V, - Specified test velocity (m/s); 

Vm = Measured test velocity (m/s); and 

Sm = Measured Braking distance (m); 
4.4.10.11 Validity of test runs 


A test run shall be considered invalid if: 


a) Side-skid causing the rider to put his foot to 


20 


the ground to retain control occurs; and 


b) Loss of control occurs. 


With certain types of braking system, it might not be 
possible to avoid entirely some skidding of the Rear 
Wheel during braking. This is considered acceptable 
provided that (a) or (b) above do not occur as a 
result. 


If the corrected braking distance exceeds the 
Braking distance specified in Table 2, a test run shall 
be considered invalid if the velocity at the 
commencement of the test exceeds the specified test 
velocity by more than 1.5 km/h as specified in Table 
2. If the corrected braking distance is less than the 
braking distance specified in Table 2, a test run shall 
be considered invalid if the velocity at the 
commencement of braking is more than 1.5 km/h 
below the specified test velocity. If the corrected 
Braking distance exceeds the braking distance 
specified in Table 2, the test run shall be considered 
valid. 


4.4.10.12 Test results 
a) Braking under dry conditions 


Depending on the gradient of the test track, the test 
result shall be the average value of the corrected 
Braking distance (see 4.4.10.10) of the test results 
of either 4.4.10.9 (a) or 4.4.10.9 (d) For 
compliance with the requirements of 4.4.10.2 the 
above average values shall not exceed the relevant 
Braking distances specified in Table 2. 


b) Braking under wet conditions 


Depending on the gradient of the Test Track, the test 
result shall be the average value of the corrected 
Braking distances (see 4.4.10.10) of the test results 
of either 4.4.10.9 (c) or 4.4.10.9 (f) For 
compliance with the requirements of 4.4.10.2 the 
above average values shall not exceed the relevant 
Braking distances specified in Table 2. 


c) Ratio between wet and dry braking 
performance for city and trekking/roadster/ 
SLR, young adult and mountain bicycles 
because the wet and dry braking distances 
are measured at different test velocities, a 
simple comparison of braking distances is 
not meaningful. Therefore, a comparison 
shall be made of equivalent, calculated 
values, using formula (2): 

16? 25? 


Scw ScD 


21 


IS 10613 : 2023 


where 
Sow = Corrected braking distance in wet 
conditions (m); and 
ScD = Corrected braking distance in dry 


conditions (m). 
4.4.11 Back-pedal brake linearity test 


This test shall be conducted on a fully assembled 
Bicycle. The output force for a Back-Pedal Brake 
shall be measured tangentially to the circumference 
of the rear tyre, when the wheel is rotated in the 
direction of forward movement, while a force of 
between 90 N and 300 N is being applied to the 
pedal at right angles to the crank and in the direction 
of braking. 


The braking force reading shall be taken during a 
steady pull and after one revolution of the wheel. A 
minimum of five results, each at a different pedal 
force level, shall be taken. Each result shall be the 
average of three individual readings at the same load 
level. 


The results shall be plotted on a graph, showing the 
line of best fit and the + 20 percent limit lines 
obtained by the method of least squares outlined in 
Annex С. 


4.4.12 Machine Test 


When tested in accordance with 4.4.13, the bicycle 
shall fulfill the requirements shown in Table 3. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 3 Calculated Braking Performance Value 
(Clause 4.4.12) 


SI Bicycle Type Condition Brake in Use Minimum Braking 
No. Performance value, Bp 
(N) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Front only 340 
Dry 
i) City and trekking and Rear only 220 
roadster or SLR bicycles Front only 220 
Wet 
Rear only 140 
Front only 204 
Dry 
Rear only 132 
Front only 132 
ii) Young adult bicycles 
Wet 
Rear only 84 
Dry Front only 425 
та "— Rear only 280 
ili) Mountain bicycles Front only 220 
Wet 
Rear only 140 
Dry Front only 425 
: . | Rear only 260 
iv) Racing bicycles 
Wet Front only 220 
Rear only 140 
4.4.13 Machine Test Method The test machine enables the braking distances for 
both brakes and the rear brake alone to be calculated 
4.4.13.1 General from measurements of the individual braking forces 
of the front and rear brakes on a drum or belt. 
4.4.13.2 Symbols 
FBr corr Corrected braking force 
Fop Operating force (that is, force (Corrected for difference 
applied on brake lever or pedal). between Fop intend and 
Foprec.) 
Fop intend intended operating force (for FBr average Arithmetic mean of the 
example, 40 №, 60 №, 80 N etc). three FBr corr at one 
Foprec recorded operating force (for level of Fop intend. 
example, 38 N, 61 N, 79 N etc). FBr max Maximum FBr average. 
F Braking force. 
Br UE ie FDBr Dry braking force. 
FBrrec Recorded braking force. 
Е FWBr Wet braking force. 
миз LEAT) 4.4.13.4 Test machine 


When tested by the methods described in 4.4.13.7 
с) (i) and (ii), the Braking Force FBr average shall 
be linearly proportional (within + 20 percent) to the 
progressively increasing intended operating forces 
Fop intend. The requirement applies to braking 
forces FBr average equal to and greater than 80 N 
(see Annex B). 


22 


The test machine shall incorporate a system that 
drives the Wheel during the test by tyre contact and 
a means of measuring the braking force, and typical 
examples of two types of machines are illustrated in 
Fig. 19 and 20. 


Fig. 19 shows amachine in which a roller drives the 


individual wheels, and Fig. 20 shows a machine in 
which a driven belt contacts both wheels. Other 
types of machines are permitted, provided they meet 
the specific requirements listed below and those 
specified in 4.4.13.5 and 4.4.13.6. 


The specific requirements are as follows: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


The linear surface velocity of the tyre shall 
be 12.5 km/h and shall be controlled within 
+5 percent; 


A means of laterally restraining the wheel 
under test shall be provided which does not 
influence the measurement of braking 
force; 


A means of laterally applying forces to the 
brake levers at the point specified in 
Fig. 10 shall be provided, with the width of 
the contact on the lever not greater than 
5 mm. In the case of back-pedal brakes, a 
means of applying forces to a pedal is also 
required. 


4.4.13.5 Instrumentation 


The test machine shall be instrumented to include 


Key 


a) Testing the front brake 


IS 10613 : 2023 


the following: 


a) A device to record the surface velocity of 
the tyre, accurate to within + 2 percent; 


b) A device to record the braking force 
(see Fig. 19 and 20, for example), accurate 
to within + 5 percent; 


C) A device to record the operating force 
applied to the hand lever or pedal, accurate 
to within + 1 percent; 


d) Awater spray system, to provide wetting of 
the brakes of the bicycle, consisting of a 
water reservoir connected by tubing to a 
pair of nozzles arranged as shown in Fig 21. 
Each nozzle shall provide a flow of water 
at ambient temperature of not less than 4 
ml/s. The wheel shall be suitably enclosed 
to ensure that, in addition to the rim, any 
hub or disc-brake is thoroughly wetted 
before a test begins; and 


e) A system for loading the wheels of the 
bicycle against the driving mechanism (see 
4.4.13.6). 


b) Testing the rear brake 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 


1 Braking force transducer; 
2 Applied force; 

3 Additional mass; and 

4 Direction of drum rotation. 


FIG. 19 BRAKING PERFORMANCE TEST MACHINE — SINGLE DRUM TYPE 


23 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 
1 Braking force transducer; 
2 Applied force; 
3 Additional mass; and 
4 Direction of belt travel. 


FIG. 20 BRAKING PERFORMANCE TEST MACHINE — DRIVEN BELT TYPE 


SEEN 


Key 

a 90? to 120°; 

p 30° to 60°; 

a 150 mm to 200 mm; and 


1 Water nozzles. 


NOTE — Applicable to all types of brake 


a 
m 
| X 


ЕС. 21 WATER NOZZLE ARRANGEMENT FOR THE WET BRAKING TEST 


4.4.13.6 Vertical force on the tested wheel 


The wheel to be tested shall be forced vertically 
downwards so that no skidding of the wheel occurs 
when tested according to 4.4.13.7(c) (1) and (ii). 
The necessary force can be applied anywhere on 
the bicycle (wheel axle, bottom bracket, seat-post, 
etc) provided that it is exerted vertically 
downwards. 


4.4.13.7 Test method 
a) General 
Test the 

individually. 


Front and Rear Wheels 


b) Running-in the braking surfaces 


Conduct a running-in process on every 
brake before the Performance test is 
performed. 


24 


In order to determine the operating force to 
be used during the running-in process, 
mount and load the bicycle on the test 
machine with the belt or drum running at 
the specified speed and apply an operating 
force to the brake lever or the pedal that is 
high enough to achieve a braking force of 
200 N + 10 percent. Maintain this operating 
force for atleast 2.5 s, and note the value of 
the applied operating force. Repeat the 
procedure (applying the operating force 
determined in the paragraph above accurate 
to within + 5 percent) 10 times, or with 
more repetitions, if necessary, until the 
mean Braking force from anyone of the 
three latest tests does not deviate by more 
than + 10 percent from the mean braking 
force from these same three tests. 


с) 


The performance tests 
i) Testing under dry conditions 


For hand-operated brakes, with a vertical 
force applied to the bicycle sufficient to 
prevent skidding of the yre on the wheel 
under test, accelerate the driving 
mechanism to the specified velocity, then 
apply the operating force in a series of 20 
N increments from 40 N to either 180 N (in 
case of young adult bicycles, apply to 120 
N) or to the force necessary to achieve a 
braking force of atleast 700 N, whichever 
is the lesser. However, if the wheel locks, 
if any possible brake-overload device is 
actuated, or if the hand lever comes into 
contact with the handle bar, do not increase 
the force further. For each increment of 
applied operating force, perform three tests 
within 1 minute. Before applying the next 
level of operating force, allow the brake to 
cool for 1 minute. 


For Back-Pedal brakes, with a vertical 
force applied to the bicycle sufficient to 
prevent skidding of the Tyre on the wheel 
under test, accelerate the driving 
mechanism to the specified velocity, then 
apply the operating force in a series of 50 
N increments from 100 N to either 350 N 
or to the force necessary to achieve a 
Braking force of atleast 400 N, whichever 
is the lesser. However, if the wheel locks, 
if any possible brake-overload device is 
actuated, do not increase the force further. 
For each increment of applied operating 
force, perform three tests within | minute. 
Before applying the next level of operating 
force, allow the brake to cool for 1 minute. 


The applied operating forces shall lie 
within + 10 percent of the intended 
operating forces, shall be applied as 
specified in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 and 
4.4.13.4 (c), shall be recorded with an 
accuracy of + 1 percent, and shall be fully 
applied within 1.0 s of the commencement 
of braking. 


For each increment of operating force, 
record the braking force value, FBr rec, for 
a period of between 2.0 s and 2.5 s, with 
measurement starting 0.5 s to 1.0 s after the 
commencement of braking. Record FBr rec 
as the average braking force during this 
measurement period. 


The time at which the measurement of the 
braking force is started shall be related to 
the speed at which the operating force is 


25 


IS 10613 : 2023 


applied. If the operating force is fully 
applied in less than 0.5 s after the 
commencement of braking, start the 
measurement after 0.5 s. However, if the 
operating force is fully applied between 
0.5 s and 1.0 s after the commencement of 
braking, start the measurement when the 
operating force is fully applied. 


ii) Testing under wet conditions 


The method shall be as given in 4.4.13.7 
(c) (1) with the addition that wetting of the 
brake system shall commence not less than 
5.0 s before the commencement of braking 
and shall continue until the measurement 
period has ended. Water nozzles shall be 
arranged according to Fig. 21. 


d) Correction of braking force 


Each recorded braking force, FBr rec, shall 
be corrected for any difference between the 
recorded operating force and the intended 
operating force. The corrected braking 
force shall be calculated by multiplying the 
recorded braking force, FBrrec, with a 
correction factor which is the ratio 
between the intended operating force, Fop 
intend, and the recorded operating force, 
FBrrec. 


Example: 


1) Recorded braking force FBrrec = 225 N 
intended operating force Fop intend = 
180 N 


2) Recorded operating force Fop rec = 
184 N Correction factor = 180/184 


3) Corrected braking force FBr cor = 
225 x (180/184) 


е) Test results 


Select from the record the maximum 
output braking force, FBr max, for each 
combination of wheel (front or rear) and 
each test condition (wet or dry). 


The braking performance value shall be 
calculated using Formula (3): 


Bp =F Br тах X (m/M) (3) 


where 


Bp = Braking performance value 
(N); 


FBr max = Maximum FBr average (N); 


IS 10613 : 2023 


m = Standard mass of the Bicycle defined 
as 100 kg for adult bicycle and 60 kg 
for young adult bicycle (kg); and 


M = Maximum permissible total mass 
(bicycle + rider + luggage). 


Where a manufacturer specifies that his bicycle can 
carry a mass such that the sum of that mass plus the 
mass of the bicycle is in excess of 100 kg (60 kg for 
young adults) to some value m, apply M as total 
weight. 


f) Linearity 


Plot the calculated FBr average values (the 
arithmetic mean of the three corrected 
braking force sat each level of operating 
force) against the equivalent operating 
force values, Fop intend, in order to assess 
the linearity against the requirement in 
4.4.3.3, Plot the results on a graph, showing 
the line of best fit and the + 20 percent limit 
lines obtained by the method of least 
squares outlined in Annex C. 


g) Ratio between wet and dry braking for city 
and trekking/roadster/SLR, young adult, 
and mountain bicycles 


For any operating force (Fop) for which 
the measured dry braking force (FDBr 
average) is greater than 200 N, the ratio 
between the measured braking force in wet 


conditions (Евг average) and the 
measured braking force in dry conditions 


(FDpr average) shall be greater than 40 
percent. 


For each Fop, where FDBr average is 
> 200 N, determine whether or not the 


requirements of have been met using 
formula (4): 


FWBr average: F Ов; average 


For symbols, see 4.4.13.2. 


h) Simple track test (see 6.2) 


After completion of the machine test, 
conduct a brief, simple track test with 
progressively increasing operating forces 
to determine whether or not the Brakes 
bring the bicycle to a smooth, safe stop. 


26 


NOTE — This test can be combined with the test on the 
fully assembled bicycle. 


4.4.13.8 Brakes — heat- resistance test 
4.4.13.8.1 General 


This test applies to all disc and hub brakes but it 
applies to rim brakes only where they are known or 
suspected to be manufactured from or include 
thermoplastic materials. Each brake on the bicycle 
shall be tested individually, but where the front and 
rear brakes are identical, only one brake needs to be 
tested. 


4.4.13.8.2 Requirement 


Throughout the test described in 4.4.13.8.3 the brake 
lever shall not touch the handlebar grip, the 
operating force shall not exceed 180 N, and the 
braking force shall not deviate outside the range 
60 N to 115 N. Immediately after having been 
subjected to the test described in 4.4.13.8.3, the 
brakes shall achieve at least 60 percent of the 
braking performance, which was recorded at the 
highest operating force used during Ше 
performance tests 4.4.13.7 [(c) (1) and (ii)]. 


4.4.13.8.3 Test method 


Drive the wheel and tyre assembly with the brake 
applied on a machine such as those described in 
4.4.13.5 at a velocity of 12.5 km/h + 5 percent with 
a rearward, cooling air-velocity of 12.5 km/h + 10 
percent, so that a total braking energy of 
E (Wh) + 5 percent specified in Table 4 is 
developed. The duration of the test shall be 15 min 
+2 minute. 

Allow the brake to cool to ambient temperature and 
then repeat the test cycle. 


A maximum of 10 interruptions per test cycle is 
permitted, each with a maximum duration of 10 s. 
When the test has been carried out, subject the 
Brakes to the applicable parts of the tests described 
in 4.4.13.7(c) (1) and (ii). 


Calculate the braking energy from formula (5): 
E = FBr x VBr x T (in watt hour units) 


where 


FBr is the braking force (N); 


VBr is the linear velocity of the periphery of the 
tyre (that is, 12.5 km/h — 3.472 m/s); and 


T is the duration of each test cycle (excluding 
interruptions) (that is, 15 minute — 0.25 h). 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 4 Total Braking Energy 
(Clause 4.4.13.8.3) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Adult Bicycles Bicycles 
Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Total braking energy, E (Wh) 55 55 75 75 


When the test has been carried out, the brakes shall 
be subjected to the applicable parts of the test 
described in 4.4.13, in order to check that the 
requirement in 4.4.13.8.2 is fulfilled. 


4.4.14 Smooth, Safe-Stop Characteristics 


The bicycle shall show smooth,  safe-stop 
characteristics with regard to the intended use of the 
bicycle and the ability of the expected user of the 
bicycle. 


a) For the track test, smooth, safe-stop 
characteristics are defined as stopping 
within the required distances without 
occurrence of any of the following: 


]) Excessive juddering; 

Front wheel locking; 

Bicycle overturning (rear wheel lifting 
uncontrollably); 

Rider's loss of control; and 

Excessive side-skid causing the rider to 
put his foot to the ground to retain 
control. 


With certain types of braking system, it 
might not be possible to avoid entirely 
some skidding of the rear wheel during 
braking; this is considered acceptable 
provided that (1v) or (v) above do not occur 
as a result. Back pedal brakes shall 
additionally comply with the linearity test 
of 4.4 8.11. 


27 


b) For the machine test, smooth, safe-stop 
characteristics are defined by compliance 
with the linearity requirements specified in 
4.4.13.3 and the simple track test described 
in 4.4.13.7 (h). 


4.4.45 Ratio Between Wet and Dry Braking 
Performance 


For city and trekking/roadster/SLR, young adult, 
and mountain bicycles, in order to ensure safety for 
both wet and dry braking, the ratio of braking 
performance wet/dry shall be greater than 4 : 10. 
The methods for calculating this ratio are given in 
4.4.10.12 (c) for the track test and in 4.4.13.7 (g) for 
the machine test. 4.4.15 is not applicable to racing 
bicycles. 


4.5 Steering 
4.5.1 Handlebar — Dimensions 


The handlebar shall have an overall width between 
350 mm and 1 000 mm unless national regulations 
dictate otherwise. Adjust the handlebar height to its 
highest normal riding position and the saddle to its 
lowest normal riding position as specified by the 
manufacturer, see 6.4. Measure the vertical distance 
from the center and top of the handlebar grips to a 
point where the saddle surface is intersected by the 
seat post axis (see Fig. 22). This dimension shall not 
exceed 400 mm. The ends of the handlebars shall 
be fitted with handgrips or end plugs that will 
withstand a removal force of 70 N. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Ес. 22 THE VERTICAL DISTANCE BETWEEN THE HANDLEBAR GRIPS AND THE SEAT SURFACE 


4.5.2 Handlebar Grips and Plugs 


The ends of the handlebar shall be fitted with 
handgrips or end plugs. When subjected to freezing 
test and hot water test, the handgrips or plugs shall 
withstand the specified removal forces. 


4.5.2.1 Freezing test 


Immerse the handlebar, with handlebar grips or 
plugs fitted, in water at room temperature for 1 h 
and then place the handlebar in a freezer until the 


28 


handlebar is at a temperature lower than — 5 ?C. 
Remove the handlebar from the freezer and allow 
the temperature of the handlebar to reach — 5 ?C, 
and then apply a force of 70 N to the grip or plug in 
the loosening direction as shown in Fig. 20. 
Maintain the force until the temperature of the 
handlebar has reached 5 ?C. It shall be permitted to 
create a hole in the plug to allow for the testing 
fixture to be fitted so long as the hole does not 
affect the seat of the plug in the Handlebar and the 
fixture does not contact the handlebar during the 
test. 


Кеу 

1 Handlebar grip; 

2 Handlebar; 

3 Drawing attachment; 
4 Hooking ring; and 

5 Clearance. 


NOTE — The hooking ring can be divided. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


FIG. 23 EXAMPLE OF HANDLEBAR GRIP DRAWING ATTACHMENT 


4.5.2.2 Hot water test 


Immerse the handlebar, with handlebar grips fitted, 
in hot water of 60 + 2 °С for 1 h. Remove the 
handlebar from the hot water, allow the handlebar to 
stabilize at ambient temperature for 30 min, and 
apply a force of 100 N to the grip in the loosening 
direction as shown in Fig. 23. Maintain this force for 
] minute. 


4.5.3 Handlebar Stem — Insertion-Depth Mark or 
Positive Stop 


The handlebar stem shall be provided with one of the 
two following alternative means of ensuring a safe 
insertion depth into the fork steerer. 


a) It shall contain а permanent, transverse 
mark, of length not less than the external 
diameter of the stem that clearly indicates 
the minimum insertion depth of the 
handlebar stem into the fork steerer. The 
insertion mark shall be located at a position 
not less than 2.5 times the external diameter 
of the handlebar stem from the bottom of 
the stem, and there shall be atleast one stem 


diameters length of contiguous, 
circumferential stem material below the 
mark. 


29 


b) It shall incorporate a permanent stop to 
prevent it from being drawn out of the fork 
steerer such as to leave the insertion less 
than the amount specified in (a) above. 


4.5.3.1 Expander bolt for handlebar stem 


The minimum failure torque of the bolt shall be at 
least 50 percent greater than the manufacturer's 
recommended maximum tightening torque, 
see 6.4 (n). 


4.5.4 Handlebar Stem to Fork Steerer — Clamping 
Requirements 


The distance ‘g’ (see Fig. 24) between the top of the 
handlebar stem and the top of the fork steerer to 
which the handlebar stem is clamped shall not be 
more than 5 mm. The upper part of the fork steerer 
to which the handlebar stem is clamped shall not be 
threaded. 


The dimension ‘g’ shall also ensure that the proper 
adjustment of the steering system can be achieved. 


For aluminum and composite fork steerer, any 
internal device that could damage the internal 
surface of the fork steerer should be avoided. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 


g Distance between the upper, clamping part of the Handlebar stem and the upper part of the Fork 


steerer; 
1 Handlebar stem; 
2 Extended fork steerer; 
3 Spacer rings; 
4 Head set; and 
5 Head tube. 


ЕС. 24 CLAMPING BETWEEN THE HANDLEBAR STEM AND FORK STEERER 


4.5.5 Steering Stability 


The steering shall be free to turn through at least an 
angle of 0] either side of the straight-ahead position 
and shall exhibit no tight spots, stiffness, or 
slackness in the bearings when correctly adjusted. 
The values are given in Table 5. 


A minimum of 25 percent of the total mass of the 
bicycle and rider shall act on the front wheel when 
the rider is holding the handlebar grips and sitting on 


the saddle, with the saddle and rider in their most 
rearward positions. For recommended steering 
geometry, see also Annex D. 


4.5.6 Steering Assembly — Static strength and 
Security Tests 


4.5.6.1 Handlebar stem — lateral bending test 


Table 5 Steering Angle 


(Clause 4.5.5) 

SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking and Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

1) Steering angle, 01 60 60 30 30 
(degree) 


4.5.6.1.1 General 


This test is intended for stem manufacturers who do 
not produce handlebars. 


4.5.6.1.2 Requirement 


When tested by the method described in 4.5.6.1.3, 
there shall be no cracking or fracture of the stem and 


30 


the permanent deformation measured at the point of 
application of the test force and in the direction of 
the test force shall not exceed 10 mm. For general 
crack detection methods, see Annex E. 


Handlebar stems can influence test failures of 
handlebars but handlebars do not usually influence 
test failures of stems. For these reasons, a handlebar 
is always to be tested mounted on a stem but stems 


can be tested with a solid bar in place of a handlebar. 


4.5.6.1.3 Test Method 


For stems which have a quill for insertion into a 
fork steerer, clamp the quill securely in a fixture to 
the minimum insertion depth as specified in 4.5.3, 
or for stem extensions which clamp directly 


IS 10613 : 2023 


on to an extended fork stem, attach the extension to a 
fork stem according to the manufacturer's instructions 
and clamp this fork steerer securely in a fixture to the 
appropriate height. Assemble a test bar to the stem, 
and apply a force of F] at a distance of d from the axis 
of the stem as shown in Table 6 and Fig. 25. Maintain 
this force for 1 minute. 


Table 6 Forces and Distances on Handlebars 
(Clause 4.5.6.1.3) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking and Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Force, ЕІ (№ 600 600 1 000 1 000 
ii) Distance, d (mm) 300 300 300 230 


a) Combined stem and quill 


Key 

1 Minimum insertion depth; 
2 Clamping block; and 

3 Solid-steel bar. 


b) Stem extension 


FIG. 25 HANDLEBAR STEM — LATERAL BENDING TEST 


4.5.6.2 Handlebar and stem assembly — lateral 
bending test 


4.5.6.2.1 General 


This test is for manufacturers who produce 
handlebars and stems or for cycle manufacturers. 


4.5.6.2.2 Requirement 


When tested by the method described in 4.5.6.2.3, 
there shall be no cracking or fracture of the 
handlebar, stem, or clamp-bolt and the permanent 
deformation measured at the point of application of 
the test force shall not exceed 15 mm. For general 
crack detection methods, see Annex E. 


31 


4.5.6.2.3 Test Method 


Assemble the handlebar and stem in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions and, unless the 
handlebar and stem are permanently connected, for 
example, by welding or brazing, align the grips 
portion of the handlebar in a plane perpendicular to 
the stem axis [see Fig. 26 (a) or Fig. 27 (a)]. For 
stems which have a quill for insertion into a fork 
steerer, clamp the quill securely in a fixture to the 
minimum insertion depth, or for stem extensions 
which clamp directly on to an extended fork steerer, 
attach the extension to a fork steerer according to the 
manufacturer's instructions and clamp this fork 
steerer securely in a fixture to the appropriate height. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Apply a force of F2 (see Table 7) at a distance of 50 to the axis of the fork steerer as shown in Fig. 26 or 
mm from the free end of the Handlebar and parallel 27. Maintain this force for 1 minute. 


Table 7 Forces on Handlebars 


(Clause 4.5.6.2.3) 
SI Bicycle Type City and Young Adult Mountain Racing Bicycles 
No. trekking/Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles 
Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Force, F2, (№ 600 600 1 000 1 000 


a) Orientation of adjustable handlebars 


Fo 


b) Combined Stem and Quill C) Stem extension 


Key 
1 Minimum insertion depth; and 


2 Clamping block. 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 


FIG. 26 HANDLE BAR AND STEM ASSEMBLY — LATERAL BENDING TEST FOR CITY AND 
TREKKING/ROADSTER/SLR YOUNG ADULT AND MOUNTAIN BICYCLES 


32 


IS 10613 : 2023 


a) Orientation of adjustable Handlebars b) Position of Applied forces 


Key 
1 Clamping fixture. 


FIG. 27 HANDLE BAR AND STEM ASSEMBLY — LATERAL BENDING TEST FOR CITY AND TREKKING/ 
ROADSTER/SLR AND RACING BICYCLES 


4.5.6.3 Handlebar-stem — forward bending test 
4.5.6.3.1 General 


Conduct the test in two stages on the same assembly 
as follows. 


4.5.6.3.2 Requirement for stage 1 


When tested by the method described in 4.5.6.3.3.1, 
there shall be no visible cracks or fractures and the 
permanent deformation measured at the point of 
application of the test force and in the direction of 
the test force shall not exceed 10 mm. For general 
crack detection methods, see Annex E. 


4.5.6.3.2.1 Test method for stage 1 


For stems which have a quill for insertion into a fork 


steerer, clamp the quill securely in a fixture to the 
minimum insertion depth, or for stem extensions 
which clamp directly on to an extended fork steerer, 
clamp the handlebar stem extension securely on to a 
suitable, solid-steel bar and clamp the bar in securely 
in a fixture, the projecting length of the bar not being 
critical. 


Apply a force of F3 through the handlebar 
attachment point in a forward and downward 
direction and at 45° to the axis of the quill or steel 
bar as shown in Fig. 28 and maintain this force for 
1 minute or the fixture may be adjusted accordingly 
to get the desired angle 45° of the load application. 
The forces are given in Table 8. Release the test 
force and measure any permanent deformation. 


If the handlebar stem meets the requirement of 
4.5.6.3.2, conduct stage 2 of the test. 


Table 8 Forces on Stems 
(Clause 4.5.6.3.2.1 and 4.5.6.3.3.1) 


SI Bicycle City and Trekking/ 


No. Type Roadster/SLR Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Stage 1 1600 
Еогсе, ЁЗ, (ЇЧ) 
ii) Stage 2 2 000 


Force, F4, (N) 


33 


Young Mountain Racing 
Adult Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(4) (5) (6) 
1 600 1 600 1 600 
2 000 2 600 2 300 


IS 10613 : 2023 


a) Stem Extension 


c) One-piece Stem-Handlebar 


Key 
1 Clamping fixture; 
2 Solid-steel bar; and 


3 Minimum insertion depth. 


ЕС. 28 HANDLE BAR STEM — FORWARD BENDING TEST 


4.5.6.3.3 Requirement for stage 2 


When tested by the method described in 4.5.6.3.3.1 
there shall be no visible cracks or fractures. For 
general crack detection methods, see Annex E. 


4.5.6.3.3.1 Test method for stage 2 


With the handlebar stem mounted as in stage 1 (see 
4.5.6.3.2.1), apply a progressively increasing force in the 
same position and direction as in 4.5.6.3.2.1 until 


34 


either the force reaches a maximum of F4 or until 
the Handlebar stem deflects 50 mm measured at the 
point of application of the test force and in the 
direction of the test force. If the stem does not yield 
or continue to yield, maintain the force for 1 minute. 
The forces are given in Table 8. 


4.5.6.4 Handlebar to handlebar stem — torsional 
security test 


When tested by the method described in 4.5.6.4.1, 


there shall be no movement of the handlebar relative 
to the handlebar stem. 


4.5.6.4.1 Test method 


Assemble the handlebar correctly in the handlebar 
stem with the locking system tightened in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and 
clamp the handlebar stem securely in a fixture to the 
minimum insertion depth and with its axis vertical. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Apply a torque of T] about the centerline of the 
stem-clamp. Divide the torque equally, by vertically, 
downward forces applied to both sides of the 
Handlebar and maintain the forces for 1 minute. The 
torque is given in Table 9. 


NOTE — The exact method of applying the torque will 
vary with the type of handlebar, and an example is shown 
in Fig. 29 (T1 = F x L) 


Table 9 Torque on Handlebar 
(Clause 4.5.6.4.1) 


Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) Torque, ТІ (Nm) 60 


Young Adult Mountain Racing 
Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(4) (5) (6) 
60 80 60 


Key 
1 Minimum insertion depth; and 
2 Clamping block. 


FIG.29 HANDLEBAR TO HANDLEBAR STEM 


4.5.6.5 Handlebar stem to fork steerer — Torsional 
security test 


When tested by the method described in 4.5.6.5.1, 
there shall be no movement of the handlebar stem 
relative to the fork steerer. 


4.5.6.5.1 Test Method 


Assemble the fork steerer correctly in the frame and 


35 


attach the handlebar stem to the fork steerer with the 
locking system tightened in accordance with the 
manufacturer 's instructions, and apply a torque of 
T2, once in each direction of possible rotation by 
applying a force on the test bar in a plane 
perpendicular to the axis of the fork steerer/ 
handlebar stem. Maintain each torque for 1 minute. 
The torque is given in Table 10. The exact method 
of applying the torque can vary, and an example is 
shown in Fig. 30. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 10 Torque on Handlebar Stem 
(Clause 4.5.6.5.1) 


Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster /SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Torque, 72, (Nm) 40 40 50 40 


Key 
] Frame and Fork assembly; and 
2 Solid-steel bar. 


FIG.30 HANDLEBAR STEM TO FORK STEERER — TORSIONAL SECURITY TEST 


4.5.6.6 Bar end to handlebar — Torsional security (see Table 11) to the following position: 
test 

a) If the bar end's length is more than 100 
When tested by the method described in 4.5.6.6.1, mm, at a distance of 50 mm from the free 
there shall be no movement of the bar ends in end of the bar end [see Fig. 31 (a)]; 


relation to the handlebar. 
b) If the bar end's length is from 50 mm to 


4.5.6.6.1 Test Method 100 mm, at a distance of 50 mm from the 
axis of the handlebar [see Fig. 31 (b)]; and 

с) If the bar length end's length is less than 50 
mm, apply a load to the mid-point of the bar 
end [see Fig. 31 c)]. Maintain this force for 
] minute. 


Secure the handlebar in a suitable fixture and 


assemble the bar end on the handlebar tightening the 
fixings їп accordance with the bar end 
manufacturer's instructions. Apply a force of F5 


36 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 11 Forces on Bar End 
(Clause 4.5.6.6.1) 


SI Bicycle City and 
No Type trekking/Roadster/SLR 
Bicycles 
(I) (2) (3) 
1) Force, F5 (N) 300 


Young Adult Mountain Racing 
Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(4) (5) (6) 
300 500 300 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 


a) L » 100 


Key 
L Bar end's length 


b) 1007 L > 50 


c)50> L 


Ес.31 BAR END TO HANDLEBAR — TORSIONAL SECURITY TEST 


4.5.6.7 Aerodynamic extensions to Handlebar — 
Torsional Security Test 


When a handlebar is suitable for use with 
aerodynamic extensions, the extension/handlebar/ 
handlebar stem assembly shall with stand the 
following security test. 


When tested by the method described in 4.5.6.7.1, 
there shall be no movement of the extension in 
relation to the handlebar and of the handlebar in 
relation to the handlebar stem. 


37 


4.5.6.7.1 Test method 


Secure the handlebar in the stem intended for use 
and assemble the extension on the handlebar 
tightening all the fixings in accordance with the 
extension, handlebar, and handlebar stem 
manufacturer’s instructions. The steering axis 
should be vertical. Apply a vertical force of 300 N 
to the extension on the position giving the maximum 
torque to the clamps as shown in Fig. 32 (a) and (b). 
The exact method of applying the force can vary 
with the type of aerodynamic extension, and an 
example is shown in Fig. 32. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


3 Type A 


b) Туре B 


FIG. 32 AERODYNAMIC EXTENSION TO HANDLEBAR — TORSIONAL SECURITY TEST 


4.5.7 Handlebar and Stem Assembly — Fatigue Test 
4.5.7.1 General 


Handlebar stems can influence test failures of 
handlebars and, for this reason, a handlebar shall 
always be tested mounted on a stem, but it is 
permitted to test a stem with a solid bar in place of 
the handlebar and bar ends with dimensions 
corresponding to handlebars/bar ends suitable for 
that stem. 


When the fatigue test is for the stem only, the 
manufacturer of the stem shall specify the types and 
sizes of handlebar for which the stem is intended and 
the test shall be based on the most severe 
combination. Conduct the test in two stages on the 
same assembly. 


4.5.7.2 Requirement for stage I and stage 2 


When tested by the method described in 4.5.7.2.1 or 
4.5.7.2.2, there shall be no visible cracks or fractures 
in any part of the handlebar and stem assembly or 
any bolt failure. For general crack detection 
methods, see Annex E. 


For composite handlebars or stems, the running 
displacements (peak-to-peak value) at the points 
where the test forces are applied shall not increase 
by more than 20 percent of the initial values. 


4.5.7.2.1 Test method for stage 1 


Unless the handlebar and stem are permanently 
connected, for example, by welding or brazing, 
align the grips of portion of the handlebar in a plane 
perpendicular to the stem axis [see Fig. 33 (a)] and 
secure the handlebar to the stem according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


Clamp the handlebar stem securely in a fixture to the 


38 


minimum insertion depth as specified in 4.5.7.3 or 
in the case of a stem extension which is intended to 
be clamped to an extended fork steerer, secure the 
extension using the manufacturer’s recommended 
tightening procedure to an extended fork steerer 
which is secured in fixture to the appropriate length. 


a) For handlebars where the manufacturer 
states that they are not intended for use with 
bar ends, Apply fully reversed forces of F6 
at a position 50 mm from the free end for 
each side of the handlebar for 100 000 
cycles, with the forces at each end of the 
handlebar being out of phase with each 
other and parallel to the axis of the fork 
steerer as shown in Fig. 33 (a). 


b) The forces are given in Table 12. The 
maximum test frequency shall Бе 
maintained as specified in 4.5.7.2. 


c) Where a bicycle manufacturer fits bar ends, 
fit the bar ends to the handlebar according 
to Ше X manufacturer's tightening 
instructions but with the bar ends located in 
a plane perpendicular to the handlebar 
stem axis and apply the out-of-phase forces 
to the bar ends, as shown in Fig. 31 and 
Fig. 34 (a). 


d) Where a handlebar manufacturer specifies 
that his handlebars are suitable for use with 
bar ends, conduct the test with the out-of- 
phase forces applied to simulated bar ends, 
as shown in Fig. 34 (b). 


If the handlebar meets the requirement as specified 
in 4.5.7.2, remove any bar ends and conduct stage 2 
of the test with the assembly in the same mountings. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 12 Forces on Handlebars and Bar Ends 
(Clause 4.5.7.2.1, 4.5.7.3.1 and 4.5.7.3.2) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Roadster/ Young Mountain Racing 
No. SLR Bicycles Adult Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Stage 1 200 200 270 280 
Force, F6, (N) 
ii) Stage 2 250 250 450 400 


Force, F7, (N) 


a) Stage 1 — Out-of-phase loading 


b) Stage 2 — In-phase loading 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Fic. 33 HANDLEBAR AND STEM — FATIGUE TESTS FOR CITY AND TREKKING /ROADSTER/SLR YOUNG 
ADULT, AND MOUNTAIN BICYCLES 


a) Test for Handlebar fitted with bar ends 
(Plan view) 


b) Test for Handlebar intended for bar ends 


(Plan view) 


FIG. 34 HANDLE BAR INCORPORATING BAR ENDS — OUT OF PHASE FATIGUE TESTS FOR CITY AND 
TREKKING/ROADSTER/SLR YOUNG ADULT, AND MOUNTAIN BICYCLE 


4.5.7.2.2 Test method for stage 2 
Apply fully reversed forces of F7 at a position 


50 mm from the free end for each side of the 
handlebar for 100 000 cycles, with the forces at 


39 


each end of the handlebar being in phase with each 
other parallel to the axis of the handlebar stem, as 
shown in Fig. 33 (b).The maximum test frequency 
shall be maintained as specified in 5.3. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


4.5.7.3 Test method for Racing Bicycles 
4.5.7.3.1 Test method for stage 1 


Unless the handlebar and stem are permanently 
connected, e.g., by welding or brazing, align the 
hand grips or the equivalent parts of the handlebar 
in a plane perpendicular to the steering axis (see 
Fig. 35), and secure the handlebar to the stem 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 


Clamp the handlebar stem securely in a fixture to the 
minimum insertion depth as specified in 4.5.3, or in 
the case of a stem extension which is intended to be 
clamped to an extended fork steerer, secure the 
stem-extension using the manufacturer’s 
recommended tightening procedure, to an extended 
fork steerer which is secured in the fixture with the 
appropriate length projecting. 


Attach to the handlebar two suitable devices that 
reproduce the brake-lever fixtures without either 
reducing or increasing the local handlebar strength. 
Each device shall incorporate a pin for connection to 
a ball joint with its axes located 15 mm from the 
outer surface of the handlebar, or such greater 


distance which accurately reproduces the position of 
the appropriate brake lever pivot (see Fig. 35). 


Through the ball joints, apply reversed forces of F6 
to the pin of the device on each side of the handlebar 
for 100 000 cycles, with the forces at each hide of 
the handlebar being out of phase with each other and 
parallel to the axis of the fork steerer as shown in 
Fig. 36 (a). The forces are given in Table 12. The 
maximum test frequency shall be maintained as 
specified in 5.3. 


If the assembly meets the requirement as specified 
in 4.5.7.2 conduct stage 2 of the test on the same 
assembly, in the same mountings. 


4.5.7.3.2 Test method for stage 2 


Through the ball joints, apply reversed forces of F7 
to the pin of the device on each side of the handlebar 
for 100 000 cycles, with the forces at each side of 
the handlebar being in phase with each other and 
parallel to the axis of the handlebar stem of the fork 
steerer, as shown in Fig. 36 (b). The forces are given 
in Table 12. The maximum test frequency shall be 
maintained as specified in 5.3. 


Key 
1 Ball joint. 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


FIG. 35 DEVICE REPRODUCING THE BRAKE FIXTURE FOR RACING BICYCLES 


IS 10613 : 2023 


a) Stage 1 — Out-of-Phase Loading b) Stage 2 — In-Phase Loading 


Key 
] Minimum insertion depth 


FIG. 36 HANDLEBAR AND STEM ASSEMBLY — FATIGUE TEST FOR RACING BICYCLES 


4.6 Frames there shall be no visible cracks or fractures of the 
frame. For general crack detection methods, see 
4.6.1 Suspension-Frames — Special Requirements Annex E. 
The design shall be such that if the spring or damper The permanent deformation measured between the 
fails, the Tyre shall not contact any part of the frame axis of the wheel axles shall not exceed the 
or the assembly carrying the rear wheel shall following values: 
become detached from the rest of the rame see also 
Annex F. a) 30 mm where a Fork is fitted; and 
b) Where a dummy fork is fitted in place of a 
4.6.2 Frame — Impact Test (Falling Mass) fork, the values are given in Table 13. For 
dummy fork characteristics, see also 
When tested by the method described in 4.6.2.2 Annex G. 
Table 13 Values of Permanent Deformation (Falling Mass) 
(Clause 4.6.2) 
SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Permanent deformation, 10 10 10 15 
(mm) 
4.6.2.1 General an 80 kg rider seated on the bicycle. For young 


adult bicycles, secure the suspension in a position 
equivalent to that which would occur with a 40 kg 
rider seated on the bicycle; if the type of suspension 
system does not permit it to be locked, then replace 


Manufacturers of frames are permitted to conduct 
the test with a dummy fork (see also Annex G) 
fitted in place of a front fork. 


Where a frame is convertible for male and female the spring/damper unit by a solid link of the 
riders by the removal of a bar, test it with the bar appropriate size and with end fittings similar to those 
removed. Where a suspension fork is fitted, test the of the spring/damper unit. 


assembly with the fork extended to its unloaded free 
length. Where a rear suspension system is 
incorporated in the frame, secure the suspension in a Assemble a roller of mass less than or equal to 1 kg 
position equivalent to that which would occur with and with dimensions conforming to those shown in 


4.6.2.2 Test method 


41 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Fig. 37 in the fork. The hardness of roller shall be 
not less than 60 HRC at impact surface. If a dummy 
fork is used in place of a fork; the bar shall have a 
rounded end equivalent in shape to the roller. Hold 
the frame-fork or frame-bar assembly vertically with 
clamping to a rigid fixture by the rear-axle 
attachment points as shown in Fig. 37. 


Rest a striker of mass 22.5 kg on the roller in the 
Fork dropouts or on the rounded end of the dummy 
Fork and measure the wheelbase. Raise the striker to 


a height of h1 above the low-mass roller and release 
it to strike the roller or the steel bar at a point in line 
with the wheel centers and against the direction of 
the fork rake or rake of the bar. The drop heights are 
given in Table 14. The striker will bounce and this 
is normal. When the striker has come to rest on the 
roller or dummy Fork, measure the wheelbase again. 


If the fork fails, the frame shall be tested with 
a dummy fork, see also Annex H. 


Table 14 Drop Heights 


(Clause 4.6.2.2) 
Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking / Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Drop height, 21, (mm) 180 180 360 212 


Key 


h] Drop height 

1 Wheelbase; 
Permanent deformation; 
22.5 kg striker; 


S 


Rigid mounting for rear-axle attachment point; and 


2 
3 
4 Low-mass roller (1 kg max.); 
5 
6 


Direction of rearward impact. 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 
FIG. 37 FRAME AND FRONT FORK ASSEMBLY — IMPACT TEST (FALLING MASS) 


42 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 15 Values of Permanent Deformation (Falling Frame) 
(Clause 4.6.3) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Adult Bicycles Bicycles 
Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Permanent deformation (mm) 60 60 60 15 


4.6.3 Frame and Front Fork Assembly — Impact 
Test (Falling Frame) 


When tested by the method described in 4.6.3.2, 
there shall be no visible cracks or fractures in the 
assembly and after the second impact there shall be 
no separation of any parts of any suspension system. 
The permanent deformation measured between the 
axis of the wheel axles shall not exceed the values 
specified in Table 15. For general crack detection 
methods, see Annex E. 


4.6.3.1 General 


Manufacturers of complete bicycles shall conduct 
the test with the frame fitted with the appropriate 
front fork. For manufacturers of frames, where the 
fork intended for the frame is not available, the test 
can be conducted with the frame fitted with a fork 
which meets the requirements of the fork impact test 
as described in 4.7.5. Where a frame is convertible 
for male and female riders by the removal of a bar, 
test it with the bar removed. Where a suspension 
fork is fitted, it shall be a tits unloaded length prior 
to the impact. If the spring/damper unit can be 
locked, it shall be locked in its unloaded length 
position. If the spring/damper cannot be locked, use 
one of the two following alternative procedures: 


a) Secure the fork at its extended length by an 
external locking method; and 


b) Replace the fork by a rigid fork which is 
known to meet the requirements of the 
impact test described in 4.7.5 and of a 
length which is consistent with an 80 kg (in 
case of young adult bicycles, apply a 40 kg) 
rider seated in a normal riding position on 
the bicycle when it is equipped with the 
suspension fork. 


43 


Where a rear suspension system is incorporated in 
the frame, secure the spring/damper unit in a 
position equivalent to that which would occur with 
an 80 kg (in case of young adult bicycles, apply 
40 kg) rider seated on the bicycle; if the type of 
suspension system does not permit it to be locked, 
then replace the spring/damper unit by a solid link 
of the appropriate size and with end fittings similar 
to those of the spring/damper unit. 


4.6.3.2 Test method 


Conduct the test on the assembly used for the test in 
4.6.2, or, in the case of a frame manufacturer who 
does not make forks, with the same frame with a 
suitable fork fitted (see 4.6.3.1). 


As shown in Fig. 38, mount the frame-fork assembly 
at its rear axle attachment points so that it is free to 
rotate about the rear axle in a vertical plane. Support 
the front fork on a flat steel anvil so that the frame is 
in its normal position of use. Securely fix mass М1 
to the seat-post as shown in Fig. 38 with the center 
of gravity at distance (D = 75 mm) along the seat- 
post axis from the insertion point, and fix masses of 
M2 and M3 (see Table 16) to the top of the steering 
head and the bottom bracket, respectively, as shown 
in Fig. 38. 


Measure the wheelbase with the three masses in 
place. Rotate the assembly about the rear axle until 
the distance between the low-mass roller and the 
anvil is /2, and then allow the assembly to fall freely 
to impact on the anvil. 


Repeat the test and then measure the wheelbase 
again with the three masses in place and the roller 
resting on the anvil. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 16 Drop Heights and Distribution of Masses at Seat Post, Steering Head, and Bottom Bracket 
(Clause 4.6.3.2) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Adult Bicycles Bicycles 
Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Mass | seat-post,M1 (Kg) 50 40 30 30 
ii) Mass 2 steering head, M2 (Kg) 10 10 10 10 
iii) Mass 3 bottom bracket, M3 (Kg) 30 20 50 50 
iv) Drop height, /2, (mm) 200 200 300 200 


Key 

Wheelbase; 

Permanent deformation; 

Mass 1 (M1); 

Mass 2 (M2); 

Mass 3 (M3) 

Rigid mounting for rear-axle attachment point; 
Steel anvil; 

Distance to the center of gravity (75 mm); and 
h2 Drop height. 


оч сч BRUT. 


FIG. 38 FRAME AND FRONT FORK ASSEMBLY — IMPACT TEST (FALLING FRAME) 


4.6.4 Frame —Fatigue Test with Pedaling Forces 


When tested by the method described in 4.6.4.2, 
there shall be no visible cracks or fractures in any 
part of the Frame, and there shall be no separation of 
any parts of the suspension system. For composite 
frames, the running displacements (peak-to-peak 


44 


values) at the points where the test forces are applied 
shall not increase by more than 20 percent of the 
initial values of displacement (peak to peak value) 
taken after 1 000 cycles апа before 
2 000 cycles.For general crack detection methods, 
see Annex E. 


4.6.4.1 General 
All types of frames shall be subjected to this test. 


In tests on suspension frames with pivoted joints, 
adjust the spring, air pressure, or damper to provide 
maximum resistance, or, for a pneumatic damper in 
which the air pressure cannot be adjusted, replace 
the suspension unit with a rigid link, ensuring that it 
send fixings and lateral rigidity accurately simulate 
those of the original unit. For suspension, frames in 
which the chain stays do not have pivots but rely on 
flexing, ensure that any dampers are set to provide 
the minimum resistance in order to ensure adequate 
testing of the frame. 


4.6.4.2 Test method 


Use a new frame/fork assembly fitted with standard 
head tube bearings for the test. A dummy fork 
(see also Annex G) of the same length and at least 
the same stiffness as the original fork can replace 
the front fork. 


If a genuine fork is used, failures of the fork is 
possible; therefore, a dummy fork stiffer and 
stronger than the genuine fork should be used. 


Where a frame is convertible for male and female 
riders by the removal of a bar, test it with the bar 
removed. 


Mount the frame assembly on a base as shown in 
Fig. 36 with the fork or dummy fork secured by its 
axle to a rigid mount of height Rw (the radius of the 
wheel/tyre assembly + 30 mm) and with the hub free 
to swivel on the axle. Secure the rear drop outs by 
means of the axle to a stiff, vertical link of the same 
height as that of the front, rigid mount, the upper 
connection of the link being free to swivel about the 
axis of the axle but providing rigidity in a lateral 
plane, and the lower end of the link being fitted with 
a ball-joint. 


Fit a crank, chain wheel and chain assembly or, 
preferably, a strong, stiff, replacement assembly to 


IS 10613 : 2023 


the bottom bracket as shown in Fig. 39 and described 
in (a) or (b) below: 


a) If a crank/chain-wheel assembly is used, 
incline both cranks forwards апа 
downwards at an angle of 45° + 2.0° to the 
horizontal and secure the front end of the 
chain to the middle chain wheel of three, 
the smaller chain wheel of two, or the only 
chain wheel. Attach the rear end of the 
chain to the rear axle and perpendicular to 
the axis of the axle; and 

b) Ifan adaptor assembly is used (as shown in 

Fig. 39), ensure that the assembly is free to 

swivel about the axis of the bottom-bracket 

and that both replacement arms are 175 mm 

long (L) and that they are both inclined 

forwards and downwards at an angle of 45? 

+ 2.0? to the horizontal. Secure the position 

of the crank replacement arms by a vertical 

arm (which replaces the chain wheel) and a 

tie rod which has ball joints at both ends 

and which is attached to the rear axle 
perpendicular to the axis of the rear axle. 

The length of the vertical arm (Кс) shall be 

75 mm and the axis of the tie rod shall be 

parallel to and 50 mm from the vertical 

plane through the centerline of the Frame. 


Subject each pedal spindle (or equivalent adaptor 
component) to a repeated downward force of F1 at a 
position 150 mm from the centerline of the frame in 
a vertical, transverse plane and inclined at 
7.5? + 2.0? to the fore/aft plane of the frame as 
shown in Table 17 and Fig. 39. During application 
of these test forces, ensure that the force on a Pedal 
spindle falls to 5 percent or less of the peak force 
before commencing application of the test force to 
the other pedal spindle. 


Apply the test forces for 100 000 test cycles, where 
one test cycle consists of the application and 
removal of the two test forces. The maximum test 
frequency shall be maintained as specified in 5.3. 


Table 17 Forces on Pedal Spindle 


(Clause 4.6.4.2) 
SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Adult Bicycles Bicycles 
Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Force, F1, (N) 1 000 1 000 1 200 1 100 


45 


IS 10613 : 2023 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Key 

Rw Height of rigid mount and vertical link; 
Rc Length of vertical arm (75 mm); 
Length of crank replacement (175 mm); 
Rigid mount; 

Vertical link; 

Ball joint; 

Adaptor assembly; 

Vertical arm; 

Tie rod; and 

Centerline of tie rod. 


м сл шоок г 


ЕС. 39 FRAME — FATIGUE TEST WITH PEDALING FORCES 


4.6.5 Frame Fatigue Test with Horizontal Forces 
4.6.5.1 General 


Where a Frame is convertible for male and female 
riders by the removal of a bar, remove the bar. 


It is not necessary for a genuine fork to be fitted, 
provided that any substitute fork is of the same 
length as the intended fork (see Annex G) and it is 
correctly installed in the steering-head bearings. For 
a suspension fork, lock it at a length equivalent to 
that with an 80 kg rider seated on the bicycle either 
by adjusting the spring/damper or by external 
means. 


In tests on suspension frames with pivoted joints, 
lock the moving part of the frame into a position as 
would occur with an 80 kg rider seated on the 
bicycle. This can be achieved by locking the 
suspension unit in an appropriate position or, if the 
type of suspension system does not permit it to be 
locked, then the suspension system can be replaced 
by a solid link of the appropriate compressed size. 


46 


Ensure that the axes of the front and rear axles are 
horizontally in line, as shown in Fig. 40. For 
suspension frames in which the chain stays do not 
have pivots but rely on flexing, ensure that any 
dampers are set to provide the minimum resistance 
in order to ensure adequate testing of the frame. 


4.6.5.2 Test method 


Mount the frame in its normal attitude and secured 
at the rear drop outs so that it is not restrained in a 
rotary sense (that is, preferably by the rear axle) as 
shown in Fig. 40. Ensure that the axes of the front 
and rear axles are horizontally inline. 


Apply cycles of dynamic, horizontal forces of F2 in 
a forward direction and F3 in a rearward direction to 
the front fork dropouts for С] cycles as shown in 
Table 18 and Fig. 40, with the front fork constrained 
in vertical direction but free to move in a fore/aft 
direction under the applied forces. The maximum 
test frequency shall be maintained as specified in 
5.3. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 18 Forces and Cycles on Front Fork Dropouts 


(Clause 4.6.5.2) 
Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Adult Bicycles Bicycles 
Bicycles 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Forward force, F2, (N) 450 450 450 450 

ii) Rearward force, F3, (N) 450 450 600 600 

Ш) Test cycles, СІ, (Number) 100 000 100 000 50 000 100 000 
Key 


] Free-running guided roller; and 


2 Rigid, pivoted mounting for rear-axle attachment point 


ЕС. 40 FRAME — FATIGUE TEST WITH HORIZONTAL FORCES 


4.6.6 Frame Fatigue Test with Vertical Forces 
4.6.6.1 General 


Where a frame is convertible for male and female 
riders by the removal of a bar, remove the bar. 


Where a suspension frame has adjustable brackets or 
linkages to vary the resistance of the bicycle against 
the ground-contact forces or to vary the attitude of 
the bicycle, arrange the positions of these 
adjustable components to ensure maximum forces 
in the frame. Secure the rear suspension as 
described in 4.6.4.1. 


If a suspension fork is fitted lock it at a length 
equivalent to that with an 80 kg (in case of young 
adult bicycles, apply 40 kg) rider seated on the 
bicycle either by adjusting the spring/damper or by 
external means. 


4.6.6.2 Test method 


Mount the frame in its normal attitude and secured 


47 


at the rear drop outs so that is not restrained in a 
rotary sense (that is., preferably by the rear axle) as 
shown in Fig. 41. Fit a suitable roller to the front 
axle in order to permit the frame to flex in a fore/aft 
sense under the test forces. 


Insert intended seat post at minimum insertion depth 
or equivalent to a seat stem to a depth of 75 mm in 
the top of the seat tube and secure this to the 
manufacturer's instructions by the normal clamp. 
Securely attach a horizontal, rearward extension 
(E in Fig. 41) to the top of this bar such that its 
length (dimension А3 in Fig. 41) places point H in a 
position equivalent to that of the center of the saddle 
clamp with the bicycle at its maximum saddle height 
recommended for the particular frame, or, if the 
maximum saddle height information is not available 
dimension, Л3 shall be 250 mm. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Apply cycles of dynamic, vertically-downward 
forces of F4 at a point 70 mm behind the intersection 


ОЁ the axes of the solid steel bar and the extension 


piece, E, as shown in Fig. 41 for 50 000 test cycles. 
The forces are given in Table 19. The maximum test 
frequency shall be maintained as specified in 5.3. 


Table 19 Forces on Seat Stem 


(Clause 4.6.6.2) 
SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Force, F4, (N) 1 000 500 1 200 1 200 
H ir „2 
Iz ax — 
/ / 
= / /|| TO E 
t 
| 2 ] F4 
/ lj 
M ] 
i 
/ NS) 
i | 4 
-- 
Cj | i Le 
All dimensions are in millimeters 

Key 


E Horizontal, rearward extension; 


H Position equivalent to that of the center of the saddle clamp with the bicycle; 


1 Free-running roller; 
2 Steel bar; 


3 Locked suspension unit or solid link for pivoted chain stays; and 
4 Rigid, pivoted mounting for rear axle attachment point. 


FIG. 41 FRAME — FATIGUE TEST WITH VERTICAL FORCES 


4.6.7 Frame and Fork Assembly — Vibration Test 
4.6.7.1 General 


4.6.7.1.1 When tested by the method described in 
Annex J, there shall be no visible fractures, 
deformation and distortion in any of the part of 
frame-fork assembly. 


4.7 Front Fork 
4.7.1 General 


4.7.2, 4.7.4, 4.7.5 and 4.7.6 apply to all types of 
Forks. In the strength tests in 4.7.4, 4.7.5, 4.7.6 and 
4.7.7, a Suspension Fork shall be tested in its free, 
uncompressed length condition. 


48 


4.7.2 Means of Location of the Axle and Wheel 
Retention 


The slots or other means of location for the wheel 
axle within the front fork shall be such that when the 
axle or cones are firmly abutting the top face of the 
slots, the front wheel remains central within the fork. 
The front fork and wheel shall also fulfill the 
requirements of 4.8.4 and 4.8.4.5. 


4.7.3 Suspension Forks — Special Requirements 
4.7.3.1 Tyre clearance test 


When tested by the method described in 4.7.3.2, the 
tyre shall not contact the crown of the fork, nor shall 
the components separate. 


4.7.3.2 Suspension forks — tyre —clearance test 


For the tyre-clearance test, a suspension fork shall 
first be checked and adjusted if necessary, according 
to the following: 


a) Inflate the Tyre to the maximum inflation 
pressure; 


b) Place the fork in uncompressed condition 
to have the highest displacement between 
suspension stanchion legs and suspension 
lower legs; 


c) Ifthe suspension fork can be locked, place 
the fork in the open position; 


d) Ifthe fork has a spring adjust device, place 
it in the softest position; 


e) Ifthe fork has a pneumatic device, inflate 
the one or the two chambers at their 
minimum pressures according the 
manufacturer's instruction; and 


f) Ifthe fork has are bound device, place it on 
the slowest position. 


With a wheel and tyre assembly fitted to the fork, 
apply a force of 2 800 N to the wheel in a direction 
towards the fork-crown and parallel to the axis of the 
fork steerer. Maintain this force for 1 minute. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


4.7.3.3 Suspension forks — tensile test 


When tested by the method described in 4.7.3.3.1, 
there shall be no detachment or loosening of any 
parts of the assembly and the tubular, telescopic 
components of any fork-leg shall not separate under 
the test force. 


4.7.3.3.1 Test method 

Mount the fork steerer securely in a suitable rigid 
mount, keeping any clamping forces away from the 
fork-crown, and apply a tensile force of 2 300 N 
distributed equally between the two dropouts in a 
direction parallel to the axis of the fork steerer and 
in the direction away from the Fork crown. Maintain 
this force for 1 minute. 


4.7.4 Front Fork — Static Bending Test 


When tested by the method described in 4.7.4.1, 
there shall be no fractures or visible cracks in any 
part of the Fork, and the permanent deformation, 
measured as the displacement of the axis of the 
wheel axle, or simulated axle in relation to the axis 
of the fork steerer, shall not exceed 10 mm. For 
general crack detection methods, see Annex E. 


4.7.4.1 Test method 


Mount the fork according to Annex G and fit a 
loading attachment and swivel on an axle located in 
the axles lots of the blades (see Fig. 42). Locate a 
deflection measuring device over the loading 
attachment in order to measure deflection and 
permanent deformation of the fork perpendicular to 
the steerer axis and in the plane of the wheel. 


Key 
] Loading attachment swivel on axle; 


2 Deflection measuring device; and 


3 Rigid mount incorporating head bearings. 


FIG. 42 FRONT FORK — STATIC BENDING TEST (TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT) 


49 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Apply a static, pre-loading force of 100 N to the 
roller perpendicular to the steerer axis, against the 
direction of travel, and in the plane of the wheel. 
Remove and repeat this loading until a consistent 
deflection reading is obtained. Adjust the deflection 
measuring device to zero. 


Increase the static force to F5 and maintain this force 
for 1 minute, then reduce the force to 100 N and 
record any permanent deformation. The forces are 
given in Table 20. 


Table 20 Forces on Loading Attachment 
(Clause 4.7.4.1) 


Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Force, F5, (№ 1 000 1000 1 500 ] 200 


4.7.5 Front Fork — Rearward Impact Test 
4.7.5.1 Forks made entirely of metal 


When tested by the method described in 4.7.5.2.1, if 
there are any fractures or visible cracks in any part 
of the fork, and the permanent deformation, 
measured as the displacement of the axis of the 
wheel axle or simulated axle in relation to the axis 
of the fork steerer exceeds 45 mm, the fork shall be 
considered to have failed. For general crack 
detection methods, see Annex E. 

If the fork meets the first test criteria, then it shall 
be subjected to a second test as described in 
4.7.5.2.2 after which it shall exhibit no fractures. If 
the Fork meets the first and second test criteria, 
then it shall be subjected to a third test as described 
in 4.7.5.2.3, irrespective of the amount of 
permanent deformation, there shall be no relative 
movement between the steerer and the crown. 


4.7.5.2 Test methods 


4.7.5.2.1 Test method 1 
Mount the fork according to Annex G as shown in 


Fig. 43. Assemble a roller of mass less than or equal 
to 1 kg and with dimensions conforming to those 
shown in Fig. 44 in the fork. The hardness of the 
roller shall be not less than 60 HRC at impact 
surface. 


Rest a striker of mass 22.5 + 0.1 kg on the roller in 
the fork dropouts such that it is exerting a force 
against the direction of travel and in the plane of the 
wheel. Position a deflection measuring device under 
the roller and record the position of the roller in a 
direction perpendicular to the axis of the fork steerer 
and in the plane of the wheel and note the vertical 
position of the fork. 


Remove the deflection measuring device, raise the 
striker through a height of h4, and release it to strike 
the roller against the rake of the fork. The drop 
heights are given in Table 21. The striker will 
bounce and this is normal. When the striker has 
come to rest on the roller, measure the permanent 
deformation under the roller see also Annex H. 


Table 21 Drop Heights 
(Clause 4.7.5.2.1 and 4.7.6.1) 
SI Bicycle Type City and Young Mountain Racing 
No. Trekking/ Adult Bicycles Bicycles 
Roadster/SLR Bicycles 
" Bicycles 
f \ 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i)  Dropheight,h4 Forks, made entirely of 180 180 360 360 
(mm) metal 
ii) Drop height, h4 Forks which have 320 320 600 640 


(mm) composite parts 


50 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Бә 


Кеу 

h4 Drop height; 

1 Low-mass roller (1 kg max.); 

2 22.5 kg striker; 

3 Rigid mount incorporating head bearings; and 
4 Direction of rearward impact. 


Ес. 43 FRONT FORK — REARWARD IMPACT TEST 


(055 max. 


Key 
] Low-mass roller (1kg Max) 


Fic. 44 Low — MASS ROLLER 


4.7.5.2.2 Test method 2 4.7.5.2.3 Test method 3 


This test is similar to that described in 4.7.5.2.1 
except the dropping height. As shown in Fig. 43, 


mount the fork used for the test in 4.7.5.2.1 and the steerer axis. The torque is given in Table 22, and 


assemble 4 low-mass roller in the fork. Raise the a typical example of test equipment is illustrated in 
striker to a height of 600 mm above the roller and Fig. 45 


release it to strike the roller against the rake of the 
fork. The section applies to forks in 4.7.5.1. 


Apply a torque of T to the assembly and maintain for 
1 minute in each direction of possible rotation about 


51 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 22 Torque on Fork 


(Clause 4.7.5.2.3) 
Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Torque, Т, (Nm) 50 50 80 80 
L3 
NN 


2 


Кеу 
1 Front fork; 


2 Fork mounting fixture (fixture representative of the head tube); 


3 Rigid mount; and 
4 Test adaptor. 


FIG. 45 FORK STEERER TORSIONAL TEST (A TYPICAL EXAMPLE) 


4.7.5.3 Forks which have composite parts 


When tested by the method described in 4.7.5.2.1, 
there shall be no fractures in any part of a fork, and 
the permanent deformation, measured аз the 
displacement of the axis of the wheel axle or 
simulated axle in relation to the axis of the Fork 
steerer, shall not exceed 45 mm. If the fork meets the 
first test criteria, then it shall be subjected to a 
second test as described in 4.7.5.2.2, torque on fork, 
irrespective of the amount of permanent 
deformation, there shall be no relative movement 
between the steerer and the crown. 


52 


4.7.6 Front fork — Bending Fatigue Test Plus 
Rearward Impact Test 

When tested by the method described in 4.7.6.1, 
there shall be no fractures in any part of the fork, and 
the permanent deformation, measured as the 
displacement of the axis of the wheel axle or 
simulated axle in relation to the axis of the fork 
steerer, shall not exceed 45 mm. For composite 
forks, the running displacement (peak-to-peak 
value) at the points where the test forces are applied 
shall not increase by more than 20 percent of the 
initial values of displacement (peak to peak value) 
taken after 1 000 cycles and before 2 000 cycles 


4.7.6.1 Front fork — bending fatigue test and 
rearward impact test 


Mount the fork according to Annex G as shown in 
Fig. 46. 


Apply cycles of fully reversed, dynamic forces of F6 
in the plane of the wheel and perpendicular to the 
fork steerer tube to a loading attachment and swivel 
on an axle located in the axle-slots of the blades for 
100 000 test cycles. The forces are given in Table 
23. The maximum test frequency shall be 
maintained as specified in 5.3. 


Conclude the test if the running displacement (peak- 
to-peak value) at the point where the test forces are 


53 


IS 10613 : 2023 


applied increases by more than 20 percent for rigid 
forks or more than 40 percent for suspension forks 
from the initial values of displacement (peak to 
peak value) taken after 1 000 cycles and before 
2 000 cycles. Stop the test after 100 000 cycles and 
inspect the sample carefully for fractures. If 
fractures are found, conclude the test. 


If the sample completes 100 000 cycles without 
exceeding the displacement limits noted above, and 
if no fractures can be observed, perform the Impact 
Resistance test described in 4.7.5.2.1 (the drop 
heights are given in Table 21). When the striker has 
come to rest on the roller, measure the permanent 
deformation under the roller and inspect the sample 
carefully for fractures. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 23 Forces on Loading Attachment 
(Clause 4.7.6.1) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Force, F6, (N) +450 +450 + 650 + 620 


Кеу 
1 Pivoted force attachment; апа 
2 Rigid mount incorporating head bearings. 


FIG. 46 FRONT FORK — BENDING FATIGUE TEST 


4.7.7 Forks Intended for Use with Hub or Disc- 
Brakes 


4.7.7.1 Static brake —torque test 


When tested by the method described in 4.7.7.2, 
there shall be no fractures or visible cracks in any 
part of the fork, and the permanent deformation, 
measured as the displacement of the axis of the 
wheel-axle or simulated axle in relation to the axis 
of the Fork steerer, shall not exceed 5 mm for rigid 
Forks or 10 mm for suspension forks. For general 
crack detection methods, see Annex E. 


4.7.7.1.1 General 


When a fork is intended for use with a hub or disc 
brake and whether supplied as original equipment or 
as an accessory, the fork manufacturer shall provide 
an attachment point on the fork blade for the torque 
arm or caliper. In tests conducted by the methods 
described in 4.7.7.2 and 4.7.7.3 and where more than 
one mounting point is provided for a hub or disc 
brake, the following shall apply: 


a) Where a complete bicycle is supplied, the 
test adaptor shall be secured to the 
mounting point used on the bicycle. If 


54 


bracket will be supplied, it shall be used to 
perform the test; and 


b) Where a fork is supplied as an accessory 
with more than one mounting point, 
separate tests shall be conducted on each of 
the mounting points on separate forks. 


4.7.7.2 Fork for hub/disc brake — static brake- 
torque test 


Mount the fork in a fixture representative of the 
head tube according to Annex G and gripped in the 
normal head-bearings, fit an axle to the fork, and 
mount on the axle a pivoted, straight adaptor as 
shown in Fig. 47 to provide a torque arm of L2 in 
length (see Table 24) and a suitable attachment for 
the brake mounting point. If the wheel size is not 
listed in Table 24, the length L2 shall be equal to 
one-half of the wheel diameter. 


Locate a deflection-measuring device on the fork at 
the hub axis in order to measure deflection and 
permanent deformation of the fork perpendicular to 
the fork steerer axis and in the plane of the wheel. 
Apply a static pre-loading rearward force of 100 N 
to the end of the torque arm, perpendicular to the 
fork steerer axis and in the plane of the wheel. 


Remove and repeat this loading until a consistent 
deflection reading is obtained. Adjust the deflection 
measuring device to zero. Apply a rearward force 
of 1 000 N to the torque arm perpendicular to the 


IS 10613 : 2023 


fork steerer axis and in the plane of the wheel. 
Maintain this force for 1 min, then reduce the force 
to 100 N and record any permanent deformation. 


Table 24 Fixture Length 
(Clause 4.7.7.2 and 4.7.7.3) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Wheel diameter 24" 26" 650b 29" or 700 
c 
ii) Arm length, L2,(mm) 305 330 349 368 


Key 

] Rigid mount incorporating head bearings; 
2 Brake mounting point; and 

3 Test adaptor. 


FIG. 47 FORK FOR HUB/DISC BRAKE — STATIC BRAKE-TORQUE TEST 


4.7.7.3 Fork for hub/disc brake — brake mount 
fatigue test 


Mount the fork in a fixture representative of the 
head tube according to Annex G and gripped in the 
normal head-bearings, fit an axle to the fork, and 
mount on the axle a pivoted, straight adapt or as 
shown in Fig. 48 to provide a torque arm of L2 in 


length (see Table 24) and a suitable attachment for 
the brake mounting point. 


Apply repeated, horizontal, dynamic forces of 600 N 
rearward to the end of the torque arm parallel to the 
plane of the wheel (as shown in Fig. 45) for C2 
cycles (see Table 25). The maximum test frequency 
shall be maintained as specified in 5.3. 


Table 25 Minimum Test Cycles 
(Clause 4.7.7.3) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Test cycles, С», 12 000 12 000 12 000 20 000 


(numbers) 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 


1 Rigid mount incorporating head bearings; 
2 Brake mounting point; and 
3 Test adaptor. 


FIG. 48 FORK FOR HUB/DISC-BRAKE — BRAKE MOUNT FATIGUE TEST 


4.7.8 Tensile Test for a Non-Welded Fork 
4.7.8.1 General 


This test is for forks where the blades and/or the fork 
steerer are secured in the fork-crown by press-fitting, 
clamping, adhesives or any method other than brazing or 
welding. It can be convenient to combine this test with 
the wheel retention test in 4.7.4. 


4.7.8.2 Requirement 
When tested by the method described in 4.7.8.3, there 


shall be no detachment or loosening of any parts of the 
assembly. 


4.7.8.3 Tensile test for a non-welded fork 


Mount the fork steerer securely in a suitable rigid mount, 
keeping any clamping forces away from the fork- crown, 
and apply a tensile force of 5 000 N distributed equally 
to both drop outs for 1 minute in a direction parallel to 
the axis of the fork steerer. 


4.8 Wheels and Wheel/Tyre Assembly 


4.8.1 Wheels/Tyre Assembly — Concentricity Tolerance 
and Lateral Tolerance 


The run-out shall not exceed the values which are given 
in Table 26. 


Table 26 Wheel/Tyre Assembly — Concentricity and Lateral Tolerance 
(Clause 4.8.1) 


SI No. Bicycle Type City and Young Mountain Racing 
trekking/ Adult Bicycles Bicycles 
Roadster/SLR Bicycles 
Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Intended for rim-brakes other 1 1 1 
Concentriity than steel rim. 
and lateral 
ii) tolerance Not intended for rim brakes 2 2 2 0.7 
" (mm) | 
iii) Intended for steel rim brakes 2 2 2 


4.8.2 Rotational Accuracy 


The run-out tolerances represent the maximum variation 
of the position of the rim when measured perpendicular 
to the axle at a suitable point along the rim 
(see Fig. 49 and Fig. 50) (that is., full indicator reading) 
of a fully assembled and adjusted wheel during one 
complete revolution about the axle without axial 
movement. Both sides of the rim shall be measured and 
the maximum value shall be taken as result. 


56 


For city and trekking/roadster/SLR, mountain and 
young adult bicycles, the measurement of both axial 
run-out (lateral) and radial run-out (concentricity) shall 
be done with a tyre fitted and inflated to the maximum 
inflation pressure but for rims where concentricity 
cannot be measured with the tyre fitted, it is permissible 
to make measurements with the tyre removed. 


For racing bicycles/SLR, the measurements of both axial 
run-out (lateral) and radial run-out (concentricity) shall 


be measured at the same time as shown in Fig. 50 and a system, the values in Table 27 apply to the suspension 


tyre is not required to be fitted. system in its uncompressed 
| | : requirements for the frame or fork under a load are 
Where a bicycle has a frame or a fork with a suspension specified in Annex F and 4.7.3.1. 


b) Rim without tyre 


a) Rim with tyre; and 


Key 


1 Dial-gauge (concentricity); 

2 Instrument stand; 

3 Hub axle support; 

4 Dial-gauge (lateral run-out); 

5 Instrument stand; 

6 Roller indicator; 

7 Rim with tyre; 

8 Rim without tyre; 

9 Dial-gauge (concentricity; alternative position); and 
10 Instrument stand. 


FIG. 49 WHEELS/TYRE ASSEMBLY— ROTATIONAL ACCURACY FOR CITY AND 
TREKKING/ROADSTER /SLR YOUNG ADULT, AND MOUNTAIN BICYCLES 


57 


IS 10613 : 2023 


>= 
S ae 


© 


Кеу 

1 Instrument stand; 5 hub axle support; 
2 Dial-gauge (concentricity); 6 dial-gauge (lateral run- out); 
7 Instrument stand; and 


3 Rim; 
4 Spoke; 8 Roller indicator. 
FIG. 50 WHEEL — ROTATIONAL ACCURACY FOR RACING BICYCLES 
Table 27 Wheel/Tyre Assembly — Clearance 
(Clause 4.8.2) 
Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Clearance (mm) 6 6 6 4 


measured at the point of application of the force on 
the rim, shall not exceed the values which are given 


There shall be no failure of any of the components in Table 28. 
of the wheel, and the permanent deformation, 


4.8.3 Wheel/Tyre Assembly — Static Strength Test 


Table 28 Values of Permanent Deformation 
(Clause 4.8.3) 


Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Permanent deformation 1.5 1.5 1.0 1.0 
(mm) 


58 


4.8.3.1 Wheel/tyre assembly — Static strength test 
— Test method 


Clamp and support the wheel suitably as shown in 
Fig. 51. Apply a pre-load of 5 N on the rim at one 
spoke perpendicular to the plane of the wheel as 
shown in Fig. 51. Record the zero position of the rim 
at the point of load application as shown. Then apply 
a Static force of F given in Table 29 for duration of 
1 minute. Reduce the load to 5 N and allow a 1 min 


IS 10613 : 2023 


settling time. After this settling time and with the 
5 N load still applied, re-measure the position of the 
rim. 


The Wheel shall be fitted with the appropriate size 
Tyre and inflated to the Maximum Inflation 
Pressure. In the case of a rear wheel, apply the force 
from the sprocket side of the wheel as shown in Fig. 
51. Repeat the above measurement once between 
two spokes. See Annex K for fatigue testing. 


Table 29 Forces on Rim 
(Clause 4.8.3.1) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Force, F, (N) 250 250 370 250 

ЛФГ 
з | 
> 
Кеу 


1 Clamping fixture; 
2 Wheel/tyre assembly; and 
3 Drives sprockets. 


FIG. 51 WHEEL/TYRE ASSEMBLY— STATIC STRENGTH TEST 


4.8.4 Wheels — Wheel Retention 
4.8.4.1 General 


Wheel retention safety is related to the combination 
of wheel, retention device, and drop-out design. 


Wheels shall be secured to the bicycle frame and 
fork such that when adjusted to the manufacturer's 
instructions they comply with 4.8.4.2, 4.8.4.4 and 
4.8.4.5. Wheel nuts shall have a minimum removal 
torque of 70 percent of the manufacturer's 
recommended tightening torque. Where quick- 
release axle devices are used they shall comply with 
4.8.4.5. 


59 


4.8.4.2 Wheel retention — Retention devices secured 


When tested by the method described in 4.8.4.3, 
there shall be no relative motion between the axle 
and the front fork/frame. 


4.8.4.5 Wheels —  Front/rear wheel retention 
devices secured — Test method 


Apply a force of 2 300 N distributed symmetrically 
to both ends of the axle for a period of 1 minute in 
the direction of the removal of the front and rear 
wheel independently. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


4.8.44 Front wheel 
devices unsecured 


retention — Retention 


A bicycle shall be equipped with secondary 
retention system that retains the front wheel in the 
drop- outs when the primary retention system is in 
the open (unlocked) position. 


Where threaded axles and nuts are fitted, and the 
nuts are unscrewed by at least 360° from the finger 
tight condition and the brake system is 
disconnected or released, the wheel shall not detach 
from the front fork when a force of 100 N is applied 
radially outwards, in line with the drop-out slots, 
and maintained for 1 minute. 


Where quick-release is fitted, and the quick-release 
lever is fully open and the brake system is 
disconnected or released, the wheel shall not detach 
from the front fork when a force of 100 N is applied 
to the wheel radially outwards, in line with the drop- 
out slots, and maintained for 1 minute. 


4.8.4.5 Wheels — quick-release devices — operating 
features 


Any quick-release device shall have the following 
operating features: 


a) It shall be adjustable to allow setting for 
tightness; 


b) Its form and marking shall clearly indicate 
whether the device is in the open or locked 
position; 


c) If adjustable by a lever, the force required 
to close a properly set lever shall not 
exceed 200 N and, at this closing force, 
there shall be no permanent deformation of 
the quick-release device; 


d) The releasing force of the clamping device 
when closed shall not be less than 50 N; 


e) If operated by a lever, the quick-release 
device shall withstand without fracture or 
permanent deformation a closing force of 
not less than 250 N applied with the 
adjustment set to prevent closure at this 
force; 


f) The wheel retention with the quick-release 
device in the clamped position shall be in 
accordance with 4.8.4.2; 


g) The front wheel retention with the quick- 
release device in the open position shall be 
in accordance with 4.4.4.4; and 


h) Wheel retention with the quick-release 
mechanism in the clamped position shall be 
in accordance with 4.8.4.2 and 4.8.4.3. 


If applied to a lever, the forces specified in (c), (d), and 
(e) shall be applied 5 mm from the tip end of the lever. 


60 


4.8.5 Rims, Tyres, and Tubes 
4.8.5.1 General 


Non-pneumatic tyres are excluded from the 
requirements of 4.8.5.2, 4.8.5.3 and 4.8.5.4. For 
wheel/tyre assembly fatigue test for city and 
trekking/roadster/SLR bicycles, see Annex K. 


4.8.5.2 Tyre inflation pressure 


The maximum inflation pressure recommended by 
the manufacturer shall be permanently marked on 
the side wall of the tyre so as to be readily visible 
when the latter is assembled on the wheel. If the rim 
manufacturer recommends a maximum tyre 
inflation pressure, it shall be clearly and 
permanently marked on the rim and also specified in 
the manufacturer’s instructions. 


NOTE — It is recommended that the minimum inflation 
pressure specified by the tyre manufacturer also be 
permanently marked on the side wall of the tyre. 


4.8.5.3 Tyre and rim compatibility 


Tyres that comply with the requirements of ISO 
5775-1 and rims that comply with the requirements 
of ISO 5775-2 are compatible. The tyre, tube and 
tape shall be compatible with the rim design. When 
inflated to 110 percent of the maximum inflation 
pressure, determined by the lower value between 
maximum inflation pressures recommended on the 
rim or the Tyre, for a period of not less than 
5 minute, the tyre shall remain intact on the rim. 


4.8.5.4 Tubular tyres and rims 


Tubular tyres shall be compatible with the rim 
design. Instructions for the correct gluing technique 
shall be given in the bicycle or the wheel assembly 
instructions of the manufacturer’s instructions 
[see 6.4(v)]. 


4.8.5.4.1 Rim-wear 


In the case where the rim forms part of a braking 
system and there is a danger of failure due to wear, 
the manufacturer shall make the rider aware of this 
danger by durable and legible marking on the rim, 
in an area not obscured by the tyre [see 6.4(u)]. 


Where the rim is made of composite materials, the 
manufacturer shall include in the manufacturer’s 
instructions warnings of the danger of rim failure 
caused by wear of the braking surfaces. 
NOTE — A symbol referring to the instruction manual is 
an acceptable marking for rims for wear. 
4.8.6 Greenhouse Effect Test for Composite Wheels 
4.8.6.1 General 
This requirement is to ensure wheels made from 
composite materials that are subjected to high 
temperature conditions (that is, such as car storage 
in direct sunlight) do not suffer concealed damage 
that could subsequently affect the safety 


performance of the wheel during normal use. 
4.8.6.2 Requirement 


When a fully assembled wheel made of composite 
material, fitted with the appropriate size tyre and 
inflated according to the lower value between 
maximum inflation pressure recommended on the 
rim or the tyre, is tested by the method described in 
4.8.6.3, there shall be: 


a) No failure of any of the components of the 
Wheel; 

b) No tyre separation from the rim during the 
test; 

c) No increase in rim width greater than 5 
percent of the initial maximal width value; 

d) Compliance of lateral and concentricity 
tolerance according to 4.8.1; 

e) Compliance of tyre and rim compatibility 
according to 4.8.5.3; and 

f) Compliance of static strength according to 
4.8.3. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


4.8.6.3 Test method 


A fully assembled wheel, fitted with the appropriate 
size tyre and inflated according to the lower value 
between maximum inflation pressure recommended 
on the rim or the tyre, shall be controlled before the 
test; lateral run-out has to be controlled according to 
4.8.1 and maximum widths of the rim have to be 
reported. 


A specific bench as shown in Fig. 52 could be used 
to measure the maximum width all around the rim 
with tyre and pressure (continuous measuring). 


The wheel is laid down on the ground of a climate 
chamber, which has been pre-heated at 80 °С, lean 
ton axle and tyre support points, sprocket side of the 
Wheel, as shown in Fig. 53, during 4 h. At the end 
of 4 h, the wheel should be taken out of the climate 
chamber and allowed to cool down at room 
temperature during 4 h to re-measuring the rim 
width and its conformance to 4.8.6.1 and 4.8.6.2. 


FIG. 52 WHEEL LAID DOWN ON TIRE AND AXLE 


FIG. 53 MAXIMUM RIM’S WIDTH MEASURING 


61 


IS 10613 : 2023 


4.9 Saddles and Seat-Posts 
4.9.1 Limiting Dimensions 


No part of the saddle, saddle supports, or accessories 
to the saddle shall be more than 125 mm above the 
top saddle surface at the point where the saddle 
surface is intersected by the seat-post axis. 


4.9.2 Seat-Post — Insertion-Depth Mark or Positive 
Stop 


The seat-post shall be provided with one of the two 
following alternative means of ensuring a safe 
insertion depth into the frame. 


a) It shall contain a permanent, transverse 
mark of length not less than the external 
diameter or the major dimension of the 
cross section of the seat-post that clearly 
indicates the minimum insertion depth of 
the seat-post into the frame. For a circular 
cross section, the mark shall be located not 
less than two diameters of the seat-post 
from the bottom of the seat-post (that is, 
where the diameter is the external 
diameter). For a non-circular cross section, 
the insertion-depth mark shall be located 
not less than 65 mm from the bottom of the 
seat-post (that is, where the seat-post has its 
full cross section); and 


b) It shall incorporate a permanent stop to 
prevent it from being drawn out of the 
frame such as to leave the insertion less 
than the amount specified in (a) above. 


4.9.3 Saddle/Seat-Post — Security Test 
4.9.3.1 Saddles with adjustment — clamps 


When tested by the method described in 4.9.3.4, 
there shall be no movement of the saddle adjustment 
clamp in any direction with respect to the seat-post, 


or of the seat-post with respect to the frame, or any 
failure of saddle, adjustment clamp, or seat-post. If 
the saddle design is such that it cannot accurately 
test the saddle/seat-post clamp, it shall be possible to 
use a fixture which is representative of the saddle 
dimensions. 


4.9.3.2 Saddles without adjustment clamps 


Saddles that are not clamped, but are designed to 
pivot in a vertical plane with respect to the seat-post, 
shall be allowed to move within the parameters of 
the design and shall with stand the tests described in 
4.9.3.4 without failure of any components. 


4.9.3.3 General 


If a suspension seat-post is involved, the test can be 
conducted with the suspension system either free to 
operate or locked. If it is locked, the pillar shall be 
at its maximum length. 


4.9.3.4 Test Method 


With the seat-post correctly assembled to the bicycle 
Frame at minimum insertion depth of the seat-post 
(as specified in 4.9.2) and the clamps tightened to 
the torque recommended by the bicycle 
manufacturer, apply a force of F] vertically 
downwards at a point 25 mm from either the front or 
rear of the saddle, whichever produces the greater 
torque on the saddle clamp. The saddle shall be 
positioned in the Seat- post clamp assembly as 
defined by the saddle manufacturer's rail markings 
or instructions. Maintain this force for 1 minute. 
Remove this force and apply a lateral force of F2 
horizontally at a point 25 mm from either the front 
or rear of the saddle and maintain this force for 1 
minute, whichever produces the greater torque on 
the clamp (see Fig. 54). The forces are given in 
Table 30. The fixture shall be such that it does not 
damage the surface of the Saddle. 


Table 30 Forces On Saddle 


(Clause 4.9.3.4) 
SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Vertical force, F1, (N) 650 650 650 650 
ii) Horizontal force, F2, (N) 250 250 250 250 


62 


IS 10613 : 2023 


АП dimensions are in millimeter 


a) Vertical force 


Key 


1 Minimum insertion-depth mark; and 
2 Bicycle frame. 


b) Horizontal force 


FIG. 54 SADDLE/SEAT-POST — SECURITY TEST 


4.9.4 Saddle — Static Strength Test 


When tested by the method described in 4.9.4.1, the 
saddle cover and/or plastic moulding shall not 
disengage from the chassis of the saddle, and there 
shall be no cracking or permanent distortion of the 
Saddle assembly. For general crack detection 
methods, see Annex E. 


4.9.4.1 Test Method 


Position the saddle in its maximum rearward 
direction as defined by the saddle manufacturer's 
rail markings or instructions, into a suitable fixture 


representative of a seat-post clamp assembly. 
Tighten the clamps to the torque recommended by 
the bicycle manufacturer, and apply forces of 400 N 
in turn under the rear and nose of the saddle cover, 
as shown in Fig. 55, ensuring that the force is not 
applied to any part of the chassis of the saddle. The 
load application point is on the longitudinal plane 
of the saddle at 25 mm from the back (front) of the 
saddle. If the saddle design is such that it cannot 
accept a center line load application, the load shall 
be symmetrically applied at two points of the 
saddle. Loading on the rear of the saddle shall be 
symmetrical about its longitudinal axis, as shown in 
Fig. 56. 


400 N 


a) Force under nose 


b) Force under rear 


ЕС. 55 SADDLE — STATIC STRENGTH TEST 


63 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 
1 Loading point. 


All dimensions are in millimeters 
FIG. 56 SADDLE — LOAD APPLICATION POINT OF STATIC STRENGTH TEST 


4.9.5 Saddle and Seat-Post Clamp — Fatigue Test 


When tested by method described in 4.9.5.2, there 
shall be no fractures or visible cracks in the seat-post 
or in the saddle, and no loosening of the clamp. For 
general crack detection methods, see Annex E. 
4.9.5.1 General 

Seat-posts can influence test failures of saddles. For 
this reason, a saddle shall be tested in combination 
with a seat-post as recommended by the saddle 
manufacturer. 


4.9.5.2 Test method 


Insert the seat-post to its minimum insertion depth 
(as specified in 4.9.2) in a rigid mount 


64 


representative of that on the bicycle and with its 
axis at 73° to the horizontal. The saddle shall be 
positioned in the seat-post clamp assembly in a 
maximum rearward direction as defined by the 
saddle manufacturer’s rail markings or instructions. 
Adjust the saddle to have its upper surface in a 
horizontal plane and tighten the clamp to the torque 
recommended by the bicycle manufacturer. Apply a 
repeated, vertically-downward force of 1 000 N for 
200 000 cycles, in the position shown in Fig. 57, by 
means of a pad 300 mm long x 80 mm diameter to 
prevent localized damage of the saddle cover. The 
maximum test frequency shall be maintained as 
specified in 5.3. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 

] Rigid mount; 

2 Minimum insertion-depth mark; and 

3 Pad (length = 300 mm, diameter = 80 mm). 


/ | 
ГР ППР 7 


FIG. 57 SADDLE AND SEAT-POST CLAMP — FATIGUE TEST 


4.9.6 Seat-Post — Fatigue Test 


Conduct the test in two stages on the same assembly 
as per 4.9.6.3 and 4.9.6.5. 


4.9.6.1 Requirement for stage 1 
4.9.6.1.1 Seat-post without suspension system 


When tested by the method described in 4.9.6.3, 
there shall be no visible cracks or fractures in the 
Seat-post, or any bolt failure. For general crack 
detection methods, see Annex E. For composite 
seat-post, the running displacement (peak-to-peak 
value) at the point where the test forces are applied 
shall not increase by more than 20 percent of the 
initial value of displacement (peak to peak value) 
taken after 1 000 cycles and before 2 000 cycles. 


4.9.6.1.2 Seat-post with suspension system 


When tested by the method described in 4.9.6.3, 
there shall be no visible cracks or fractures in the 
seat-post, or any bolt failure. The design shall be 
such that in the event of failure of the suspension 
system, the two main parts do not separate, nor does 
the upper part (that is, the part to which the saddle 
would be attached) become free to swivel in the 
lower part. For general crack detection methods, 
see Annex E. 


65 


4.9.6.2 General 


In the following test, if a Suspension seat-post is 
involved, the test shall be conducted with the 
suspension system adjusted to give maximum 
resistance. 


4.9.6.3 Test method for stage I(fatigue test) 


A seat-post shall be inserted to the minimum 
insertion depth (as specified in 4.9.2) in a suitable 
fixture with a representative seat collar and clamped 
to the manufacturer's recommended torque. The 
seat-post shall be fixed at an angle of 73? from 
horizontal, as shown in Fig. 58. 


Secure an extension-bar to the saddle attachment 
point by the appropriate attachment fitting such that 
the bar extends rearwards and downwards at an 
angle of 10? below the horizontal to permit the 
application of a vertical test force at a distance of 70 
mm from the centre of the saddle clamp where the 
center line of the clamp intersects the axis of the bar, 
as shown in Fig. 58. 


Apply a repeated, vertically downward, dynamic 
force of F3 to the point described above and shown 
in Fig. 58 for 100 000 cycles. The forces are given 
in Table 31. The maximum test frequency shall be 
maintained as specified in 5.3. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 31 Forces on Seat-Post 


(Clause 4.9.6.3) 
Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Force, ЁЗ, (N) 1 000 1 000 1 200 1 200 
Key 


1 Minimum insertion-depth mark. 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


FIG. 58 SEAT-POST — FATIGUE TEST 


4.9.6.4 Requirement for stage 2 
4.9.6.4.1 Seat-post without suspension system 


When tested by the method described in 4.9.6.5 
there shall be no fractures and the applied forces 
shall be accurate to within percent of their nominal 
values, as determined by suitable means of 
displacement shall not exceed 10 mm during 
testing. For general crack detection methods, 
see Annex E. 


4.9.6.4.2 Seat-post with suspension system 


When tested by the method described in 4.9.6.5, 
there shall be no fractures. The design shall be such 
that in the event of failure of the Suspension system, 
the two main parts do not separate, nor does the 


66 


upper part (that is, the part to which the saddle would 
be attached) become free to swivel in the lower 
part. For general crack detection methods, see 
Annex E. 


4.9.6.5 Test method for stage 2 (static strength test) 


A Seat-post shall be inserted to the minimum 
insertion-depth (as specified in 4.9.2 in a suitable 
fixture with a representative seat collar and clamped 
to the manufacturer's recommended torque. The 
seat-post shall be fixed at an angle of 73? from the 
horizontal, as shown in Fig. 59. 


A Force of F4 shall be exerted vertically on the 
saddle clamp for a duration of 1 minute. The 
displacement at the loading point shall be constantly 
monitored during testing. The forces are given in 
Table 32. 


Table 32 Forces on Seat-Post 


IS 10613 : 2023 


(Clause 4.9.6.5) 
SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Force, F4, (N) 2 000 1 500 2 000 3 000 
F4 
1 
\ 
7 
RR RR RRR 
Key 


1 Minimum insertion-depth mark. 


FIG. 59 SEAT-POST — STATIC STRENGTH TEST 


4.10 Pedals and Pedal/Crank Drive System 
4.10.1 Pedal Tread 
4.10.1.1 Tread surface 


The tread surface of a pedal shall be secured against 
movement within the pedal assembly. 


4.10.1.1.2 Toe clips 


Pedals intended to be used without toe-clips, or for 
optional use with toe clips, shall have: 


a) Tread surfaces on the top and bottom 
surfaces of the pedal; 

b) A definite preferred position that 
automatically presents the tread surface to 
the rider’s foot; and 

c) Pedals designed to be used only with toe 
clips or shoe-retention devices shall have 
toe clips or shoe retention devices securely 


67 


attached and need not comply with the 
requirements of 4.10.1.1.2 (a) and (b). 


4.10.2 Pedal Clearance 
4.10.2.1 Ground clearance 


With the bicycle unladen, the pedal at its lowest 
point and the tread surface of the pedal parallel to 
the ground and uppermost where it has only one 
tread surface, the bicycle shall be capable of being 
leaned over at an angle of 02 from the vertical before 
any part of the pedal touches the ground. The values 
are given in Table 33. 


When a bicycle is equipped with a suspension 
system, this measurement shall be taken with the 
suspension adjusted to the softest condition and 
with the bicycle depressed into a position such as 
would be caused by a rider weighing 80 kg (in case 
of young adult bicycles, apply 40 kg). 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 33 Values of Angles for Ground Clearance 
(Clause 4.10.2.1) 


Sl Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Lean angle 02 (degrees) 25 23 25 23 


4.10.2.1.1 Toe clearance 


Bicycles shall have at least C clearance between the 
pedal and front tyre or mudguard (when turned to 
any position). The clearance shall be measured 


forward and parallel to the longitudinal axis of the 
bicycle from the center of either pedal axle to the arc 
swept by the tyre or mudguard, whichever results in 
the least clearance (see Fig. 60). The values are 


SI Bicycle Type City and Young Mountain 
No. Trekking/ Adult Bicycles 
Roadster/SLR Bicycles 
Bicycles 
(1) Q) (3) (4) (5) 
Without foot retention 100 89 100 
i) Toe clearance, 
C (mm) 
With foot retention 89 89 89 
NOTE — Foot retention system, for example, Quick release pedal or toe-clip. 
Li 1 
tip | er ааа у. 
| \ 222 / 
TEC Өс y 
" M x 
auos. / 
4 | N N / 
4 ` . 
b VM Р 
Кеу 
1 Longitudinal axis; 
2  Fronttyre; 
3  Mudguard; 
4 Clearance, C; and 
5 Pedal. 


given in Table 34. 


Table 34 Values of Toe Clearance 
(Clause 4.10.2.1.1) 


FIG. 60 PEDAL TO WHEEL/MUDGUARD — TOE CLEARANCE 


68 


Racing 
Bicycles 


(6) 


100 


89 


4.10.3 Pedal — Static Strength Test 


When tested by the method described in 4.10.3.1, 
there shall be no fractures, visible cracks, or 
distortion of the pedal or spindle that could affect the 
operation of the pedal and pedal spindle. For 
general crack detection methods, see Annex E. 


1500 N 


Key 
1 Rigid mount. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


4.10.3.1 Test method 


Screw the pedal-spindle securely into a suitable rigid 
fixture with its axis horizontal, as shown in Fig. 61, 
and apply a vertically downward force of 1 500 N 
for 1 minute to the centre of the pedal release the 
force and examine the pedal assembly and the 
spindle. 


FIG. 61 PEDAL/PEDAL-SPINDLE ASSEMBLY — STATIC STRENGTH TEST 


4.10.4 Pedal — Impact Test 


When tested by the method described in 4.10.4.1, 
there shall be no fractures of any part of the pedal 
body, the pedal spindle, or any failure of the 
bearing system. 


4.10.4.1 Test method 


Screw the pedal-spindle securely into а suitable 


rigid fixture with its axis horizontal as shown in 
Fig. 62 and release a striker of the design shown in 
Fig. 63 and mass of 15 kg from a height of 400 mm 
to strike the pedal at the centre of the pedal. The 
width of the striker shall be wider than the width of 
the tread surface see also Annex H. 


FIG. 62 POSITION OF IMPACT 


69 


IS 10613 : 2023 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


FIG. 63 STRIKER DIMENSIONS 


4.10.5 Pedal—Dynamic Durability Test 


When subjected to test, there shall be no fractures 
or visible cracking of any part of the pedal, the 
pedal spindle, pedal spindle threads or any failure 
of the bearing system. For general crack detection 
methods, see Annex E. 


4.10.5.1 Test method 


Screw each pedal securely into a threaded hole in a 


rotatable test shaft as shown in Fig. 64 and suspend 
a mass of M at the centre of the pedal width by 
means of a tension spring to each pedal, the object 
of the springs being to minimize oscillations of the 
load. The masses are given in Table 35. 


Drive the shaft at a speed not exceeding 100 min—! 
for a total of 100 000 revolutions. If the pedals are 
provided with two tread surfaces, they shall be 
turned through 180° after 50 000 revolutions. 


Table 35 Masses on Pedal 
(Clause 4.10.5.1) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Roadster/SLR Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Mass, M (kg) 80 80 90 90 


70 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 

1 Pedal; 

2 Test shaft; 

3 Mass; and 

4 Tension spring. 


FIG. 64 PEDAL/PEDAL-SPINDLE — DYNAMIC DURABILITY TEST 


4.10.6 Drive System — Static Strength Test 
4.10.6.1 Drive system with chain 


When tested, there shall be no fracture of any 
component of the drive system and drive capability 
shall not be lost. 


4.10.6.1.1 Test method for drive system with chain 
4.10.6.1.2 General 


Conduct the drive system static load test on an 
assembly comprising the frame, pedals, 
transmission system, rear wheel assembly, and, if 
appropriate, the gear-change mechanism. Support 
the frame with the central plan ever tical and with 
the rear wheel held at the rim to prevent the wheel 
from rotating. 


4.10.6.1.3 Single-speed system 


With the non-drive side crank in the forward 
position, apply a force, F1, increasing gradually to 
1 500 N vertically downwards to the centre of the 
non-drive side pedal. Maintain this force for 1 
minute. 

Should the system yield or the drive-sprockets 
tighten, such that the crank rotates while under load 
to a position more than 30° below the horizontal, 
remove the test force, return the crank to the 
horizontal position or some appropriate position 
above the horizontal to take account of yield or 
movement, and repeat the test. 


On completion of the test on the left-hand crank, 
repeat the test with the drive side crank in the 
forward position and with the force applied to the 
drive side pedal. 


4.10.6.1.4 Multi-speed system 
a) Conduct the tests described in 4.10.6.1.3; 


71 


b) with the transmission correctly adjusted in 
its highest gear; and 


C) Conduct the tests with the transmission 
correctly adjusted in its lowest gear but, 
where appropriate, with the maximum 
force, F], adjusted to suit the particular 
gear ratio. Thus, the maximum force, ЕІ, 
shall be a function of the lowest gear ratio, 
Nc/Ns, where F1 is the force applied to the 
Pedal, expressed in newton (N); Nc is the 
number of teeth on the smallest chain 
wheel (front); Ns is the number of teeth on 
the largest sprocket (rear). 


Where the ratio Nc/Ns has a value equal to or greater 
than 1, the force, F1, shall be 1 500 N; but where the 
ratio Nc/Ns has a value less than 1, the force, F1, 
shall be reduced in proportion to the lowest gear 
ratio. Thus: 


F1 is 1 500 x Nc/Ns 


4.10.7 Drive System with Belt 


When tested by the method described in 4.10.7.1, 
there shall be no fracture of any component of the 
drive system and the belt shall not slip/skip, fracture, 
or cause any loss in drive capability. Smooth sliding 
between pulleys and belt is allowed at a rate not 
exceeding 1°/s at the drive axis. 


4.10.7.1 Test method for drive system with belt 


The sample in its fully finished condition (with 
teeth, if any) shall be submitted to a water spray 
conditioning equivalent to IPx4 as per IEC 60529 for 
10 minute. Application of the loading shall be done 
within 20 minute after conditioning. 


a) Ifthedrive system is a single-speed system, 


IS 10613 : 2023 


conduct the tests as described in 4.10.6.1.3. 


b) Ifthe drive system is a multi-speed system, 
conduct the tests as described in 4.10.6.1.4. 


4.10.8 Drive Belt — Tensile Strength Test 


Set up a fixture with two drive pulleys that are 


similar or identical as shown in Fig. 65. At least 
one pulley should be free to rotate. Increase the 
tensile load gradually until the tension load of the 
belt reaches 4 000 N. 


NOTE — 4 000 N is the tension load within the belt and 
requires a load F of 8 000 N to achieve this tension load. 


FIG. 65 DRIVE BELT — TENSILE STRENGTH TEST 


4.10.9 Crank Assembly —Fatigue Test 
4.10.9.1 Requirement 


When tested by the method described in 4.10.9.3, 
there shall be no fractures or visible cracks in the 
cranks, the bottom-bracket spindle, or any of the 
attachment features, or loosening or detachment of 
the chain wheel from the crank. For general crack 
detection methods see Annex E. 


For composite cranks, the running displacements 
(peak-to-peak values) of either crank at the point 
where the test forces are applied shall not increase 
by more than 20 percent of the initial value of 
displacement (peak to peak value) taken after 
1 000 cycles and before 2 000 cycles. 


4.10.9.2 General 


Two types of fatigue test are specified for mountain 
and racing bicycles: 


a) the first test with the cranks positioned at 
45? to the horizontal to simulate the forces 
due to pedalling; and 


b) the second test with the cranks positioned 
at 30? to the horizontal, which has been 
found to simulate the forces due the rider 
standing on the pedals during the descent 
of hills. 


The two tests shall be conducted on separate 
assemblies. 


4.10.9.3 Test method with the cranks at 45? to the 
horizontal 


72 


Mount the assembly of the two pedal-spindle 
adaptors, the drive side and non-drive side crank, the 
chain wheel set (or other drive component), and the 
bottom-bracket spindle located on its normal- 
production bearings in a fixture with bearing 
housings representative of the bottom-bracket (as 
shown in Fig. 66). Incline the crank sat 45? to the 
horizontal. 


Prevent rotation by locating a suitable length of 
drive chain around the largest or only chain wheel 
and securing it firmly to a suitable support, or, for 
any other type of transmission (for example, belt or 
shaft-drive) by securing the first stage of the 
transmission. 

NOTE — It is permissible to have the non-drive side crank 

in either of the two positions shown in Fig. 66, provided the 


test force is applied in the appropriate direction as specified 
in the next paragraph. 


Apply repeated, vertical, dynamic forces of F2 
alternately to the pedal-spindle adaptors of the drive 
side and non-drive side crank at a distance of 65 mm 
from the out board face of each crank (as shown in 
Table 36 and Fig. 66) for C test cycles (where one 
test cycle consists of the application of the two 
forces). The direction of the force on the drive side 
crank shall be downwards and that on the non-drive 
side crank shall be upwards for a rearward-pointing 
crank, or downwards for a forward- pointing crank. 
During application of these test forces, ensure that 
the force on a pedal-spindle adapt or falls to 
5 percent or less of the peak force before 
commencing application of the test force to the 
other pedal-spindle adaptor. The maximum test 
frequency shall be maintained as specified in 5.3. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 36 Forces on Pedal-Spindle and Test Cycles 
(Clause 4.10.9.3) 


SI Bicycle Type City and Trekking/ Roadster/SLR Young Adult Mountain Racing 
No. Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles Bicycles 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Force, F2 (N) 1 300 1 300 1 800 1 800 
ii) Test cycles, C At 100 000 100 000 50 000 100 000 
angle 45° 
ш) Test cycles, C At - - 50 000 = 


angle 30° 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


Key 
1 Repeated test force; 
2 Horizontal axis; 
3 Axis of crank; and 
4 Alternative left crank arrangement. 


a) From outboard face of crank. 


FIG. 66 CRANK ASSEMBLY — FATIGUE TEST WITH CRANKS AT 45? (TYPICAL TEST ARRANGEMENT) 


4.10.9.4 Special requirements for mountain bicycles 
For mountain bicycles, two types of fatigue test are 
specified: 


a) one with the cranks positioned at 45? to the 
horizontal to simulate the forces due to 
Pedalling, and 


b 


— 


the second test with the cranks positioned at 
30? to the horizontal, which has been found to 
simulate the forces due to the rider standing on 
the pedals during the descent of hills. 


The two tests shall be conducted on separate 
assemblies. 

When tested by the method described in 4.10.9.4.1, 
there shall be no fractures or visible cracks in the 
cranks, the bottom-bracket spindle or any of the 
attachment features, or loosening or detachment of 
the chain wheel from the crank. For general crack 
detection methods, see Annex E. 


73 


For composite cranks, the running displacements 
(peak-to-peak values) of either crank at the point 
where the test forces are applied shall not increase 
by more than 20 percent of the initial value of 
displacement (peak-to-peak value) taken after 
1 000 cycles and before 2 000 cycles. 


4.10.9.4.1 Test method with the cranks at 30? to the 
horizontal for mountain bicycles 


Mount the assembly of the two pedal-spindle 
adaptors, the drive side and non-drive side crank, the 
chain wheel set (or other drive component), and the 
bottom-bracket spindle located on its normal- 
production bearings in a fixture with bearing 
housings representative of the bottom-bracket, as 
shown in Fig. 67. Incline the cranks at 30? to the 
horizontal as shown in Fig. 67. Restrain the non- 
drive side crank to the base of the test machine by a 


IS 10613 : 2023 


device attached to the pedal-spindle at a distance of 
65 mm from the outboard face of the crank. 


Apply a repeated, vertically downward, dynamic 
force of 1 800 N to the pedal-spindle of the drive 


Key 
] Horizontal axis; 
2 Axis of Crank; 


3 Reactive force (equal and opposite to test force); and 


side crank at a distance of 65 mm from the out board 
face of the crank (as shown in Fig 67) for 50 000 
cycles. The maximum test frequency shall be 
maintained as specified in 5.3. 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 


a) From outboard face of the crank 


FIG. 67 CRANK ASSEMBLY — FATIGUE TEST WITH CRANKS AT 30° (TYPICAL TEST ARRANGEMENT) 


74 


4.11 Drive-Chain and Belt Drive 
4.11.1 Drive —Chain 


Where a chain-drive is used as a means of 
transmitting the motive force, the chain shall 
operate over the front and rear sprockets without 
binding. 


The chain shall conform to the requirements of IS 
15511/ISO 9633. 


4.11.2 Belt Drive 


Where a belt-drive is used as a means of transmitting 
the motive force, the drive belt shall operate over the 
front and rear pulleys without binding. When tested 
by the methods described in 4.10.8, there shall be no 
evidence of cracking, fracture, or delamination of 
the belt drive. For general crack detection methods, 
see Annex E. 


4.11.3 Chain-Wheel and Belt-Drive Protective 
Device 


4.11.3.1 Requirements 


City and trekking/roadster/SLR and young adult 
bicycles shall be equipped with 


3) A chain wheel discord drive pulley disc 
which conforms to 4.11.3.2; 


IS 10613 : 2023 


b) A chain and drive belt protective device 
which conforms to 4.11.3.3; and 


c) Where fitted with positive foot-retention 
devices on the pedals, a combined front 
gear-change guide which conforms to 
4.11.3.4 shall be used. 


Mountain and racing bicycles shall be equipped with 
any one of the above. 


4.11.3.2 Chain-wheel disc and drive pulley disc 
diameter 


А chain-wheel disc shall exceed the diameter of the 
outer chain wheel, when measured a cross the tips of 
the teeth, by not less than 10 mm (see Fig. 68). 


A drive pulley disc shall exceed the diameter of the 
front pulley, when measured across the tips of the 
teeth; by not less than 10 mm (see Fig. 69). Where 
the design is such that the crank and chain wheel are 
too close together to accommodate a full disc, a 
partial disc can be fitted which closely abuts the 
crank. 


NOTE — Where the design is such that the pedal crank and 
chain wheel are too close together to accommodate a full 
disc, a partial disc may he fitted which closely abuts the 
pedal crank. 


Key 


1 Chain-wheel disc (D2 > D] + 10) 


АП dimensions are in millimeter 


FIG. 68 CHAIN-WHEEL DISC 


75 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Key 
1 Drive pulley disc (D2 > D] +10). 


FIG. 69 DRIVE PULLEY DISC 


4.11.3.3 Chain and drive belt protective device 


A chain protective device shall, as a minimum, 
shield the side plates and top surface of the chain and 
the chain wheel for a distance of at least 25 mm 
rearwards along the chain from the point where the 
chain wheel teeth first pass between the side plates 
of the chain, and forwards round the outer chain 
wheel to a horizontal line passing through the 
bottom-bracket axle centre [see Fig.70 (a)]. 


A drive belt protective device shall, as a minimum, 
shield the side and top surface of the drive belt and 
the front pulley for a distance of at least 25 mm 
rearwards along the drive belt from the point where 
the tip circle of the pulley [circle B in Fig. 70 (b)] is 
intersected by the tip line of the belt [line C in 
Fig. 70 (b)], and forwards round the front pulley to 
a horizontal line passing through the bottom- 
bracket axle centre [see Fig. 70 (b)]. 


76 


4.11.3.4 Combined front gear-change guide 


When the chain is located in the outer gear position, 
some portion of the combined front gear change 
guide shall be above the chain in the region 25 mm 
from the point where the chain wheel first passes 
between the side plates of the chain, parallel to the 
chain side plates in the direction towards the rear 
wheel of the bicycle (see Fig. 71). 


In addition, some portion of the combined front gear 
change guide shall be present below the chain in the 
region beyond 25 mm from the point where the 
chain wheel first passes between the side plates of 
the chain, parallel to the chain side plates in the 
direction towards the rear wheel of the bicycle 
(see Fig. 71). 


NOTE — It is recommended that the gap between front- 
gear and front gear-change guide specified by the 
manufacturer is properly set. 


Кеу 


1 Bottom-bracket axle centre; 
2 Chain wheel or front pulley; 
B Тір circle of the pulley; and 
C Tip line of the belt. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


a) A-enlarged (Chain) 
2 25 


B 


b) A-enlarged (Drive belt) 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 
FIG. 70 CHAIN AND DRIVE BELT PROTECTIVE DEVICE REQUIREMENTS (MINIMUM) 


Key 


а The point where the chain wheel first passes between the side plates of the chain; and 


b 25 mm rearwards from the point where the chain wheel first passes between the side plates of the chain. 


АП dimensions are in millimeters 


ЕС. 71 CHAIN AND CHAIN-WHEEL JUNCTION 


4.12 Spoke Protector 


Bicycles for young adults as well as city and 
trekking/roadster/SLR bicycles with multiple 
free-wheel/cassette sprockets shall be fitted with a 
spoke-protector guard to prevent the chain from 
interfering with or stopping rotation of the wheel 
through improper adjustment or damage. All other 
types of bicycles covered by this part can be fitted 
with a spoke protector. 


4.13 Luggage Carriers 


If luggage carriers are fitted or provided, they shall 
comply with IS 14363/ISO 11243. 


77 


4.14 Warning Devices 


Bell or other suitable audible warning device if 
fitted, shall comply with ISO 7636. 


5 ADDITIONAL TESTS /REQUIREMENTS OF 
SUB-ASSEMBLIES 
5.1 Brake Test and Strength Test 


5.1.1 Numbers and Condition of Specimens for the 
Strength Tests 


In general, for static, impact and fatigue tests each 
test shall be conducted on a new test sample, but if 
only one sample is available, it is permissible to 


IS 10613 : 2023 


conduct all of these tests on the same sample with 
the sequence of testing being fatigue, static and 
impact. 


When more than one test is conducted on the same 
sample, the test sequence shall be clearly recorded 
in the test report or record of testing. It should be 
noted that if more than one test is conducted on the 
same sample, earlier tests can influence the results 
of subsequent tests. Also, if a sample fails when it 
has been subjected to more than one test, a direct 
comparison with single testing is not possible. In all 
strength tests, specimens shall be in the fully 
finished condition. 


5.1.2 Accuracy Tolerances of Test Conditions for 
Brake Tests and Strength Tests 


Unless stated otherwise, accuracy tolerances based 
on the nominal values shall be as follows: 


Forces and torques 0/ + 5% 
Masses and weights +1% 
Dimensions +1 mm 
Angles же 
Time duration +55 
Temperatures +2°C 
Pressures +5% 


5.2 Front Mudguard Test Methods 
5.2.1 Front Mudguard with Stays Test Methods 


5.2.1.1 Stage 1: 
obstruction 


Test method — Tangential 


Insert a 12 mm diameter steel rod between the 


78 


spokes, in contact with the rim and below the front 
mudguard stays as shown in Fig. 72 (a), and rotate 
the wheel to apply a tangentially upward force of 
160 N, against the front mudguard stays; maintain 
this force for 1 minute. 


Remove the rod and determine whether or not the 
wheel is free to rotate and whether or not any 
damage to the front mudguard adversely affects 
wheel rotation (blocking of the heel) and the 
steering. 


5.2.1.2 Stage 2: Test method — radial force 


Press the front mudguard at a distance of 20 mm 
from its free end (not taking the flap into 
consideration) with a 20 mm diameter, flat-ended 
tool radially towards the tyre with a force of 80 N 
as shown in Fig. 72 (b). 


While the force is maintained, rotate the wheel 
manually in the direction of forward movement of 
the bicycle and determine whether or not the wheel 
18 free to rotate, and whether or not any damage to 
the front mudguard adversely affects wheel rotation 
(blocking of the wheel) and the steering. 


5.2.2 Front Mudguard Without Stays Test Method 


Press the front mudguard at a distance of 20 mm 
from its free end with a 20 mm diameter, flat-ended 
tool radially towards the tyre with a force of 80 N 
as shown in Fig. 72 (b). 


While the force is maintained, rotate the wheel 
manually in the direction off or ward movement of 
the bicycle and determine whether or not the front 
mudguard is rolled up the wheel, and whether or not 
any damage to the front mudguard adversely affects 
wheel rotation (blocking of the wheel) or obstructs 
the steering. Contact between tyre and mudguard is 
allowed. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


АП dimensions are in millimeter 


FiG. 72 (B) FRONT MUDGUARD — RADIAL FORCE TEST 


5.3 Fatigue Test 


The force for fatigue tests is to be applied and 
released progressively, not to exceed 10 Hz. The 
tightness of fasteners according to manufacturer's 
recommended torque can be re-checked not later 


79 


than 1 000 test cycles to allow for the initial settling 
of the component assembly. (This is considered 
applicable to all components, where fasteners are 
present for clamping). The test bench shall be 
qualified to meet the dynamic requirements of 5.1.2. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


5.4 Plastic Material Strength Tests at Ambient 
Temperature 


All strength tests involving any plastic materials 
shall be pre-conditioned for 2 h and tested at an 
ambient temperature of 23 °C + 5 °С. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 
BICYLES 


OF COMPLETE 


6.1 Road Test 
6.1.1 Test Requirement 


When tested by the method described in 6.1.2, there 
shall be no system or component failure and no 
loosening or misalignment of the saddle, handlebar, 
controls, or reflectors. 


The bicycle shall exhibit stable handling in braking, 
turning, and steering, and it shall be possible to ride 
with one hand removed from the handlebar (as 
when giving hand signals), without difficulty of 
operation or hazard to the rider. If the bicycle is 
fitted with a luggage carrier, the test shall be carried 
out with the maximum load capacity indicated on 
the luggage carrier see also 4.4.13.7 (h). 


6.1.2 Test Method 


First, check and adjust, if necessary, each bicycle 
selected for the road test to ensure that the steering 
and wheels rotate freely without slackness and that 
brakes are correctly adjusted and do not impede 
wheel rotation. Check and adjust wheel alignment 
and, if necessary, inflate tyres to the maximum 
inflation pressure. Check and correct, if necessary, 
transmission-chain adjustment, and check any gear 
controls for correct and free operation. Carefully 
adjust the saddle and handlebar positions to suit the 
rider. 


The test shall be carried out with the permissible 
total weight specified by the manufacturer, 
see 6.4 (h). Ensure that the bicycle is ridden for at 
least 1 km. 


6.2 Structural Integrity of a Fully Assembled 
Bicycle 


For structural integrity of a fully assembled bicycle, 
machine test method as given in Annex K shall be 
carried out. After completion of the machine test, 
conduct a brief, simple track test with progressively 
increasing operating forces to determine whether or 
not the brakes bring the bicycle to a smooth, safe 
stop, see also 4.4.13.7 (h). 


6.3 Folding Cycle Mechanism 


Folding bicycle mechanism if provided, shall be so 


80 


designed that the bicycle can be locked for use in a 
simple, stable, safe way, and when folded, no 
damage shall occur to any cables. No locking 
mechanism shall contact the wheels or tyres during 
riding, and it shall be impossible to unintentionally 
loosen or unlock the folding mechanisms during 
riding. 


6.4 Manufacturer's Instructions 


For guidance on usages and upkeep of bicycles, 
manufacturers shall provide suitable instructions to 
the users. These instructions may be provided in all 
types of formats (paper, CD, website, etc) shall be 
written in the language of the country where the 
bicycle is to be marketed, or by visual tools, such as 
pictograms and illustrations, which shall feature 
prominently in the product safety information. 
When an electronic format is provided, a paper 
version shall be available upon request. The 
customer shall be made aware of this information 
either by the manufacturer or the retailer. 
Instructions for use shall contain the following 
information: 


a) The type of use for which the bicycle has 
been designed (that is, the type of terrain 
for which it is suitable) with a warning 
about the hazards of incorrect use; 


b) Preparation for riding: how to measure and 
adjust the saddle height to suit the rider 
with an explanation of the insertion-depth 
warning marks on the seat-post and 
handlebar-stem. Clear information on 
which lever operates the front brake, which 
lever operates the rear brake, the presence 
of any brake-power modulators with an 
explanation of their function апа 
adjustment, and the correct method of 
using a back-pedal brake if fitted; 


c) Indication of minimum saddle height and 
the way to measure it; 


d) The recommended method for adjusting 
any adjustable suspension system fitted; 


e) Recommendations for safe riding, the use 
of a bicycle helmet, regular checks on 
brakes, tyre pressure, steering, rims, and 
caution concerning possible increased 
braking distances in wet weather; 


f) An advisory note on specific risk of 
entrapment during normal use and 
maintenance; 


g) The safe use and adjustment of foot- 
securing devices if fitted (that is, quick- 
release pedals and toe clips); 


h) 


k) 


m) 


n) 


р) 


q) 


r) 


5) 


и) 


у) 


w) 


y) 


The permissible total weight of the rider 
plus luggage and the maximum total 
weight (bicycle + rider + luggage); 


Indication of whether or not a bicycle is 
suitable for the fitting of a luggage carrier 
and/or a child seat; 


Recommendation about usage for bicycle 
trailer or trailer bicycle if allowed by 
bicycle manufacturer; 


An advisory note to draw attention to the 
rider concerning possible national legal 
requirements when the bicycle is to be 
ridden on public roads (that is, Llghting and 
reflectors); 


Recommended tightening of fasteners 
related to the handlebar, handlebar stem, 
saddle, seat-post, wheels, and aerodynamic 
extension if fitted with torque values for 
threaded fasteners; 


The method for determining the correct 
adjustment of quick-release devices, such 
as the mechanism should emboss the 
fork-ends when closed to the locked 
position; 

The correct method of assembling any parts 
supplied unassembled; 


Lubrication: where and how often to 
lubricate, and the recommended lubricants; 


The correct chain tension and how to adjust 
it (if appropriate); 

Adjustments of gears and their operation (if 
appropriate); 


Adjustment of brakes and 
recommendations for the replacement of 
the friction components; 


Recommendations on general 
maintenance; 
Importance of using опу genuine 


replacement parts for 
components; 


safety-critical 


Care of the wheel rims and a clear 
explanation of any danger of rim wear 
(see 4.8.5.4.1). For composite rims where 
wear damage can be invisible to the user, 
the manufacturer shall explain Ше 
consequences of rim wear and how the 
cyclist can assess the degree of wear or 
should recommend returning the composite 
rim to the manufacturer for inspection; 


81 


IS 10613 : 2023 


z) The correct gluing technique for wheels 


equipped with tubular tyres if fitted 
(see 4.8.5.4); 


aa) Appropriate spares, that is., tyres, tubes, 


and brake friction-components; and 


ab) Accessories: where these are offered as 


fitted, details should be included such as 
operation, maintenance required (if any), 
and any relevant spares (for example, light 
bulbs). 


ac) An advisory note to draw the attention of 


the Rider to possible damage due to 
intensive use and to recommend periodic 
inspections of the frame, fork, suspensions 
joints Gf any), and composite components 
(if any). The wording of the advice can be 
as follows: 


WARNING 


As with all mechanical components, the 
bicycle is subjected to wear and high 
stresses. Different ^ materials and 
components may react to wear Or stress 
fatigue in different ways. Any form of 
crack, scratches or change of coloring in 
highly stressed areas indicate that the 
component is about to fail shortly and it 
should be replaced. This is necessary to 
avoid sudden failure while in use which 
may also result injuries to the rider. 


For composite components, impact damage 
may be invisible to the user, the 
manufacturer shall explain the 
consequences of impact damage and that in 
the event of an impact; composite 
components should either be returned to 
the manufacturer for inspection or 
destroyed and replaced. 


a) For composite components, ап 
advisory note to draw attention to the 
influence of high temperature (heat 
radiations) in confined environment on 
composite materials (if appropriate); 


b) For city and trekking/roadster/SLR 
bicycles, the importance of suitably 
covering any coil springs under the 
saddle if a child-seat is fitted to prevent 
trapping of fingers; 


c) For racing bicycles, caution 
concerning possible reduction of 
toe-clearance due to replacement of 
cranks or tyres; 


IS 10613 : 2023 


d) For racing bicycles, an advisory note 
to draw attention to the fact that when 
using an aerodynamic extension on the 
handlebar, the rider’s response to 
steering and braking can be adversely 
affected; and 


e) The maximum inflation pressure for a 
conventional or tubular tyre, according 
to the lower value between maximum 
inflation pressure recommended on the 
rim or the tyre . 


Any other relevant information may also be included 
at the discretion of the manufacturer. 


6.5 Marking Requirement 
6.5.1 Marking on Frame 


The frame shall be visibly and permanently marked 
with a successive frame number at a readily visible 
location such as near the pedal-crank, the seat-post, 
or the handlebar, and the name of the manufacturer 
of the complete bicycles or the manufacturer’s 
representative and IS 10613. 


NOTE — It is recommended that the maximum permissible 
load (rider plus luggage) is also marked at a readily visible 
location on the frame by the manufacturer. 


6.5.2 Marking on Other Components 


Currently there are no specific requirements, but it 
is recommended that the following safety-critical 
components be clearly and permanently marked 
with traceable identification, such as manufacturer’s 
name and a part number: 


a) Front fork; 

b) Handlebar and handlebar stem; 

c) Seat-post; 

d) Brake levers, brake blocks, and/or brake- 
block holders; 

e) Outer brake-cable casing; 


82 


f) Hydraulic-brake tubing; 


g) Disc-brake calipers, brake-discs, and 
Brake pads; 
h) Chain; 


j) Pedals and cranks; 
k) Bottom-bracket spindle; 
m) Wheel rims. 


6.5.3 Method of Marking 


АП permanent marking shall be done by punching of 
sufficient depth for easy reading. For certain 
components where marking by punching is not 
feasible, marking may be undertaken by printing or 
affixing label. 


6.5.3.1 Durability test of marking 


For checking durability of printed marking, rub the 
marking by hand for 15 s with a piece of cloth 
soaked in water and again for 15 s with a piece of 
cloth soaked in petroleum spirit. The marking shall 
remain easily legible. 


If any label is used for any marking, it shall neither 
be easily removable nor show any sign of curling. 


6.6 BIS Certification Marking 


Each bicycle may also be marked with Standard 
Mark. 


6.6.1 The product(s) conforming to the 
requirements of this standard may be certified as 
per the conformity assessment schemes under the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and the Rules and Regulations framed there 
under, and the products may be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


IS 10613 : 2023 
ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


IS/ISO/IEC/EN IS/ISO/IEC/EN 


Мо. Title A Title 
IS 1367 (Part Technical supply conditions ISO 5775-2 : Bicycle tyres and rims — Part 
3):2017/ISO for threaded steel fasteners: 2021 2: Rims 
898-1 : 2013 Part 3 Mechanical properties of 
fasteners made of carbon steel ISO 6742-1 : Cycles — Lighting and retro- 
and bolts, screws and studs 2015 reflective devices — Part 1: 
(fifth revision) Lighting and light signalling 
devices 
IS 1367 (Part Technical supply conditions 
6):1994/ISO for threaded steel fasteners: IS/ISO Cycles — Lighting and retro- 
898-2 : 1992 Part 6 Mechanical properties 6742-2:2015 reflective devices — Part 2: 
and test methods of nuts with Retro-reflective devices 
specified proof loads (fourth 
revision) ISO 7636 : Bells for bicycles and mopeds 
ISO 3452-1: Non-destructive testing  — 1284 = Technical specications 
2021 Penetrant testing — Part 1: 
General principles ISO 8124-1 : Safety of toys — Part 1: Safety 
2018 aspects related to mechanical 
ISO 3452-2 : Non-destructive testing — and physical properties 
2021 Penetrant testing — Part 2: 
Testing of penetrant materials БОЕ: Safety of toys uu Pat 3: 
2020 Migration of certain elements 
ISO 3452-3 : Non-destructive testing — IS 14363 : Cycles — Luggage carriers for 
2013 Penetrant testing — Part 3: 2018 bicycles — Requirements and 
Reference test blocks test methods 
е Pare ng Big Б IS 15511: Cycle chains — Characteristics 
: 20047 
Equipment ae а and test methods 
ISO 4210 -2: Cycles — Safety requirements 
2015 for bicycles — Part 2: IS 15533: Safety requirements for 
Requirements for City and 2018/ISO Bicycles for young children 
trekking, young adult, 8098 : 3014 (first revision) 
mountain and racing bicycle 
IEC 60529 : Degrees of protection provided 
р р 
ISO 5775-1: Bicycle tyres and rims — Part 1989 by enclosures (IP Code) 
2014 1: Tyre designations апа 
Dimensions 


98 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.1.2) 


TOXICITY TEST 


B-1 PLASTIC COMPONENTS 


Plastic components such as brake cable, grips, brake 
levers, pdals etc. shall be tested for total polycyclic 
aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) content and total 
phthalate content. 


B-1.1 Total Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
(PAH) Content 


Total polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) 
content shall be determined as per AFPS GS 2014 : 
01 PAK-Analysis by GC-MSD for following 18 
compounds: 


Naphthalene (91-20-3), 
Acenaphthylene (208-96-8), 
Acenaphthene (83-32-9), 
Fluorene (86-73-7), 
Phenanthrene (85-1-8), 
Anthracene (120-12-7), 
Fluoranthene (206-44-0), 
Pyrene (129-00-0), 
Chrysene (218-01-9), 
Benzo (a) Anthracene (56-55-3), 
Benzo (b) Fluoranthene (205-99-2), 
Benzo (k) Fluoranthene (207-08-9), 
Benzo (j) Fluoranthene (205-82-3), 
Benzo (e) Pyrene (192-97-2), Benzo (a) Pyrene (50- 
32-8), 
Dibenzo (a, h) Anthrancene (53-70-3), 
Indeno (1,2,3-cd) 
Pyrene (193-39-5), Benzo (g, h, i) Perylene (191-24- 
2) 


Samples tested shall meet the 


requirements: 


Total of 18 PAH's: < 10 mg/kg and Benzo (a) 
pyrene: < 1 mg/kg 


following 


NOTE — CAS number of compounds are given in brackets. 
B-1.2 Total Phthalate Content 


Total Ppthalate content shall be determined by 
Solvent Extraction followed by GC-MS Analysis. 
The amount of following 19 compounds shall be 
determined: 


83 


i) DEHP Bis (2-ethylhexyl) 

ii) phthalate (117-81-7); 

iii) DBP Dibutylphthalate (84-74-2); 

iv) BBP Benzylbutylphthalate (85-68-7); 

v) DINP Diisononylphthalate (28553-12-0, 
68515-48-0); 


vi) DIDP Diisodecylphthalate (26761-40- 
0); 


vii) ОМОР Dioctylphthalate (117-84-0); 

viii) DIBP Diisobutylphthalate (84-69-5); 

1x) DHNUP 1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, 
di-C7-11-branched and linear alkyl 
esters (685 15-42-4); 

x) DIHP 1,2-Benzoldicarbonsáure, Di-C6- 
8-verzweigte Alkyl ester, С7-геісһ 
(71888-89-6); 

xi) ОМЕР Dimethoxyethylphthalat (117- 
82-8); 

xi)  12-Benzoldicarbonsáure, Dipentylester, 

verzweigt undlinear (84777-06-0); 

DIPP Diisopentylphthalat (605-50-5); 

nPIPP N-Lentil-isopentylphthalat 

(776297 -69-9); 

xv) РРР Dipentylphthalat (131-18-0); 

xvi) | DnHP Dihexylphthalate (84-75-3); 

xvii) DHxP 1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, 

dihexylester, branched апа linear, 

(68515-50-4); 

1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid di-C6-10- 

alkyl esters; 1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic 

acid, mixed decyl and hexyl and 
octyldiesters with 0.3% of dihexyl 

phthalate, (68515-51-5, 68648-93-1); 

DCP dicylohexyl phthalate (84-61-7); 

and 

xx) | Di-n-pentyl phthalate (DNPP). 


xiii) 
xiv) 


xviii) 


xix) 


The presence of none of above compound shall 
exceed 0.1 percent. 


NOTE — CAS number of compounds are given in brackets. 
B-2 COATED METAL COMPONENTS 


Metal components with coating such as metal tubes 
shall be subjected to determination of 19 elements 
for migration of heavy metal as per ISO 8124-3. The 
list of 19 elements along with their maximum 
migration allowed is given in Table 37. Samples are 
required to meet the migration content requirement 
of all the elements individually. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Table 37 Migration Limits of Heavy Metals 
(Clause B-2) 


SI No. Element Limit Max (mg/Kg) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Aluminum (AI) 70 000 
ii) Antimony (Sb) 560 
iii) Arsenic (As) 47 
iv) Barium (Ba) 18 750 
у) Вогоп (В) 15 000 
vi) Cadmium (Cd) 17 
ai) m 460 
viii) e » 0.2 
ix) Cobalt (Co) 130 
x) Copper (Cu) 7 700 
х1) Lead (Pb) 160 
xii) Manganese (Mn) 15 000 
xiii) Mercury (Hg) 94 
xiv) Nickel (Ni) 930 
xv) Selenium (Se) 460 
xvi) Strontium (Sr) 56 000 
xvii) Tin (Sn) 180 000 
xviii) Organotin 12 
xix) Zinc (Zn) 46 000 


84 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 4.4.11, 4.4.13.3 and 4.4.13.7(f)) 


METHOD OF LEAST SQUARES FOR OBTAINING THE LINE OF BEST-FIT AND + 20 PERCENT 
LIMIT LINES FOR BRAKING PERFORMANCE LINEARITY 


C-1 The readings taken in the test specified in 4.4 
can be expected to lie near some straight line that 


can be drawn through them. Although in practice а= у — bx (B.5) 
one might draw a good straight line through the 

points by eye, the method of least squares given here For example, the following four values of x and y 
provides а criterion for minimizing the are noted during а test, from which Уху and Ух? аге 
discrepancies and permits a line to be selected that determined besides x and y as shown below: 


has a claim to be called the best fit. 


C-2 The line of best fit is the line that minimizes 


the sum of the squares of the differences between SI No. x y 
the observed results and the corresponding results Pedal Force Braking 
predicted by the line. N Force 
N 
C-3 The relationship between the variables 1 
: . ) 90 90 
18 considered to be of the form: 2) 150 120 
3) 230 160 
y=atbx (B.1) 
4) 300 220 
where 
Sum Ух = 770 Уу = 590 
x= Independent variable, and is known BS = 
precisely (in this case, the load applied to the Mean аы yedens 
pedal); and 
y = Dependent variable, and is observed but 51. No. Xy x? 
with a degree of uncertainty (in this case, the 1 8 100 8 100 
braking force at the wheel). 2 18 000 22 500 
3 36 800 52 900 
a and b= Unknown constants and have to be 4 66 000 90 000 
шы $ит Yxy-1,28,900 Ух2-1,73,500 


For a series of n readings, this relationship can be 
resolved by taking a minimum of the sum of the 


squares of the difference to give. p = 222-92 
Yx?-xyx 
= mE (B.2) _ 128 900 - (147.5 x 770) 
^. 173 500 - (192.5 x 770) 
we know ко 
a=y — bx 
ya and x= ux (B.3) 
" " = 147.5 – (0.606 х 192.5) 
Ixy-3X =30.8 
_ àxy-YYx 
C Yx2- xyx (B.4) 


The line of best fit is therefore 


Then a can be found by substitution: JESUS 


85 


IS 10613 : 2023 


qm 120 
And the + 20 percent limit lines are Yupper = 155 (30.8+0.606x) 
80 
Уюмет = Тр (30.8+0.606х) = 36.96 + 0.727x 
= 24.64 + 0.485x The results from the example are shown 


graphically in Fig. 73. 


250 7 
z 
Y P 
P 
200 = 
ч. 4^ [2 
72 
P ud 24 
Pad EN Д 
150 а = 
4 - 
ee] 3 
100 2 = 


50 


Key 


Braking force, N; 
Input force, N; 
+20 percent limit; 
line of best fit; and 
—20 percent limit. 


эю ре 


FIG. 73 GRAPH OF LEVER FORCE Or PEDAL FORCE (INPUT FORCE) AGAINST BRAKING FORCE, SHOWING LINE OF 
BEST FIT AND + 20 PERCENT LIMIT LINES 


86 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.5.5) 
STEERING GEOMETRY 
D-1 The Steering geometry employed, as shown in b) The steering axis intersects a line 
Fig. 74, will generally be dictated by the use for perpendicular to the ground line, drawn 
which the bicycle is intended but it is nevertheless through the wheel center, at a point not 


recommended that 


a) The steering head angle be not more than 


lower than 15 percent and not higher than 
60 percent of the wheel radius when 
measured from the ground line. 


775° and not less than 65? in relation to the 


ground line; and 


Key 


Direction of travel; 
Steering axis; 


Ground line; 


Intersection point; 
Wheel radius; 


QN л FW Ne 


Steering head angle; 


0,15R 


7 Wheel centre; 

8 Perpendicular to ground line; 
9 Tolerance; 

10 Offset; amd 

11 Trail. 


FIG. 74 STEERING GEOMETRY 


87 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses 4.5.6.1.2, 4.5.6.2.2, 4.5.6.3.2, 4.5.6.3.3, 4.5.7.2, 4.6.2, 4.6,3, 4.6.4, 4.7.4, 4.7.5.1, 4.7.7.1, 
4.9.4, 4.9.5, 4.9.6.1.1, 4.9.6.1.2, 4.9.6.4.1, 4.9.6.4.2, 4.10.3, 4.10.5, 4.10.9.1, 4.10.9.4 and 4.11.2) 


GENERAL CRACK DETECTION METHODS 


The detection of visible cracks after certain tests 
have been specified as criteria of failure. In cases 
cracks are not visible by naked eye but are 
suspected, suitable methods such as dye-penetrant 
methods as specified in ISO 3452-1, ISO 3452-2, 


88 


ISO 3452-3 and ISO 3452-4 may be used to detect 
cracks. In addition, white Paint or surface treatment 
can be used to aid in detection for cracks pertaining 
to composite materials. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Causes 4.6.1 and 4.8.2) 


SUSPENSION FRAMES — TYRE CLEARANCE TEST 


F-1 TEST REQUIREMENTS 


When tested the tyre or any components other than 
fixing mechanism shall not contact the frame nor 
shall the components separate. 


F-2 TEST METHOD 


For the tyre-clearance test, a suspension frame and 
wheel shall first be checked and adjusted according 
to the following: 


a) Inflate the tyre to the maximum inflation 
pressure; 


b) If the frame’s suspension element can be 
locked, place it in the open position; and 


c) If the frame’s suspension element is a 
pneumatic shock, pressurize the chamber 
to the minimum pressure according to the 
manufacturer’s instruction. 


Secure the frame in an orientation that allows a force 
to be applied to the wheel from a simulated ground 
plane. With a wheel and tyre assembly fitted to the 
frame, apply a force of 2 800 N to the wheel in a 
direction perpendicular to the simulated ground 
plane such that the suspension is compressed (see 
Fig. 75). Maintain the force for | minute. 


FIG. 75 EXAMPLES OF SUSPENSION FRAMES — TYRE-CLEARANCE TEST 


89 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clauses 4.6.2, 4.6.2.1, 4.6.4.2, 4.6.5.1, 4.7.4.1, 4.7.5.2.1, 4.7.6.1, 4.7.7.2 and 4.7.7.3) 


DUMMY/TEST FORK CHARACTERISTICS 


G-1 DUMMY/TEST FORK 


G-1.1 The test forks shall be designed to mount in a 
manner similar to the original fork, or in a manner 
using fork mounting fixture (see F-2). 


G-1.2 The test forks, when mounted, shall be the 
same length (axle to race), L, as the longest fork 
designed for use with the frame. 


G-1.3 The deflection of the test fork shall be 
measured in the direction of the force application at 
the front axle center, from the resulting application 
of a vertical force of 1 200 N. The fork shall be 
secured in a horizontal position by constraining the 
steerer tube by means of a false head tube (with 
bearings) equal to 150 mm in length. The steerer 
tube shall be secured as in a bicycle with the crown 
race seat adjacent to the false head tube lower 
bearing assembly, see Fig. 76. 


G-1.4 The deflection ratio, Dr, for the test fork for 
the horizontal loading fatigue test and the vertical 
loading fatigue test shall not exceed the value of 1,0 
when computed as follows: 


кух 10000 x6 
mee 
where 


D, = The deflection ratio; 
ky = 1 417,a constant; 


L = The fork length, expressed in mm; and 
ô = The deflection, expressed in mm. 


Example: 


Fork length L = 460 mm; and 


Deflection 6 = 6.85 mm, from which deflection ratio Dr 


= 1417 x 10000 x 6.85 


460? 


— 0.99721 x 1.0 


G-1.5 The deflection ratio, Dr, for the test fork for 
the impact test shall not exceed the value of 1.0 
when computed as follows: 


Кох 10 000 x 6 
EIE S 


where 


D, = The deflection ratio; 


Kı = 709, а constant; 
L = The fork length, expressed in mm; and 
ó - The deflection, expressed in mm. 


G-2 FORK MOTING FIXTURE 


G-2.1 The fork shall be mounted in a fixture 
representative of the head tube and gripped in the 
normal head bearings. The distance between the 
bearings can have an influence on the results. 
Therefore, when known the real mounting distance 
shall be used with a tolerance of +5 mm. If no 
indication about the distance is given, a value of 
(150 + 5) mm shall be taken. The measurement 
points are taken from the middle of the bearings. 
Examples of distance measurements are given in 
Fig. 76. 


G-2.2 During loading, the fork steerer will bend 
and can touch the dummy head tube. The design of 
the dummy tube shall be such that this contact shall 
not occur. 


a) Measurement with external cup bearing 


IS 10613 : 2023 


b) Measurement with integrated bearings 


Key 
d Distance between the bearings 


FIG. 76 EXAMPLES OF DISTANCE MEASUREMENTS 


91 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Clauses 4.6.2.2, 4.7.5.2.1 and 4.10.4.1) 


VERIFICATION OF FREE-FALL VELOCITY 


H-1 For all vertical Impact Tests, the striker shall h = The falling height (m). 
be guided in such a way that the efficiency will 
permit to reach at least 95 percent of the free-fall 


velocity. The efficiency is equal to Formula: 
The free-fall velocity is calculated using Formula и = (vj/v )x100 
= J2gh 
K g where 
where 


u = The efficiency (%); and 
0 = The free-fall velocity (m/s); v; = The measured velocity at impact 
g = The gravitational acceleration (m/s)) (that (m/s). 

is,=9.80665m/s2); and 


92 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX J 
(Clause 4.6.7.1.1) 


STRENGTH TEST OF FRAME-FORK ASSEMBLY 


J-1 VIBRATION TEST METHOD 


J-1.1 With a frame-fork assembly mounted on the 
stand so as the ground contact points of both 
intended wheels are horizontal as shown in Fig. 77, 
test shall be made by application of vertical up and 
downward vibrations under the conditions given in 
Table 38. The front wheel attachment shall be freely 
movable in the lengthwise orientation. 


J-1.2 Using a seat pillar to be combined with the 
frame-fork assembly, fix the seat pillar at the 
position of the minimum insertion mark. Secure the 
saddle-shape support as shown in 4 onto the seat 
area and suspend the circular weights dividedly on 
both sides through the hanger metals so that the total 
mass of the weight support, hanger metals, and 
weights is applied to the seat assembly. The weight 
support shall be secured to the seat pillar on the axis 
at 20 mm below the upper extreme of the by a 
fastening metal. For a frame-fork assembly a 
combined seat pillar, the test may be performed by 
replacing the combined seat pillar with a unit pillar 
having the same If the bar connecting the right-hand 
and left-hand weights contacts with the battery or 
other parts, test shall be performed with connecting 
bar removed. For applying load to the bottom 
bracket assembly, fix circular weight to the bottom 
bracket area dividedly on both sides. The weight 
support to which the weight is fixed shall not be 
heavier than 2 kg. 


93 


J-1.3 For applying load to the head assembly, fix 
the weight at the position where there is no 
clearance between the under surface of weight 
support (of mass not more than 0.5 kg) and the 
upper surface of the head lock nut by using a metal 
fiting as shown in (Fig. 77). For a frame-fork 
assembly using a handlebar stem consisting of a 
stem only, in which the fork stem is clamped from 
outside, the test shall be performed with the weight 
fixed to the upper end of the fork stem by means of 
a jig which clamps the Fork stem from outside or 
by means of handlebar stem. 


J-1.4 Frequency of vibration shall be selected 
arbitrarily in the range of 5 Hz to 12 Hz avoiding a 
resonance. 


J-1.5 For testing a frame-fork assembly motor 
assist cycles, fix the battery, the drive unit, control 
unit or other that are to be mounted under the test 
conditions in Table 38, or weights of equivalent 
masses thereof, on positions where they are actually 
mounted so that the test assembly simulates the 
actual application of load on the frame-fork. In this 
case, the battery, drive unit and control unit 
themselves are not the subjects of evaluation for the 
vibration proof performance. When the drive unit 
housing or other of the frame fork assembly for 
motor assist cycles constitute a of the frame-fork 
assembly, the test shall be with all such attached. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Sl 


(1) 


i) 


ii) 


Weight Weight 


н] [m 


Mid-point 


Full amplitude 


| 
| 


Bottom 
bracket 
: ssembly 
Vibration stand ны 


FIG. 77 VIBRATION TEST OF FRAME AND FORK ASSEMBLY 


Table 38 Test Condition for Vibration Test of Frame — Fork Assembly 
(Clauses J-1.1 and J-1.5) 


Weight (mass) kg 


Bicycle Type Head Seat Bottom Total Frequenc — Accelerati 
Assem Asse Bracket y on 
bly mbly — Assembl Vibration Vibrating 
y of Part 
m/s? 
(2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
Diamond 
For «shaped 50 20 75 19.6 
adults 
pas 4515 65 5012 176 
shapes 
MTB - look 10 50 25 85 22 


94 


Number 
of 
Vibration 
s 


(9) 


100 000 


70 000 


150 000 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX K 
(Clauses 4.8.3.1 and 4.8.5.1) 


WHEEL/TYRE ASSEMBLY — FATIGUE TEST for CITY and TREKKING/ROADSTER /SLR 
BICYCLES 


K-1 TEST REQUIREMENTS 


After the test there should be no fractures, 
detachments, or visible cracks in any part of the 
wheel, no loss of air pressure in the tyre due to 
damage from the wheel to the tyre or the inner tube 
(where fitted), and the undamaged tyre should 
remain on the Rim. 


K-2 TEST METHOD 


K-2.1 Assemble the wheel, tyre, and inner tube 
(when fitted) and inflate the tyre to 90 percent of the 
maximum inflation pressure. 


K-2.2 Mount the wheel/tyre assembly free to rotate 
on its axle, and free to move in a vertical direction. 
load the wheel assembly by means of dead weights 
against a drum equipped with equally spaced, 
transverse, metallic slats such that the radial force 


applied to the wheel/tyre assembly is 640 N. The 
wheel and drum axes shall be vertically aligned. 


K-2.3 An example of a test arrangement is shown 
in Fig. 78, in which the wheel axle is fixed between 
the free ends of a pair of pivoted arms that extend 
horizontally with the tyre contacting the drum 
between the slats. 


K-2.4 The diameter of the drum shall be in the 
range of 500 mm to 1 000 mm, and the slats shall 
have a width of 50 mm + 2.5 mm, a thickness of 10 
mm + 0.25 mm, and 45? chamfered edges of half 
their thickness. The  circumferential spacing 
between the center lines of two consecutive slats 
shall be not less than 400 mm. 


K-2.5 Rotate the drum to give a linear surface 
speed of 25 km/h (+ 10 percent) for a period to 
provide 750 000 impacts between the tyre and the 
slats. 


АП dimensions are in millimeter 


Key 
1 Total force on the axle, 640 N 


FIG. 78 WHEEL/TYRE ASSEMBLY — FATIGUE TEST 


IS 10613 : 2023 


ANNEX M 
(Clause 6.2) 


STRENGTH TEST FOR STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY OF THE FULLY ASSEMBLED BICYCLE 


M-1 TEST REQUIREMENT 


There should be no system or component failure and 
no loosening or misalignment of the saddle, 
handlebar, controls, lighting equipment, ог 
reflectors, after the test conducted as per M-2. 


M-2 MACHINE TEST METHOD 


M-2.1 Mount a fully assembled bicycle on a 
test machine. The following weights should be 
applied: 
a) One 36 kg weight with a pin for insertion 
in the seat-post and divided into two halves 
to be hung, one on each side; 


b) Two 18 kg weights with fixtures for 
attaching them to the cranks in place of the 


Pedals; 
c) Two 6.75 kg weights with fixtures for 
attaching them to each side of the 


96 


Handlebar; and 


d) One 10kg, 18 kg, or 25 kg weight with the 
dimensions 240 mm x 240 mm on the 
Luggage Carrier. 


M-2.2 An example of a test arrangement is shown 
in Fig. 79, in which the bicycle is mounted on two 
drums. The diameter of the drums should be in a 
range from 500 mm to | 000 mm, and the slots 
should have a width of 50 mm + 2.5 mm, a thickness 
of 10 mm + 0.25 mm, and 45° chamfered edges of 
half their thickness. The circumferential spacing 
between the centerlines of two consecutive slots 
should be not less than 400 mm. 


M-2.3 Rotate the drums to give a linear surface 
speed of 8 km/h (+ 10 percent) for a period of 6 h. 
The tyres of the bicycle should be inflated to the 
maximum inflation pressure. 


IS 10613 : 2023 


7] 


I 
515 


Кеу 

Adjustable height; 
Weight, 18 kg; 

Height adjustable; 

Drum diameter, 760 mm; 
Weight, 6.75 kg; 
Weight, 18 kg; 

Weight, 6.75 kg; and 
Weight, 18 kg. 


0 -1 O t BA U у ш 


АП Dimensions in millimeters 


FIG. 79 DYNAMIC STRENGTH TEST ON A FULLY ASSEMBLED BICYCLE 


97 


ANNEX N 
(Foreword) 


IS 10613 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Bicycles Sectional Committee, TED 16 


Organization 
Research and Development Centre for Bicycle and 
Sewing Machine, Ludhiana 
Amar Wheels Pvt Ltd 
АП India cycle Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Atlas Cycles, Ghaziabad 


Avon Cycles Ltd, New Delhi 


Department of Industries of Commerce, Haryana 


Development Commissioner Micro-Small and Medium 
Enterprises 


G-13 Bicycle Forum 


Hartex Rubber Pvt Ltd, Ludhiana 


Hero Cycles, Ludhiana 


Hero Ecotech Ltd, Ludhiana 


Institute for Auto Parts and Hand tools Technology, 
Ludhiana 
Lucky Exports, Kolkata 


Metro Tyres Ltd, Hyderabad 


Milton Cycles Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Department for 
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, New Delhi 


99 


Representative(s) 


SHRI H. S. BAINS (Chairperson) 
SHRI KARAN AGGARWAL 
DR K. B. THAKUR 


SHRI ZOHEB KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM KAPUR 
SHRI GIRISH KAPUR (Alternate) 


SHRI ONKAR SINGH PAHWA 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR KAUSHIK 
SHRI AMAR SINGH SOLANKI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. RAMESH 
SHRI K. L. RAO 
SHRI K. K. FUNDA (Alternate) 
SHRI K. N. L. MURTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI UMESH KUMAR NARANG 
SHRI RAJINDER JINDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVNEET CHABRA 
SHRI MANOJ MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. RAI 
SHRI K. C. SHARVA (Alternate) 


SHRI LOKESH MALHOTRA 
SHRI PRITPAL SINGH RANDHAWA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV KATOCH 


SHRI SOHRAB CHHABRA 
SHRI HARSIMER JIT SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR MAYRA 
SHRI JITENDAR SINGH PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI I. D. CHUGH 
SHRI DINESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MARGARATE GANGTE 
SHRI ANSHU MAULI KUMAR (Alternate) 


IS 10613 : 2023 


Organization 


MS Bhogal and Sons, Ludhiana 


MSME Tool Room, Kolkata 


National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar 
Nova Bicycle Indutries, Ludhiana 


Ralson India Ltd, New Delhi 


Research and Development Centre for Bicycle and 
Sewing Machine, Ludhiana 

S.K. Bikes Pvt Ltd, Ludhiana 

Sebco Enterprises, Ludhiana 


Spark Engineering Pvt Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Tube Investments of India Ltd, Chennai 


United Cycle and Parts Manufacturers Association, 
Punjab 


Vishal Cycles Pvt Ltd, Ludhiana 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI NAGINDER SINGH BHOGAL 
SHRI R. S. BHOGAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT PRAKASH SHARMA 


SHRI SHARNPAL SINGH TAGGAR (Alternate) 


DR B. RAMAN BEDI 


SHRI HARMINDER SINGH PAHWA 


SHRI SANJEEV PAHWA 
SHRI S. P. PANDEY (Alternate) 
SHRI AMIT KHANNA (Young Professional) 


SHRI VISHWAS MEHTA 
SHRI PAPINDER SINGH (Young Professional) 


SHRI SACHIN LAKRA 
SHRI MUKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV JAIN 
SHRI LALIT SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANOOP AGGARWAL 
SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VELMURUGAN P. 
SHRI PRAKASH V. (Alternate) 
SHRI PRINCE KAPOOR (Young Professional) 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV MAHINDRU 
SHRI K.K. PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(TRANSPORT ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI RAVINDRA BENIWAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(TRANSPORT ENGINEERING), BIS 


100 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No. TED 16 (17674). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. РАМРАТ. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


