(Reaffirmed 2000)

ISz 1981- 1978

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ANIMAL CASINGS

( First Revision)
Meat

Industry Sectional Committee, AFDC 18
Rcprczrnting
Indian Veterinary Izatnagar Research Institute ( ICAR ),

Chairman
DR C. M. SINQH

Members
DR B. PANDA C Afturn& to Dr C. M. Singh ) MARKETINQ Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry AQRICULTURAL of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA SHRI S. JAYARAKAN ( Altrmafe ) Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of SHRI D. S. CHADHA Health & Family Welfare ), New Delhi SMT DEBI MUEHERJEE ( Alfnnat~ ) Technical Standardisation Committee ( Foodstuffs ) CEAIRMAN ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi SEORETARY ( Altnnau ) Metal Box Company of India Ltd, Calcutta DR S. C. CHAKRAVORTY SFIRI D. B. P. CHANDRASEKHARA Regional Bacon Factory, Gannavaram RAO DR S. RAQHAVENDEA RAO ( A&mats ) Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Agriculture DE A. K. CEATTERJEE & Irriga;ate, New Delhi Research Institute ( CSIR ). Central DR S. DIVAKA~AN Madras DR K. J. SCAR= ( Altcrnatr ) Central Dairy Farm, Aligarh GENERAL MANAGER SERI K. S. BISHT ( Al&ma& ) bscx Fatma Private Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ANAND K. GOYLE SHRI ARUN K. GOYLE ( AlUmatr ) Corporation of Madras HEALTH OYFICER VETERINARY OFFICER ( ALrnutr )

(Cmtinmdm$aga2) @ Copyrighf 1978
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION Tbii publication i.v protected under the Iadiaa Ca@ight Ad ( XXV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any meam except with written pcrmimion. of the publisher aball be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the satd Act.

IS : 1981 - 1978
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Reprszmting Directorate of Remount Headquarters Veterinary Services, Army

Membrrs B~ra K. S. KIJTTY MAJ S. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) DR R. R. MALLYA MANAQRR DR M. N. MOORJANI

Mafco Factory, Bombay Regional Bacon Factory, Haringhata Central Food Technological Research ( CSIR ), Mysore

Institute

DR B. R. BALI~A ( ALrnats ) Municipal Corporation of Delhi `MUNICIPAL HEALTH OFFICER SUPERINTENDENT ( SLAUQHTER HOUSE ) ( Alternate ) Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute SHRI V. NAQARAJU ( CSIR ), Durgapur Madras Veterinary College, Madras DR R. RAMAMURT_EI DR M. P. ARKJMIJQAM f \ Altcrnats -~ -~1 Accelerated Freeze Drying Factory ( Ministry of SHRI S. RAMASWAMY Defence ), Tundla SHRI T. N. RAWAL ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Tccbnical Development, SHRI S. RAXASWAMY New Delhi SERI S. N. PANDEY ( Altcrnats ) DR T. SHARMA . . Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore ^ R. _._ SHRI L. A. KAMANATHAN ( Altcrnatc ) Quartermaster General's Branch, Army HcadCOL R. N. TANEJA quarters LT-COL K. N. ACHARYA ( Aknate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-oJicio Member ) SHRI T. PVRNANANDAX, Deputy Director ( Agri & Food )
I

Secretary SHRI MANOHAR T. SANTWANI Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IQ

ISt1981-1978

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ANIMAL CASINGS .,-

( First Revision)
0.

FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard ( Fht

Revision ) was adopted by the In&an Standards Institution on 31 July 1978, after the draft finalized by the Meat Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.

0.2 Animal casings are generally obtained from the intestines of sheep, goats, cattle and hogs, and are mainly used in the production of sausages and also for non-edible purposes, such as surgical sutures, guts for sports goods and strings for musical instruments. The process of manufacture of animal casings has been included in this standard as a guide ( SCI Appendix A ) . In view of the common trade practice, the term ` sheep casings ' has been used in the standard to include goat casings also. 0.3 Most of the casings produced in this country are exported. Due consideration has, therefore, been given in the preparation of this standard to the requirements prescribed by the importing countries for the import of animal casings with particular reference to ante-m,ortem and postcalibration and certification. inspection, It is, therefore, mortem, expected that the casings conforming to this standard will find ready acceptance abroad and also speed up the export of this commodity. 0.4 This standard was first published in 1962. The present revision incorporates a number of modifications, namely (a) dry ready-to-wet casings have been included; and (b) the various grades have been alignrd with the grades laid down under the Animals Casings Grading and Marking ( Amendment ) Rules, 1975. This standard is subject to the This revision also incorporates Amendments provisions of the Rules. No. 1 and 2 issued earlier to the standard , (h5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Rules for rounding off numerical value: ( rruised ). 3

lS : 19811. SCOPE

1978

1.1 This standard prestribes the requirements and the methods of sampling and test for animal casings derived from sheep, goats, cattle and hogs.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, apply. 2.1 Black Node - Black node usually ingesta or slime left behind in the casing. the following definitions shall

caused by the residue of the

2.2 Calibration - (a) Measurement of the diameter of the casing in the case of wet-salted casings; (b) Flat measure ( half circumference ) in the dase of dried casings; and (c) Measurement of the diameter of the casings after their treatment with water for at least fifteen minutes in the case of dry ready-to-wet casings of sheep and goats. The diameter is found out by inflating the casing with air or water and measuring the diameter by means of suitable calibration frames after properly stretching out the casing wall and taking the mean of several readings. &.3 Cattle buffalo. 2.4 Cattle a) Includes
-

bull,

cow,

ox, heifer,

calf,

steer, bullock and

Casing

Includes the following: measuring

The terminal end of the large intestine Fat Endabout I.5 m in length from the anus. b) Middci - Remaining part of the large intestine. c) Bund - Caecal part of the intestine. d) Runner f) Sniall intestine. e) `Urinary, Bladder Weasand - Gullet or oesophagus.
-

.

2.5 Cicatris 2.6 Domestic 2.7 Kink 2.8 Nodule -

Scar of healed-up wound. Small grease spot in the casing.

Twisted loop in the casing. Small rounded structure. Bundles of casings. These shall be as follows:

2.9 Ringa and Hanks

a) Rings of Sheep and Goat Casings - A ring shall contain not more than 4 pieces and shall measure at least 21 m in length, no single piece measuring less than l-5 m. 4

IS : 19811 1978

b) c) 4

Rings of Hog Casings -

and shall measure than 1 m.

A ring shall contain not more than 4 pieces at least 9 m, no single piece measuring less

Hanks of Sheep or Coat Casings - A hank shall consist of not more than 18 pieces and shall measure at least 92 m in length. Rings, Hanks or Cocoons of Dry Ready-to-Wet Casings of Sheep and Goats - May be made up of several pieces joined together with

adhesive and other approved measure not less than 1'5 m.

materials;

each single piece shall length 180m 90 m or a packet 25 m 30 m 18 m

e>Hanks

of Cattle Cusings measure as follows:

The minimum

of a hank shall

Dried runners Dried middles Salted runners Salted middles No single piece shall measure less than I m. 2.10 Rust - Black fungal action. spots caused by putrefaction

of

due to bacterial

or

2.11 Salt Barn - Areas of discolouration generally caused by: (a) the entry of air-tight tin containers in which the casings are packed, and/or (b) by the use of poor quality salt. 3. TYPES 3.1 The casings shall be of the folIowing types: a) b) c) Sheep casing ( including goat casing ); Cattle casing ( dried cattle casing and salted cattle casing ); Hog casing; and casings of sheep, goats and cattle.

d) Dry ready-to-wet 4. GRADES

4.1 There shall be three grades for sheep casings, namely, Prime Quality ( PQ) or Grade 1, Grade 2 and Grade 3; and four grades for cattle casings, namely, Prime Quality ( PQ ), Grade 1, Grade 2 and Grade 3 ( shorts ). 5

IS : 1981 - 1978
5. REQUrREMENTS 5.1 General - The casings shall be obtained from healthy animals slaughtered in licensed premises and subjected to ante-mortem and postmortem inspection according to the procedure prescribed in IS : 1982197!*. The casings shall be prepared under hygienic conditions and shall be wholesome and otherwise fit for human consumption. 5.2 Description 5.2.1 The casings shall be of uniform natural colour and shall be free from defects like holes, blisters, lacerations, nodules and cicatrices. 5.2.2 The casing wall shall be free from any parasitic from scars of healed-up wounds. 5.2.3 The casings mucus and dung. 5.2.4 5.2.5 shall be free from domestics, black infestation nodes, and slime,

The casings shall be free from moulds

or fungus infestation.

The casings shall be free from salt burns and rust.

5.3 Preservatives - Preservatives other than common salt shall not be The common salt used shall be of edible quality ( see IS : 253used. 1970f ). 5.4 Individual Requirements

5.4.1 Sheep Casings 5.4.1.1 Sheep casings, Grade Prime Quality be of (PQ) or Grade colour 1:

4 b) cl 4

c010ur without Wall -

The casing shall any discolouration.

natural

throughout

The casing wall shall be intact

and not torn or lacerated. when filled pressed. with air or

Strength - The casing shall not burst water to its normal capacity and slightly

may be-even, for example, 12 to Calibration - The calibration 14 mm, 14 to 16 mm, etc, up to 26 mm; or it may be odd, for example, 13 to 15 mm, 15 to 17 mm, etc, up to 27 mm as agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor. casings may be tied in rings or hanks Assembly - The calibrated as agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor.

4 f)

:;:,I

The rings or hanks shall be cured properly IS : 253-1970t ).

\itith common

*Code of practice for ante-mortem and post-mortem inspection of meat animals ( fisr reuision1. tspccificatiori for edible common salt ( second rroirion ).

6

IS:1981-

1978

!iA.k2 Sheep casings, grade 2 - If the casings do not satisfy the requirements `for Grade Prime Quality ( PQ) in respect of colour, strength and pin holes on walls which shall not exceed 2 in a metre, but are otherwise deemed. fit for use in the preparation of sausages, the casings shall be classed as Grade 2. 5.4.1.3 Sheep casings grade 3 -This grade shall be the same as Grade 2 except that the presence of nodules may be permitted. 5.4.2 Cattle Casings Driedcattle casings ( runners and middles ) Grade Prime @aZig ( PQ) - The casing shall be of uniform natural colour, lustorous throughout without any spot or mark and free from discolouration. The casing wall shall be `intact, free from any tear or laceration and shall be perfectly rolled. The casings shall also be free from salt burns, must, domestics, black nodes, slime, mucus, dung, mould or fungus infestation, nodules and ,cicatric%

5.4.2.1

b)

Grade i - The requirements for this grade shall be the same as for Grade Prime' Quality ( PQ) except that a slight deviation in colour and folds and a few black nodes may be peimitted. Toral fat streaks shall not exceed 40 per metre; a streak of fat shall not exceed 30 mm in length and 10 mm in breadth. The middle of the seam shall be free from fat streaks.

Grade 2 - Casings not properly rolled or having larger black c>nodes or rough texture and a few streaks of fat not exceeding 60 in a metre shall be classed in this grade.

4 4

Grade 3 ( Shorts ) - This grade shall include short pieces of any or all of the above grades and/or having fat streaks in excess of 60 in a metre. Calibration - The calibration for dried runners and middles shall be 35 mm and below, 35 to 40 mm, 40 td 45 mm and so on up to 60 mm; or 35 to 37 mm, 37 to 39 inm, 39 to 41 mm and so on trp to 60 mm; or as agr-ed to between the purchaser and the vendor. Salted cattle casings ( runners and
m'iddlcs )

5.4i2.2

4 b)

The requirements for colour and wall shall be as for Grade Prime Quality of dried cattle casings.( ~~`5.4.2.1 ). Stwngth - On being inflated with air and rolled round the finger and pressed, the casings should burst with a sharp round. 7

IS r1981-1978 c) Calibration The calibration shall be 28 to 30 mm, 30 to 32 mm and so on up to 40 mm and above by diameter, or as igreed to between the purchaser and the vendor.

5.4.3 Dry Ready-to-Wet Casings - Requirements for PQ, Grade 1, Grade 2 and Grade 3 dry ready-to-wet casings shall be the same as for Grade 1, Grade 2 and Grade 3 sheep casings of Prime Quality, respectively. 5.4.4 Hog Casings - Requirements for hog casings shall be the same as for sheep casing of Prime Quality, except that the calibration shall be 24 to 26 mm, 26 to 28 mm, 28 to 30 mm and so on; or as agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor. 6. PACKING

AND

MARKING

- Unless agreed otherwise between the purchaser and the vendor, the rings or hanks of the casings shall be packed in suitable containers lined with polyethylene. Casings of only one type shall be packed in a lot.
6.2 Marking information: a) b) c) d) e) f) 6.2.1 Mark. Name, Name Batch

6.1 Packing

-

Esch

container

shall

be

marked

with

the

following

type and grade of the material; of the manufacturer; or code number; of hanks or rings; and

Calibration; Number Date of packing. Each container may also be marked with the IS1 Certification

NWTE The USC of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and thc'Kulcs and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by -the produce. -IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a liccnce for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

7. SAMPLING
7.1 Representative samples prescribed in Appendix B. of the material for tests shall be drawn as

8

IS t 1981 - 1978 8. TESTS 8.1 Shake the test sampIe ( see S2.4
) free of salt and soak in water for about an hour. Measure the lengths and inflate the casings with water or air and check the diameter and defects, like holes, punctures, pimpIes, etc. Also carry out the test for strength [ see 5.4.1.1(c) and 5.4.2.2(b) 1.

APPENDIX
( Clause 0.2 )

A

PROCESSING OF ANIMAL CASINGS A-l. GENERAL METHOD

A-l.1 While the slaughtered animal is being dressed, the viscera is removed in such a way that it does not get contaminated with the intestinal refuse. Immediately after the removal of the stomach, the intestines ,along with the peritoneal and mesenteric covering are sent to the gut and tripe room. The intestines are then separated from their mesenteric attachments by easy pdl~. Before disengaging the intestines from their attachments, it may be advantageous to put the intestines along with the peritoneal and mesenteric covering in barrels with crushed ice or ice-cold water till the fatgurrounding the guts sets. This step might make it easier to pull the intestmes from their attachments without much damage. After the removal of the intestines from their attachments, the contents of the intestines should be stripped off by uniformly gentle pressing and by drawing the gut between the fingers. The guts should then be washed thoroughly by flushing with tap water at full pressure. The guts are then taken to the casings factory in barrels packed with crushed ice.
A-1.2 In the casings factory, the guts are given a thorough rinse in ordinary tap water after allowing to remain for some time so that the chill due to packing in ice is taken off, if processed immediately. Otherwise, the guts are kept in wooden barrels in ice-cold water overnight. Next morning, they are processed. All adhering fat and tissue are removed with knife or scissors. Defatting of the guts with such mechanical implements does not completely remove the fat in the case of cattle casings. In such case, the guts should be treated with warm water at 35 to 40�C and the fat so loosened trimmed off. The guts are then completely washed in ordinary water. A-1.3 The next step is to remove the mucus and slime. For this purpose implements with smooth surface should be used: In the case of cattle casings, the guts are turned inside out and the mucus and slime are removed by scraping with smooth-edged implements. Care should be 9

ISr1981-1978
taken not to lacerate the casing wall. Complete removal of slime and mucus is very, important as these affect the appearance and shine of the wall. Complete removal of the slime and mucus gives a bright and whiter appearance to the casing. A-l.4 During washing with water, all the holes and other defects, such as blisters, pimples, etc, should be detected and preliminary assortment In the case of cattle casings, this is done at of the guts should be done. the time of inflation with air. A-1.5 In the case of dried cattle casings, the next step is the inflation of The air should be blown by mechanical the guts with air and drying. means and care should be taken to blow air in such a manner that the It should not be too tense nor gut spreads out fully and expands evenly. should it leave any folds or kinks in the gut. Correct blowing is very important as it influences calibration. A-I.6 Drying of casings in shaded places should be preferred to the direct hot sun as the former facilitates gradual and uniform drying. When the casings are subjected to direct hot sun, the superficial layer dries and contracts before the interns1 layers are properly dried. This If the casings are left too long in the sun, reduces the keeping quality. the surface gets too dark and the colour is affected. A-I.7 After the casings are dried, the air is expelled by pressing the guts Metal rollers with smooth, even and exacting surfaces between rollers. should be used. While pressing the guts between the rollers, care should be taken to see that uniform pressure is applied at all the points of the exacting surfaces of the rollers, SO that the gut is pressed evenly and it spreads properly. A-l.8 While feeding the gut to the pressing machine, the gut should be led dorso-ventrally to the pressing surfaces and the gut should be at right angles to the surface. This will facilitate the formation of fine, uniform marbling lines in the gut wall ( dorsal part ). If it is not led at right angles to the surface, folds and kinks would form in the gut wall. A-l.9 Calibration ventral points. If wall, these should of several readings of the casings should be done between the dorsothere are wrinkles, overlappings or folds in the casing be spread out properly before measuring and the mean should be taken.

A-1.10 The calibrated casings should be graded and assorted and prepared in rings or hanks. In damp atmosphere and on rainy days, a further step for thorough dehydration should be taken. The casings may be hung up in a hall in rows one above the other and hot air passed through. Charcoal fire should be avoided as the smoke, even in traces, darkens the casing wall. 10

IS:1981-1978 A-l.11 Sheep casings are packed wet. After they are cleaned as described in A-1.3, they are calibrated and assorted in different grades. Rings or hanks are prepared and these are sjuffed with common salt and allowed to remain for at least 3 to 4 days after which they are taken out. cleared of excess salt and packed in wooden barrels with layers of common salt.

APPENDIX ( Cfausc 7.1 )
SAMPLING B-l. GENERAL OF ANIMAL

B

CASINGS

REQUIREMENTS

OF SAMPLING

B-1.0 In drawing, storing and handling samples, the following precautions and directions shall be observed. B-l.1 Samples shall,be taken in a protected place not exposed to dust or soot. B-l.2 Samples shall be protected from adventitious contamination. B-1.3 The sample containers shall be sealed air-tight after filling and marked with full details of sampling, date of sampling, batch or code number, name of manufacturer and other important particulars of the consignment. ~1.4 The samples shall be stored in such a manner deterioration of the material. that there is no

B-1.5 Sampling shall be done by a person agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor and if desired, in the presence of the purchaser ( or his representative ) and the vendor ( or his representative ). B-2. SCALE OF SAMPLING

B-2.1 Lot - In any consignment, all the containers of the same size and from the same batch of manufacture, shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. B-2.1.1 Samples shall be tested for each lot for asce~aining conformity of the material with the requirements of this standird. t&e

13-2.2 The number of containers to be selected from each lot shall be in accordance with co1 1 and 2 of Table 1. 11

IS : 1981.1978
TABLE 1 NUMBER OF CONTAINERS FROM A LOT TO BE SELECTED

( Clause B-2.2 )
NUMBER OFCONTAINERS IN TEE LOT NIJMBEROBCONTAINEII~ To BE SELECTED

N (1)
2to 16 ,, 41 ,, 66 ,, 111 ,, Above 15 40 65 110 250 250

n (2) 2 3 4 5 7 10

B-2.3 The container3 shall be selected at random. In order to ensure the randomness of selection, a random number table ( see IS : 49051968* ) shall be used. In case such tables are not available, the following procedure may be adopted:

Starting from any container, count them as 1, 2, 3 ,........ , up to r and so on in a systematic manner and withdraw every rth container, 7 being the integral part of JV/n. where Jv = total number of containers, n = number of containers and 1 ). to be selected ( see Table

Every 7th container thus counted shall be separated until the requisite number of containers is obtained from the lot to give samples for . test.
Test Samples - From each of the containers selected as in B-2.2 B-2.3, draw at random from different parts of the same container, at least one percent of the total number of hanks or rings packed in it. This shall constitute the test sample for that particular container and shall be tested for the requirements prescribed in 5.

B-2.4

and

B-3.

CRITERION

FOR

CONFORMITY

B-3.1 A lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of this standard if all the samples tested satisfy the requirements prescribed for the various characteristics in 5. r-----*Methods for random sampling.

12

AMENDMENTNO.

1

JULY 1989 FOR

IS : 1981 -B7&S&J~A~&ll~ON

(

Ifrd

Revision

)

,( Puge 3, clause 0.3, he 5 ) Y Deletethe ` , ' appearing between @post

mortem' and .`inspcction*. [ fage i, chue 2&(c) ] - Substitute `JW' for *Jbd'.
( Page 5, c&we 2.11,1&u .2 ) -SubstiWte `air-into*fOr `air-tight', [ Page 7, c&use 5.42.1(8>,Ihe 5 ] - Substitute bst'for
%nust'.

( AFDC 18)

AMENDMENT NO.3 APRIL 2011 TO IS 1981 : 1978 SPECIFICATION FOR ANIMAL CASINGS
(First Revision)

[Page 8, clause 6.2(1)]- Insert the following at the end:
'g) Any other marking required under the Standards of Weights and Measures (Packaged Commodities) Ruies, 1977, and the Prevention of Food Aduiteration Act, 1954 and the Rules tTamed thereunder.'

(FAD (8)
Rcprography Unit, SIS, New Delhi, India

