**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13383-2 (1992) : Methods of photometry of luminaires, 
Part 2: For road and street lighting [ETD 24: Illumination 
Engineering and Luminaries] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



REAFFIR«ED^O©$ 

IS 13383 ( Part 2 ): 1992 
( Superseding 18 7878 : 1875 ) 

Indian Standard 

PHOTOMETRY OF LUMIN AIRES— METHOD 

OF MEASUREMENT 

PART 2 LUMINAIP.ES FOR ROAD AND STREET LIGHTING 



UDC 628-971-6 : 535-24 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Juty 1992 Price Group 6 



Illumination Engineering and Luminaires Sectional Committee, ETD 24 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft 
finalized by the Illumination Engineering and Luminaires Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

The object of this standard is to recommend the adoption of the test procedures that will 
give acceptable results in determining and reporting the photometric characteristics of 
luminaires intended for use of road and street lighting. 

This standard ( Part 2 ) is one of the series of Indian Standards which deals with the methods 
of photometry of luminaires. The series consist of the following parts: 

Methods of photometry of luminaires: 

Part 1 Luminaires intended for use of interior lighting; 
Part 2 Luminaires for road and street lighting; and 
Part 3 Luminaires for floodlighting. 

In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from CIE Publication No. 27 
( TC-2.4 ) 1973 on Photometry of luminaires for street lighting. 

This standard supersedes IS 7678 : 1975 'Method of photometric testing of incandescent type 
luminaires for general lighting services* which covers the method for photometric testing of 
filament type general lighting luminaires. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 2000 

TO 

IS 13383 ( PART 2 ) : 1992 PHOTOMETRY OF 

LUMINAIRES — METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 

PART 2 LUMINAIRES FOR ROAD AND STREET LIGHTING 

[Page 11, clause 95(a), last line ] — Substitute clause reference '4.5' for 
'76.8.' 

[Page 11, clause 9.6(a), line 2 ] — Substitute clause reference '3.5' /or '3.6'. 
(ETD24) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ): 1992 



Indian Standard 



PHOTOMETRY OF LUMINAIRES— METHOD 

OF MEASUREMENT 

PART 2 LUMINAIRES FOR ROAD AND STREET LIGHTING 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard applies to testing of 
luminaires designed primarily for road and 
street lighting, suitable for ac electricity 
supply and using the following lamp types: 

a) High pressure mercury vapour; 

b) Blended or self — ballasted mercury 
vapour; 

c) Low pressure sodium vapour; 

d) High pressure sodium vapour; 

e) Tubular fluorescent; 

f) Incandescent; and 

g) Tungsten halogen. 

2 DEFINITIONS 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the 
following definitions shall apply. 



2.1 Luminaire 
Lumens 



Photometry per 1000 Lamp 



Photometric measurements of a luminaire 
converted into a total luminous flux of 1 000 
lumens from all the lamps in the luminaire 
together, when these are operated under 
standard test conditions ( see 5.3 ). 

2.2 Measuring Half-Plane ( C-Plane ) 

That portion of any vertical plane through the 
photometric light centre of a lnminaire, which 
is wholly to one side of the vertical axis. 

2.3 Distribution of Luminous Intensity 

By the luminous intensity distribution of a 
luminaire or light source is meant the luminous 
intensities of the luminaire or light source in 
all directions. The luminous intensity distribu- 
tion may be represented by tables, diagrams or 
curves. 

2.4 Test Distance 

Photometric test distance is the distance from 
the photometric centre of the distribution 
photometer to the surface of the photocell, 
taking into account the distance to and from 
any mirror or mirrors that may be used. 



2.5 Light Output Ratio 

The light output ratio is defined as the ratio of 
the light output of the luminaire measured 
under specified practical conditions, to the 
sum of the individual light outputs of the lamps 
operating outside the luminaire under specified 
conditions. 

The 'specified conditions' should be the 
standard conditions defined in 5.3. 

3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Photometric Characteristics 

The requirements described in these recom- 
mendations relate to the following characteris- 
tics. They can be divided into the measured 
characteristics, that is, those directly measured 
with laboratory instruments, and the derived 
characteristics which can be calculated from 
the measured ones and used in the application 
of the luminaires. The derived characteristics 
are more closely related to lighting application 
than to photometric measurements, but it is 
emphasized that these recommendations only 
deal with the measured photometric charac- 
teristics. 

3*2 Distribution of Luminous Intensity 

Distribution of luminous intensity in specified 
directions per 1 000 lamps lumens ( see 2.1 ). 
The directions in which the luminous intensity 
needs to be measured will depend on the later 
use of the measurements ( see 2.3 ). 

3.3 Flashed Area 

The flashed area is used in the calculation of 
glare in street lighting installations. It is the 
area of orthogonal projection of the light 
emitting surface of a luminaire on a plane 
perpendicular to a given direction of viewing 
within which the luminance exceeds 1 percent 
of the brightest part. For the purpose of the 
determination of the glare control mark the 
direction of viewing in specified as y *= 76°C 
in the plane C — 0°. 



1 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ): 1992 

3.4 Presentation of Distribution Int en de d for gives a luminous intensity as a function of the 
Luminance Calculations , horizontal angle C and the vertical angle Y 

Luminance calculations are practically always ' " sys cm ' 5ee g ' ''. 

made by means of the computer. The light T i, A .. KU a u n »tA k» -:.,.- :„ *u« e u ,: 

distribution must, therefore, be given in digital I h r e m . tab,e sh ° U,d bc g,Ven m the fo,lowln « 
form ( a light distribution table ). The table 



\ 



\ 



\. 



\ 



\ 



C = 270° 285° 300° 310° +- ( 5° steps ) -+ 50° 60° 75° 90 3 



\ 



\. 



( 10° steps ) 

30° 
( 5° steps ) 

45° 
( 2-5° steps ) 

105° 
( 15° steps ) 

180° 



X X X X 



X X X X 



X X X X 



X X X X 



X X X X 



X X X X 



X X X X 



X X X X 



X X X X 



X X X X 



\ 



\ 



\ 



\. 



\ 



C = 105° 120° 130° 



( 5* steps ) 



\ 



230° 240° 255° 



\ 














Y= 














0° 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


( 10° steps ) 
30° 


X 


X 


r 
X 


X 


X 


X 


( 5° steps ) 
45° 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


( 2-5° steps ) 
105° 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


( 15° steps ) 
180° 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



The reference half-plane ( that is C «■ 0° ) 
should generally be orientated parallel to the 
road as shown in Fig. 1. 

In cases where that light distribution accor- 
ding to the construction of the luminaire can 
be considered symmetrical about the half* 
planes C « 270° and C = 90°, the table may 
contain only the luminous intensities for the 
half-planes from C « 270° to C » 90°. Each 
value in the table ( except for C « 270° and 
C = 90° ) will then be the mean value of the 
two readings in symmetrical directions. 

3.5 Presentation of Distribution Intended for 
General Purposes 

The presentation may be given in ( one or 
more of ) the following forms: 

a) A polar curve in a vertical plane parallel 
to the road axis; 

b) A polar curve in a vertical plane through 
the peak intensity, if different from (a); 

c) A conical light distribution through the 
peak intensity. The value of the cons- 
tant angle y shall be stated; and 

d) An isocandela diagram. 



C =180 



C :.27oV 



4 SELECTION OF TEST APPARATUS, 
PROCEDURES AND METHODS 

4.1 General 

The accuracy of a street lighting design 
depends upon a knowledge of the charac- 
teristics of the road surface, the performance 
of the luminaires and of the associated 
lamps. 

The accuracy of photometric measurement is 
in turn depended upon the apparatus used, and 
also on the testing procedure adopted. 

4.2 Sources of Error 

In General, two kinds of errors impair accuracy, 
namely, systematic errors, inherent in the test 
methods used, or caused by imperfections of 
instruments; and random errors, due to varia- 
tions in test conditions outside the photome- 
trist's control. It is the latter which affects 
repeatability. Examples of such sources of 
errors are given in Table 1. 



Table 1 Examples of Sources of Inaccuracy 




Random Errors 

Instability of lamp 
Temperature variation 



Draughts due to air 
conditions, etc 



Air movement due to 
relative movement of 
the lamp of luminaire 



Fatigue of photocell 
variation in frequency, 
of voltage source 



Variation in reflectance 
factor of mirror due 
to dust 



Systematic Errors 

Measurement of voltage 

Measurement of tem- 
perature 

Non-linearity of photocell 

Stray light 

Spectral selectivity of 
luminaire* 

Variation in reflectance 
factor of mirror due to 
distortion from a plane 
surface, variation in 
silvering 

Polarisation of light 
source 



Non standard value of 
phosphor density of 
test lamp 

Misalignment of lamp and 
optical components of 
luminaire, etc 



loo short 
distance 



measuring 



Fig. 1 Coordinate System for Luminaire 
Light Distribution 



If the luminaire is spectrally selective, systematic 
errors could arise due to the spectral response 
curve of a mirror system and/or photocell 
departing from the CIE spectral luminous effici- 
ency curve V ( y ). 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



4.3 Acceptable Order of Accuracy of Photometric 
Measurement 

It is recommended that the sum of any system* 
atic error and random error, specified by the 
standard deviation, is not greater than: 

-For measurement of luminous intensity: 

±5 percent or for the lower intensities 
±2 cd/1000 lm, whichever is the greater. 

— For measurement of angle: 

±0-5° 

4.4 Selection of Apparatus and Testing Procedures 

Apparatus and testing procedures listed in 
Annex A are considered acceptable for photo- 
metry of street lighting luminaires within the 
scope of these recommendations and to the 
order of accuracy nominated in 4.3. 

4.5 Calibration Procedures 

The distribution photometer may be calibrated 
either by the relative or by the absolute ( or 
direct ) method. 

In the relative method the luminous flux of the 
lamp(s) used for the test is obtained from 
measurement of intensity distributions in terms 
of arbitrary units of the photometer scale 
reading. Intensity measurements on the lumi- 
naire being tested are then made in the same 
arbitrary units of scale reading. A description 
of this method is given in 8. 

In the absolute method both the lamp(s) 
and the photometer are calibrated in absolute 
units against standard light sources of which 
the luminous flux ( in lumens ) or the intensity 
( in candelas ) are known. 

5 LABORATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR 
TESTS 

5.1 General 

Photometric tests on luminaires should be 
carried out under the co/iditions and with the 
corrections, where applicable, as described 
in 5.5. 

5.2 Object of Tests 

The object of the tests is to provide the users 
and manufacturers of luminaires with such 
information of the photometric characteristics 
of the luminaires under test that calculations 
of lighting installations may be carried out 



with sufficient accuracy and that a realistic 
comparison between different luminaires can 
be made. Provision is, therefore, made in these 
recommendations for: (a) appropriate standard 
test conditions ( 5.3 ); (b) acceptable variations 
produced by limitations of the laboratory and 
its apparatus, for example, temperature and 
orientation during test (5.4); and (c) correction 
factors where a service condition causes the 
luminaire to operate differently to the labora- 
tory standard test conditions ( 5.5 ). 

5.3 Standard Test Conditions 

The standard test conditions should be taken 
as: 



Luminaire 
orientation 



Light source 



The luminaire should be 
suspended in the position 
for which it is designed to 
operate in service. 

Fundamentally the photo- 
meter should be calibrated 
with the lamp, operated 
under the same conditions 
for which the nominal 
luminous flux is measured. 

For most lamps this means 
freely suspended in either 
horizontal or vertical 
position. 

If lamp data are published 
for the lamp in both hori- 
zontal and vertical posi- 
tions, the position during 
calibration should be the 
same as the operating 
position in the luminaire. 

Still air at 25°C in the 
vicinity of the luminaire, 
or bare lamp(s) when 
calibrating the photo- 
meter. 

The same ballasts should 
be used for testing the 
luminaire and the bare 
lamps, and they should be 
representative for the 
manufacturer's normal 
production. 



5.4 Practical Test Conditions 

As it is virtually impossible to carry out photo- 
metry on a lamp or luminaire without some 
variation in ambient temperature and some 
movement of air within its vicinity, tests 
should be made to ensure that the laboratory 



Air movement 
and ambient 
temperature 



Test ballasts 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



conditions arc satisfactory. Where the output 
of a lamp or luminaire is affected by changes 
in ambient temperature or air movement the 
recommendations of 5.4.1 and 5.4.2 should be 
observed. Usually these considerations only 
apply when testing tubular fluorescent lamps 
or luminaires incorporating them, but may be 
important for some other types of discharge 
lamps. 

5.4.1 Ambient Temperature Variation 

The mean ambient temperature t m should be 
equal to 25 ± 2°C throughout the test on the 
lamp or luminaire. 

The difference between mean ambient tempera- 
ture t m for the lamp during calibration and 
mean ambient temperature t^ for the luminaire 
during the test should not exceed 2°C. 

5.4.2 Limits of Error Due to Air Movement 

5.4.2.1 General 

Movement of air may be caused by draughts, 
air conditioning, or motion of the luminaire on 
the photometer. It is recommended that the 
following tests be made to ensure that the 
laboratory conditions are satisfactory. 

5.4.4.2 Air movement due to draughts or air 
conditioning 

A bare lamp mounted on the photometer 
should be stabilized, as in 8.2, in the proposed 
laboratory conditions, and the luminous inten- 
sity in a specified direction measured at a 
known ambient temperature. The air condi- 
tioning plant should then be switched off, any 
remaining draughts reduced as far as practi- 
cable, and the lamp re-stabilized and the 
luminous intensity again measured at the same 
ambient temperature. 

A similar test should be carried out on the 
luminaire. 

These tests shouid be repeated for a number 
of positions of the lamp or luminaire in the 
photometer. 

5.4.2.3 Satisfactory laboratory conditions 

Laboratory conditions may be considered 
satisfactory, if the sum of the differences 
between the readings measured under 5.4.2.2 
and 5.4.2.3 does not exceed 2 percent. 



5.5 Electric Power Supply 

5.5.1 Supply Voltage and Frequency 

The voltage and frequency at the supply 
terminals of the luminaire, except where 
tungsten filament lamps are used should be 
taken as the rated values marked on the 
luminaire. If not marked the rated voltage and 
frequency of the ballast should be used. 

During photometric measurements the supply 
voltage and frequency should be maintained 
constant within ±0-5 percent. 

NOTE — It will b; necessary to control the varia- 
tion in voltage and frequency to a closer tolerance 
when selecting tests lamps in accordance with 7.2. 

In the case of luminaires incorporating 
tungsten filament lamps the voltage should be 
controlled to within ±0-2 percent or better. 

It should be noted that many matt black paints 
have a reflection factor as high as 4 percent 
when new and unmarked. For angles of 
incidence close to the plane of such surfaces 
the reflection factor is much higher. Where 
possible, therefore, screening should be 
arranged so that stray light from the luminaire 
reaches the photocell only after two or more 
reflections from blackened surfaces. Where 
only one surface can be provided it may be 
necessary to cover it with black velvet, black 
carpet, etc. 

Possible paths of stray light which should not 
be overlooked are: 

a) Luminaire — blackened surface ( floor, 
screen, etc ) — mirror — photocell. 

b) Luminaire — blackened surface ( floor, 
screen, etc ) — luminaire — mirror — 
photocell. 

c) Luminaire — mirror— luminaire — mirror 
— photocell. 

6 REQUIREMENTS FOR TEST APPARATUS 

6.1 General 

The requirements in this clause are supple- 
mentary to the laboratory conditions described 
in 5. 

6.2 Requirements for Photocells 

6.2.1 Performance of Photocells 

The photocell and its measuring circuit should 
be stable in operation and not subjected to 
fatigue when exposed to the maximum level of 
illuminance encountered. 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



The combination of photocell and measuring 
circuit should possess essentially linear response 
to light up the maximum level of illuminance 
encountered. 

The spectral sensitivity of the photocell should 
closely follow the CIE spectral luminous 
efficiency curve. It is recommended that the 
stability of the spectral response be checked 
periodically. A method of checking with colour 
filters is given in Annex B. 

6.2.2 Measurement of Photocell Output 

The output of the photocell should be measured 
to an accuracy of ± 1 percent. If automatic 
recording equipment is used for the measure- 
ment of photo current, it is important that the 
maximum inherent errors of the equipment 
are determined, for example, delayed response 
to change in photo current, and lack of 
response ( a finite dead zone ) to small changes. 

6.2.3 Additional Requirements for the Auxiliary 
Photocell Used in the Monitored Light Source 
Method 

The auxiliary photocell used in the monitored 
light source method should comply with the 
above requirements. In addition, it should be 
shielded so as to respond only to light from 
the centre position of the luminaire. The 
photocell may be mounted at any convenient 
distance, but should be rigidly fixed and rotate 
with the luminaire. The position chosen should 
not cause any disturbance of light reaching 
the main photocell when at normal measuring 
position. 

6.3 Requirements for Distribution Photometers 

6.3.1 Selection of Performance 

The selection of a distribution photometer 
for use in an industrial laboratory involves the 
aspects of acceptable accuracy as discussed 
in 4 as also laboratory space available. The 
choice largely lies on one hand between: 

a) mounting the luminaire on the normal 
service position, or 

b) a test distance complying with the 
recommendation below ( see 6.3.2 ). 

6.3.2 Test Distance 

In general the test distance should not be less 
than fifteen times the maximum dimension of 
the light emitting part of the luminaires. 



However, for luminaires with an approxi- 
mately cosine distribution in planes passing 
through the long axis of the luminaire, the test 
distance may be determined as: 



either 



or 



fifteen times the dimensions of the 
light emitting part normal to the 
lamp axis, 

five times the dimension of the 
light emitting part parallel to the 
lamp axis. 

The test distance to be used will be the larger 
distance of these two. 

6.3.3 Special Requirements for Mirrors 

Any mirror used in the construction of a 
distribution photometer should be rigidly 
supported and kept flat in all normal positions 
of rotation. The variation of the reflectance 
factor over its usable surface should not be 
more than ± 3 percent from the mean. This 
should be checked at regular intervals using 
the method described in 6.3.4 or a similar one. 
Errors introduced by mirrors may be caused 
by one or more of the following factors: 

a) departures of the mirrored surface from 
a plane surface, for example, ripples in 
glass due to method of support, sagging 
etc. 

b) variation in reflectance factor over the 
main reflecting surface of silver, alumi- 
nium, etc; 

c) variation in transmission through the 
glass, when the reflecting surface is on 
the rear side. 

d) light scattering due to scratches, dust, 
etc; and 

e) spectral selectivity. 

6.3.4 Testing of Mirrors for Variation in Reflec- 
tance Factor 

By setting the photometer so that the effective 
position of the photocell is at nadir and moving 
a light source in a horizontal plane through 
the optical centre of the photometer, variation 
in the reflectance factor of the mirror over the 
area traversed can be measured. The light 
source should have an essentially uniform light 
distribution in directions near the vertical, 
and the apparent area should be approximately 
0-003 m« ( that is, a 100 W inside white 
incandescent lamp ) with the photocell placed 
in its normal position. 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



The variation of the angle of incidence on the 
photocell and of the distance between the 
photocell and the light source, when moving 
this, must be taken into account. 

NOTE — Variation observed by such a test will be 
due to one or more of the causes listed under (a) to 
(d) of 6.3.3 above. ' 

6.3.5 Special Requirements for Luminaires 
Mounted in Their Designed Operating Positions 

Movement of the luminaires should be smooth, 
free from rocking and in the case of luminaires 
using tubular fluorescent lamps, sufficiently 
slow so as not to upset the air temperature 
within the luminaire ( see 5.4 ). 

NOTE — Mirror Goninometer method is recommen- 
ded for accurate measurements. However in the 
absence of mirror goninometer other methods using 
convential goninometer may be used. 

7 PREPARATION OF LAMPS AND 
LUMINAIRES FOR TESTS 

7.1 General 

The preparation of lamps and luminaires for 
testing should comply with the following 
recommendations. 

7.2 Test Lamps 

7.2.1 Selection of Lamps for Test 

The lamps selected for test should comply with 
the relevant Indian standards. If such standards 
do not exist, the lamps should comply as close 
as possible with the nominal specifications of 
the lamp manufacturer. In the case of tubular 
fluorescent lamps, the variation from a uniform 
circular distribution in a plane at right angles 
to the axis should not exceed 3 percent. 

Lamps for multiple lamp luminaires, if intended 
to be of the same type and wattage, should be 
matched for light output within a spread of 
3 percent when operated on the same supply 
and ballast circuit. They may then be used in 
calibration and test without regard to the 
light output which might be obtained on the 
circuits of the luminaire ballasts. 

The lamp should furthermore comply with the 
specifications given in 7.2.2 and 7.2.4. 

7.2.2 Diffusing Quality of Lamps Bulb 

For lamps with a phosphor or diffuse coating 
of the bulb should correspond to the average 
of the production. 



7.2.3 Ageing of Lamps 

All lamps should be aged until the light output 
is shown by successive readings to be stable. 
Ageing should be carried out by cycle opera- 
tion of the lamps close to their electrical 
design specifications for a recommended 
minimum period of 100 h in the case of tungsten 
filament and tubular fluorescent lamps and 
200 h for other lamps. A suggested cycle con- 
sists of 15 min off period every 4 h. The 
position of lamps during ageing should be as 
follows: 

a) Tubular fluorescent — horizontal 

b) Low pressure sodium — horizontal 

For the U bend type the plane through the 
limbs should be vertical unless otherwise speci- 
fied. 

NOTES 

1 The lamp should be marked to ensure that in 
subsequent use it is operated in an identical 
position including its orientation about the long 
axis. 

2 After ageing any lamp showing an abnormal 
distribution of metallic sodium should be discarded. 

If the lamp is of a type which is intended to 
be used either horizontally or vertically the 
stability should be checked for both positions. 

7.2.4 Stability of Lamps 

Lamps should be regarded as stable when the 
variation in luminous flux during consecutive 
switch-ons is not greater than ± 1 percent, 
and when the variation between the mean 
values for any consecutive switch-ons is not 
greater than 2 percent. 

7.2.5 Tests for Lamp Stability 

Tests may be made either by measurement of 
total flux in an integrating sphere or by 
measurement of luminous intensity in one 
direction at 90° to the lamp axis in a distribu- 
tion photometer. 

The lamps should not be moved between 
measurements. 

For tubular fluorescent lamps air temperature 
in the vicinity of the lamp should be stable 
throughout this test, and the air draughtfree 
( see 5.4.2 ). 

7.2.6 Handling of Aged Lamps 

Aged lamps should be carefully handled. This 
is particularly important for low pressure 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



sodium lamps both when hot and cold because 
a sudden movement can alter the distribution 
of sodium within the arc tube. 

7.2.7 Mounting of Bare Lamps in Photometer 

It is most important that curing calibration of 
the distribution photometer the bare lamp or 
lamps are mounted in the position for which 
they are specially designed or for which the 
lamp photometric data are normally prepared. 
For example, most low pressure sodium lamps 
should be mounted horizontally, since except 
for the lowest wattage they will not operate 
satisfactorily in any other orientation. Tubular 
fluorescent lamps should be mounted horizon- 
tally as lamp data are usually only prepared for 
that condition. 

Lamps of the type designed for universal 
mounting such as some types of high pressure 
mercury vapour lamps can be mounted in either 
position provided lamp photometric data are 
published for the position chosen, but prefe- 
rably in the same position as the operating 
position in the luminaire. In such cases the 
orientation of the lamp during calibration 
should be included in the test report. 

7.3 Test Ballast 
7.3.1 General 

The output of the luminaire is affected by the 
ballast used. In the case of tubular fluorescent 
lamps of the ballast position and method of 
attachment are also important, and they should 
be positioned as intended by the luminaire 
manufacturers. 

Ballasts used for test on the luminaire should 
comply with the specification in 5.3. 

7.4 Preparation of Lumiaaires for Test 

7.4.1 Selection of Luminaire 

The luminaire selected for test should be 
representative of the manufacturer's regular 
product. 

The optical parts should be clean, and all 
components rigidly located in their designed 
positions. 

7.4.2 Alignment of Lamp in Luminaire 

The photometric distribution of a luminaire is 
somewhat dependent upon the alignment of the 
lamp in relation to the position of a filament 
gap, arc tube support, etc. 



It is recommended that the following conven- 
tions are adopted, where possible. 

Tungsten filament lamps with a ring-type 
filament should be positioned so that the 
filament gap faces across the street. A plane- 
type filament should be aligned so that the 
filament lies in the C = 0° and C = 180° half, 
planes ( see 3.5 ). 

Low pressure sodium lamps of the *U' tube type 
should be mounted so that the plane through 
the two tubes is vertical, unless the manufac- 
turer has specified otherwise. Low pressure 
sodium lamps of the linear type should be 
mounted so that the plane containing the profile 
of the grooves is vertical, unless the manufac- 
turer has specified otherwise. 

High pressure sodium or mercury vapour lamps 
when mounted vertically should be arranged so 
that the arc tube support rods are in a vertical 
plane perpendicular to the kerb lines. If there 
is only one support rod it should be located 
towards the house side. When such lamps are 
mounted horizontally the arc tube support rods 
should preferably be in a vertical plane. If there 
is only one rod it should be located towards the 
zenith. 

A small variation from the above recommenda- 
tions, which does not significantly change the 
light distribution, is peimissible. 

The alignment of the lamp should be recorded 
in the test report. 

7.4.3 Mounting of Luminaire in Photometer 

The luminaire should be mounted in the 
distribution photometer so that the photometer 
light centre of the luminaire ( see 7.4.4 ) 
corresponds with the optical centre of the 
photometer. 

The luminaires should be levelled according to 
the manufacturer's instructions so that its 
alignment is mechanically true. 

If instructions are not provided, then the plane 
containing the lower edge of the luminaire 
canopy ( or the plane containing the reflector 
opening if this is lower ) should be taken as one 
reference and the longitudinal axis, determined 
from the outer edges of the luminaire, when 
viewed in plan, should be taken as the second 
reference. 

The mounting of the luminaire should also 
comply with. 



8 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



7.4.4 Photometric Light Centre 

The position of the photometric light centre of 
the luminaire should be determined in accor- 
dance with the following paragraphs: 

a) At the lamp centre, if this is positioned 
below the plane of the lower edge of the 
luminaire canopy ( or the plane of the 
reflector opening if this is lower ). 

b) At the intersection of the vertical axis 
passing through the lamp centre with the 
plane of the lower edge of the luminaire 
canopy ( or the plane of the reflector 
opening if this is lower ), if the lamp 
centre is positioned above the said plane. 

c) For luminaires with more than one lamp 
the lamp centre is taken as being at the 
geometric centre of the individual lamp 
centres. 



8 METHODS AND PROCEDURES FOR 
TEST APPARATUS 

8.1 General 

The stabilization of the lamps and luminaire, 
the calibration of the photometer and the 
procedures for testing should comply with the 
provisions in this section. 



8.2 Stabilization 
Photometer 



of the Lamps, Luminaire and 



The lamps, luminaire and measuring devices can 
be regarded having reached stability when the 
variation between three successive readings of 
luminous intensity of flux at intervals of not 
less than 15 min does not exceed 1 percent. 

Experience may show that a bare incandescent 
lamps is sufficiently stable within 10 min, and 
most gaseous discharge lamps after 30 min 
operation. For metal halide lamps, however, 
the stabilization time may vary between 30 min 
and 6 h. 

The stabilization period of luminaires may be 
much greater than that for the respective bare 
lamps, particularly in the case of tubular 
fluorescent lamps which may require periods in 
excess of 2 h. 

Care should be taken to stabilize the measuring 
circuits and associated devices. 



8.3 Calibration of Distribution Photometer 
Relative Method 

The principle underlying the relative method 
of calibration is 



r C,y(1000) " R C,y 



J_000_ 
n 

x = 1 



where 



+ x = luminous flux of lamp No. x, in 
arbitrary units calculated from the 
readings of the photometer without 
converting these readings to abso- 
lute intensity units ( candelas ); 

n = number of lamps in luminaire; 

*C y ( 1 000 ) ** luminous intensity of the 
' v ' lamp in the direction C, per 

1 C00 lumens; and 

R r v ~ rea ding of the photometer for the 
^ ,7 direction C,y. 

8.3.1 Determination of j> x 

<frx is determined from a number of intensity 
readings and calculated by means of a suitable 
procedure, for example, direct calculation, 
Russel angles, zone factors, etc. 

The necessary number of intensity readings will 
depend on the light distribution, but in general 
18 to 20 readings in each of 12 to 20 vertical 
half-planes will be adequate. 

For lamp types for which certain assumptions 
on the light distribution can be made, fewer 
readings may be sufficient. The accuracy of 
such a simplified procedure should, in these 
cases, be verified. 

8.3.2 Calibration of the Photometer 

The photometer can be calibrated according to 
the principle described in 8.3.1 measuring the 
lamp or lamps just prior to or immediately 
after the measurement of the luminaire. 

A detailed description of how the calibration 
may be carried out is given in Annex C. 

Precautions should be taken to ensure that the 
given direction can be reproduced in the photo- 
meter, for example, by marking the lamp and 
the direction should be so chosen that the 
variation of the luminous intensity with the 
angle is small. 



IS13383(Part2):1992 



The position of the lamp axis should be as 
recommended in 7.2.7. Lamps should be care- 
fully positioned in the photometer, using any 
convenient method, so that their axis is either 
vertical or horizontal, which is relevant. It is 
not advisable to simply insert the lamp into 
the lampholder and assume it is correctly 
aligned. Lamps fitted with bayonet caps may 
require a modified lampholder to provide a 
sufficiently rigid support. 

Precautions should be taken to avoid the 
creation of cool spots with tubular fluorescent 
lamps. The light output of a tubular fluorescent 
lamp operated in sortie muhi-lamp circuits is 
affected by the operating temperature of the 
other lamp ( or lamps ) in the same circuit. In 
such cases the other lamps not under test 
should remain energised, but should be freely 
suspended horizontally outside the luminaire, 
in still air at 25°C. It should not be necessary 
to remove the ballast from the luminaire for 
photometric measurement on the lamp. 

The precautions under 7.2.7 relating to low 
pressure sodium lamps should be observed. 

A check on lamp stability should be made at 
intervals during the test by comparing readings 
taken at the nadir. The drift in such readings 
should not exceed 2 percent. 

NOTE — It may be necessary to sight from the 
photocell position to ensure that the view of the 
lamp is not obstructed by the supporting structure. 
Should this be unavoidable at some angles then the 
reading at these angles may be interpolated from 
measurements either side or alternatively taken as 
equal to the reading diametrically opposite. 

However, most lamps if carefully handled, 
maintain a constant light distribution through- 
out the life, which means that the ratio: 



4? 










where 



R = reading of the photometer in the 
9 given direction; 

I B «= the luminous intensity in the given 
direction; and 

<f> = luminous flux from the lamp. 

will be constant. 

If this ratio has been determined previously for 
the test lamp, it will in subsequent luminaire 
measurements, in which the same lamp is used, 
be sufficient to measure the photometer reading 
for the lamp in the given direction. 



8.4 Procedure for Measurements on the Distri- 
bution Photometer — Lamps and Luminaire in 
Standard Test Condition 

When the lamps and luminaire are located in 
the distribution photometer in accordance 
with 5.3 and laboratory temperature variation 
complies with 5.4.1 then measurements can be 
reported as relating to the standard laboratory 
test condition. 

9 TEST REPORT 

9.1 General 

The following list is intended as a guide to the 
information which should be included in a test 
report covering photometric measurements on 
a luminaire. 

The purpose of this information should be: 

a) to correctly inform the user of the data 
as to the nature of the various controlled 
conditions under which the luminaire 
was measured; and 

b) to give sufficient information so as to 
relate the photometric information to 
the particular luminaire tested. Without 
which the report may become quite 
meaningless. 

9.2 Description of Luminaire 

a) Manufacturer's name, type, catalogue 
number; and 

b) Rated voltage and frequency. 

9.3 Ballasts ( and Auxiliary Starting 
Transformers ) 

a) Manufacturer's name, type catalogue 
number; 

b) Type of circuit, for example, single or 
multi lamp, switch or quick start; 

c) Rated voltage, wattage and frequency; 

d) Method of mounting; 

e) Marked operating temperature; and 

f ) Capacitive circuit, if used. 

9.4 Test Lamps 

a) Manufacturer's name, type, relevant 
dimensions; 

b) Rated lumen output and orientation of 
the lamp for which this output was 
given; 

c) Colour; 



10 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



d) Rated watts; 

c) Diffusing quality of lamps ( see 7.2.2 ); 

f) If universal mounting operating position 
during calibration of distribution photo- 
meter ( see 7.2.2 ); and 

g) Alignment of lamp in luminaire ( see 
7.4.2 ). 

9.5 Test Procedure 

a) Description of photometric procedure 
and equipment used. This should include 



the method of calibration of the photo- 
meter And alignment of lamp within the 
luminaire ( see 7.2.8 and 7.4.2 ). 

b) Test distance. 
9.6 Test Results 

a) Polar curve is one or more vertical half- 
planes ( see 3.6 ), 

b) Conical light distribution, 

c) Isocandela diagram, and 

d) Light output ratio. 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.4 ) 

SELECTION OF TESTING APPARATUS AND TESTING PROCEDURE 



Procedure Orientation of Luminaire 
No. ( 5.3 and 5.4.3 ) 

1 Standard 

2 Standard 



Apparatus and Procedure 
( 6.3.1 ) 

Distribution photometer 
without mirror 

Distribution photometer 
with mirror(s) 



Comments 
( see 6.2.1 
and 6.3.5 ) 

5**6.2.1 to 6.3.3 
6.3.4 to 6.3.5 



ANNEX B 
( Clause 6.2.1 ) 

METHOD OF CHECKING STABILITY OF SPECIAL RESPONSE OF A 
PHOTO-ELECTRIC CELL USING COLOUR FILTERS 



B-l It is recommended that the stability of the 
spectral response of a photocell and associated 
filter be checked periodically. This may be 
done simply by using the cell to make periodic 
measurements of the luminous transmittances 
of three stable colour filters. 

Measurements should be made at a normal 
illuminance level. High illuminance of the 
photocell should always be avoided. It is 
recommended that, in the case of selenium 
photovoltaic cells, the illuminance should not 
exceed a level at which the cell begins to show 
non-linearity. In practice this is commonly in 
the region of 200 lux for a cell operating with 
zero external resistance. 

Periodic measurements should be made under 
identical test conditions to minimise errors due 



to extraneous effects. The light source should 
be an incandescent lamp operated at the same 
colour temperature on each occasion, usually 
2856 K ( CIE Illuminant A ). 

NOTES 

1 Filtrers with characteristics similar to the 
following are satisfactory for this measurement: 

Blue filter : Corning Type CS 1-62, Glass type 
5900 or Schott Type BG 28/1 mm 

Green filter : Corning Type CS 4-64, Glass Type 
4010 or Schott Type VG 6/1 mm 

Red filter : Corning Type CS H, R, 2-61, Glass 

Type 2412 or Schott Type RC 1/3 mm 

2 The red filters may be sensitive to high tempera- 
tures and should not be mounted close to the light 
source. 



11 



IS 13383 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



ANNEX C 
( Clause 8.3.2 ) 

DESCRIPTION OF A PROCEDURE FOR CALIBRATION OF THE 
PHOTOMETER BY MEANS OF ZONE FACTORS 



C-l The lamp is mounted in the photometer 
and connected as specified in 5.3 and 7.2.7. 
A number of readings of the luminous intensity 
( in scale units ) is taken as specified in the 
table. 



The luminous flux of the lamp ( in scale units ) 
is then calculated by means of the given zone 
factors. Finally the value of one scale units in 
cd per 1 000 lumen is calculated ( Formula 1 ). 



One scale unit = l °^ cd/1 000 lm 



If there is more than one lamp, the lamp flux 
from each lamp ( <£i* <£s> *Aa» ctc ) > s measured 
and calculated separately as described above. 
The luminous flux from all lamps together is: 

* = <*1 + 4l + *3 + CtC 



And the value of one scale unit in cd per 1 000 
lumen is calculated from Formula 1. 



C= Luminous 


intensity 


Mean 


Zone Zonal 


in scale units 




of 


Fac- Flux 










Zone 


tor in ac 
Units 


0° 30° 


60 


o 9o° 


130<> 


150° 180o 210° 






240° 


270' 


• 300° : 


330° 


y - 












5° 










0-095 


15° 










0-284 


25« 










0-463 


35° 










0-628 


45° 










0-774 


'55° 










0-897 


65° 










0-993 


75° 










1-058 


85° 










1091 


95° 










1.091 


105° 










1058 


115* 










0-993 


125° 










0-897 


135° 










0-774 


145° 










0-628 


155° 










0.463 


165° 










0-284 


175° 










0-095 



4> ( scale unit ) = 



12 



-7^- 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well denned system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureu of Indian Standard 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 19S6 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications* No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This doe? not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designation. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No, ETD 24 ( 3209 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

€331 01 31 
1331 13 75 

84 99, 37 85 61, 
86 26, 37 86 62 

153 38 43, 53 16 4P, 
{53 23 84 

(235 02 16, 235 04 42, 
{235 15 19, 235 23 15 

C632 92 95, 63 27 80, 
{632 78 91, 632 78 92 



C37! 
137 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, 
LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Primed at Printwcll Priotert, Aligarh. India 



