UDC

669'5-426

: 621'793'7

IS : 12447 Indian Standard

- 1988

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

SPECIFICATION ZINC WIRE FOR SPRAYED I. scopeThis standard specifies the requirements

FOR ZINC COATINGS

of zinc wire used for metal spraying,

2. Terminology 2.1 ingot - Virgin metal cast in the form of slabs of suitable ioles, cavities, cracks, oxide inclusion, slag and foreign matter. 2.2 Wire Bar - A product of solid circular ength cast by melting the virgin ingots, cross-section of diameter shape and size, free from 10 blow

to 16 mm and of suitable sound circular in the form of

from wire bar having uniform 2.3 Wire - A product reduced by cold drawing :ross-section along its whole length, of diameter not exceeding 6 mm and supplied :oils having continuous lengths. 3. Supply of Material aid down in IS : 1387-1967 ( first revision )`. 4. Method of Manufacture by cold drawing from wire rod through respectively rolling

General requirements relating to the supply of zinc wires shall be as `General requirements for the supply of metallurgical materials

4.1 Zinc wire shall be manufactured 4.2 Wire rod and slug will 5. Chemical Composition

or extrusion.

be cast for rolling

and extrusion

from virgin zinc ingots.

5.1 The chemical composition of zinc wires for metal spraying shall conform with the requirements specified in IS : 209-l 979 .Specification for zinc ( third revisjon )`, grade Zn 99% as given in Table 1.
TABLE 1 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF ZINC WIRE

Values given are in Percent Element Zinc, Lead Cadmium Iron Tin Copper Total impurities

maximum, unless shown otherwise.
Requirement, Percent

Min

99.95
0'025 0'02 0'01 0'001 0'002 0'05

5.2 The chemical composition shall be determined either by the method specified in IS : 26001965 <Methods of chemical analysis of high purity zinc and zinc base alloys for die casting' OI IS : 2599-l 983 `Method of spectrographic analysis of high purity zinc and zinc base alloys for die casting ( first revision )' or any other established instrumental/chemical method. In case oi dispute, the procedure specified in IS : 2600-1964 shall be the referee method. 6. Diameters and Tolerances in the diameters with tolerance as specified in Table 2. the above specifiec

6.1 Zinc wire shall be supplied

6.2 The suppliers shall ensure that tolerances on zinc wire shall be well within limits to facilitate free movement in the spray guns.

Adopted 25 July 1988

@ June 1989, BIS I
I

Gr 2

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADIJR NEW DELHl

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 12447

- 1988
TABLE 2 DIAMETER AND TOLERANCES 6.1 OF ZINC WIRE

( Clause Diameter mm 2'00 2'50 3'17 4.00 I

)
Tolerance mm

I J

1

+ 0'00

- 0'05
in this table are based on the hole sizes of the standard spray guns used

Note - Diameters of zinc wire given for metal spraying

7. Type of Finish purchaser: a) Cold drawn,

Zinc wire shall be supplied in the following conditions annealed and descaled; and

as specified by the

b) Hot drawn and descaled. 8. Freedom from Defects - Zinc wire shall be free from burrs, cuts, slivers, die marks, splits, kinks, bends and twists. The wire shall be clean, smooth, uniform in diameter, and free from surface flaws and oxide inclusions. 9. Mechanical Properties of zinc wire, when tested according to Appendix A,

9.1 Tensile Strength - The tensile strength shall not be less than 100 MPa.

of the gauge length at break shall not be less 9.2 Elongation - The permanent elongation than, 40 percent of the original gauge length, when tested according to Appendix A. 9.3 Wrapping Test - Zinc wires, when subjected to wrapping test according to IS : 17&j_lgg3 8Method of wrapping test for metallic wire ( first revision )`, shall withstand without breaking, splitting or cracking when wrapped erght times around its own diameter and subsequently straightened. 10. Supply Length The minimum mass lengths. However, in case of spools,

10.1 Zinc wires shall be supplied in coils or spook of continuous of the coil should be 25 kg, unless otherwise specified in the order. the minimum mass may be 10 kg. 10.2 Wires of cut lengths and discontinuity of wire within 11. Sampling, I 1 .I
and retest

a coil shall riot,.... permitted.

Retest

and Criteria

for Acceptance sampling

Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, the following procedure and criteria for conformity shall hold good.

In any one consignment, all coils/spools of wire of same diameter manufactured by a 11.2 Lotsingle firm under essentially similar conditions of production shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. I 1.3 All coils/spools of wire shall be examined from each lot for the freedom from defects, and for diameters and its tolerance. Any coil found defective shall be rejected. 11.4 One test for chemical composition shall be conducted for 100 kg or part thereof of wires in one lot or one test for 500 kg or part thereof of a lot comprising the same cast. If the results obtained are satisfactory, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the chemical requirements of this specification. 11.4.1 If the test results of the chemical composition fail to satisfy the requirement for any of the characteristics, two more tests for that characteristic shall be done on the same sample in order to confirm that the analysis has been done prooerly. If the results of the retests are satisfactory, the lot shall be accepted, otherwise the lot shall be rejected. 11.5 The sample for mechanical test shall consist of one test for every 100 kg or part thereof in a lot. The lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of tensile strength, elongation, and wrapping test, if the test results satisfy the requirements specified in 9.1 to 9.3. 2

IS : 12447

- 1988

11.5.1 If the test results fail to meet the mechanical properties requirements specified in 9.1 to 9.3, two more tests shall be carried out for that requirement. If both the test results satisfy the relevant requirements, the lot shall be accepted, otherwise the lot shall be rejected. 12. Packing -- Zinc wire to be supplied in coils of continuous without any loose turns. The inner diameter of the coil shall be be bound and fastened compactly at two places on the opposite using binding wires. Each coil shall be wrapped all round with scratches during transit and storage. 13. Marking 13.1 Each coil of zinc wire shall be attached with a suitable metallic tag or label with marking made on them indicating the name of the manufacturer, diameter of the wire, mass of coil, batch number and date of manufacture. 13.2 Standard Marking - The wire may also be marked with the Standard Mark. standard marking scheme are available from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 14. Information to be Given by the Purchaser the requirements of this standard shall contain the The details of lengths shall be closely coiled 300-600 mm. The coils shall ends of a diagonal of the coils hessian to avoid damage and

14.1 Orders for supply following information:

of zinc wire meeting

a) Diameter of wire, b) Type of finish, and c) Mass and diameter of coils/spools.

APPENDIX
METHOD OF TENSILE TEST

A
FOR ZINC WIRE to fracture,

( Clauses 9.1 and 9.2 )

A-O. This test consists in subjecting a length of zinc wire to tensile stress, generally with a view to determine one or more of the mechanical properties defined below. A-l. Terminology

A-l.1 Tensile Strength - Maximum load reached in a tensile test divided by the original sectional area of the test specimen, that is, the stress corresponding to the maximum load.

cross-

A-1.2 Permanent Elongation -- The permanent variation of the gauge length of a test specimen after removal of the prescribed stress expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length. in the gauge A-l .3 Percentage Breaking Elongation - The .permanent variation specimen after breaking expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length. A-2. Test Specimen length of a test

A-2.1 The test. specimen sha!l consist of a piece. of wire of such a length that the distance ",;tr;;nmthme grips of the tenslle testmg machme IS not less than 150 mm with a gauge length A-3. Test Requirement

A-3.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser, the crossTests for sectional area of the test specimen shall be measured to an accuracy of f 1 percent. determination of tensile strength and elongation shall be carried out on five test specimens and the average of five readings arrived at for interpretation of the results. A-4. Determination of Tensile Strength

A-4.1 For determining the tensile strength, the test specimen shall be loaded by chasing an appropriate load range and the rate of loading shall be 0.5 to 1-O kg/mm2 per second. Increasing loads are successively applied to the test specimen and maintained in case for about 10 seconds. When fracture occurs, maximum load is recorded and the tensile strength is calculated in accordance with definition given in A-l .I. 3

IS : 12447 - 1988 A-5. Determination of Elongation

A-5.1 When the elongation after fracture is to be determined, two or more over-lapping gauge lengths shall be marked on the straightened test piece with suitable accuracy. In practice this will be accomplished by marking a consecutive series of half gauge lengths with suitable accuracy. The test piece shall be straight before it is marked. manner that it does not cause fracture at the gauge marks. The test specimen shall be gripped in such a manner the grips and the adjacent gauge marks are equal. The marking that is performed in such a the ends of

the distance between

The fractured parts of the test specimen are carefully fitted together so that they lie in a straight line. The increase in gauge length after the test is measured to the nearest 0.6 mm between the two marks on either side of the marks nearest to the fracture. The measurement is valid in any case if the elongation may be the position of the fracture. reaches the specified value, whatever

EXPLANATORY'

NOTE

Zinc wire is primarily used for metal sDraying on iron and steel parts for protection against atmospheric and galvanic corrosion. Metal spraying is also employed for building-up worn metal surface and recommended where hot dip galvanising is not physically and economically feasible.

4 Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, India

