***•••*•**•••••• 



^ t?^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 2746 (1964): Spring Boards [PCD 22: Sports Goods] 



M<>5iVff7n^sb^ja^rssa^iTv;aa!Sg; 



5?5?-m |7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPRING BOARDS 



IS : 2746 • 19«4 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



UDG 605043-5 




® Copyright 1964 by 

INDIAN STANDAItDS INSTITUTION 
UANAK BHAVANi 9 BMIADUm SHAH ZATA'R MARO 

NEW DELIU I 

Pric^ Re l4o ' * Juiy 1964 



IS : 2746 - 1964 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPRING BOARDS 



sports Goods Sectional Committee, GPDC 4 

Chairman Representing 

Lt-Gen Sant Singh The National Institute of Sports, Patiala 

Members 

Mr. H. Davenpobt ( Alternate to 
Lt-Gen ^ant Singh ) 
Lt-Col H. R. Adhikaei Services Sport Control Board, New Delhi 

Flt-Lt p. R. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Balwant Singh The Sports Goods Export Promotion Council. New 

Delhi 
Shri a. R. Dikshit ( Alternate ) 

c IT tf T> . _ . All t_j:„ r^ :t „fc; t„ /■ aj:_:„i- „ri?j t: \ 

Shbi M. L. Bhattachabyya Directorate of Industries, Government of West 

Bengal 
Shbi B. B. Chaki { Alternate ) 
Shei p. Bisya The National Small Industries Corporation Ltd., 

New Delhi 
Shbi M. Chinnaswamy The Board of Control for Cricket in India, Bangalore 

Shbi A. N. Ghose ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R, DayakiSsen Indian Hockey Federation, Madras 

Shbi P. G. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Malik Ram Dewan Directorate of Industries, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh 
Wo Cde K. K. Ganguly All India Football Federation, Bombay 

Dr. M. Habibullah Industries & Commerce Directorate, Jammu & 

Kashmir Government 
Shei Lakshman Dass Gub- 
OOTBA { Alternate ) 
Shbi N. G. Jain Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shbi H. B. Singh Kalra Quality Marking Centre for Sports Goods, Depart- 

ment of Industries, Government of Punjab, 
Jullundur 
Shbi K. L. Kawatea All India Sports Manufacturers Federation ( Regd. ), 

Meerut 
Shei A. S. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Shei A. L. Kumae Federation of Sports Industries, Jullundur 

Shei Habnam Singh Jolly ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Sumant C. Misea All India Lawn Tennis Association, Calcutta 

Shei R. K. Khanna ( Alternate ) 



{ Continued on page 2 ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 1 



IS: 2746- 1964 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing. 

Shei Pubm Pawdhi In personal capacity ( The Metal Box Co. of India 

Ltd., Calcutta ) 
Shbi Rambshwab Dayal Gymnastic Federation of India, New Delhi 

Shri Baboja Ranjan Roy { Alternate ) 
Shri M. a. Rehman Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Db. H. a. Shah Office of the Development Commissioner, Small 

Scale Industries ( Ministry of Industry ) 
Shei Bhttpesh B. Turakhia Montana Sports { India ) Private Ltd., Bombay 

Shbi A. B. Rao, Director, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Consumer 
Products ) ( Secretary ) 



IS:2746-1964 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPRING BOARDS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 25 June 1964, after the draft finalized by the Sports Goods 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products 
Division Council. 

0.2 Spring boards are an essential equipment in all sports events. As the 
performance of an athlete is dependent to a certain extent on the equip- 
ment he uses and the equipment that is made available in competitions, 
their standardization is very essential. 

0.3 ISO/TG 83 Gymnastics and Sports Equipment Technical Committee 
of the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) with the 
active help and collaboration of the International Gymnastic Federation 
( IGF ) is concerning itself with standardization of equipment used in the 
international competitions. This standard is based on the ISO proposal 
on the subject. 

0.4 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this speci- 
fication, it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is compHed with, the final value, observed or calculated, expres- 
sing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960 
Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values {Revised). The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as 
that of the specified value in this standard. 

0.6 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions 
relating to spring boards, and it does not include all the necessary pro- 
visions of a contract. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard relates to spring boards which are essential equipment 
in all national and international sports events. 



IS : 2746 - 1964 



2. MATERIAL 

2.1 The material of the head board and the floor board is left to the 
discretion of the manufacturer, but it shall be capable of withstanding the 
test specified in 5.1. 

3. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The shape and dimensions shall be as given in Fig. 1 . Only the shape 
and dimensions required to ensure the performance of the equipment are 
given in this standard. Where shapes and dimensions are not specified, 
these are left to the discretion of the manufacturer. 

3.2 The jumping off surface on the head board shall be raised and slip- 
proofed or shall have a slip-proof covering. 

3.3 The bearing surface of the floor board shall have a covering of rubber 
or ledges or discs of rubber. 

SLIP-PROOF 
COVERING 




FLOOR BOARD 



HEAD BOARD 



4. SAMPLING 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Spkinq Board 



4.1 The acceptance criteria for spring boards shall be as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the supplier. A suitable sampling scheme is given in 
Appendix A. 



IS : 2746 - 1964 

5. TEST 

5.1 When a load of 300 kgf is applied as in Fig. 2, the spring board shall 
bend to a position of 97 ± 5 mm from the floor. The spring board shall 
return to its original position after removal of the load without any perma- 
nent set. 




97 + 5 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 2 Testing of Spring Board 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Each spring board shall carry the manufacturer's name or identifica- 
tion mark. 

6.1.1 The spring boards may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of 
that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated 
by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed arc 
continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, 
under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manu- 
facturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. PACKING 

7.1 The spring boards shall be packed as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 4.1 ) 

SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

A-1. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

A-1.1 Lot — All spring boards of the same dimensions and manufactured 
from the same material under essentially similar conditions of manufac- 
ture shall constitute a lot. 



IS: 2746 -1964 

A-1 .2 Ascertaining Conformity — For ascertaining the conformity of a 
lot to the requirements of the specification, the number of spring boards 
selected at random from a lot, shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of 
Table I. 



TABLE I SCALE OF SAMPLING 




No. OF Spring 

boabds in the 

Lot 


Sample Size No . 

or Sprino Boards 

TO BE Selected 


Acceptance 
Number 


(1) 


(2) 




(3) 


2 to 8 
9 „ 15 
16 „ 25 
26 „ 50 
51 „ 90 
91 „ 150 


2 
3 
5 
8 
13 
20 









1 
1 



A-1 .2.1 To ensure the randomness of selection a random number table 
shall be used. In case a random number table is not available, the 
following procedure may be used: 

Starting from any spring board count them in a systematic 

order as 1,2, up to r and soon. Every rth spring board thus 

counted shall be included in the sample, where r is integral part of 
Njn ( N being tlie number of spring boards in the lot and n the 
number of spring boards in the sample ) . 

A-2. CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

A-2.1 All spring boards included in the sample shall be tested for con- 
struction according to 3 and for deflection according to 5. 

Any spring board which does not satisfy any one or more of the 
requirements given in 3 and 5 shall be regarded as a defective. 

A-2. 1.1 If the number of defective boards in the sample does not exceed 
the corresponding acceptance number given in col 3 of Table I, the lot shall 
be declared conforming to the requirements of the specification. 



