NAT Alan IS 9972 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


APT GLAU Фат ч 
хегапїет« ізет gg — fats 


( 480 чта ) 


Automatic Sprinkler Heads for Fire 
Protection Service — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.20 


© BIS 2023 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, 4% Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 14 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Fire Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A sprinkler system consists of a water supply and one or more sprinkler installations; each installation consisting 
of a set of Installation control valve and a pipe array fitted with sprinkler heads. The sprinkler heads are fitted at 
specified locations at the roof or ceiling, walls and where necessary between racks, below shelves, and in ovens 
or stoves. 


The sprinklers operate at pre-determined temperatures to discharge water over the affected part of the area 
below, the flow of water through the installation control valve initiating a fire alarm. The operating temperature 
Is generally selected to suit ambient temperature conditions. Only the sprinklers in the vicinity of the fire, that is, 
those which become sufficiently heated, operate. 


A sprinkler has two functions to perform. It must first detect a fire, and must then provide an adequate distribution 
of water to control or extinguish it. Each function is performed separately and one is independent of the other 
except in so far as early detection makes extinction easier because the fire has not grown large. 


A sprinkler head is, in essence, a thermally operated valve which when opens acts as a distributor of water over a 
specified area. It consists of a body which screws into a pressurized pipe, and which contains a discharge orifice. 
The orifice is normally sealed by a valve assembly which is held in place by a thermally sensitive fusible element 
or glass bulb. The latter will separate or burst when its operating temperature is reached. The other end of the 
fusible element or glass bulb is supported by the yoke arms, which also serve to support the deflector plate. On 
operation, the element or the bulb falls away and allows the valve to open under the pressure of water, which 
is ejected from the orifice and strikes the deflector plate thus distributing the water over a pre-determined area 
beneath the sprinkler. This standard has been formulated so as to cover the requirements of automatic sprinkler 
heads of both fusible element and glass bulb types. 


This standard was first published in 1981 and since then there had been a revolution in the industry worldwide 
in respect of fire protection particularly in sprinkler installation. Several new types of sprinklers were developed 
and testing procedures for the sprinklers were drastically changed keeping in view the variety of fire protection 
requirements. Hence, this standard was first revised in 2002 in tune with the international trends then. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 


a) New types of special sprinklers, such as cut off sprinkler and rack storage sprinkler, have been 
included. 


b) Information regarding identification marks of each sprinkler complying with the requirements of this 
standard have been included in detail. 


c) Colour coding of sprinklers and bulbs have been updated with respect to modified nominal release 
temperature. 


d) Testing conditions for sprinkler have been included and examination of sprinklers have been updated. 
e) Existing tests in the standard for the performance of the sprinklers have been modified. 


f) Various tests on performance of sprinklers [such as hydrostatic strength test, operating temperature 
(liquid bath) test, operating temperature (air bath) test, high temperature exposure test, freezing test, 
minimum operating pressure test, moist air test, vacuum test, drop and tumble test, test for discharge 
coefficient (K-factor), salt spray corrosion test, carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide corrosion test, 
hydrogen sulphide corrosion test and test for conductivity (C-factor)] have been included in detail. 


g) Fire test for sprinklers has been added and its test method for all types of sprinklers has also been 
explained. 


h) Terminology has been updated. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 9972 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER HEADS FOR FIRE 
PROTECTION SERVICE — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the mechanical properties and 
performance requirements of automatic sprinkler heads 
for installation in fire protection service. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards given below: 


IS No. Title 
15105 : 2021 Design апа installation of 
Fixed Automatic Sprinkler 
Fire Extinguishing Systems — 
Code of practice (first revision) 
2643 : 2005/ Pipe threads where pressure — 
ISO 228-1: Tight joints are not made on 
2000 the threads — Dimensions, 
tolerances and designation 
(third revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, following definitions 
shall apply: 


3.1 Angle of Protection 


3.1.1 Centre Strut or Glass Bulb Sprinkler — For this 
sprinkler, if a line drawn to the edge of the lower seat 
of the actuator or bulb rather than to the extremity of 
the actuator or bulb produces a larger angle, then that 
larger angle shall be the “angle of protection” for that 
sprinkler. 


3.1.2 Link and Lever Sprinkler — For this sprinkler, 
this would be the lowermost edge of the link or lever, 
measured with the link and lever assembly rotated 90° 
to the frame arm plane. 


3.1.3 Rack Storage Sprinklers — For such sprinklers, 
the “angle of protection” is that angle measured between 
the plane of the water shield and the line drawn from 
its outer edge to the lowest and outermost extremity of 
the actuator. 


3.2 Assembly Load 


The force which is applied to the sprinkler frame due 
to assembly of the operating parts plus the equivalent 
force resulting from the maximum rated inlet pressure. 


3.3 Coated or Plated Sprinkler 

A sprinkler which has a factory applied coating or 
plating for corrosion protection or decorative purposes. 
3.4 Concealed Sprinkler 

A sprinkler in which the entire body, including the 
operating mechanism, is above a concealing plate. 

3.5 Conductivity (C-Factor) 


A measure of the conductance between the sprinkler’s 
heat responsive element and the other components of 
the sprinkler expressed in units of (m/s)'”. 


3.6 Corrosion Resistant 

Materials having resistance to corrosion equal to or 
exceeding that of bronze alloy having a minimum 
copper content of 80 percent. Stainless steel and other 
alloys of brass, titanium are also possible options for 
use in sprinkler heads. 


3.7 Decorative Sprinkler 


A sprinkler which is factory-painted or coated or plated 
to improve its aesthetics. The coating is not considered 
a corrosion-resistant barrier. 


3.8 Design Load (Element) 


The load actually applied on the operating element 
(fusible element or bulb) at the maximum rated inlet 
pressure. 


3.9 Discharge Coefficient (K-Factor) 


The coefficient of discharge, K, as expressed in the 
equation: 


Q = KP! 


where О is the flow in litre per min (1 lpm), and P is the 
pressure in bar. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


3.10 Dry-type Sprinkler 


A device consisting of a sprinkler permanently attached 
to an extension nipple which has a closure at the inlet 
end to prevent system water from entering the nipple 
until the sprinkler operates. 


3.11 Hang-Up (Lodgement) 


A malfunction in the operation of a sprinkler 
which, when operated under a typical system water 
pressure, experiences the lodging of an operating part 
(cap, gasket, lever, etc) on or between the frame, 
deflector and/or compression screw, adversely affecting 
the water distribution for a period in excess of 60 s. A 
momentary hesitation of an operating part to clear itself 
from temporary contact with the frame, deflector and/or 
compression screw does not constitute a hang-up. 

NOTE — For quick response sprinklers, and hang ups, they 

generally need to eject within 10 s. 


3.12 Heat Responsive Element 


The component of a sprinkler assembly that, when 
subjected to the influence of heat, ruptures, bursts or 
otherwise functions, causing water to be discharged 
through the sprinkler orifice. 


3.13 Leak Point 


The pressure at which leakage of water in excess of one 
drop per min occurs and sprinkler operates. 


3.14 Light Hazard Occupancy 


An occupancy in which the quantity and/or 
combustibility of contents is low and fires with 
relatively low rates of heat release are expected 
(see also IS 15105). 


3.15 Maximum Service Pressure 


The maximum rated working pressure of a sprinkler, 
typically 12.1 bar. 


3.16 Operating Temperature 


The temperature, in degree celsius (°C), at which the 
heat responsive element of a sprinkler operates when 
subjected to a controlled rate-of-temperature-rise liquid 
bath. 


3.17 Ordinary Hazard Occupancy 


An occupancy where quantity and combustibility of 
contents is greater than that of a light hazard occupancy 
(see also IS 15105). 


3.18 Orientation, Best Case 


When testing sprinklers for sensitivity in the plunge 
tunnel, the orientation of a sprinkler which results in 
the fastest operating time, or the lowest response time 
index (RTI). Typically, this orientation is one in which 
the sprinkler waterway axis and the plane of the frame 
arms are both perpendicular to the air flow and, in the 


case of non-symmetric elements, the heat responsive 
element is upstream of the frame arms. 


3.19 Orientation, Worst Case 


For use in this standard, when testing sprinklers 
for sensitivity in the plunge tunnel, the worst 
case orientation is a given angular offset from the 
orientation which results in the slowest operating time, 
or the highest response time index (RTI). For standard 
response sprinklers this angular offset is 15 degrees. 
The angular offset for quick response sprinklers is 
25 degrees. 


3.20 Orifice 


The opening in a sprinkler body through which the 
water is discharged. 


3.21 Response Time Index (RTI) 


A measure of sprinkler sensitivity expressed 
as RTI = т (u)? where т is the time constant of 
the heat responsive element in units of seconds, 
and u is the gas velocity expressed in metre per 
second. The quantity J relates the properties of the 
heat responsive element and the heated gas flow. 
RTI can be used to predict the response of a sprinkler in 
fire environments defined in terms of gas temperature 
and velocity versus time. R77 1s expressed in units of 
(т.5)!?. 


3.22 Service Pressure 


The working hydrostatic pressure of a sprinkler system. 


3.23 Standard Response Sprinkler 


This is a sprinkler having an RTI between 80 and 
350 (m.s)? and а C-factor equal to or less than 
2.0 (m.s)!2 when the sprinkler is tested in the best-case 
orientation. 


3.24 Strutting 


Partial fracture of a glass bulb or partial rupture of a 
fusible element which does not result in sprinkler 
operation. 


3.25 Weep Point 

The pressure at which any visible leakage of water is 
detected. 

3.26 Yoke 


The part of a sprinkler that retains the heat responsive 
element in load bearing contact with the sprinkler head 
valve. 


3.27 Early Suppression Fast Response Automatic 
Sprinkler (ESFR) 

Sprinkler that is intended to provide early suppression 
of a fire when installed on the appropriate sprinkler 
piping. 


3.28 Fusible Element Sprinkler 


Sprinkler that opens under the influence of heat by 
the melting of a component (fusible link, generally an 
alloy). 


3.29 Glass Bulb Sprinkler 


Sprinkler that opens under the influence of heat by the 
bursting of the glass bulb through pressure resulting 
from expansion of the fluid enclosed therein. 


3.30 Horizontal Sidewall Sprinkler 


Sprinkler arranged such that the orifice directs the 
water stream horizontally towards the deflector giving 
a one-sided distribution pattern. 


4 TYPES OF SPRINKLERS 


Sprinklers of the following types are covered under this 
standard. 


4.1 Sprinklers According to Release Mechanism 


4.1.1 Fusible Element Sprinklers 


A fusible element sprinkler is opened under influence of 
heat by melting of a component (fusible link, generally 
an alloy). 


4.1.2 Glass Bulb Sprinklers 


A glass bulb sprinkler is opened under the influence of 
heat by the bursting of the glass bulb through pressure 
resulting from expansion of the fluid enclosed therein. 


4.2 Sprinklers According to Type of Discharge 


4.2.1 Conventional Sprinklers 


The conventional sprinkler has a spherical water 
distribution directed towards the ground and the ceiling 
over a definite protection area. A conventional sprinkler 
shall discharge from 40 to 60 percent of the total water 
flow initially in a downward direction. 


4.2.2 Spray Sprinklers 


The spray sprinkler has a paraboloidal water distribution 
directed towards the ground over a definite protection 
area. A spray sprinkler shall discharge from 80 to 
100 percent of the total water flow in a downward 
direction. 


4.2.3 Sidewall Sprinklers 


The sidewall sprinkler has a one-sided (half paraboloid) 
water distribution directed towards the adjacent wall 
and the ground over a defined protection area. 


4.3 Sprinklers According to Mounting Pattern 


4.3.1 Pendent Sprinkler 


A sprinkler intended to be installed so that its deflector 
is located below the orifice and the water flows 
downward through the orifice. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


4.3.2 Upright Sprinkler 


A sprinkler intended to be installed so that its deflector 
is located above the orifice and the water flows upward 
through the orifice. 


4.3.3 Horizontal Sprinklers (Sidewall Only) 


Horizontal sprinklers are designed to give the specified 
distribution when the jet of water is directed horizontally 
against the deflector. This applies to sidewall sprinklers 
only. 


4.3.4 Ceiling Sprinklers 


Ceiling sprinklers are in which part of the body of the 
sprinkler (other than shank) may be mounted above the 
lower plane of the ceiling. 

NOTE — Approved sprinkler dropper pipes having matching 


pressure ratings and rosette plates for mounting are required 
for interconnection of upright and pendant sprinklers. 


4.4 Special Sprinklers 


4.4.1 Dry Upright Sprinklers 


Dry upright sprinklers are installed in an upright 
position on special rise pipes. These pipes are kept free 
from water. 


4.4.2 Dry Pendent Sprinklers 


Dry pendent sprinklers are installed in a pendent 
position on special drop pipes. These pipes are kept 
free from water. 


4.4.3 Flush Sprinklers 


Flush sprinklers are installed in a pendent position 
close to the ceiling, such that part of the body may be 
above the ceiling line, and the heat responsive element 
is completely below the ceiling line. 


4.4.4 Recessed Sprinklers 


Recessed sprinklers are installed in a pendent position 
partly or wholly above the ceiling line. The sprinkler 
is fitted into a recess cup, the rim of which is flush with 
the ceiling. 


4.4.5 Concealed Sprinklers 


Concealed sprinklers are installed position above the 
ceiling line. The concealed sprinkler incorporates a 
recessing cup which enclose the sprinkler, such that is 
flush with the ceiling and conceals the sprinkler. 


4.4.6 Intermediate Level Sprinklers 

A sprinkler installed below, and in addition to roof 
sprinklers with a specific purpose. 

4.4.7 Detector Sprinkler 


A sealed sprinkler mounted on a pressurized pipeline 
used to control a deluge valve. Operation of this 
sprinkler causes loss of air pressure and water pressure 
which opens the deluge valve. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


4.4.8 Cut off Sprinkler 


A sprinkler protecting a door and/or window between 
two areas of which only one is protected by sprinklers. 


4.4.9 Extended Coverage (EC) Sprinklers 


А control mode sprinkler with an intended area of 
coverage which exceeds the standard coverage area 
applicable to that type of sprinkler. Extended coverage 
ordinary hazard (ECOH) and extended coverage light 
hazard (ECLH) sprinklers have an intended area of 
coverage between 21 m? and 37 m°. 


4.4.10 Flow Control (FC) Sprinklers 

A sprinkler that is intended to control water flow by 
automatically cycling open and close within a specified 
temperature range. 

4.4.11 Fast Response Sprinkler 

A sprinkler that complies with the applicable 
requirements for such sprinklers in the sensitivity tests 
and that is intended to be installed at standard spacing. 
4.4.12 Rack Storage Sprinkler 


A sprinkler intended for use in racks or beneath open 
gratings, which is equipped with a shield mounted 
above the heat responsive element to protect it from 
water discharge from nearby sprinklers at higher 
elevations. Rack storage sprinklers are also commonly 
known as an in-rack or intermediate level sprinklers. 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


All the sprinklers shall comply with the various 
requirements specified below. 


5.1 Orifice Sizes 


5.1.1 Orifice sizes shall comply with Table 1. 
Table 1 Orifice Sizes 
(Clauses 5.1.1 and 5.1.4) 


SI No. Nominal Orifice Diameter Nominal Thread Size 
mm inch 

(1) (2) (3) 
3 

i 10 = 
1) 8 
ii) 15 1 
ii = 
2 

3 

= 20 3 
iii) 4 
iv) 25 1 
1 

v) 32 1- 


5.1.2 All automatic sprinklers shall allow a sphere of 
8 mm + 0.010 mm size to pass through each waterway 
of the device. 


5.1.3 Nominal thread sizes for fittings shall be according 
to IS 2643. 


5.1.4 Dry and flush sprinklers may have larger thread 
sizes than specified in Table 1. 


5.2 Identification (see also 12.1) 


5.2.1 Each sprinkler, complying with the requirements 
of this standard shall be marked with sprinkler 
type and model identification details, and batch 
number, nominal release temperature and is colour 
coded (see 5.3.1, 5.3.2 and 12.1). The manufacturer’s 
catalogue identification shall define uniquely the 
design size, distribution type and mounting position. 
In particular, the identification symbol used shall be 
changed where there is any significant alteration in the 
shape, materials or method of manufacture. 


5.2.2 The deflectors of sidewall sprinklers shall show 
the intended direction of discharge with respect to the 
rear wall. An arrow or similar symbol indicating the 
direction of spray discharge is acceptable. Horizontal 
sidewall sprinklers shall include the word ‘top’ on the 
deflector to indicate orientation. 


5.3 Nominal Release Temperatures and Colour 
Coding for Sprinklers and Bulbs 
5.3.1 Glass Bulbs 


The nominal temperature in case of sprinklers with 
glass bulbs, shall be colour coded as indicated in 
Table 2 with a variability in operating temperatures 
within the ranges specified. 

Table 2 Colour Code for Sprinklers 


(Clause 5.3.1) 


SI No. Nominal Release Colour Code 
Temperature 
°C Sprinkler Bulb 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 57-67 Uncoloured Orange 
or black 
ii) 68 - 78 Uncoloured Red 
or black 
iii) 79 - 92 White Yellow 
iv) 93 - 107 White Green 
v) 121-149 Blue Blue 
vi) 163 - 191 Red Mauve 
vil) 204 - 246 Green Black 
уш) 260 - 302 Orange Black 


5.3.2 Fusible Elements 


The nominal temperature in case of sprinklers with 
fusible elements, shall be colour coded as indicated 
in Table 3 with a variability in operating temperatures 
within the ranges specified. 

Table 3 Colour Code for Fusible elements 


(Clause 5.3.2) 


SINo. Nominal Release Yoke Arm Colour code 
Temperature 
°C 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 57-77 Uncoloured 
1) 80-107 White 
iii) 121 - 149 Blue 
iv) 163 - 191 Red 
v) 204 - 246 Green 
vi) 260 - 302 Orange 


NOTE — For ultra-high category having release temperature of 260 to 
302 °C, the colour of yoke shall be orange. 


5.3.3 Testing Conditions 


Unless otherwise specified, all tests shall be carried out 
in an ambient temperature of 25 + 10 °C and, sprinkler 
specimen shall be conditioned at 25 + 10 °C for at least 
24 h before the test. 


5.3.4 Examination of Sprinklers 
Sprinklers shall be examined visually for the following 
points: 

a) Conformance with 5.1.1 (sprinkler orifice sizes); 


b) Comparison of sprinkler specimens with 
manufacturer's drawings and specification; and 


c) Conformance as per 5.2 (identification). 
6 PERFORMANCE TESTS 


6.1 Number of sprinklers to be selected for each of the 
tests given below are enumerated in Annex A. 


6.1.1 Leakage Test 
6.1.1.1 Hydrostatic leakage test 


At least twenty (previously untested) sprinklers (each 
type) shall be subjected to a water pressure of 30 + 1 bar. 
The pressure shall be raised from 0 bar to 30 bar at an 
average rate of < 1 bar/s. The pressure of 30 bar shall 
then be maintained for a period of 3 min + 5 s and then 
allowed to fall to 0 bar in not less than 5 s. 


After releasing the pressure, it shall be then raised to 
0.5 + 0.1 bar in not more than 5 s. This pressure shall 
be maintained for 15 min 5 s. 


The pressure shall then be raised to 10 + 0.5 bar at an 
average rate of increase of < 1 bar/s. The 10 bar pressure 
shall be maintained for 15 min+5 s. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


No leakage shall be observed within the prescribed 
conditions. 


6.1.1.2 Pneumatic leakage test 


Four (previously untested) sprinklers shall be 
individually conditioned at —25 + 5 °C for 24 h. 
Each sample shall be pneumatically pressurized to 
2 + 0.1 bar and immersed in glycol liquid conditioned 
to —25 + 5 °C, and observed for 5 min. 


No leakage shall be observed within the prescribed 
conditions. 


6.1.2 30-Day Leakage Test 


At least five sprinklers (each type) when tested as per 
the following procedures shall: 


a) experience no leakage when subjected to a 
hydrostatic pressure of 20 bar for 30 days. Five 
samples shall be tested and the same shall be 
checked every week for evidence of leakage; 


b 


s 


not leak when subjected to a pressure of 35 bar 
for 1 min following the 30 days. The pressure 
shall be increased at a rate not exceeding 20 bar 
per min. Similarly after the test, the pressure shall 
be brought down to 0 bar at a rate not exceeding 
20 bar/min; and 

show no distortion or other mechanical damage 
following the leakage testing, as determined by 
visual examination. 


с 


хи 


6.2 Hydrostatic Strength 


Samples that passed the test under 6.1.1.1 shall be 
further subjected to a gradually increasing hydrostatic 
pressure to 45 bar at a rate not to exceed 20 bar per 
min. The test pressure shall be maintained for 1 min. 
If leakage at the orifice prevents testing at 45 bar, the 
maximum attainable test pressure shall be maintained 
for | min. Leakage at the orifice above a hydrostatic 
pressure of 35 bar shall be deemed acceptable but there 
shall be no rupture. 


6.3 Water Hammer Test 


6.3.1 When tested as detailed in the procedure below, 
the sprinkler shall: 


a) experience no leakage when subjected to 100 000 
applications of a pressure surge increasing rapidly 
from 3.5 bar to 35 bar; 


b) not leak when subjected to a pressure of 35 bar for 
1 min, following 100 000 cycles of water hammer; 
and 


c) show no distortion or other physical damage 
following the water hammer testing as determined 
by visual examination. 


6.3.2 Sprinkler samples (at least five) shall be installed 
in a water filled test line connecting with a small motor 
operated piston pump that produces a rapid rise in 


IS 9972 : 2023 


discharge pressure from 3.5 to 35 bar at the rate of not 
more than 60 cycles/min. The test piping shall be filled 
so that there is water at the sprinkler seat, and the pump 
Is to be placed in operation and adjusted to produce the 
specific test pressure cycle. 


6.3.3 During pressure cycling, observations made for 
the evidence for leakage, if any. 


6.3.4 Following the completion of the pressure cycling, 
the samples shall be tested to verify that they do not 
ЇеаК at 35 bar pressure. The pressure shall be increased 
to 35 bar at a rate not exceeding 20 bar a minute. The 
pressure shall be maintained at 35 bar for a minute and 
then released at a rate not exceeding 20 bar a minute to 
O bar. The samples shall then be physically checked 
to verify evidence of distortion or other mechanical 
damage. 


6.4 Hang-up of Operating Parts (Lodgement Test) 


6.4.1 When tested as described below, not more than 
1 percent of the samples shall exhibit a hang-up, or 
lodgement, of operating parts on the non-operating 
components (that is, frame, compression screw, 
deflector, etc) of the sprinkler. 


Samples shall operate fully and completely, and shall 
exhibit no binding of internal components. Upon 
operation, the measured discharge coefficient (K-factor) 
of all samples shall comply with 6.20. 


Any non-operation caused by binding of an operating 
element or improper fracturing of a glass bulb, shall be 
considered a hang-up. Momentary obstructions which 
clear in less than 60 s are not considered hang-ups. 


A lodgement is considered to have occurred when a 
part of the release element lodges in the deflector/frame 
assembly for a period of more than one min. However, 
in the case of quick/fast response sprinklers, lodging 
period shall not be more than 10 8. 


6.4.2 Tests/Verification 


Samples shall be selected in accordance with 
Table 4 and shall be individually installed in their 


intended installation position, on a pipe manifold as 
described in Fig. 1. Each sample shall be subjected 
to an inlet water pressure in accordance with Table 4, 
operated using a suitable open flame heat source, and 
observed for complete and proper functioning. 


Dry sprinklers shall be tested at both the minimum and 
maximum lengths, requiring more sample quantity. 


The samples shall be tested with the pipe manifold 
configured for single-fed flow. Five samples shall be 
tested at each pressure with the pipe manifold configured 
for double-fed flow, and the remaining samples shall be 
tested with single-fed flow (see Fig. 1). 


A tolerance of + 5 percent applies to all pressures 
specified in the table. 


Upon activation of each sample, the discharge 
coefficient may be measured to verify proper and 
complete operation as per 6.20. 


A delay of not more than 5 s between activation of the 
heat-sensitive element and complete opening of the 
sprinkler is acceptable. 


Table 4 Hang-up Test Samples 


(Clause 6.4.2) 
51 Хо. Pressure Number of Samples 
Bar 
0) (2) (3) 
i) 0.5 0 
ii) 1:7 5 
iii) 3.4 5 
iv) 5.2 Š 
v) 6.9 15 
vi) 8.6 0 
vii) 10.3 0 
уш) 12.1 0 


6.5 Operating Temperature (Liquid Bath) Test 


Ten previously untested sprinklers shall be immersed 
in a vessel containing a liquid as specified in Table 5. 


Table 5 Liquid Bath Status 


(Clause 6.5) 
51 Мо. Nominal Temperature Rating of Bath Liquid Maximum Rate of Temperature Rise 
Sprinkler 
°C °C/min 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 0-79 Water 0.4 
1) 80-182 Glycerine 0.3 
iii) > 183 Vegetable oil 0.3 


a) 


b) 


BLEED LINE 


50 mm NOMINAL 
GROOVED COUPLING 
(TYPICAL) 


50 mm NOMINAL 
STEEL PIPE 
(TYPICAL) 


IS 9972 : 2023 


BLEED LINE 


50 mm NOMINAL TEE 
(OUTLET AS REQUIRED) 


< — 500 mm (TYPICAL) 


1A TEST APPARATUS FOR DOUBLE-FED FLow 


(OUTLET AS REQUIRED) 


30 mm NOMINAL 
STEEL PIPE 


300 mm 


30 mm NOMINAL ELBOW 30 mm x 50 mm 
NOMINAL REDUCER 


50 mm NOMINAL BLEED LINE 


GROOVED COUPLING 


50 mm NOMINAL 
STEEL PIPE 


1B Test APPARATUS FOR SINGLE-FED FLOW 


200 mm 


Fic. 1 LODGEMENT TEST 


The sprinklers shall be placed on a grate or rack 
suspended above the bottom of the vessel. The 
liquid level shall not exceed 25 mm above the top 
of the sprinkler, and whenever possible, shall not 
exceed 40 mm above the top of the temperature 
sensitive element. The vessel shall be provided 
with a source for heating the liquid, a means 
to agitate the liquid, and a device to measure 
the temperature of the liquid (see Fig. 2) for a 
typical test set-up. The liquid shall be agitated 
at a constant rate of 200 + 10 rpm via a paddle 
measuring 100 mm long by 20 mm high. The 
device used to measure the temperature of the 
liquid shall be calibrated. It shall be immersed 
such that readings are taken at the same depth as 
the sprinkler temperature sensitive element. 


The temperature of the bath shall be raised until the 
liquid is 10 + 1 °C below the nominal temperature 
rating of the sprinkler. The temperature rise 
shall then be controlled at a rate not exceeding 
that specified in Table 5 until operation of all 
sprinklers occurs. If one or more sprinklers fails 
to operate at, or below, the maximum temperature 
as stated below, the rate of rise shall continue 


с) 


d) 


to be controlled until all the sprinklers have 
operated, or until the bath reaches a temperature 
ten percent above the nominal temperature rating 
of the sprinklers, at which point the test shall be 
terminated. The temperature of the liquid bath at 
the time of operation shall be recorded for each 
sprinkler. 


Partial fracture of a glass bulb or partial rupture of 
a fusible element which does not result in sprinkler 
operation, that is, strutting, shall necessitate an 
additional sensitivity test (air bath test, 6.6) in 
order to verify proper operation of the sprinkler in 
air. 


All sprinklers and cover plates having nominal 
temperature ratings less than 200 °C shall have an 
actual operating temperature within + 3.5 percent 
of the marked nominal temperature rating, when 
immersed in a constant rate of temperature rise liquid 
bath. Sprinklers and cover plates with nominal 
temperature ratings of 200 °C or greater shall meet 
the requirements stated above, or shall have an actual 
operating temperature within + 107 percent of the 
marked nominal temperature rating. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


THERMOMETER 


UPPER CLAMP 
AGITATOR MOTOR 


CONTROL THERMOCOUPLE 
(CONNECTED TO 
TEMPERATURE CONTROLLER) 
LIQUID LEVEL 


LOWER 


TEST SAMPLE 
CLAMP 


(TYPICAL) 


SPRINKLER 
SUPPORT RING 


GLASS VESSEL 
VERTICAL 


SUPPORT AGITATOR PADDLE 


IMMERSION HEATER 
BATH STAND 
TRAY 


MESH SCREEN 


Fic. 2 LiQuiD BATH TEST 


6.6 Operating Temperature (Air Bath) Test 
[Additional Test — See 6.5(c)] 


Fifty previously untested sprinklers shall be placed on 
their threaded inlets in a programmable oven circulating 
air at ambient temperature. The temperature in the 
oven shall be steadily raised to 10 + 1 °C below the 
nominal temperature rating of the sprinklers over a 
20 min period. Once this temperature is reached, the 
oven shall be maintained at constant temperature for 
a period of 60 + 5 min. The temperature shall then be 
raised at a constant rate of 0.5 + 0.3 °C per min until 
the temperature reaches 20 + 2 °C above the nominal 
temperature rating of the sprinklers. 


Partial fracture of a glass bulb or partial rupture of a 
fusible element, that is, strutting, shall be deemed a 
failure. 


The heat responsive element of all sprinklers shall 
operate properly when the sprinklers are subjected to a 
constant rate of temperature rise air bath. 


6.7 Heat Exposure Test (for Glass Bulb Sprinklers) 


A sprinkler when subjected to fatigue conditions as 
indicated below shall remain intact and undamaged so 
that it can be subjected to satisfactory functional test 
thereafter. The sequence of the test is as follows. 


a) Heat the sprinkler in a liquid bath from room 
temperature to 20 + 2 °C under its normal release 
temperature at a rate of rise of temperature not 
exceeding 20 °C/min. 


b 


wm 


The temperature shall then be raised at a rate of 
1 to 7 +2 °C below the normal release temperature 
(bubble disappears). 


с 


ме 


Тһе sprinkler shall then Бе removed from the 
liquid bath and cooled in air at room temperature 
for 2 min. During the cooling period, the point 
of the glass bulb (seal end) shall be pointing 
downwards (bubble reappears). 

The sprinkler shall then be returned to the liquid 
bath, which is maintained at 7 + 2 °C below the 
nominal release temperature for 10 min + 10 s. 


d 


М7 


е) Repeat the action specified in 6.7 а). 


f) Repeat the actions specified in 6.7 c) and 
6.7 d) twice. 


The test shall be carried out in a bath of distilled water 
for nominal temperatures not exceeding 80°C. Refined 
vegetable oil shall be used for nominal temperatures 
above 80 °C and below 301 °C, the liquid bath shall 
be so constructed that the temperature deviation within 
the test zone does not exceed 1 °C. The sprinkler shall 
then be subsequently tested in accordance with 6.1.1 at 
a pressure of 10 bar. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


6.8 High Temperature Exposure Test 


Five previously untested, but open, sprinklers, supported 
on its threaded inlet, shall be heated in an oven or furnace 
having a temperature of 650 + 10 °C for a period of 
15 min. Following this exposure, the sprinklers shall be 
removed with tongs, preferably by holding the threaded 
inlet portion, and promptly submerged in a water bath 
with a temperature of 15 + 5 °C. 


Sprinklers, less operating mechanisms, shall not show 
significant deformation, blistering, or fracture following 
exposure to an elevated temperature as detailed above. 


6.9 Freezing Test 


a) Five previously untested sprinklers shall be 
hydrostatically tested to confirm that there are 
no weep or leak points at, or below, 35 bar. 
Each sprinkler shall be attached to one end of a 
250 mm minimum length of 25 mm nominal 
diameter schedule 40 or 80 steel pipe using an 
appropriate fitting. Each assembly shall then 
be filled to capacity with water and sealed. The 
samples shall then be exposed to a temperature of 
—30 + 5 °C for a period of 24 h, or until operation 


occurs. 
b) Following exposure to freezing temperatures, 

sprinklers shall not either: 

1) operate, 

2) leak subsequent to thawing when 


hydrostatically pressurized from 0.35 to 
12.1 bar, or 


3) sustain no damage. 


NOTE — For 3), sprinklers shall not weep or leak at, or below, 
35 bar. 


6.10 High Ambient Temperature (Ageing) Test for 
All Sprinklers 


Sprinklers shall withstand exposure to an increased 
ambient air temperature without evidence of weakness 
or failure. 


6.10.1 Ten sprinklers shall be exposed for a period 
of 90 days to an ambient temperature which is 
16 °C below the operating temperature of the sprinkler, 
but not less than 48 °C. Following the exposure, the 
sprinklers shall be allowed to cool for not less than 
2 h, and shall then be subjected to any of the tests under 
6.1.1, 6.3, 6.5 or 6.9 as required. 


Concealed sprinkler cover plates shall be exposed for 
a period of 90 days, hung in pendent position, to an 
ambient temperature which is 16 °C below the rated 
release temperature of the cover plate. Following 
exposure, the concealed sprinkler shall be assembled 
and subjected to test as given in 6.1.1. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


6.10.2 Glass bulbs shall also be subjected to the 
increased ambient air temperature as enumerated in 6.6. 


6.10.3 Fifty glass bulbs from the same manufacturing 
batch shall be subjected to 90 day ageing as specified 
above. Following exposure and cooling, the loose 
glass bulbs shall be tested to determine their operating 
temperature distribution as specified in 6.5 and meet 
the requirements of 6.5 (b) thereof. 


6.11 Thermal Shock Test (for Glass Bulb Sprinklers) 


Glass bulb sprinklers shall remain intact and undamaged 
during thermal conditioning and shall pass functional 
test thereafter. 


Following procedure shall be carried out on the 
specimen (10 sprinklers) for the test on the specimen 
(10 sprinklers) as specified in 6.5. 


The glass bulb sprinklers shall be submerged in 
a liquid bath the temperature of which shall be 
10 + 2 °C below the nominal release temperature of the 
sprinklers. After 10 min, the sprinklers shall be taken 
out of the heated liquid bath, and with the bulb seal 
downwards, submerged in a water bath, maintained at a 
temperature of 10+ 1 °C for 10 to 15 s. The sequence of 
heating and submerging of glass bulb sprinklers shall 
be repeated three times for each sample. The sprinklers 
shall then be stabilized at room temperature before 
being tested in accordance with 6.1.1 at a pressure as 
stated therein. 


6.12 Minimum Operating Pressure Test 


6.12.1 Ten previously untested sprinklers shall be 
subjected to an inlet water pressure at, or below, that 
shown in Table 6 and operated using a suitable heat 
source. If a sample does not operate fully as described 
above, the pressure shall be slowly increased to 
determine the actual minimum operating pressure. 


6.12.2 Sprinklers shall be designed to produce 
positive operation and release of all operating parts 
at the minimum operating pressure stated in Table 6. 
Following operation of the heat responsive element, all 
parts which are intended to prohibit the discharge or 
leakage of water shall clear the exit of the waterway 
within 5 s. 


Table 6 Minimum Operating Pressure 
(Clause 6.12.2) 


SI Type of Sprinkler Operating 
No. Pressure 
Bar 
0) (2) (3) 
i) Only dry upright 0.7 
ii) All those with K-Factors 40 and 80 0.2 
ii) All others including other dry type 0.3 


10 


6.13 Moist Air Test 


Sprinklers shall withstand an exposure to high 
temperature and humidity for a continuous period of 
90 days. The test method is given hereunder. 


6.13.1 Five previously untested sprinklers shall be 
hydrostatically tested to confirm that there are no weep 
or leak points at, or below, 35 bar. They shall then be 
exposed to an atmosphere having a relative humidity 
of 98 + 2 percent and a temperature of 95 + 1 °C fora 
period of 90 + 1 days. 


6.13.2 Following the exposure, samples shall not 
weep or leak at, or below, 12 bar when tested in 
accordance with 6.1.1 (leakage) and 6.2. (hydrostatic 
strength) Subsequently the samples shall exhibit 
positive operation and release of all operating parts 
at the minimum operating pressure stated in Table 6 
when tested in accordance with 6.12 (minimum 
operating pressure). The heat responsive element shall 
be specially fabricated to prevent operation during this 
test. The sprinklers shall be installed on a pipe manifold 
which contains water in approximately 50 percent of its 
volume. The entire manifold, along with the sprinklers, 
shall be placed in the high temperature and humidity 
enclosure for the duration of the test. 


6.14 Vacuum Test 


6.14.1 Five previously untested sprinklers shall be 
hydrostatically tested to confirm that there are no weep 
or leak points at, or below, 35 bar. The sprinklers 
shall then be subjected to a vacuum of 650 mm of Hg 
(0.88 bar) for a period of 1 min. 


6.14.2 Sprinklers shall be designed such that when 
the inlet of an assembled sprinkler is subjected to a 
vacuum, as might be experienced during draining of a 
sprinkler system, the sprinkler shall not be damaged or 
leak when tested as described in 6.14.1. Following this 
test, each sample shall not weep or leak at a pressure 
of 0.3 + 0.03 bar when tested in accordance with 6.1.1 
(leakage). Additionally, each sample shall not weep or 
leak at a pressure at, or below 35 bar. 


6.15 Assembly Load/Frame Strength 


6.15.1 The frame of a control mode sprinkler shall be 
capable of withstanding twice the assembly load without 
sustaining permanent elongation or deformation in 
excess of 0.2 percent of the distance between the load 
bearing parts of the sprinkler. 


6.15.2 Fifteen previously untested sprinklers shall be 
individually tested to determine the assembly load. 
With the threaded portion of the sprinkler restrained 
from movement, the heat responsive element of the 
test sample shall be removed and the negative axial 
deflection ofthe frame, resulting from the release of the 


assembly shall be recorded. Deflection measurements 
shall be made using an indicator capable of reading to 
an accuracy of 0.001 mm. A force necessary to return 
the deflection of the frame to the original zero position 
shallthen be applied and the value ofthe force recorded. 


6.15.3 Each of these sprinklers shall then be subJected 
momentarily (for 1 to 5 s) to twice the sum of the 
force recorded in 6.16.2, plus the force applied to the 
sprinkler as a result of the maximum rated working 
pressure (typically 12.1 bar). The amount of permanent 
set after the load application shall be determined. The 
percentage of permanent frame elongation shall be 
calculated using the minimum distance between the 
load bearing points, determined to the nearest 0.03 mm, 
from the plane of the sprinkler orifice to the centre of 
the compression bearing surface of the sprinkler. 


6.16 Strength of Heat Responsive Element 
6.16.1 Heat Responsive Element of the Fusible Type 


6.16.1.1 Fifteen samples shall be loaded with a weight 
representing the equivalent of 15 times the design load. 
All samples shall remain undamaged after sustaining 
this load for a period of 100 h. 


6.16.1.2 Fusible type heat responsive elements which 
cannot pass the test described above in the 6.16.1.1 
shall meet the following requirements. 


a) Sample fusible type heat-responsive elements 
shall be subjected to loads in excess of the design 
load which will produce failure both within and 
after 1 000 h. 


The test samples shall be maintained at an 
environmental temperature of 21 + 2.6 °C. At least 
15 samples shall be loaded to various degrees in 
order to establish a basis of time as a function of 
load. Failures which are not related to the solder 
bond shall be disregarded. 

A least square, full logarithmic regression curve 
shall be plotted from which both the load to failure 
at 1 h (Z,) and the load to failure at 1 000 h (2) 
shall be determined. 


b 


— 


с 


ме 


d 


М7 


The actual maximum design load (L) on the 
fusible element, as determined using the upper 
tolerance limit of assembly load from 6.15.2, shall 
be less than or equal to the value determined in the 
expression: 

_ 1.02 (L, Т 


L 
4 L, 


where 


L,= Maximum design load for the heat responsive 
element; 


L = Load resulting in failure at 1 000 h; and 
L = Load resulting at failure in 1 h. 


11 


IS 9972 : 2023 


6.16.1.3 Where physical limitations of the fusible 
element prevent the application of the loads described in 
6.15.2, alternate methods of determining the adequacy 
of the design shall be developed to ensure that such 
elements should not fail during the anticipated life span. 


6.16.2 Heat Responsive Element of the Bulb Type 


The results of the assembly load test, 6.15.2, shall form 
the basis for calculating the upper tolerance limit of the 
sprinkler assembly load. 


The lower tolerance limit for bulb strength shall be 
determined using the results obtained from subjecting a 
minimum of 25 sample bulbs to an increasing load until 
the bulbs fail. 


Each test shall be conducted with the bulb mounted 
in hardened steel inserts with seating surfaces 
having dimensions which conform to the actual 
mating components of the sprinkler. The inserts 
shall have a hardness within the range rockwell 
C 38-50 (see Fig. 3). They shall be provided by the 
manufacturer each time the test is specified. The load 
shall be applied at a rate of compression not exceeding 
1.25 mm/min. The results obtained from the two sets of 
data shall be utilized for the tolerance limit calculations. 


6.17 Deflector Strength Test 


Deflector strength test sprinkler deflectors shall be 
capable of withstanding a force without permanent 
deformation. 


Sprinkler deflectors shall be capable of withstanding a 
force of 190 N without any permanent deformation of 
any of their parts or cause their disengagement from the 
sprinklers. The force shall be applied at a rate of 30 N/s 
by means of a rigid flat metal edge and where possible 
shall form a line contact at least 15 mm long with the 
deflector. 


Following the above test, sprinklers shall be individually 
installed in the test apparatus detailed in Fig. 1 to 3 in 
their intended orientation. Water shall be introduced to 
the inlet of each sprinkler at a pressure of 15 + 0.5 bar. 
Each sprinkler shall then be operated using a suitable 
heat source and water flow shall be adjusted to and 
maintained at 15 + 0.5 bar for a period of 15 min. 


Sprinklers with detached components shall be capable 
of satisfying the distribution tests specified in 6.23 after 
the test. 


6.18 Vibration Test 


6.18.1 Five previously untested sprinklers shall be 
hydrostatically tested to confirm that there are no weep 
or leak points at, or below 35 bar. The samples shall then 
be subjected to the vibration conditions stated in Table 7. 


6.18.2 For the variable frequency conditions, the 
frequency shall be varied with a cycle period of 
25:55 6; 


IS 9972 : 2023 


EDGE TO HAVE CONTOUR 
IDENTICAL TO ACTUAL MATING 
COMPONENT OR SHARP EDGE 


BURR FREE R 0.0125 mm max 
(TYPICAL ) 


+ 0.000 


г -1-9.96 Mets mm 9.96 555, mm 
E 
2 E E 
N Ч 
5 © 
ч H 
w Te) 
: 45° 
INSIDE DIAMETER | 0.5 mm x 45° 0.5 mm x 
IDENTICAL TO ACTUAL ——  i-— CHAMFER (TYPICAL) CHAMFER (TYPICAL) 


MATING COMPONENT 


ЗА For DESIGNS WITH LINE CONTACT 


SURFACE TO HAVE CONTOUR 
IDENTICAL TO ACTUAL MATING 
COMPONENT (TYPICAL) 


3B FoR DESIGNS WITH SURFACE CONTACT 


Fic. 3 STRENGTH OF HEAT RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 


а) The sprinklers shall be attached to a rigid mounting 
plate and the plate bolted to the table ofa vibration 
machine so that the sprinklers are vibrated 
vertically. This test shall be conducted with the 
sprinklers unpressurized. The sprinklers may be 
pressurized for this test at the sole discretion of 
testing authorities if so deemed necessary. 


The sprinklers shall be subjected to the above 
vibration conditions and continuously monitored 
for 15 min at each condition (75 min total). If 
one or more resonant point(s) is detected, the 
sprinklers shall be vibrated for the remainder 
of the test at such frequency(ies) for a period 
of time proportionate to the number of resonant 
frequencies. Otherwise the sprinklers shall be 
subjected to each vibration condition for a period 
of 5 h (25 h total). 


Sprinklers shall be capable of withstanding the effects 
of vibration without deterioration of their performance 
characteristics. Following the vibration test detailed 
in 6.18.2, the sprinklers shall not weep or leak at, or 
below 35 bar when tested in accordance with 6.1.1 
(leakage). Subsequently, the sprinklers shall be tested 
for conformance to the requirements for time constant 
determination and sensitivity as described in 6.24 and 
6.27 at the discretion of authorities. 


b 


x 


12 


Table 7 Vibration Test Conditions 
(Clause 6.18.1) 


SI Хо. Total Displacement Frequency Time 
mm Hz h 

0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 0.5 28 5 
ii) 1 28 5 
iii) 3.8 28 5 
iv) 1 18 to 37 variable 5 
v) 1.8 18 to 37 variable 5 

6.19 Drop and Tumble Tests 

6.19.1 Drop Test 

Five previously untested sprinklers shall be 


hydrostatically tested so as to ascertain/confirm that 
there are no weep or leak points at, or below, 35 bar. 
Each sprinkler shall then be tested by dropping a weight 
equal to that of the sprinkler + 5 g, onto the deflector 
end of the sprinkler along the axial centreline of the 
waterway (see Fig. 4). The weight shall be dropped 
from a height of 1.0 m above the deflector. The weight 
shall be prevented from impacting the test sample more 
than once. 


LENGTH A TO BE DETERMINED 
BY REQUIRED WEIGHT 
A 


IB 1 


BREAK CORNER 
0.05 mm x 45° 


WEIGHT - @ 12.7 mm 
COLD FINISHED STEEL 


DETAILA 


LATCHING 


PIN 


WEIGHT ( SEE DETAIL А) 
14.15 0009 mm 

STEEL TUBING 

INSIDE DIAMETER 

COLD DRAWN SEAMLESS 


RIGID 
SUPPORT 
E 
Y 
SAMPLE SPRINKLER 


SPRINKLER SUPPORT 
@ 165 mm COLD 
FINISHED STEEL 


Fic. 4 Drop TEST 


IS 9972 : 2023 


ADJUSTABLE BRACKETS (2) 


IS 9972 : 2023 


6.19.2 Tumble Test 


Five previously untested sprinklers shall be 
hydrostatically tested so as to ascertain/confirm that 
there are no weep or leak points at, or below 35 bar. 
Each sprinkler shall then be individually subjected to 
a tumbling test for 3 min. Sprinklers provided with 
shipping caps, which are intended for removal only 
after completion of the sprinkler installation, shall be 
tested with the caps in place. Each sample shall be 
placed in a vinyl lined right hexagonal prism shaped 
drum designed to provide a tumbling action. The 
drum shall have a length along the axis of rotation of 
250 mm. The internal distance between two opposite 
and parallel sides of the drum shall be 300 mm. For 
each test, the drum shall contain one sprinkler and 
5 wood blocks. The blocks shall be 40 + 3 mm cubes 
made of hardwood (like oak, maple, etc). The drum 
shall be rotated at one revolution per second about its 
longitudinal axis. 


6.19.3 Impact Test 
The Impact test shall be conducted as given below: 


a) For rack storage sprinklers, five previously 
untested samples shall not sustain damage when 
the assembled sprinklers are individually dropped 
from a height of 750 + 25 mm onto a concrete 
surface such that the shield impacts the floor at 
an angle. The shield shall not shear off or bend as 
a result of this impact. If rotation of the shield 15 
possible, such rotation shall not alter the assembly 
load on the sprinkler. 


b 


— 


For sprinklers with guards, five previously 
untested samples shall not sustain damage when 
the sprinkler/guard assemblies are individually 
dropped 3 times from a height of 3 m onto a 
concrete surface. Sprinklers shall not show 
evidence of damage after the drop sequence. The 
guards shall not make contact with the sprinkler 
deflector or become separated from the sprinkler 
as a result of the drop sequence. 


Following all the tests detailed above, a visual 
examination of each sprinkler shall reveal no permanent 
distortion, cracks, breaks, or other evidence of 
impending failure. Also, each sprinkler shall not weep 
or leak at, or below 35 bar when tested in accordance 
with 6.2. Subsequently, the samples shall be tested 
for conformance to the requirements for sensitivity as 
described in 6.27. 


6.20 Discharge Co-efficient (K-Factor) 


6.20.1 The mean value of the discharge coefficient 
(K-factor) shall be consistent with Table 8 when tested 


14 


as detailed in 6.20.2. Additionally, not more than one 
individual value shall fall outside of the stated range. 


6.20.2 Four samples shall be individually tested using 
the test apparatus for determining K-factor shown in 
Fig. 5 at increasing and decreasing pressures over the 
complete operating range 1.0 to 12.1 bar in 0.7 bar 
increments. With the deflector and a portion of the 
frame removed, if necessary, to facilitate testing, each 
sample shall be inserted into the test fixture and torqued 
to a rotation one-half turn (180 degrees) beyond “hand 
tight” using an appropriate wrench. 


At ambient temperature conditions. Water flow of the 
sprinkler 18 calculated Бу the equation 


Q = K P2 
where 

Q= water flow, in Ipm; 

P= pressure, in bar; and 

К = flow constant. 


It is acceptable to adjust the pressures for differences 
in height between the gauge and the sprinkler outlet 
orifice. The flow test shall be carried out at ambient 
temperature 25 + 5 °C. 


Table 8 K-Factor of Sprinklers 


(Clause 6.20.2) 
SINo. Nominal K-Factor Tolerance 
(Based on LPM) 
0) (2) (3) 
i) 40 38-42 
1) 58 57-60 
iii) 80 76-84 
iv) 115 107- 118 
v) 160 154 - 168 
vi) 200 195 - 209 
vii) 240 231 - 254 
viii) 360 344 - 382 


NOTE — Depending on usage, other sprinklers having higher K factor, 
say 480 may also be used depending on the protection required. 


6.21 Endurance Test 


An automatic sprinkler shall withstand for 30 min, 
without evidence of cracking, deformation, or 
separation of any part, a water flow at a pressure equal 
to the maximum rated pressure plus 1.5 bar. One 
sample of an automatic sprinkler shall be installed on 
an elbow in a pressurized system. The heat responsive 
element of the sprinkler shall be activated, and the 
sprinkler subjected to water flow at the above specified 
pressure for 30 min. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


| 900 тт тіп. -| 
й------ 300 + 12.5 mm ——————- 


GAUGE 


GROOVED COUPLING 
(TYPICAL) 


SPRINKLER BUTT 


GROOVED END CAP 
(SEE DETAIL B) 


WATER SOURCE 
INLET PIEZOMETER 


RING 


INLET OF 

TAPPED HOLE 

R 12.5 + 0.75 mm 
TANGENT TO HOLE 


@ 12.5 mm, 20 mm 
OR 25 mm NPT 
TAPPED HOLE 


INTERNAL FACE 
OF END CAP ——— 


SECTION A-A 
DETAIL B 
GROOVED END CAP 
CROSS SECTION 


FiG. 5 WATER FLow TEST 


15 


IS 9972 : 2023 


6.22 Corrosion Test 


6.22.1 Salt Spray Test (Optional Test) 
The salt spray shall be conducted as below: 


a) Eight previously untested samples shall be 
hydrostatically tested to confirm that there are no 
weep or leak points at, or below 35 bar. 


Each sprinkler inlet shall be filled with deionized 
water and sealed with a non-reactive material 
(for example, plastic cap) so as to prevent the 
introduction of salt fog into the waterway of the 
sprinkler. When feasible, each sprinkler shall be 
supported in its intended installation position. 


b 


wm 


с 


— 


Cover plates, common to the design of concealed 
sprinklers, shall be tested separately and shall be 
oriented such that salt fog residue cannot pool on 
the plate. 


d 


— 


The samples shall be exposed to salt spray (fog). 
The salt solution shall consist of 20 percent 
by weight of common salt (sodium chloride) 
dissolved in deionized water. 


е 


— 


The samples shall be exposed for a period of 
10 days. 


f) Forsprinklers having a corrosion resistant coating, 
the samples shall be exposed for a period of 
30 days. 


Following exposure to the salt fog, the samples 
shall be removed from the test chamber and 
permitted to air dry for a two to four day drying 
period. Following this drying period, the samples 
shall be subjected to the post-exposure tests as 
detailed below: 


1) All of the samples shall be subjected to a 
hydrostatic pressure of 12 bar for 1 min 
(as detailed in 6.2) without leakage; 


— 


g 


2 


МУ 


Subsequently, the sprinklers shall Бе tested 
for conformance to the requirements for 
sensitivity as described in 6.27 for different 
types of sprinklers as applicable; 


3) Atthe discretion of testing authorities, some or 
all of the samples may be tested for operating 
temperature as described in 6.5 [operating 
temperature (liquid bath)]; and 


4 


хэ 


Should the deflector or other non-operating 
components, or their attachment method 
exhibit questionable corrosive attack, at least 
one sample shall be tested for compliance with 
the requirements in 6.17. 


6.22.2 Stress Cracking Test 


Sprinklers shall be resistant to stress corrosion 
cracking, as determined through the process described 
below. Following exposure, the samples shall not 
show evidence of cracking, delamination, or 
degradation. 


6.22.2.1 Copper bases materials (ammonia test) 


In order to determine the susceptibility of copper 
based sprinkler parts to stress corrosion cracking, four 
previously untested sprinklers shall be hydrostatically 
tested to confirm that there are no weep or leak points 
at, or below, 35 bar. They shall then be subjected to a 
moist ammonia environment for a period of 10 days. 


The inlet end of each sample shall be filled with 
deionized water and sealed with a non-reactive 
material (for example, plastic cap) so as to prevent 
the introduction of the ammonia atmosphere into the 
waterway of the sprinkler. The samples to be tested 
shall be free from any non-permanent protective 
coating and, if necessary, shall be degreased. When 
feasible, the samples shall be tested in their intended 
orientation. 


There shall be provisions in the test chamber to prevent 
droplets of condensation from falling from the top of 
the enclosure directly onto the sprinklers. Such shield 
or other means shall be constructed of glass or other 
non-reactive materials. 


The samples shall be exposed to the moist ammonia-air 
mixture maintained in a glass chamber with a volume 
of 0.02 + 0.01 m°. 


Aqueous ammonia having а density of 
0.94 + 0.01 g/cm? shall be maintained іп the bottom of 
the chamber, approximately 40 mm below the bottom 
of the samples. A volume of aqueous ammonia equal 
to 10 + 0.86 I/m? of the test chamber volume shall 
result in approximately the following atmospheric 
concentrations: 35 percent ammonia, 5 percent water 
vapour, and 60 percent air. Prior to beginning the 
exposure, the test chamber shall be conditioned to a 
temperature of 34 + 2 °C for a period of not less than 
1 h, and shall be maintained as such throughout the 
exposure period. The moist ammonia-air mixture shall 
be maintained at essentially atmospheric pressure. 
Provision shall be made for venting the chamber, such 
as by the use of a capillary tube, to avoid build-up of 
pressure. 


Upon removal, sprinklers shall be rinsed in potable 
water and air dried. Following a two to four day 
drying period, visual examination of the samples shall 
be made. The samples shall then be subjected to the 
post-exposure tests as detailed below. 


a) The sprinklers shall not weep or leak at, or below 
12 bar when hydrostatically tested for 1 min as per 
6.2. 


b) Subsequently, half of the samples shall exhibit 
positive operation and release of all operating 
parts at the minimum operating pressure when 
tested in accordance with 6.12. 

c) The remaining samples shall be subjected to a 
water flow at a pressure of 12 bar for a period of 
1 minute. 


Upon completion of this test, the deflector shall not 
show evidence of fracture, distortion or impending 
separation from the frame. 


6.22.2.2 Stainless steel and other materials (boiling 
magnesium chloride test) 


In order to determine the susceptibility of stainless 
steel sprinkler parts to stress corrosion cracking, four 
previously untested sprinklers shall be degreased and 
then exposed to a boiling magnesium chloride solution 
for a period of 500 + 12 h as described below, special 
fixtures or elevated temperature operating elements 
may be employed to simulate assembly loading on 
parts, where appropriate. 


Samples are to be placed in a flask fitted with a wet 
condenser. The flask shall be filled approximately 
one-half full with a nominal 44 percent by 
weight magnesium chloride solution, placed on a 
thermostatically-controlled electrically-heated mantle, 
and maintained at a boiling temperature of 150 + 2 °C. 


Following exposure, the samples shall be removed and 
rinsed in potable water. Following a two to four day 
drying period, visual examination of the samples shall 
be made. Samples which show evidence of cracking, 
delamination, degradation, or evidence of separation of 
permanently attached parts shall then be subjected to 
the post-exposure tests as detailed below: 


a) The sprinklers shall not weep or leak at, or below 
12 bar when hydrostatically tested for 1 min as per 
6.2. 


b) Subsequently, half of the samples shall exhibit 
positive operation and release of all operating 
parts at the minimum operating pressure when 
tested in accordance with 6.12. 


c) The remaining samples shall be subjected to a 
water flow at a pressure of 12 bar for a period of 
1 min. 


Upon completion of this test, the deflector shall not 
show evidence of fracture, distortion or impending 
separation from the frame. 


6.22.3 Corrosion — Carbon-dioxide and Sulphur-dioxide 
Tests 


Sprinklers shall be resistant to corrosion resulting 
from exposures to a moist carbon dioxide-sulphur 
dioxide-air mixture. Following the exposure period, 
the samples shall be examined for deterioration 
or impending failure of any component. Such 
condition is unacceptable and constitutes failure. The 
carbon-dioxide and sulphur-dioxide test is not required 
for concealed or flush type sprinklers. 


17 


IS 9972 : 2023 


a) Four previously untested sprinklers shall be 
hydrostatically tested to confirm that there are 
no weep or leak points at, or below, 35 bar. The 
samples shall then be exposed to a moist carbon 
dioxide-sulphur dioxide-air mixture for a period 
of 10 days. 


For sprinklers having classified as corrosion 
resistant, eight previously untested samples shall 
be exposed to this test for a period of 30 days. 


The inlet end of each sample shall be filled with 
deionized water and sealed with a non-reactive 
material (for example, plastic cap) so as to prevent 
the introduction of the gas mixture into the 
waterway of the sprinkler. When feasible, each 
sprinkler shall be tested in its intended installation 
position. 


b 


Бэ 


с 


— 


d 


х 


Cover plates, common to the design of сопсеа!еа 
sprinklers, shall be tested separately and shall be 
oriented such that residue cannot pool on the plate. 


е 


wm 


There shall be provisions in the test chamber to 
prevent droplets of condensation from falling from 
the top of the enclosure directly onto the sprinklers. 
Such shield or other means shall be constructed of 
glass or other non-reactive materials. 


The samples shall be tested in a chamber having 
provisions for gas inlet and outlet. Sulphur dioxide 
and carbon dioxide are to be supplied to the test 
chamber from commercial cylinders. An amount 
of sulphur dioxide equivalent to one percent 
of the volume of the test chamber, and an equal 
volume of carbon dioxide shall be introduced 
into the chamber each day after the chamber has 
been purged. Approximately 2.0 litre of deionized 
water shall be maintained in the bottom of the 
chamber. 


— 


Following the exposure, the samples shall be 
removed from the test chamber and permitted to air 
dry for a two to four day drying period. Following 
this drying period, the samples shall be subjected 
to the post-exposure tests detailed below: 


g 


1) Following the visual examination, the samples 
shall not weep or leak at, or below 12 bar when 
hydrostatically tested for 1 min. 


2 


МУ 


Subsequently, half ofthe samples shall бе tested 
for compliance with 6.5 [operating temperature 
(liquid bath)], and half of the samples shall be 
tested for conformance to the requirements for 
sensitivity and time constant determination as 
per 6.27 and 6.24 respectively. 


3 


— 


Should the deflector or other non-operating 
components, or their attachment exhibit 


IS 9972 : 2023 


questionable corrosive attack, at least one 
sample shall be subjected to water flow at a 
pressure of 12 bar for a period of 1 min. 


Upon completion of this test, the deflector shall not 
show evidence of fracture, distortion or impending 
separation from the frame. 


6.22.4 Corrosion - Hydrogen Sulphide Test 


Sprinklers shall be resistant to corrosion resulting from 
exposures to a moist hydrogen sulphide-air mixture. 
Following the exposure period, the samples shall be 
examined for deterioration or impending failure of 
any component. Such condition is unacceptable and 
constitutes failure. The hydrogen sulphide test is not 
required for concealed or flush type sprinklers. 


a) Four previously untested sprinklers shall be 
hydrostatically tested to confirm that there are 
no weep or leak points at, or below, 35 bar. The 
samples shall then be exposed to a moist carbon 
dioxide-sulphur dioxide-air mixture for a period 
of 10 days. 


For sprinklers having corrosion-resistant coatings, 
eight previously untested samples shall be exposed 
to this test for a period of 30 days. 


The inlet end of each sample shall be filled with 
deionized water and sealed with a non-reactive 
material (for example, plastic cap) so as to prevent 
the introduction of the gas mixture into the 
waterway of the sprinkler. When feasible, each 
sprinkler shall be tested in its intended installation 
position. 


b 


wm 


с 


ми 


4 


— 


Cover plates, common to the design of concealed 
sprinklers, shall be tested separately and shall 
be oriented such that residue cannot pool on the 
plate. 


е 


хи 


There shall be provisions in the test chamber to 
prevent droplets of condensation from falling from 
the top ofthe enclosure directly onto the sprinklers. 
Such shield or other means shall be constructed of 
glass or other non-reactive materials. 


The samples shall be tested in a chamber having 
provisions for gas inlet and outlet. Hydrogen 
sulphide is to be supplied to the test chamber from 
a commercial cylinder. An amount of hydrogen 
sulphide equivalent to one percent of the volume 
of the test chamber shall be introduced into the 
chamber each day after the chamber has been 
purged. Approximately 2.0 litre of deionized 
water shall be maintained in the bottom of the 
chamber. 


18 


g) Following the exposure, the samples shall be 
removed from the test chamber and permitted 
to air dry for a two to four day drying period. 
Following this drying period, the samples shall 
be subjected to the post-exposure tests detailed 
below: 

1) Following the visual examination, the samples 
shall not weep or leak at, or below 12 bar when 
hydrostatically tested for 1 min. 


2 


хи 


Subsequently, half ofthe samples shall be tested 
for compliance with 6.5 [operating temperature 
(liquid bath)], and half of the samples shall be 
tested for conformance to the requirements for 
sensitivity and time constant determination as 
per 6.27 and 6.24 respectively. 


3 


— 


Should the deflector or other non-operating 
components, or their attachment exhibit 
questionable corrosive attack, at least one 
sample shall be subjected to water flow at a 
pressure of 12 bar for a period of 1 min. 


Upon completion of this test, the deflector shall not 
show evidence of fracture, distortion or impending 
separation from the frame. 


6.23 Water Distribution Test 


6.23.1 Conventional, Spray and Dry Sprinklers 


Tests shall be carried out using square arrays of 
4 sprinklers over 100 equal sized pans at ambient 
conditions of 20 + 15 °C. In a test room of a size 
7.5 + 0.5 m and a height of 3.2 m+ 25 mm, 4 sprinklers 
of the same type shall be installed, arranged in a square 
array, on piping constructed for the purpose. The 
arrangement of the piping and measuring containers 
is shown in Fig. 6, 7, 8 and 9. The yoke arms of the 
sprinklers shall be in line with the range pipes. The 
distance between the ceiling and the centre of the 
range pipe shall be 165 + 20 mm. Flush, recessed and 
concealed sprinklers shall be mounted in a simulated 
false ceiling. 


The size of the protected area and the density of the 
coverage for each of the three nominal sizes of sprinkler 
are specified in Table 9. The number of low content 
containers shall not exceed that stipulated in col 7 of 
Table 9. 


The water distribution shall be collected in square 
containers of side measuring 0.5 m + 10 mm. The 
distance between the ceiling and the upper edge of 
the containers shall be 2.7 m + 25 mm. The containers 
shall be positioned centrally in the room under the 
4 sprinklers. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


Table 9 Protected Area, Density of Coverage for Nominal Sizes of Sprinklers 
(Clause 6.23.1) 


SINo. Nominal Orifice Water Nominal Flow Rate per Nominal Sprinkler Spacing Allowable Low 
Diameter Coverage Sprinkler Protected Area Content Container 
mm Ipm/m? Ipm m? m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 10 2:5 50.6 21 4.5 8 
1) 15 5.0 61.3 12 3.5 5 
iii) 15 15.0 135.0 9 3.0 4 
iv) 20 10.0 90.0 9 3.0 4 
v) 20 30.0 187.5 6.25 2.5 3 


[7 7 m min., 8 m max. "| 


NOMINAL BORE @ 25 mm 


7 m min., 8 m max. 


COLLECTING CANS MEDIUM TUBE 
(0.5 m x 0.5 m) | NOMINAL BORE @ 65 mm 
WATER 
FLOW 


FIG. 6 LAYOUT FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION COLLECTION SYSTEM (MEASURED AREA 20.25 m?) 


19 


IS 9972 : 2023 


[7 7 m min., 8 m max. "| 


NOMINAL BORE Ø 25 mm 


7 m min., 8 m max. 


MEDIUM TUBE 
! NOMINAL BORE 065 mm 


WATER 
FLOW 


Fic. 7 LAYOUT FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION COLLECTION SYSTEM (MEASURED AREA 12.25 т?) 


20 


IS 9972 : 2023 


Г 7 m min., 8 m max. J] 


NOMINAL BORE © 25 mm 


7 m min., 8 m max. 


MEDIUM TUBE 
| NOMINAL BORE @65 mm 


WATER 
FLOW 


FIG. 8 LAYOUT FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION COLLECTION SYSTEM (MEASURED AREA 9.0 т?) 


Г 7 m min., 8 m max. J] 


NOMINAL BORE 0 25 mm 


7 m min., 8 m max. 


MEDIUM TUBE 
NOMINAL BORE 0 65 mm 


WATER 
FLOW 


Fic. 9 LAYOUT FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION COLLECTION SYSTEM (MEASURED AREA 6.25 m?) 


21 


IS 9972 : 2023 


6.23.2 Sidewall Sprinklers (15 mm) 


The tests shall be made in a room measuring 
3.75 m x 7.0m x 3.21 m. One sprinkler shall be mounted 
in an appropriate position on a distribution pipe passing 
through one wall so that the sprinkler centre line is 
situated 50 mm from that wall and at a distance of 
1.8 m from an adjacent wall. For an upright sprinkler, 
the deflector of the sprinkler shall be 100 mm below the 
ceiling and for a pendent sprinkler 150 mm below the 
ceiling (see Fig. 10 and 11). Water shall be collected in 
cans having square open tops measuring 0.5 m x 0.5 m 
array with its edges 1 m from the adjacent wall and 
10 mm from the sprinkler mounting wall. With the 


| 7 m min., 8 m max. 


3.75 m 


sprinkler discharging at 60 l/min, the discharge density 
into each can shall be determined and the height of the 
boundary between the wetted and the unwetted parts of 
the absorbent strip shall be measured. The distribution 
of water and wall wetting in an area bounded by 
two sprinklers 3.7 m apart is derived by overlapping 
two identical wall wetting profiles and distributions 
obtained from one test using single sprinkler. 


The testing shall be considered as satisfactory if not 
more than 10 percent of the bounded area receives less 
than 1.125 l/min. In addition, wetting of the adjacent 
and opposite walls shall be achieved to a height of 1 m 
below the level of the sprinkler deflector. 


10 - 30 mm WALL 


7 m min., 8 m max. 


COLLECTING CANS 
(0.5 m x0.5 m) 


Fic. 10 LAYOUT FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION SIDEWALL SPRINKLER 


22 


CEILING 


IS 9972 : 2023 


100 mm 


025 mm PIPE 


Fic. 11 MOUNTING OF SIDEWALL SPRINKLER 


6.23.3 Water Distribution Above and Below the 
Sprinkler Deflectors (Not Applicable to Sidewall 
Sprinklers) 

The water discharge of sprinklers downwards from 
the deflectors shall be 40 percent to 60 percent for 
conventional sprinklers and 80 percent to 100 percent 
for spray sprinklers. Sprinklers shall be installed 
horizontally in a testing rig and the features of which 
are shown in Fig. 12. 


The deflector is positioned within the apparatus, 
such that a theoretical dividing line between the two 
collecting volumes intersects a point on the axis 
of the sprinkler where the water spray is traveling 
substantially parallel to the plane of the partition. (The 
results shall be given assuming that the conventional 
sprinkler is mounted in the upright position). 


Sprinklers shall be tested under flow conditions as 
shown in Table 10. 


23 


Table 10 Flow Condition for 
Water Distribution Test 


(Clause 6.23.3) 


51 No. Nominal Orifice Sprinkler Water Flow 
Diameter Rate 
mm Ipm 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 10 50 
ii) 15 60 
iii) 20 90 


6.24 Determination of Time Constant 


The sprinklers shall be tested in each designed operating 
position. The sprinklers shall be mounted in the test 
section of the wind tunnel (see Fig. 13) in such a way 
that the release element is exactly in the middle of the 
tunnel. The air mass flow rate in the tunnel is adjusted 


IS 9972 : 2023 


20 mm 


PARTITION 


FiG. 12 APPARATUS FOR DETERMINING WATER DISTRIBUTION ABOVE AND BELOW THE DEFLECTOR 


24 


COND tn + O м н 


IS 9972 : 2023 


305 mm 


305 mm 
SECTION AA 


Control Panel with nine switches for coarse control and autotransformer for fine control of heaters in (2) 
Heater compartment with ten 1 kW heater elements 

74.6 W, 2850 rpm motor blower 

Manual control for shutter controlling air flow 

Removable asbestos sheet cover 

Cover of sprinkler test compartment with glass inspection window 

Exhaust part 


Inlet part coupled to exhausted part to facilitate rapid cooling 


Fic. 13 WIND TUNNEL 


25 


IS 9972 : 2023 


to the equivalent of 80 cm/s at 20 °C and is maintained 
at this rate as the temperature of the air in the tunnel 
is raised in uniform steps in the range of 1 °C/min to 
30 °C/min. The temperature inside the tunnel is stabilized 
prior to the start of the test. The sprinklers shall be 
charged to a pressure of 0.35 bar during the test. The 
response time of the sprinklers is noted for each rate of 
rise of temperature. Then the time to operate ‘? against 
rate of rise curve is plotted which comes to a straight line. 
The intercept of the straight line is a measure of time 
constant T. If the rate of rise of temperature in °C/min is 
о and the temperature rating in °C is f then the following 
equation will apply: 
t= (Bla) + T 

The value of 7 thus calculated shall be always less than 
150 s. 


6.25 Response Test for Ceiling, Flush, Recessed and 
Concealed Sprinklers 


6.25.1 Sprinklers shall operate within the times specified 
when tested in accordance with 6.25.2 or 6.25.3. 


4.57 m+0.4 m 


6.25.2 The sprinkler to be tested shall be installed in a 
ceiling panel in the centre of a closed room with floor 
dimensions of 4.57 m + 0.1 m x 4.57 m + 0.1 m and 
ceiling height of 2.4 m+ 0.1 mas shown in Fig. 14. The 
heat source shall consist of a propane gas pot burner, 
positioned in a comer with its centre 450 + 25 mm from 
two adjacent walls and its top surface 560 + 25 mm above 
the floor. Adequate ventilation shall be provided for the 
burner. 


The room temperature shall be monitored 180 mm 
from the centre of the room and 30 + 2 mm below 
the ceiling. For the duration of the test the room 
temperature at the measuring point shall conform to the 
time/temperature curve in Fig. 15. The temperature shall 
also be monitored 5 + 1 mm below the ceiling. At the 
start ofthe test the room shall have been preconditioned 
to 30 + 5 °C with a ceiling structure temperature of 
between 25 °C and 40 °C, and the specimens shall have 
been preconditioned to 20 + 5 °C for at least 24 h. The 
specimen shall be installed, the burner ignited, and the 
time of operation recorded. For concealed sprinklers, 
the time for detachment of the cover plate shall also be 
recorded. 


THERMOCOUPLES 


TEST SPRINKLER 


2.4m+0.1m EN 


ELEVATION 


4.57m+0.1m 


PLAN 


Fic. 14 LAYOUT OF RESPONSE TEST ROOM 


26 


IS 9972 : 2023 


TEMPERATURE, °C 


F 


— 


The statistical limit in seconds, is calculated following 
expression: 


х+3.47 uN 
where 


x= arithmetic mean response time of specimen 
tested; 


3.47 = constant, used where 10 specimens tested; and 
uN = standard deviation for specimens tested. 


The following requirements shall be met as specified 
in Table 11. 


6.25.3 When tested in accordance with 6.25.3.1 and 
6.25.3.2 using the time constant apparatus in Fig. 16, 
concealed and recessed sprinklers shall operate such 
that the mean response time of three samples tested at 
each of the noted test conditions does not exceed the 
theoretical maximum response time calculated utilizing 
the following information: 


a) RTI according to Table 12; 

b) Gas temperature and velocity according to 
Table 13 — for standard and special response, 
utilize test conditions 1 to 9; for fast response, 
utilize test conditions 1 to 6; 


TIME, 


MINUTES 


G. 15 TIME TEMPERATURE RELATIONSHIP FOR ROOM RESPONSE TEST 


c) Upper permitted temperature limit of the sprinkler 
in accordance with 6.5; and 


d) Ambient temperature during testing. 
Table 11 Response Test 
(Clause 6.25.2) 


51 No. Sprinkler Nominal Statistical Limit of 
Temperature Rating Operating Time 
°С s 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Upto and including 78 170 
ii) 79 212 
iii) 80—100 285 
Table 12 Maximum Permitted RTI 
[Clause 6.25.3(a)] 
SI Хо Sprinkler Response RTI 
m/s°5 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Standard 350 
ii) Special 80 
iii) Fast 50 


27 


IS 9972 : 2023 


ALL DIMENSIONS IN mm 


KEY 

Differential pressure ports 7 0.40 mm thick stainless steel enclosure 

2 Vacuum port 8 32 mm dia. threaded rod, 146 mm long (thread one end for air 

hose fitting, other end for sprinkler) 

Steel frame (3 m + 0.20 mm) 9 Sprinkler installation hole in Marinite 

4 Jam nut to lock-in-position 10 2.5 mm thick, 25 mm wide gasket (on 4 sides) 
Jam nut welded to inside of 11 Pan head screws countersunk in Marinite used to fasten steel 
enclosure frame and flange of enclosure body 

6 Handle а Marinite 1.9 cm 


NOTE — Marinite is an example of a suitable product available commercially. This information is given for the convenience of users 
of this standard and does not constitute any endorsement by BIS of this product. 


FiG. 16 TYPICAL TIME CONSTANT APPARATUS TEST PLATE FOR CONCEALED AND RECESSED SPRINKLERS 


28 


Table 13 Conditions for Time Constant Apparatus 
for Concealed and Recessed Sprinklers 


[Clause 6.25.3(b)] 


SI No. Test Gas Gas Applied 

Condition Temperature Velocity Vacuum 

°С m/s mm Hg” 

(1) (2) 8) (4) (5) 

i) 1 128 1.0 0.007 
ii) 2 128 2.6 0.007 
iii) 3 128 35 0.007 
iv) 4 197 1.0 0.010 
v) 5 197 2.6 0.010 
vi) 6 197 3.5 0.010 
vii) 7 290 1.0 0.013 
viii) 8 290 2.6 0.013 
ix) 9 290 3.5 0.013 


91 mm Hg = 133 322 4 Pa 


6.25.3.1 Three samples shall be tested at each of the 
test conditions and orientations determined from 
the calculations obtained according to 6.25.3. Each 
sprinkler under test shall have | wrap to 1.5 wraps of 
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) sealant tape applied to 
the sprinkler threads. Each sample shall be screwed into 
the test plate to a torque of 15 + 3 N:m and maintained 
in a conditioning chamber to allow the sprinkler and 
test plate to reach ambient temperature for a period of 
not less than 30 min. The sprinkler shall be installed 
such that the sprinkler's heat-sensitive element is at 
the minimum protrusion (as permitted by the sprinkler 
design) into the time constant apparatus, laminar gas 
stream. The orientations according to Table 13 shall 
be based on the sprinkler as if it were not concealed or 
recessed. 


6.25.3.2 A timer accurate to + 0.01 s with suitable 
measuring devices to sense the time between when 
the sprinkler is plunged into the tunnel and the time 
it operates shall be utilized to obtain the response 
time. As soon as the sprinkler is plunged into the time 
constant apparatus, the applied vacuum (as noted in 
Table 13) shall be applied and maintained throughout 
the remainder of the testing. 


Record the operating time of each sprinkler. 


29 


IS 9972 : 2023 


6.26 Conductivity (C-Factor) 


6.26.1 Requirements 


The conductivity (C-factor) shall not exceed 
1.0 (m/s)? for quick response and extended coverage 
type sprinklers. Standard response sprinklers shall 
have a C-factor not exceeding 2.0 (m/s)!”. Coated, 
flush, recessed and concealed sprinklers are not subject 
to these requirements. 


6.26.2 Test/Verification 


The C-factor shall be determined using the prolonged 
plunge test method. The prolonged plunge test is an 
iterative process to determine the C-factor and may 
require up to twenty sprinkler samples. A new sprinkler 
sample shall be used for each test even 1f the sample 
does not operate during the test. 


Determination of the C-factor shall be performed with 
sprinklers of each nominal temperature rating in the 
"best case" orientation as determined in the sensitivity 
test (see 3.18). 


Prior to testing, each sprinkler shall have one to 
three wraps of PTFE sealant tape applied to the 
threads. Sprinklers shall be allowed to reach ambient 
temperature for a period of not less than 30 min. 


A minimum of 0.025 litre of water, conditioned to 
ambient temperature, shall be introduced into the 
sprinkler inlet and mounting fixture prior to testing. 
All sprinklers are to be tested with the inlet end of 
each sample connected to a source of pressure at 
0.3 bar (with tolerance of + 0.04 and —0). All tests 
shall be conducted with the geometric centre of the 
heat responsive element located at least 38 mm from 
the interior horizontal surfaces of the test section, and 
with the centreline of the waterway perpendicular to 
the airflow in the test chamber. 


A timer accurate to + 0.01 s with suitable measuring 
devices to sense the time between when the sprinkler 
is plunged into the tunnel and when it operates shall 
be utilized to obtain the response time. 


The mount temperature shall be maintained at 20 + 1 °C 
for the duration of each test. The mount temperature 
shall be recorded at the beginning of the test and at the 
time of sprinkler operation. If a sample does not operate, 
the mount temperature shall be recorded after 15 min has 
elapsed. Testing shall start with a tunnel gas temperature 
from the range detailed in Table 14. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


Table 14 Tunnel Parameters 


(Clause 6.26.2) 
SI No. Sprinkler Nominal Tunnel Gas Tunnel Gas Maximum Variation of 
Operating Temperature Temperature Velocity Temperature During the Tests 
(see Note) from Selected Temperatures 
°C °C m/s °С 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 57-77 +6 
ii) 79 - 107 +9 
iii) 121-149 цэнэг зыр +25 
iv) 163 - 191 +25 


NOTE — For temperature ratings between those shown, a linear interpolation shall be used to determine the maximum variation from 
selected temperature. 


Test velocity selection shall ensure that: 
(u,/u,) 1/2 <1.1 


The C-factor of the sprinkler is determined by computing the average of the C-factors calculated at the two velocities (и„ and u,) using the 
following equations: 


C, = (AT/AT, - 1) и? 
C, = (AT /AT,- 1) и? 
C-(C, t C,y2 
where 
is the C-factor at velocity u, 
is the C-factor at velocity u, 
is the average C-factor of the sprinkler 
is the actual gas (air) temperature minus the mount temperature 
is the mean liquid bath operating temperature minus the mount temperature 


is the actual gas velocity in the test section at which the sprinklers operated 


To determine the C-factor, each sprinkler shall be 
immersed in the test stream at a selected gas velocity 
and air temperature for a maximum of 15 min. The 
average gas velocity in the tunnel test section at the 
sprinkler location shall be maintained within + 0.07 m/s 
of the selected velocity. Velocities are to be chosen such 
that actuation is bracketed between two successive test 
velocities. That is, two velocities shall be established 
such that, at the lower velocity (и,), actuation does not 
occur in the 15 min test interval. At the next higher 
velocity (u,), actuation shall occur within the 15 min 
time limit. To establish и, and u, the velocity shall be 
raised by 10 percent increments within the range detailed 
in Table 14. If the sprinkler does not operate at the 
highest velocity in the range, a higher temperature shall 
be used and the same procedure repeated. 


The sprinkler C-factor is determined by repeating the 
bracketing procedure. The C-factor values from at least 
two non-operations shall be averaged. The C-factor 
values from at least two operations shall be averaged. 
The final C-factor value is the calculated numerical 
average of these two values. 


30 


is the actual gas velocity in the test section at which the sprinklers failed to operate within 15 min 


6.27 Requirement and Testing Methods for the 
Determination Automatic Sprinkler Heat Sensitivity 


6.27.1 General 


The automatic sprinklers having an external primary 
heat sensitive element which will normally be positioned 
not closer than 5 mm to any mounting surface shall 
be subjected to the tests as described in 6.27.2.1 and 
6.27.2.2. These test methods are not applicable for 
determining the sensitivity of ceiling flush, recessed or 
concealed sprinkler types. 


6.27.2 Test Requirements 


Sprinklers shall operate satisfactorily and the time 
of operation shall be measured and recorded when 
tested using the "plunge test and ‘rate of rise’ test. 
Sprinklers having an ЁТ, T (metric) ofless than 100 when 
measured in the fastest orientation in accordance with 
the requirements of 6.27.2.1 shall be classified as fast 
response sprinklers. 


6.27.2.1 Plunge test 


It determines the variations in sensitivity due to 
orientation and it provides sensitivity performance 
record to enable efficient quality assurance. 


a) Sprinkler samples of each temperature rating shall 
be tested. Each sprinkler shall be mounted in 
a test jig (see Fig. 17) and shall be stabilized at 
30+ 2 °C. 

The jig mounted sprinklers shall be inserted 
in a wind tunnel with an airflow at a constant 
temperature and velocity to determine the times to 
operate from insertion. The tunnel conditions at 
the test section shall be in accordance with Table 10 
(a supervisory air pressure of not less than 
0.35 bar shall be applied at the sprinkler outlet). 
Sprinklers shall be tested with the waterway axis 
perpendicular to the airflow in the orientations 
detailed below. 


Sprinklers symmetrical about the waterway axis shall 
be tested with: 


b 


— 


с 


ме 


1) Frame arms normal to the airflow (such that 
the thermal element is fully exposed to the 
airflow) (see Fig. 18А), and 

2) Frame arms in line with the airflow 


(see Fig. 18B). 
Sprinklers which are asymmetric about the waterway 
axis shall be additionally tested with: 
i) Frame arms rotated 180° about the 
waterway axis from position a, and 
ii) The centre of the heat collector directly 
downstream of a frame arm. 
d) The following numbers of sprinklers shall be 
tested for each rating and orientation: 
1) Fusible element sprinklers : 2 
2) Glass bulb sprinklers 23 


6.27.2.2 Rate of rise test 


It determines the sensitivity performance characteristic 
of sprinklers to determine their suitability for use in 
applications specifying particular performance criteria. 


a) Sprinkler specimens shall be suitably mounted in 
a test jig. At the start of each test the test jig and 
the sprinkler shall be inserted in the tunnel test 


31 


IS 9972 : 2023 


section and shall be stabilized at a temperature of 
30 + 2 °C, before commencement of the heating 
rate of rise cycle. 


Sprinklers shall be tested in the following 
appropriate positions and orientations in relation 
to the wind tunnel test section: 


1) All sprinklers types — Sprinklers shall be 
tested with the waterway axis perpendicular to 
the airflow in the orientation which resulted in 
the longest mean time to operate when tested 
in accordance with 6.27.2.1. 


b 


wm 


2) Sprinklers for in-rack use 


i) Pendant spray and conventional sprinkler 
types shall be tested with the waterway 
axis parallel to the airflow direction with 
the sprinkler waterway inlet downstream 
relative to the airflow (see Fig. 18С). 


Upright spray and conventional sprinklers 

shall be tested with the waterway axis 

parallel to the airflow direction with the 

waterway inlet upstream relative to the 

airflow (see Fig. 18D). 

c) Prior to the start of the test the sprinkler pipe work 
shall be filled with a specified volume of water 
above the sprinkler inlet. 


ii 


— 


d 


М7 


Sprinkler specimens of each rating shall be tested 
in the wind tunnel in the appropriate positions 
and orientations described at 6.27.2.2 b) and shall 
be subjected to a steadily increasing airstream 
temperature at a constant mass flow. Tests shall be 
undertaken at the following rates of temperature 
rise: 

1) 2 °C/min, 

2) 12 °C/min, and 

3) 20 °C/min. 
The sprinkler operating time shall be measured from 


initiation of the rate of rise, starting at a stable condition 
of 30 °C. 


e) The following numbers of sprinklers shall be 
tested for each temperature rating, position and 
rate of rise: 


2 
3 


1) Fusible element sprinklers : 
2) Glass bulb sprinklers 


IS 9972 : 2023 


RESERVOIR FOR USE 
IN `WET' TESTS 


EXTERNALLY THREADED TUBE 


LOCKING NUT 
LOCATING DISC 


LOCATING DISC 
~~ SPRINKLER FITTING 


FiG. 17 TEST JIG FOR PLUNGE TEST 


6.27.3 Analysis of Test Results 


6.27.3.1 Plunge test results analysis 


a) The arithmetic mean time to operate each sprinkler 
rating at each orientation shall be determined. 


b) The time constant for each sprinkler rating at any 
orientation may be determined by the formula: 


t, 


E In(1— AT, / AT, ) 


where 
T „= Time constant, 
t,— Time to operate, 


AT, = Sprinkler nominal rating —starting temperature, 
and 


AT, = Tunnel temperature — starting temperature 


32 


с) The КТ: А shall then be determined by the following 
formula: 


RTI, = T,V° 


p 
where 


V= Airstream velocity in test section, and 


T — Time constant. 


6.27.3.2 Rate of rise analysis 


The time constant and the effective operating 
temperature 0, shall be determined for each sprinkler 
orientation and temperature rating. The values may 
be graphically by plotting tunnel air temperature at 
operation 0, against the rate of rise p. 


A graphical plot of 0, against В will describe a line with 
slope equal to the time constant T having an intercept 
at the 0, axis (at B = 0) equal to the effective operating 
temperature 0 for the sprinkler rating and orientation 
(see Fig. 18E). 


AIRFLOW 
DIRECTION 


18A FRAME ARMS NORMAL TO AIR FLOW 


AIRFLOW 


IS 9972 


AIRFLOW 
DIRECTION 


шинжлэн ' 


18B FRAME ARMS IN LINE WITH AIR FLOW 


AIRFLOW 


DIRECTION DIRECTION 
— — m 
18C FRAME ARMS PARALLEL TO AIR FLOW 18D FRAME ARMS PARALLEL TO AIR FLOW 


TUNNEL AIR TEMPERATURE 


AT OPERATION, °C 


1504 


SLOPE = TIME CONSTANT 


= 
° 
° 


504 INTERCEPT = EFFECTIVE 
OPERATING TEMPERATURE 


10 20 30 
RATE OF TEM. RISE, °C / min. — 
18 E GRAPHICAL METHOD FOT DETERMINING TIME CONSTANT, T 
AND EFFECTIVE OPERATING TEMPERATURE , © , 


Fic. 18 WIND TUNNEL TEST SECTION 


33 


: 2023 


IS 9972 : 2023 


6.27.4 Test Apparatus 


6.27.4.1 Apparatus for plunge test 


A wind tunnel with approximate test section dimensions 
of 305 mm width x 305 mm depth shall be capable 
of developing the conditions at the test sections in 
accordance with Table 15. 


Table 15 Plunge Test Tunnel Condition 
(Clause 6.27.4.1) 


SI Sprinkler Tunnel Airstream 
No. Nominal Temperatureat Velocity at Test 
Temperature Test Section** 
Rating Section* 
9( ӨС m/s 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 57 to 107 197 + 5 2.5+0.2 
ii) 121 to 149 29147 1.5 + 0.2 


* Monitored at the inlet to the working section using a sheathed type K 
(С:/А1) thermocouple 0.5 mm O.D. 


** Measured at the working section using a pitot-static tube connected 
to a micro manometer calibrated for measuring velocity at airstream 
‘temperatures up to 800 °C. Checked between runs using a vane 
anemometer in the open end of the tunnel. 


6.27.4.2 Apparatus for rate of rise test 


Awind tunnel with approximate test section dimensions 
of 240 mm width x 150 mm depth shall be capable 
of developing the conditions at the test sections in 
accordance with Table 16. 


7 TESTING PROCEDURE 


The complete type testing of the sprinkler heads 
involves evaluation through all the tests enumerated 
in 6. However, for the evaluation of both types of 
sprinklers, that is, fusible element and glass bulb types, 
at least 60 sprinklers from each type shall be tested 
as per the following scheme for various requirements 


and sprinklers shall be reused for subsequent tests in 
certain cases as detailed in Annex A. 


8 ROUTINE TESTING PROCEDURES IN 
PRODUCTION LINE 


The testing program suggested in 7 is applicable for 
the evaluation of the prototype sprinklers in the initial 
stage and also at the time of renewal of the acceptance 
by the authorities having jurisdiction. However, during 
the production of sprinklers the following testing 
requirements shall be met for all the sprinklers in the 
production line: 


a) examination of sprinklers for its orifice size, colour 
coding and key features as per manufacturer’s 
drawing, and 


b) each automatic sprinkler shall be subjected to 
hydrostatic test at 35 bar pressure and the pressure 
shall be maintained for a period of not less than 
5 8. There shall be no leakage during the test. 


9 TEST FACILITIES EXPECTED 
MANUFACTURERS WORKS 


AT THE 


The manufacturer shall provide regular production 
control, inspection and tests to maintain the quality 
of the sprinklers produced from time to time. For this 
purpose, it is necessary to provide at least the following 
facilities so that these tests can be carried out at regular 
intervals: 

a) Leak resistance test, 

b) Lodgement test, 

c) Release temperature test, 

d) Strength of frame test, 

e) Water flow test, 

f) Distribution test, 

g) Response test, and 

h) Sensitivity test. 


Table 16 Rate of Rise Test Tunnel Conditions 


(Clause 6.27.4.2) 
SI No. Start Rate of Temperature Max Temperature Temperature Variation Airstream Velocity 
Temperature Rise from Ideal Ramp in Test Section at 
°C °C/min °C °C EE 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) 30+2 2 250 +3 10.1 
ii) 30-2 12 250 +3 10.1 
iii) 3042 20 250 +3 10.1 


10 FIRE TESTS 


10.1 Ceiling, Sidewall, Pendent, Upright or Extended 
Coverage Types 


A sprinkler of the ceiling, pendent, or upright type is to 
be installed in its intended installation position with the 
deflector 250 mm below the ceiling, unless specifically 
designed for other positions (such as recessed or ceiling 
type installations) See Fig. 19. 


10.2 Test Method — All Types 


10.2.1 Water distribution measurements shall 
be conducted in an enclosed room with an open 
sprinkler discharging water at the minimum flow 
rate and maximum area of coverage specified by the 
manufacturer. The minimum flow rate is to be not 
less than a minimum water density of 4.0 Ipm for 
the specified coverage area. For sprinklers rated at a 
pressure exceeding 12 bar, tests shall also be conducted 
using a flow rate corresponding to a pressure of 5 bar 
less than the rated pressure for the largest rated spacing. 
Water collection pans that are 300 mm square, and 
300 mm deep with a lip on one edge, shall be located 
on the floor of the enclosed room in the areas of the 
11 crib locations as shown in Fig. 20. The distribution 
data shall be recorded and used in determining the 
specific positions of the wood cribs as required for the 
second and third fire tests specified in 10.2.2. 


10.2.2 A series of three fire tests shall be conducted 
at each flow rate using automatic sprinklers in the 
maximum temperature rating. For the first fire test, 
a wood crib as specified in 10.2.4 to 10.2.6 shall 
be located at crib location 1 of the test enclosure, 
see Fig. 20. For the second fire test, the wood crib 
is to be located at crib location 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7, 
see Fig. 20, whichever location had the least amount of 
water collected during the distribution determinations. 
However, when crib location 5, 6, or 7 had the least 
amount of water collected then: 


a) a sprinkler other than a sidewall type is to be 
rotated 180 degrees and the crib placed in crib 
location 1, 3, or 4, whichever is opposite the 
crib location that had the least amount of water 
collected; and 


b 


хи 


a sidewall type sprinkler 18 to be installed on the 
wall near crib location 2. 


10.2.3 For the third fire test, the wood crib 18 to be 
located in the centre of one of the four quadrants of the 
test room (see Fig. 20, crib location 8, 9, 10, or 11), 
whichever had the least amount of water collected 
during the distribution determination. However, when 
crib location 8 or 9 had the least amount of water 
collected, then: 


35 


IS 9972 : 2023 


a) a sprinkler other than a sidewall type is to be 
rotated 180 degrees and the fire placed in crib 
location 10 or 11, whichever is opposite the 
crib location that had the least amount of water 
collected; and 


b 


wm 


a sidewall type sprinkler is to be installed on the 
wall near crib location 2. 


10.2.4 The wood crib is to be dimensioned 
500 mm x 500 mm x 380 mm high and weigh 
15+1 kg. 


10.2.5 The wood crib is to consist of ten alternate layers 
of five trade size 50 mm x 50 mm (nominal 38 mm 
x 38 mm) kiln-dried spruce or fir lumber 500 mm long. 
The alternate layers of the lumber are to be placed at 
right angles to the adjacent layers. The individual wood 
members in each layer are to be evenly spaced along 
the length of the previous layer of wood members and 
stapled to the adjacent members. 


10.2.6 After the wood crib is assembled, it is to be 
conditioned at a temperature of 50 + 5 °C for not less 
than 48 h. Following the conditioning, the moisture 
content of the crib is to be measured with a probe type 
moisture meter. The moisture content of the crib at any 
measurement location is not to exceed 5 percent prior 
to weighing the crib for the fire test. 


10.2.7 For each test, the crib is to be placed on four 
bricks, one at each corner of the crib, that are contained 
ina 525 mm x 525 mm x 100 mm deep steel pan filled 
with 1 litre of heptane on a 25 mm layer of water. When 
the crib position is in a corner, the edge of the crib is to 
be positioned 12.5 mm from both walls. 


10.2.8 The test room enclosure and sprinkler sample 
are to be maintained at a temperature of 24 + 8 °C prior 
to each test. The room is not to have provisions for 
ventilation other than that provided by the two door 
openings shown in Fig. 20. 


10.2.9 The water flow for the sprinkler is to be preset 
for the flow rate specified in 10.2.1. The test room doors 
are to be fully opened. The heptane is to be ignited. 
The test is to be conducted for 10 min after the ignition 
of the heptane. Ten minutes after ignition, the water 
for the sprinkler is to be turned off. When the fire in 
the crib has not been extinguished, it is to be carefully 
extinguished to prevent further destruction of the crib. 
The crib is to be removed from the test enclosure and 
is to be conditioned at a temperature of 49 + 5 °C for 
not less than 16 h. Following the conditioning, the 
moisture content of the crib is to be measured with a 
probe type moisture meter. The moisture content of 
the crib at any measurement location is not to exceed 
5 percent prior to weighing the crib to determine the 
crib weight loss. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


25 x 25 mm 90° 
ELBOW 


25 mm SCHEDULE 40 PIPE 
250 mm LONG 


25 x 12.5 mm 
REDUCING COUPLING 


250 mm 


SPRINKLER 


FiG.19 FIRE TEST 


DOOR OPENING 2.2 m HIGH 


DOOR OPENING 
2.2 m HIGH 


m Y/4 


= Ү/2 ын 
Ү 


SPRINKLER OTHER ТНАМ SIDEWALL TYPE (УУНЕМ 
OTHER THAN SIDEWALL TYPE IS BEING TESTED) 


() SIDEWALL TYPE SPRINKLER (WHEN SIDEWALL 


TYPE IS BEING TESTED ) 


POSSIBLE CRIB LOCATION (SEE TEXT FOR 
SPECIFIC LOCATION DETERMINATION ) 


FiG. 20 FIRE TESTS 


36 


11 WOOD CRIB FIRE TEST (160 Ко) 


11.1 General 


11.1.1 When tested as described in 11.2.1 to 11.4.14 
while discharging water at the flow rates as shown in 
Table 17 and for sprinklers having a rated pressure 
exceeding 12 bar, at a flow rate corresponding to a 
pressure of 5 bar less than the rated pressure; four open 
sprinklers shall: 


a) limit the loss in weight of the wood crib to not 
more than 20 percent; and 


b) result in the ceiling temperature reduced to a 
value less than 295 °C above ambient within 
5 min after start of water discharge. Additionally, 
from the time the temperature initially falls below 
295 °C above ambient to the end of the test, the 
ceiling temperature shall not exceed this value 
for more than three consecutive minutes and 
the average temperature for this period shall not 
exceed 295 °C above ambient. 


11.1.2 Sidewall sprinklers with K-factors less than 80, 
and extended coverage type sprinklers, intended for use 
in light hazard occupancies only, are not to be subjected 
to the 160 kg wood crib fire test. 


11.2 Test Method — Spray Upright, Spray Pendent, 
Ceiling, Dry, or Recessed or Extended Coverage for 
Ordinary Hazard Occupancies Types 


11.2.1 Four open standard coverage sprinklers of the 
upright, pendent, ceiling type, or dry type shall be 
installed on 3 m x 3 m spacing. Extended coverage 
sprinklers for ordinary hazard occupancies shall be 
installed at their rated spacing. Sprinkler frame arms 


IS 9972 : 2023 


are to be parallel to the piping and the wood crib 
centred between the four sprinklers. See Fig. 21 for 
extended coverage sprinklers, an additional fire test 
is to be conducted at the maximum rated spacing, 
using the highest flow indicated in Table 17 for the 
applicable spacing, with the crib positioned in a 
location yielding the least amount of water collected 
during the distribution tests for extended coverage 
sprinklers intended for ordinary hazard occupancies 
(see IS 15105 for the list). The test room is to be a 
minimum of 18 m x 18 m square. The piping grid is to 
be connected to a water-supply piping system. . 


11.2.2 Dry-type sprinklers are to be tested using the 
shortest available length produced by the manufacturer 
and installed into tees rather than elbows in the piping 
system. 


11.2.3 The deflectors of upright sprinklers are to be 
located 180 mm below the ceiling. The deflectors of 
pendent sprinklers are to be located 300 mm below 
the ceiling. Each ceiling sprinkler (flush, concealed, 
or recessed type) is to be mounted in the centre of a 
1.2 m x 1 m ceiling section in accordance with the 
manufacturer's installation instructions. 


11.3 Test Method — Sidewall Types for Ordinary 
Hazard Use 


Four open sidewall sprinklers are to be installed at the 
corners of a 3 m x 6 m piping grid with the deflectors 
located 180 mm for upright sprinklers, 240 mm 
for horizontal sprinklers, and 300 mm for pendent 
sprinklers from the ceiling. Sprinklers located at the 
extremities of each 6 m dimensional line are to face 
each other and are to be set to discharge in an opposing 
pattern with the line forming the axis of the spray. 


Table 17 Flows for 160 kg Wood Crib Fire Test 
(Clause 11.1.1) 


SI No. Description of Sprinkler Spacing Test Flow Per Sprinkler 
m Ipm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Spray type, nominal KF 80 3x3 56 and 95 
ii) Spray type, nominal KF 115 3x3 79 and 132 
iii) Sidewall, nominal KF 80 3x6 56 and 95 
iv) Sidewall, nominal KF 115 3x6 79 and 132 
v) EC Sprinklers for OH occupancies 3.7 x 3.7 83 and 110 
4.3 x 4.3 113 and 147 
4.9 x 4.9 147 and 192 
5.5x 5.5 185 and 245 
6x6 225 and 300 


37 


IS 9972 : 2023 


11.4 Test Method — All Types 


11.4.1 The test is to be conducted in a vented test room 
having a 4.8 m high smooth, flat, horizontal ceiling. 
The piping grid is to be connected to the water supply. 


11.4.2 The fire employed for these tests is to combine 
the use of a combustible liquid commercial grade 
heptane having the following characteristics: 


a) Minimum initial boiling point of 88 °C; 
b) Maximum dry point of 100 °C; and 


c) Specific gravity 15.6 °C/15.6 °C of 0.68 to 
0.73; and a torch and a crib of wood weighing 
approximately 160 kg. 


11.4.3 The wood crib is to consist of layers of trade 
size 50 mm x 100 mm [nominal (38 mm x 90 mm)], 
trade size 100 mm x 100 mm [nominal (90 mm x 
90 mm)] and trade size 100 mm x 150 mm [nominal 
(90 mm x 140 mm)] kiln-dried spruce or fir lumber 
(having moisture content 6 to 12 percent) having the 
configuration and support illustrated by Fig. 22. 


11.4.4 The alternate layers of lumber are to consist of 
the sizes specified in 11.4.3 of the lengths specified in 
Fig. 22, and placed at right angles to the adjacent layers 
as illustrated in Fig. 22. The individual wood members 
in each layer are to be evenly spaced from each other, 
and form a square crib 1.22 m x 1.22 m in area and 
550 mm high, supported, in turn, by the two 2.5 m long, 
100 mm x 150 mm stringers. The total crib weight is to 
be determined and recorded. 


11.4.5 The crib is to be supported by a steel framework 
as illustrated in Fig. 21 and 22, or the equivalent. The 
crib supports are to be located beyond the edges of a 
1.8 m x 2.5 m steel pan. 


11.4.6 The top of the wood crib is to be 2.3 m below the 
deflectors of the test sprinklers. 


11.4.7 The steel pan is to be 1.8 m x 2.5 m, 300 mm 
deep, constructed of steel not less than 6 mm thick. 
The top edges are to be reinforced by a continuous steel 
angle section. The pan is to be liquid-tight and is to be 
filled prior to test with water to a depth of approximately 
100 mm. The pan is to be provided with a means for 
draining to maintain the 100 mm water level. 


11.4.8 At a location in the pan and directly under the 
vertical axis of the wood crib, an atomizing nozzle is 


38 


to be placed and arranged to spray heptane vertically 
upward. The nozzle and its supply piping are to be 
arranged as shown by Fig. 21. To prevent flameout, an 
igniter is to be located near the nozzle. The igniter shall 
be any convenient device that prevents flameout, such 
as a container partially filled with heptane. 


11.4.9 The atomizing nozzle is to form a hollow-spray 
pattern having an included angle of 75 degrees when 
atomizing heptane at the rate of 3.4 Ipm. 


11.4.10 A means for supplying and metering the fuel is 
to be furnished. 


11.4.11 The temperatures at the ceiling level are to 
be continuously recorded during the test, utilizing an 
unprotected 0.52 mm? chromel-alumel thermocouple 
centrally located above the test crib 50 mm from the 
ceiling. The relation of the thermocouple to the ceiling 
and the crib is to be as illustrated in Fig. 21. 


11.4.12 The fuel flow is to be started and the torch 
ignited immediately. The 30 min test period is to begin 
when the torch is ignited. Water application is to be 
started after a minimum free-burning time of 1 min 
or after a ceiling temperature of 760 °C is attained, 
whichever occurs last. Thirty minutes after ignition, 
the fuel flow to the torch is to be stopped, and after any 
residual fire in the crib is extinguished, the water is to 
be turned off. 


11.4.13 The crib is then to be dried and weighed. The 
drying is to be accomplished either by using an oven 
or by storing the crib for 7 days after the test in a 
sheltered area. The values of the crib weight measured 
before the test (6 to 12 percent moisture content) 
and after drying are to be corrected to the value at 
0 percent moisture before calculations are performed to 
determine compliance with the 20 percent weight loss 
requirement specified in 11.1.1. 


11.4.14 The average temperature for the time interval 
between the time at which the ceiling temperature 
first falls below a temperature of 295 °C above initial 
ambient and the time at the end of the test is to be 
computed by comparing the area under the curve 
determined by the recorded ceiling temperatures with 
the area beneath a straight line drawn at the temperature 
point 295 °C above initial ambient. The area beneath 
the curve of the recorded ceiling temperatures shall be 
the lesser of the two areas. 


IS 9972 : 2023 


"4 THERMOCOUPLE 50 mim 
! 
| 1 
— SEE NOTE FOR SPACING 
4 SPRINKLERS - SPACED 3 m x 3 m FOR 5 
TYPES OTHER ТНАМ = 
SIDEWALL N 
4 SPRINKLERS - SPACED 3m x 6 m 
FOR SIDEWALL TYPES 
4 SPRINKLERS - SPACED AS SPECIFIED 
THE MANUFACTURER 
FOR EXTENDED 
COVERAGE TYPES Ë 
со 
CRIB + 
! 
ADJUSTABLE ADJUSTABLE 
PIPE SUPPORT п-НЕРТАМЕ 1 РЇРЕ SUPPORT 
| FLAME эй 
Е 
N 
5 
SUPPORT 
FRAME 
FUEL SUPPLY 
PIPING 


коол тл 
100mm WATER F 


OVERFLOW РЇРЕ 
65 тт 


Fic. 21 Woop CRIB FIRE TEST METHOD 


39 


IS 9972 : 2023 


| | 5 j | И 
way Ç 
RY `: 


Л hA 
ба! KON 


М 0А] 
Й S 


500 тт 


“ҺҢ-------5-5-5-5-5-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:--------2441------------:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:5:-::: š 


22B SIDE VIEW 


FIG. 22 ARRANGE FOR WOODEN CRIB 


40 


12 MARKING 


12.1 Each sprinkler shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked with the following: 


a) Manufacturer’s name or trade-mark; 


b) Model identification to be used in conjunction 
with the manufacturer’s catalogue (see 5.2.1); 

c) Month and year of manufacture with batch 
number; 

d) Nominal release temperature; 

e) Cover plates of the concealed sprinklers shall be 
marked ‘DO NOT PAINT’; 


f) Sprinklers shall be marked with the nominal 
release temperature rating in °С or colour code on 
a part of the sprinkler remaining after operation 


41 


IS 9972 : 2023 


and on the yoke arm of the sprinkler with fusible 
assembly element; 


— 


In case of sidewall sprinklers, the deflectors shall 
show the intended direction of discharge with 
respect to the rear wall; and 


The word “ТОР” on the deflector to indicate 
orientation in the case of horizontal sidewall 
sprinklers. 


12.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The sprinklers conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the sprinklers 
may be marked with the ‘Standard Mark’. 


8 


h) 


IS 9972 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 6, 10 and 11.1) 
QUANTITY OF SAMPLES OF SPRINKLERS FOR TESTING 


SI No. Test Number of Sprinklers Required | Ref. Clause 
1. Leakage test 24, Min 6.1.1 
2. 30-day leakage test 5, Min 6.1.2 
3: Hydrostatic strength As per (1) 6.2 
4. Water hammer test 5, Min 6.3 
5. Lodgement test 10 or 15 applicable as per Table 4 6.4 
6. Liquid bath test 10 6.5 
7. Air bath test 50 6.6 
8. Heat exposure test (glass bulb) 6.7 
9. High temperature exposure test 5 6.8 
10. Freezing test 5 6.9 
П. Ageing test 50 6.10 

(high ambient temperature) 

12. Thermal shock test (for glass bulb sprinklers) 10 6.11 
13. Minimum quality pressure test 10 6.12 
14. Moist air test 5 6.13 
15. Vacuum test 5 6.14 
16. Assembly load/frame strength 15 6.15 
17. Strength of heat responsive element 15 6.16 
18. Deflector strength test 6.17 
19. Vibration test 5 6.18 
20. Drop test 5 6.19.1 
21. Tumble test 5 6.19.2 
22. Impact test 5 6.19.3 
23. K-factor (discharge coefficient) 4 6.20 
24. Endurance test 1 6.21 
25. Corrosion test 

a) Salt spray 8 6.22.1 

b) Stress cracking test 4 6.22.2.1 

c) Boiling magnesium chloride test 4 6.22.2.2 

d) Carbon dioxide & Sulphur dioxide test 4 6.22.3 

e) Hydrogen sulphide test 4 6.22.4 
26. Water distribution test 

a) Conventional/spray dry sprinkler 4 6.23.1 

b) Side wall sprinklers 1 6.23.2 
27. Response test 6.25 

(ceiling/flush/recessed/concealed 

28. Conductivity (C - Factor) 

a) Prolonged plunge test method 20 6.26.2 


42 


IS 9972 : 2023 


SI No. Test Number of Sprinklers Required | Ref. Clause 

29. Heat Sensitivity 

a) Plunge test 2 (for fusible element sprinkler) 6.27.2.1 

3 (for glass bulb sprinkler) 

b) Rate of rise test -do- 6.27.2.2 

30. Fire test 1 10 
(3 no. of fire test 15 kg wood crib) 

31. 160 kg wood crib fire test 4 11.1 


43 


IS 9972 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


Organization 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire Explosive and Environment Safety 
(DRDO), Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corp Ltd, Chennai 


Chhatariya Rubber and Chemicals Industries, 
Mumbai 


City and Industrial Development Corporation, 
Navi Mumbai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 
Delhi Fire Services Headquarters, New Delhi 


Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Goa 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


F M Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


Fire and Emergency Services J & K, Srinagar 


Fire and Security Association of India, Chennai 
Fire Protection Association of India, Mumbai 
GAIL (India) Ltd, Noida 


Gunnebo India Pvt Ltd, Maharashtra 


H. D. Fire Protect Co, Thane 


Representative(s) 


FIRE ADVISOR (SHRI D. K. ӛнамі) (Chairman) 


SHRI D. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
SHRI P. K. DESHMUKH (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


Dr R. S. CHIMOTE 
DR Suvir SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
SHRIA. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suet D. K. TULANI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JAIN 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. K. HEPAT 


SHRI S. A. HAVELIWALA 
SHRI H. S. HAVELIWALA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND P. MANDKE 


CONTROLLER OF QA (FE) 
Jr CONTROLLER OF QA (FA) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF Еке OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
SHRI NITIN V. RAIKER (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITABH KISHORE 
SHRI GYASUDDIN (Alternate) 
SHRI AKASH DEEP PATEL (YP) 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR AHEMED SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAS RIZVI 
PRESIDENT 


SHRI S. P. GARG 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR KALKAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH N. DHARAMSHI 
SHRI K. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


44 


Organization 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Pipelines Division, 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 
Johnson Controls (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
K V Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services, 
Bengaluru 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Association of Fire Officers, Mumbai 
NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 
Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


RESQ Technologies, Ahmedabad 


Safex Fire Services Ltd, Mumbai 


Shah Bhogilal Jethalal and Bros, Ahmedabad 
State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Surex Production and Sales Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 
Swastik Synergy Engineering Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


The Supreme Industries Ltd, 

T T S Consutant, Kolkata 

Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services Department, 
Chennai 

U L India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 

Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Lucknow 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata 


In Personal Capacity, (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


IS 9972 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTHOSH MUZUMDAR 
SHRI NITIN RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH H. SABADRA 
SHRI UDAY K. SHROFF (Alternate) 


Suri K. U. RAMESH 
SHRI K SRINIVASA (Alternate) 


SHRI 5. S. WARICK 
SHRI KIRAN HATYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJIV KHARE 
Cor SUMEET SINGH MAKKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI P. S. RAHANGDALE 
SHRI H. D. PARAB (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 


SHRIMATI SUNITA PURUSWANI 
SHRI R. K. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 
SHRI S. K. NANDY 
SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR 


SHRI ROHIT V. SHAH 


SHRI JITENDRA SHAH 
SHRI SANDIP SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH M. SHAH 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 
FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


SHRI MUKESH D. SHAH 
SHRI KUNAL ZATAKIA (Alternate) 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
ӛнкі G. K. SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI TARAK CHAKRABORTY 


SHRI S. VIJAYASEKAR 
SHRIMATI N. PRIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH SHANMUGAM 
SHRI RENOY RAJAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. RAO 
SHRI AMAN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHIJIT PANDEY 
SHRI KAMAL NANDY (Alternate) 


SHRI R. C. SHARMA 


45 


IS 9972 : 2023 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (K-33A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity, (274, Tapovan Senior Citizens 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641010) 


In Personal Capacity, New Delhi 

In Personal Capacity (A-45, Sector - 70, Noida) 
In Personal Capacity (Vadodara) 

BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. K. DHERI 


SHRI T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 
DR H. S. KAPARWAN 


SHRI ABHAY PURANDARE 


SRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR S. 
SCIENTIST “Е” (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Composition of Fire Detection Alarms and Supression System Subcommittee, CED 22 : 4 


Organization 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


ASTRAL Polytechnik Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire and Explosive Environment Safety 
(DRDO), Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance 
Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 


DSPA Fire Suppressions India Pvt Ltd, Pune 
EAST Corporation, Thane 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


FOGTEC Brandschutz GmbH and Co KG, Mumbai 
FM Global India, Bengaluru 


FYRPROTEK (Fire Engineers and Consultants), 
New Delhi 


46 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI (Convener) 


SHRI D. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI SELVAKUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RITESH PATEL 
SHRI MANOJ Duar (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


Suri RAJIV GOEL 
SHRI R. S. CHIMOTE (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. TULANI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JAIN 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. K. HEPAT 


Сог V. V. KADAM 
Cor N. K. N. Rao (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETAN UDGIR 
SHRI HEMANT KHADSE 


SHRI VIPAN GOEL 
Suri R. B. BHUTDA (Alternate) 


SHRI JACKSON JOSE 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


Organization 
Gunnebo India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Honeywell International (I) Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Johnson Controls (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Maple Engineering Design Services (India) Pvt Ltd, 
Bengaluru 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Mumbai 


Newage Industries, Mumbai 


Nitin Fire Protection Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Realty Automation and Security Systems Pvt Ltd, 
Pune 


Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 
Schrack Seconet AG, Gurugram 

Steel Authority of India, Salem 

The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


T. T. S. Consultant, Kolkata 
West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata 


In Personal Capacity, (K-33A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (A-45, Sector - 70, Noida) 


In Personal Capacity, (274, Tapovan Senior Citizens 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641010) 


In Personal Capacity, (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (A-55, Sector 35, Noida) 


IS 9972 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANDAR SAWANT 
SHRI AKHAND KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH MAJUMDAR 
SHRI ASHISH DILEEP SAWANT (Alternate) 


ӛнкі B. 5. A. NARAYAN 
SHRI H. R. RANGANNATH (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
DEPUTY CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK M. SHAH 
SHRI SHETUL A SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI NITIN M. SHAH 
SHRI PRAVIN SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 
SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI ANANT GOKHALE 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 
SHRI AJIT SAINI 
SHRI D. KUMARESAN 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
SHRI G. K. SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI TARAK CHAKRABORTY 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI S. K. DHERI 


DR H. S. KAPARWAN 
SHRI T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


SHRI R. C. SHARMA 


SHRI KANWAR A. SINGH 


47 


(Continued from second cover) 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to International coordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field of this country. 


The composition of Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (14938). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


