IS 14850:2000

.
tiY61viq

W?a%Mm7

`i%Fmmd%@-fam
Indian Standard

FIRE SAFETY OF MUSEUMS -- CODE OF PRACTICE

ICS 13.220.20; 91.120.99

0 BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August 2000

Price Group 3

Fire Safety Sectional Committee,

CED 36

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the drafl finalized by the Fire Safety

Sectional `Comrnitee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Museums are Institutions in which objects of work or art, historic?] artifacts or scientific specimens are collected, preserved, studied and exhibited. Most of these objects are irreplaceable. The museums are deposited with valuable objects dating back from many centuries. These museums form an important part of man's cultural heritage. However, because of their nature, they are especially vulnerable to damage by heat, fire, smoke and water. To presewe this rich heritage of India, the Government of India have come up with a number of national museums for preservation of irreplaceable objects. Also a large number of public and private organizations have an enviable store of such collections of art. If these are ever damaged by tire, heat and smoke or water application, this will be a severe blow to our national heritage, The purpose of this standard is therefore to give guidance for tire safety and prevention to the trustees of museums, and government body of Museum, who are responsible for museum collections and for the safety of the persons who visit the museum or work in them.
This standard, therefore lays down guidelines how to design fire safety measures in a new buildings and how to improve these factors in existing museums also which had come up much earlier. Possibly many of the safety

factors have been overlooked while designing these buildings. This standard gives social attention to time and place in museum which increase the danger of fire and recommends measures in which the management can prevent fires or reduce tire loss. The.goveming body and management have also greater responsibility for the lives of the visitors and staff. This aspect becomes more critical when class of school children are taken for a visit to such museums and is crowded in a make shitl auditorium. At times, visitors numbering thousands may flock in to see a new acquisition or special exhibition. In such cases, visitors easily loose their way in the unfamiliar maze of gallaries. The composition of the technical committee responsible for tthe formulation of this standard is given at Annex B.

IS 14850:2000

Indian Standard
FIRE SAFETY OF MUSEUMS -- CODE OF PRACTICE
1 SCOPE

This standard covers the fire safety and fire protection measures of museums. 2 REFERENCE The Indian Standards listed at Annex A contain provisions which, through reference in the text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standad are encouraged to. investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards given at Annex A.
3 PLANNING OF SITE

is totally sprinklered. However, if only part of the building is sprinklered, the non-sprinklered area must be cut off with a fire resistance wall of 4 hour rating. 6 AIR CONDITIONING
AND FALSE CEILING

The site selected for the proposed museum should have adequate and reliable water supply for tire fighting and also within easy accessibility from the nearest fire fighting station. The consultation with the local fire authority is .suSgested. 4
PROTECTION EXPOSURE AGAINST EXTERNAL

For the comfort of the visitors and also to prevent some of the exhibits getting damaged due to heat, etc many museums are centrally air conditioned. When this is so, the installation of the air conditioning system including its ducting, insulation and outer coverage of insulation shall be totally non-combustible and in conformity with IS 1642. The false ceiling, if it is used in such air conditioned buildings, shall be of noncombustible materials preferably wood wool board having a minimum of 1 hour fire resistance. There, shall be arrangement to cut off the air Jandling unit by automatic means in case of fire. 7 COMPARTMENTATION While large halls are essential for display of exhibits, so that the maximum number of persons can gather and see the same, it is also important to note that such large areas with suitable quantity of exhibits, some of which may be combustible also, will cause a fire spread uninterrupted through the entire area and may be too big to control. Therefore, it is essential that proper compatmentation should be made to the extent possible. Such compatmentation shall be with fire resistive walls of 4 hour rating. .8 BASEMENT
AREA

4.1 All new museums should be so located that in case

of any tire out break in the neighboring building the same should not spread to the museum. Therefore, there shall be sufficient space around to provide a natural fire b~eak. 4.2 If sufficient clear space cannot be provided, the exterior walls facing the adjacent buildings should be of adequate fire resistive construction of 4 hour rating conforming to IS 1642 and shall be without doors, windows or other openings. When such openings are absolutely essential, these should be protected with w:red glazing and the doors shall be fire check doors. Further, the external face or such openings shall be protected by water drenching system combined with automatic tire shutters, if possible. Roof covering of the museum building and window frames also required to be of non-combustible material. 5 TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION The type of construction for exterior walls shall be 4 hour rating in conformity with IS 1.642. All internal walls shall be of 2 hour resistance minimum. The staircase shall be on the exterior wall and enclosed from 3 sides and accessible only through a fire check door. Relaxation in regard to interior wall/ceilings/ partitions, etc, can be permitted only when the building 1

In some of the new museums usually a basment is used as a repository of exhibits and art objects, etc which required to be given finishing touches before being put up for public exhibition. Such situation pose special problem for the persons working in such basements because the chance of fire spread is much greater, fire fighting is more difficult and with reduced visibility due to smoke logging escape to safety severely jeopardized. Such area shall be ventilated through mechanical means. Therefore, to ensure safety of visitors/workers in such places, it shall be ensured that the escape route is always kept clear of all obstructions, and mechanical ventilating system is fully functional to exhaust all smoke in case of any fire outbreak. The guidelines given in the National Building Code of India for escape from basement shall be fully implemented. 9 INTERIOR
FINISH

Extreme care should be taken in selecting materials

IS 14850:2000 for interior finish. To make the interior more decorative, frequently extensive interior finish materials are employed. It should be ensured that any such interior finished do not add to the spread of fire by any way. So far as possible, all materials used in connection with such interior finished like wall panelling, ceiling decoration, drop clothes etc, shall be of non-combustible nature. Where for practical reasons, some limited quantity of combustible materials like wood-panel ling/partitions or decorative drop clothes, Hessions have to be used, it should be ensured that these materials are properly treated with appropriate fire retardant paints to improve its surface spread as flame from Class IV to Class I as defined in the National Building Code.
10 LIMITING VALUES IN CONCEN~RATION OF

suitable automatic fire protection measures should be installed. 13 LIGHTING SYSTEM In museums special provisions are often necessary to cater for extra demand for lighting, in the form of flood lights, search lights, T.V. lighting system, concealed lighting, etc. In every case of lighting installation, it should in general conform to National Electrical Code. Since major number of fires do originate from electical faults, particular care should be taken about the following : a)
Electrical Wiring -- Wiring should be in conduit only. Where this is not practicable, only armoured and sheathed copper cable should be used. For very sensitive areas or where extreme high value exhibits have been kept, fire resistance low sulphur cables (F.R. L. S.) should be used.

b)

Since many of the exhibits though not combustible, may be of irreplaceable nature whose value cannot be counted in terms of money, it is advisable that the management of each museum should limit storage of materials to the mrnimum quantity in one particular room, and spread over the exhibits in different adjoining rooms/halls with properly segregated fire walls and fk-edoors. This action will ensure that even in case of a fire outbreak, the damage to such invaluable exhibit is contained to the minimum. Such exhibits may be coated with colorless fire retardent paints.
11 HAZARDOUS AREAS

c) Distribution boards shall be housed inside metal enclosure openable in front. Alternatively, treated timber of at least 40 mm thick may be employed with coating of fire i rettardent solutions. d)
Cables -- Particularly heavy cables should be coated with fire paints. A band of fire resistant paint of 1 m width at every 10 m intternal in horizontal plane; complete run of cable in vertical plane, 1 m on either side of cable, when the cable is running from one room to other room etc through wall opening/ conducts, etc, should be provided.

In almost all museums, some amount of hazardous operations are unavoidable. These are carpentry shops, painting shops, display shops, conservation laboratories, packing rooms, etc. It is apparent that all such hazardous operation area shall be segregated from the exhibit area, other valuable stores by proper fire resisting wall and door. Preferably, such hazardous operations shall be on upper floors of the building that is above the exhibit area. In no case such haradous operations are in lower floor than the exhibit area unless all such areas are totally sprinkler protected. In any other circumstances, the hazardous operation areas shall be segregated from exhibit areas and in addition should be protected by automatic fire detection cum alarm system as per IS 218.9. 12 COMPACT STO-RAGE To save space, some museums do keep exhibits in rows of cabinets or shelf units mounted on tracks which can be moved from place to place for exhibition purpose. While saving much space, such arrangements severely impede fire fighting operations because of difficulty in access to the site of fire. In such cases, 2

e)

Electrical shafts should be sealed at every floor level with non-combustiblematerial, in conformity with National Building Code.

14 EXIT WAYS LOCKED Normally in all museums during closing time only 1 Exit way/door is kept open to funnel all visitors and off-duty staff to go through by the single exit, while other entry gates are usually kept closed for reasons of security. While this tisk cannot be overlooked, it is equally important that in case of an emergency all the entry gates shall be also available for exit in addition to the main exit gate. As such, the practice of locking other gates/doors should be avoided at all costs. Except main door, all the doors of the hall of "museum should be lockable type only from inside.
15 LIGHTENING PROTECTION

The building should be protected against lightening as per the requirements given in NBC and IS 1646.

1s 14t$5u : Zwu
16 FIRE PROTECTION AND FIRE FIGHTING

j)

16.1 Considering the extreme high value of exhibits, it is extremely important that the fire protection and fire fighting device should be carefully chosen. In deciding these, the following points should be carefi,dlyconsidered as these have a direct impact on the system to be chosen.

For areas mentioned in 11, a gas based automatic extinguishing system should be used.

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

o

g)

h)

Importance of early detection of fire cannot be overlooked, specially in a museum where the exhibitsare likelyto be damaged even by smoke. While water is the most effective media for extinguishing such fires, no water damage is permissible either. Besides, there are areas like very old documents or clay exhibits in original or painting in original, etc, where injudicious usei of water may cause more harm than good. Also the fire fighti?g system should be automatic in ac!ion, coming into operation alongwith first indication of smoke Signal. Therefore, keeping these factors in view, the following methods may be adopted by the management. The entire building should be protected with automatic fire detection cum alarm system with all panels, hooters, break glass, etc. In maximum areas, only ionisation type smoke detectors should be used. Only for areas which are dust prone, like above false ceiling area, open corridors, etc. Heat detector of rate of rise cum fixed temperature type should be used. Fire Hydrant System, if installed, shall conform to IS 3844 except with the following deviations: i) Only re-inforced rubber line hose of 38mm dia should be used. ii) Only diffuser or fog nozzle type spray branch with hand control shall be used. Open jet branch pipe should not be used. iii) Maximum possible use of hose reel is desirable, which will restrict water darnage to the minimum. in this case also, the hose reel nozzle should be spray/jet type. Use of automatic sprinkler is strongly recommended in all areas except as listed in 16.l(b). However, even in such cases only special type of sprinklers, quick responses, and with 10 mm outlet may be used. To cut off water immediately after the fire has been extinguished, there should be more number of isolating valves/alarm valvesinstead of normal practice to have only 1 control valve. 3

16.2 First aid fire fighting appliances shall be properly maintained, checked, tested and refilled as specified in IS 2190. The following type of extinguishers shall be used: a) b) c) Carbon dioxide type, conforming to IS 2878 Halon type, conforming to IS 11108 Dry powder type, only for sub-station/main electrical room, kitchen, etc, conforming to 1S2171
MUSEUMS

17 OLIYEXISTING

The recommended guidelines as given in 16.1 and 16.2 may be made applicable for the new/proposed museums. It may not be practicable to follow those for the existing institutions. Compartmentation with 4 hour resistant wall may not be possible, nor installation of automatic sprinkler for most areas. Internal hydrants also may pose difficulty to install. Therefore, in such cases relaxation from provisions of standard may have to be considered. But such relaxations should be to the minimum extent possible. There should be not much difficulty in adopting the following: Compressed wood wool boards may be very conveniently used for achieving same result as masonry partitions, while installation of such framed partitions will pose no problem even in old building. b) Wherever possible and it is not difficult to paint all wooden surfaces like panelling, false ceiling underside, internal timber frame, etc, with fire retardant paints to improve their flame spread factor. c) Provision of tire check doors [see IS 3614 (Part 1)] by replacing existing timber doors. d) Provision of automatic tire detection system, which can be done in any building, old or new. e) Installation of automatic halon 1211 system for certain specific areas, until a better substitute is available. o Cable protection including electrical rooms, shaft sealing, etc. Q Provide extinguishers as suggested in 1-6.2 and discard other types which do not fit in for such risks. 18 TRAIN-ING All members of staff of the museum should be trained in action to be taken in the event of an outbreak of tire and in the operation and use of first aid free extinguishers and hose reels. a)

1S 14850:2000

ANNEX A (Clause 2)
LIST OF REFERRED
IS No.

INDIAN STANDARDS IS No. Title

Title

1642:1989

1646:1997

2171:1985

Code of practice for fire safety of buildings (general) : Details of construction (first revision) Code of practice for fire safety of buildings (General): Electrical installations (second revision) Portable fire extinguishers, dry powder (cartridge type) (third
revision)

extinguishers -- Code of practice
(second revision) 2878:1986

3614

(Part 1) :1966 3844:1989

Specification for fire extinguisher, carbon dioxide type (portable and trolly mounted) (second revision) l%re check doors: Part 1 Plate metal covered and rolling type Code of practice for installation and maintenance of internal fire hydrants and hose reel on premises (first
revision)

2189:1988

2190:1992

Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of automatic fire detection and alarm system (second revision) Selection, installation and maintenance of first-aid fire

Portable fire extinguisher halons1211 type National Building Code (Part 4) Fire protection National Electrical Code
11108:1984

4

IS 14850-:2000

ANNEX B (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36
Chariman
SHRIJ. N,VAKIL

Representing

Tariff AdivsoryCommittee, Ahmedabad Ministry of Railways,New Delhi Ministry of Defence,(CEESO), New Delhi Municipal Corporationof Mumbai (Mumbei Fire Brigade), Mumbai Bhabha Atomic ResearchCentre, Mumbai, Metallurgicaland EngineeringConsultants (India) Ltd, Ranchi Delhi Fire Service,Governmentof Delhi, New Delhi ,. In personalcapacity (B-4/5A.G. KhanRoadMunicipalOflcersSaciety, Worli,Mumbal] Ministry ofHome Affairs,New Dclhi Central Public Works Department,New Delhi in personal capacity (J-1916, Chiftranjan Park New Delhi-J9) StateBank of India, Mumbai Lloyd Insulation(India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi Tariff, AdvisoryCommittee,Delhi/Ahmedabad ControllerateofQuality Assurance, Pune Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd, Bhopal/Trichy In personal capacity (16, Anikef Society Munjalpur, Vadodara) Hydm~ConstructionCentral ElectricityMonitoring Authority,New Delhi Loss PreventionAssociationof India Ltd, Mumbai hr personal capacity (4/34, Haji Ali Municipal Oflcers Cooperative HousingSocie@ Mumbai) In personal capacity (46, Block E-1, Pocket H, Sector 15, Rohini, Delhi) Institutionof Fire Engineers(India), New Delhi Tata ConsrdtingEngineers,Mumbai Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, New Delhi DirectorateGeneral Factory Advice Service and Labour Insitute, Mumbai Central Building Reserach Institute, Roorkee National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi Engineer-in-Chief'sBranch,New Delhi Departmentof IndustrialPolicy and Promotion, Ministry of Industry, New Delhi Directorate General, BIS (Ex-oflcio Member)
Member-Secreta~

Members
ASSISTANT SECWUTY COMMISSIONER DIRIXTOR(FIRES AFETV) CHIEF FIREOFFICER CHltF FIRt OWICER SHRI R.N. CHACHRA SHRI SUNIL DAs(Afternate) SHRI S. . DY DIRECTOR (FIRE SAFETY)(Alfernate)

K. DHERI

SHRISURINDER KUMAR(Alternate) SHRI S. M. DESAI SHRIOM PRAKASH SHRID. K. SHAMI (Ahernafe) CHIEFENGINEER (E-I) SHRI P. N, GHOSH SHRIJ. S. GAHLAUT SHRJS. C. GUWA SHRISANIEEVANGRA(Alternate) SHRI M. M. KAPOOR SHRJP. C. SINGHAL(Alrernate) SHRI T. R. A. KRJSHNAN SHRIP. K. MAJUMOAR (Alternafe) COL. KULDEEP SINGH
SHRI

A. J. PAWA~(Alternate)

SHRIA. R. KHAN SHRINATRAJAN (Alferrrate) SHRIG. B. ME~ON MEMBER MANAGtNGDIRECTOR SHRJD. K. SAIULAR (Alternate) SHRIV. B. NIKAM SHRIP. N. PANCHAL PRESIOENT SHRJ D. PADAMHABHA SHRIB. S. VENKATESH (Alternate) SHRIV. M. RANALSAR SHRIP. MAOHUSUNDAVA RAO SHRID. R. KRJSHNA (Alfernate) DR. T. P. SHARMA DR GOPALKRJSHNAN (Alternate) SHRIR. SUNOARAJAN SHRIS. K. CHATTOPADHYAY (Alternate) SHRIS. K. SHANGARI LT-COL A. T. PARNAIK(Alternate) SHRIP. K. SUNSARIA SHRIK..C. MATHUR(Alternate) SHRIS. S. SETHI,

Director (Civ Engg)

SHRJ s. CHATURVEOI Joint Direetor (Civ Engg ), BIS

5

Bureau of Indian Standards
BLS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Review of Indian Standards
Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are neexd, it is taken should ascertain thatthey are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: "Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of

CED 36 (5445).

Amendments Issued Since Publication
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,337856.1 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 23502 i6, 2350442 { 2351519,2352315 8329295,8327858 { 83278 91,K327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at : Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

