(Reaffirmed 1999)

IS : 9818 ( Part I ) - 1981

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO TILLAGE AND INTERCULTlVATION EQUIPMENT
PART Soil Working
Chairman SHRI K. S. YADAV Members SHRI V. W. A~EEKAR SEIRI S. C. ANAND BRIG B. S. DAEIYA Directorate of Agriculture, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Rajasthan State Agro Industrial Corporation, Jaipur Directorate of Military Farms, Quartermaster NCW General's Branch, Army Headquarters, Delhi ),

I

GENERAL Sectional

TERMS Committee,
Rcprcrentirg

Equipment

AFDC

50

Ministry of Agriculture ( Department & Cooperation ), New Delhi

of Agriculture

SERI SHAHID ALI ( Altrrnafs ) Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur DR R. K. DATTA Trac;;,sTaining Ccntre ( Ministry of Agriculture DIREOTOR

SENIOR TEST ENQINEER (Alternate ) Tamil Nadu Agro-Engineering and Services CoSERI S. GOPALAN operative Federation Ltd, Madras State Farms Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. IS. GUFTA Sartr M. L. GARB ( Alisrnats) Partapsons Engineerr, Jullundur SHRI J. S. HANJRA SHRI R. S. HANJRA ( Altrrnafa ) Kirloskar Tractors Ltd, Nasik SHRI K. MEETA SHRI N. S. RANAWAT ( Alternate ) Escorts Ltd, Faridabad SERI M. M. MERTA SHRI RIPDAMAN SINGE ( Alternate ) Tractor Training & Testing Station ( Ministry of SARI S. K. MIERA Agriculture ), Budni SHRI J. PRAEAD ( Alternate) Swadeshi Agro Machines Pvt Ltd, Kanpur SERI 0. P. NEMANI Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering Poor A. C. PANDYA ( ICAR ), Bhopal DR C. SRIRAM ( Alternate ) National Farmers Organization, New Delhi SHRI S. B. PANDYA SRRI 8. R. BARWALE ( Alttrnole ) ( Continued onpage 2 ) @) Copyrig& 1981 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyrrght Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except wirh written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.
L

IS

I

9818 ( Part I ) - 1981
pugs 1 )
Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), New Delhi Bharat Krishak Samaj, New Delhi Haryana Agro-Industries Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh Light Carts Private Ltd. Meerut Department of Agriculture, Government of Bihar, Patna Punjab Agricultural Univenity, Ludhiana U. P. State Agro-Industries Lucknow _ Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ofi& Corporation Ltd, Indian

( Continurdfrom

Msmbrrs
DR J. S. PANWAR SHRI PARAMPAL %-ma SHR1 E. C. PETER SARI K. K. SAQAR SERI M. P. SINHA Da S. R. VERMA DIG B. S. SANDHU ( Altcrnatr ) SHRI R. S. YADAVA
SHRI T. PURNANANDA~,

Membrr )

Director

( Agri

& Food

)

Deputy

SHRI R. N. SEARMA Director ( Agri k Food

), IS1

2

IS : 9818 ( Part I ) - 1981

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO TILLAGE AND INTERCULTIVATION EQUIPMENT
PART I GENERAL TERMS

0. 0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part I) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 April 1981, after the draft finalized by the Soil Working Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 With the increasing scope of farm mechanization, a large number of tillage and intercultivation equipment are being designed, developed, manufactured and used in the country. The need was, therefore, felt for a comprehensive glossary which would provide authentic definitions of the terms used in respect of such equipment. It is hoped that this glossary would serve as a useful reference. 0.3 This standard is being published in two parts. definitions of general terms; the other Part ( Part definitions of terms relating to equipment. 0.4 In preparation following: of this standard, assistance Part I covers II ) covers the the

has been derived

from the machinery

BS 2468 : 1963 Glossary of terms relating to agricultural and implements. British Standards Institution.

ASAE R 291.1-1965 Terminology and definitions for soil, tillage and soil tool relationships. American Society of Agricultural Engineers, USA.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers the in relation to tillage and intercultivation definition of general equipment. terms used

IS I 9818 ( Part I ) - 1981 2. TILLAGE 2.1 Broadcast AND KINDS OF TILLAGE

Tillage

partial tillage. 2.2 soil with with

coverage

as in

- Coverage of an entire area as contrasted to a bands or strips. It is also known as overall

Deep

tillage operation which manipulates Tillage - A primary It may be accomplished to a gredter depth than normal ploughing. a heavy-duty mould board or disc plough which inverts the soil, or a chisel plough or subsoiler which shatters soil. operations utilized

2.3 Earth Moving - Tillage action and transport to loosen, load, carry, and unload soil.

operation which move soil to create 2.4 Land Forming - Tillage desired soil configurations. Forming may be done on a large scale, such as contouring or terracing or on a small scale, such as ridging or pitting. 2.4.1 Land Grading a desired soil elevation and filling. 2.4.2 Land Planing layers of soil to provide Tillage operation which moves soil to establish and slope such as levelling, contouring, cutting Tillage operation that cuts a smooth and refined surface. and moves small

- Tillage operations which 2.5 Oriented Tillage specific paths or directions with respect to the sun, previous tillage actions or field base lines.

are oriented in prevailing winds,

2.6 Primary Tillage initial major soil-working soil strength, cover plant 2.7 Rotary Tillage break and mix soil.
-

-

Tillage operations which constitute the It is normally designed to reduce operation. materials and rearrange aggregates. operation employing rotary action to cut,

Tillage

following primary tillage, 2.8 Secondary Tillage - Tillage operations, which are performed to create proper soil tilth for seeding and planting.
- Tillage operations performed to create 2.9 Soil Cultivation conditions conducive to improve aeration, infiltration, compaction moisture conservation as well as to control weeds.

soil and

manipulation 2.10 Tillage - The mechanical but in agriculture the term is usually restricted conditions for crop production. 2.11 Tillage specific form inversion.

of soil for any to the changing

purpose; of soil a or

of a tillage tool Action - The action such as soil cutting, of soil manipulation,

in executing pulverizing

4

IS : 9818 ( Part I ) - 1981 3. TILLAGE SYSTEMS secondary to

3.1 Conventional Tillage - The combined primary and tillage operations normally performed in preparing a seed bed. 3.2 Minimum Tillage - The minimum soil manipulation meet tillage requirements for crop production.

necessary

of soil in such a way that plant 3.3 Mulch Tillage - Preparation residues or other mulching materials are specially left on or near the surface. 3.4 Optimum Tillage - A system of tillage contributing net return for a crop under given field conditions. to maximum

3.5 Reduced Tillage - A tillage system in which the primary tillage operation is performed in conjunction with special planting procedure in order to reduce or eliminate secondary tillage operations. 3.6 Strip Tillage soil arc tilled. 4. TILLAGE A tillage system in which only isolated bands of

OPERATIONS

4.1 Anchoring - A tillage operation used to partially bury and thereby preventing movement of foreign materials, such as plant residue or paper mulches. 4.2 Bedding or Ridging specific configuration. 4.3 Bulldozing A tillage operation and rolling which places soil into a blade.

The pushing

of soil by an inclined

4.4 Chiseling - A tillage operation in which a narrow tool is used to break up hard pan in the soil. It is usually performed at a depth greater than the normal ploughing depth. 4.5 Combined Tillage Operations Operations simultaneously utilizing two or more different types of tillage tools or implements or plough-planter combinations ) to ( subsoiler-lister, lister-planter simplify, control or reduce the number of operations over a field. 4.6 Harrowing - A secondary smoothens and packs the soil in weeds. 4.7 Incorporating or Mixing disperse foreign materials, such soil. 4.8 Intercultivation tillage seedbed operation which pulverizes, preparation and/or controls mix OI into the crop.

- Tillage operations which as chemicals or plant residues performed in standing

Soil cultivation

IS I 9818 ( Part I ) - 1981 4.9 Levelling - The tillage operation establish a desired soil elevation slope. in which the soil is moved to

4.10 Listing - A tillage and land-forming operation using a tool which splits the soil and turns two furrows laterally in opposite directions, thereby providing a ridge-and-furrow soil configuration. - The use of a lister in a manner 4.11 Middle Breaking the furrow midway between two previous rows of plants. 4.12 Ploughing - A primary tillage cut, break and invert the soil partially operation which or completely. of ploughing that opens to soil

is performed in which the

4.12.1 Contour Ploughing - The method is broken and turned along contours. 4.12.2 .Normal Ploughing Ploughing

up to a depth of 15 cm. or

4.13 Residue Processing - Operations that cut, crush, anchor otherwise handle residues in conjunction with soil manipulation. 4.14 Subsoiling Chiseling at depth greater than 40 cm. in which

4.15 Vertical Mulching - A subsoiling operation band of, mulching material is put in the soil. 4.16 Weeding Eradication of unwanted plants

a vertical

from the field.

5. SOIL

REACTION A soil-tool reaction in which soil slides over of tillage tool without significant adhesion. cutting or abrading the soil

5.1 Scouring engaging surface

5.2 Soil Abrasion - The scratching. tools caused by the action of soil. 5.3 Soil Adhesion The sticking

of tillage

of soil to tillage in the specific

tools or wheels. volume of soil by

5.4 Soil Compaction - Reduction means of mechanical manipulation. 5.5 Soil Cutting Soil separation

from the soil mass by slicing

action.

5.6 Soil Failure caused by mechanical 5.7 Soil Heaving such as freezing. -

The alteration or destruction of a soil structure forces, such as shear, compression and impact. The swelling of soil resulting caused 6 from natural forces,

5.8 Soil Reaction - The reaction nical forces to the soil.

by the application

of mecha-

1s I 9818 ( Part I ) - 1981 5.9 Soil Shatter or Pulverization - The general of tillage forces.

fragmentation

of a

soil mass resulting 5.10
Soil Slicing

from the action
The

sliding

of soil across a surface. as a result of

of soil in any direction 5.11 Throw - The movement kinetic energy imparted to the soil by tillage tool. 6. SOIL NOMENCLATURE

6.1 Adhered Soil Bodies - Masses of soil which adhere on soilworking Soil bodies may be stationary or surfaces and act as a part of the tool. in a relatively slow motion. 6.1.1 Soil Cone 6.1.2 Soil Sheet a tool like a sheet.

An adhered An adhered An

soil body which soil body which

resembles covers

a cone. a large area of

6.1.3 wedge.

Soil Wedge -

adhered

soil body which

resembles

a narrow

6.2 Aggregates or Peds produced by natural processes.

Agglomerations

of primary

soil particles or broken loose cemenpipes,

6.3 Clods - Soil blocks or masses that are cut, sheared by tillage tools. 6.4 Concretions ted together.
-

Soil structural

units

which

are irreversibly of tiles, in soil.

objects including pieces 6.5 Foreign Body - Foreign wires, or crushed rock that occur in or have been inserted

- All foreign matter in soils including residues, 6.6 Foreign Materials soil additives and foreign bodies that have not originated in the development of the soil.

6.7 Fragments natural surfaces 6.8 Mechanical to the movement

- Masses of soil which of weakness. Impedance

are

created

by

fracture of the

along soil

of plant

- The mechanical roots or tillage tools.

resistance

6.9 Mechanical Stability deformation or break down

of the soil to the - The degree of resistance ,by a specified mechanical force. mechanical resistance of soil to

6.10 Mechanical Strength - The deformation or separation by forces.

mechanical strength of the overall soil 6.10.1 Bulk Strength -The mass as contrasted to the strength of loose but individually strong clods, fragments or aggregates. 7

IS : 9818 ( Part

I ) - 1981 The mechanical strength of individual soil

6.10.2 Clod Strength clod.

including roots, remaining in or on 6.11 Residue - Foreign materials the soil in significant amounts such that they can be detected, or that they can exe1 t a separate and distinct influence on soil properties OT machinery operations. 6.12 Shear Blocks - The blocks of soil which are sheared the main soil mass as a result of ultimate shearing strains tillage tools. 6.13 Shear sheared. Surfaces Failure surfaces occurring where loose from applied by the

soil has

shear surfaces 6.13.1 Primary Shear Surfaces - The initial and distinct which appear during failure and are caused mainly by soil movement resulting from the advance of a tool. which result from the 6.13.2 Secondary Shear Surfaces - Shear surfaces twisting, pushing or tumbling of the soil after or during the initial displacement. Secondary shear surfaces are often perpendicular to the primary shear surfaces. 6.14 Soil Additives - Foreign materials, other than seeds, which are added to or incorporated in soil for directly influencing the soil condition These include pesticides, fertilizers, mulches, or or environment. conditioners but not foreign bodies, such as drain tiles which have an indirect influence. 6.15 Tillability - The degree pulated for a specific purpose. 7. SOIL SURFACE of ease with which a soil may be mani-

CHARACTERISTICS

7.1 Back Furrow - A raised ridge left at the centre of the strip of land, when ploughing is started from centre to side ( see Fig. 2 ). 7.2 Bedded or Listed Land back furrows and dead furrows. 7.3 Dead Furrow of land after finishing 7.4 Furrow ( see Fig. 1 ). 7.4.1 7.4.2
Furrow

The land which

is broken

in

alternate strips.

An open trench left in between of ploughing ( scc Fig. 3 ). trench formed

two adjacent

The

by a tool in the soil during furrow

operation 1 )1 )..

Crown -The

peak of the turned

slice (MC Fig.

Furrow Slice -

The soil mass cut and turned 8

by tool ( see Fig.

IS : 9818 ( Part I ) - 1981 7.4.3 Furrow Sole 7.4.4 Furrow Wall The bottom surface of the furrow ( set Fig. 1 ). ( SGC Fig. 1 ).

The undisturbed
yFURROW \ SLICE

side of furrow
CROWN r

Fxa. 1

.i-FURROW

BACX /-

FURROW

FIQ. 2

DEAD FURROW

r

FURROW

Fro.

3

7.5 Root Bed - The soil prohle use by plant roots.

modified

by tillage

or amendments

for

IS I 9818 ( Part I ) - 1981 7.6 Root Zone plants. The part of soil profile exploited by the roots of

7.7 Seed Bed - The soil zone and emergence of seedlings. 8. MISCELLANEOUS

which affects

the germination

of seeds

8.1 Depth of Cut - The maximum depth of the penetration measured with reference to the initial soil surface. 8.2 Draft The horizontal component of the pull. 8.5 Effective Field Capacity - The actual area covered ment based on its total time consumed and its width. 8.4 Field Efficiency theoretical field capacity 8.5 Pall The quotient of effective expressed in percentage. field

of the tool

by the implecapacity and

The total force required to pull an implement.

S.6 Side Draft - The horizontal component of the pull perpendicular to the direction of motion. This is developed if the centre of resistance is not directly behind the centre of pull. 8.7 Soil Working Surface designed to be in contact manipulation. Portion of a tool, implement or machine with soil in order to effect proper

S.8 Theoretical Field Capacity - The rate of field coverage of an implement based on 100 percent of time at the rated speed and covering 100 percent of its rated width. 8.9 Tillage Depth - Vertical to a specific point of penetration 8.10 Unit Draft distance from of the tool. the initial soil surface

Draft per unit cross-sectional

area of the furrow.

