NAT HIAF IS 23485 : 2019 


Indian Standard (ISO 13485 : 2016, ISO 16142-1 : 2016 
and ISO 16142-2 : 2017 NEQ) 


fafeacat saencot — ferfencat suU 
d% fan moraa siea WOT SA 
ATAVAHATE Vest mAT BH aA 
& anayac Agia 


Medical Devices — Quality 
Management System Requirements 
and Essential Principles of 
Safety and Performance 
for Medical Devices 


ICS 11.20.01 


© BIS 2019 


adie AR À 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR YAT, 9 SERLE TH AMT, AQ Reet- 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2019 Price Group 11 


Hospital Planning Sectional Committee MHD 14 


FOREWORD 


0.1 General 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hospital 
Planning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Council. 


This Indian Standard specifies requirements for a quality management system that can be used by an organization 
involved in one or more stages of the life-cycle of a medical device, including design and development, production, 
storage and distribution, installation, servicing and final decommissioning and disposal of medical devices, and 
design and development, or provision of associated activities (for example, technical support). The requirements 
in this Indian Standard can also be used by suppliers or other external parties providing product (for example, raw 
materials, components, subassemblies, medical devices, sterilization services, calibration services, distribution 
services, maintenance services) to such organizations. The supplier or external party can voluntarily choose to 
conform to the requirements of this Indian Standard or can be required by contract to conform. 


Several jurisdictions have regulatory requirements for the application of quality management systems by 
organizations with a variety of roles in the supply chain for medical devices. Consequently, this Indian Standard 
expects that the organization: 


a) Identifies its role(s) under applicable regulatory requirements; 
b) Identifies the regulatory requirements that apply to its activities under these roles; and 
c) Incorporates these applicable regulatory requirements within its quality management system. 


The organization needs to understand how the definitions in this Indian Standard will be interpreted in light of 
regulatory definitions in the jurisdictions in which the medical devices are made available. 


This Indian Standard can also be used by internal and external parties, including certification bodies, to assess the 
organization’s ability to meet customer and regulatory requirements applicable to the quality management system 
and the organization’s own requirements. It is emphasized that the quality management system requirements 
specified in this Indian Standard are complementary to the technical requirements for product that are necessary 
to meet customer and applicable regulatory requirements for safety and performance (Refer Section II of this 
standard) 


The adoption of a quality management system is a strategic decision of an organization. The design and 
implementation of an organization’s quality management system is influenced by the: 


a) Organizational environment, changes in that environment, and the influence that the organizational 
environment has on the conformity of the medical devices; 

b) Organization’s varying needs; 

c) Organization’s particular objectives; 

d) Product the organization provides; 

e) Processes the organization employs; 

f) Organization’s size and organizational structure; and 

g) Regulatory requirements applicable to the organization’s activities. 


This standard is a merger of ISO 13485 : 2016 Medical devices — Quality management systems — Requirements 
for regulatory purposes, ISO 16142-1 : 2016 Medical Devices — Recognized essential principles of safety and 
performance of medical devices, Part 1 General essential principles and additional specific essential principles 
for all Non-IVD Medical Devices and Guidance on the Selection of Standards and ISO 16142-2 : 2017 Medical 
devices — Recognized essential principles of safety and performance of medical devices Part 1: General essential 
principles and additional specific essential principles for all non-IVD medical devices and guidance on the selection 
of standards. However, this national standard is not equivalent to these International Standards in technical content 
and structure and the changes have not been clearly identified. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 23485 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


MEDICAL DEVICES — QUALITY 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS 


SECTION I 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard specifies requirements for a quality 
management system where an organization needs to 
demonstrate its ability to provide medical devices and 
related services that consistently meet customer and 
applicable regulatory requirements. Such organizations 
can be involved in one or more stages of the life-cycle, 
including design and development, production, storage 
and distribution, installation, or servicing of a medical 
device and design and development or provision of 
associated activities (for example, technical support). 
This Indian Standard can also be used by suppliers 
or external parties that provide product, including 
quality management system-related services to such 
organizations. 


Requirements of this Indian Standard are applicable 
to organizations regardless of their size and regardless 
of their type except where explicitly stated. Wherever 
requirements are specified as applying to medical 
devices, the requirements apply equally to associated 
services as supplied by the organization. 


The processes required by this Indian Standard that are 
applicable to the organization, but are not performed 
by the organization, are the responsibility of the 
organization and are accounted for in the organization’s 
quality management system by monitoring, 
maintaining, and controlling the processes. 


If applicable regulatory requirements permit exclusions 
of design and development controls, this can be used 
as a justification for their exclusion from the quality 
management system. These regulatory requirements 
can provide alternative approaches that are to be 
addressed in the quality management system. It is 
the responsibility of the organization to ensure that 
claims of conformity to this Indian Standard reflect any 
exclusion of design and development controls. 


If any requirement in Clauses 6, 7 or 8 of this Indian 
Standard is not applicable due to the activities 
undertaken by the organization or the nature of the 
medical device for which the quality management 
system is applied, the organization does not need to 
include such a requirement in its quality management 
system. For any clause that is determined to be not 
applicable, the organization records the justification as 
described in 4.2.2. 


2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES 


The following documents, in whole or in part, are 
normatively referenced in this document and are 
indispensable for its application. For dated references, 
only the edition cited applies. For undated references, 
the latest edition of the referenced document (including 
any amendments) applies. 

IS/ISO 9000 : 2015, Quality management systems — 
Fundamentals and vocabulary. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this document, the terms and 
definitions given in IS/ISO 9000 : 2015 and the 
following apply. 


3.1 Advisory Notice 


Notice issued by the organization, subsequent to 
delivery of the medical device, to provide supplementary 
information or to advise on action to be taken in the: 
a) Use of a medical device, 
b) Modification of a medical device, 
c) Return of the medical device to the organization 
that supplied it, or 
d) Destruction of a medical device. 
NOTE 1 — Issuance of an advisory notice can be required to 


comply with applicable regulatory requirements. 


3.2 Authorized Representative 


Natural or legal person established within a country or 
jurisdiction who has received a written mandate from 
the manufacturer to act on his behalf for specified tasks 
with regard to the latter’s obligations under that country 
or jurisdiction’s legislation. 

[SOURCE: GHTF/SG1/N055 : 2009, 5.2] 


3.3 Clinical Evaluation 


Assessment and analysis of clinical data pertaining 
to a medical device to verify the clinical safety and 
performance of the device when used as intended by 
the manufacturer. 


[SOURCE: GHTF/SGS/N4 : 2010, Clause 4] 


3.4 Complaint 


Written, electronic or oral communication that alleges 
deficiencies related to the identity, quality, durability, 


IS 23485 : 2019 


reliability, usability, safety or performance of a medical 
device that has been released from the organization’s 
control or related to a service that affects the 
performance of such medical devices. 


NOTE 1 — This definition of ‘complaint’ differs from the 
definition given in IS/ISO 9000 : 2015. 


3.5 Distributor 


Natural or legal person in the supply chain who, on his 
own behalf, furthers the availability of a medical device 
to the end user. 
NOTE 1 — More than one distributor may be involved in the 
supply chain. 
NOTE 2 — Persons in the supply chain involved in activities 
such as storage and transport on behalf of the manufacturer, 
importer or distributor, are not distributors under this 
definition. 


[SOURCE: GHTF/SGI/N055 : 2009, 5.3] 
3.6 Implantable Medical Device 


Medical device which can only be removed by medical 
or surgical intervention and which is intended to: 


a) Be totally or partially introduced into the human 
body or a natural orifice, or 


b) Replace an epithelial surface or the surface of the 
eye, and 
c) Remain after the procedure for at least 30 days. 


NOTE 1 — This definition of implantable medical device 
includes active implantable medical device. 


3.7 Importer 


Natural or legal person in the supply chain who is 
the first in a supply chain to make a medical device, 
manufactured in another country or jurisdiction, 
available in the country or jurisdiction where it is to be 
marketed. 


[SOURCE: GHTF/SG1/N055 : 2009, 5.4] 
3.8 Labelling 


Label, instructions for use, and any other information 
that is related to identification, technical description, 
intended purpose and proper use of the medical device, 
but excluding shipping documents. 


[SOURCE: GHTF/SG1/N70 : 2011, Clause 4] 
3.9 Life-cycle 


All phases in the life of a medical device, from the initial 
conception to final decommissioning and disposal. 


[SOURCE: IS/ISO 14971 : 2007, 2.7] 
3.10 Manufacturer 


Natural or legal person with responsibility for design 
and/or manufacture of a medical device with the 
intention of making the medical device available for 
use, under his name; whether or not such a medical 
device is designed and/or manufactured by that person 
himself or on his behalf by another person(s). 


NOTE 1 — This ‘natural or legal person’ has ultimate legal 
responsibility for ensuring compliance with all applicable 
regulatory requirements for the medical devices in the countries 
or jurisdictions where it is intended to be made available or 
sold, unless this responsibility is specifically imposed on 
another person by the Regulatory Authority (RA) within that 
jurisdiction. 

NOTE 2 — The manufacturer’s responsibilities are described 
in other GHTF guidance documents. These responsibilities 
include meeting both pre-market requirements and post-market 
requirements, such as adverse event reporting and notification 
of corrective actions. 

NOTE 3 — ‘Design and/or manufacture’, as referred to in 
the above definition, may include specification development, 
production, fabrication, assembly, processing, packaging, 
repackaging, labelling, relabelling, sterilization, installation, 
or remanufacturing of a medical device; or putting a collection 
of devices, and possibly other products, together for a medical 
purpose. 

NOTE 4 — Any person who assembles or adapts a medical 
device that has already been supplied by another person for an 
individual patient, in accordance with the instructions for use, 
is not the manufacturer, provided the assembly or adaptation 
does not change the intended use of the medical device. 
NOTE 5 — Any person who changes the intended use of, or 
modifies, a medical device without acting on behalf of the 
original manufacturer and who makes it available for use under 
his own name, should be considered the manufacturer of the 
modified medical device. 


NOTE 6 — An authorized representative, distributor or 
importer who only adds its own address and contact details 
to the medical device or the packaging, without covering 
or changing the existing labelling, is not considered a 
manufacturer. 


NOTE 7 — To the extent that an accessory is subject to the 
regulatory requirements of a medical device, the person 
responsible for the design and/or manufacture of that accessory 
is considered to be a manufacturer. 


[SOURCE: GHTF/SG1/N055 : 2009, 5.1] 
3.11 Medical Device 


Instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, appliance, 
implant, reagent for in vitro use, software, material 
or other similar or related article, intended by the 
manufacturer to be used, alone or in combination, for 
human beings, for one or more of the specific medical 
purpose(s) of: 

a) Diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or 

alleviation of disease; 


b) Diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of or 
compensation for an injury; 


c) Investigation, replacement, modification, or 
support of the anatomy or of a physiological 
process; 


d) Supporting or sustaining life; 
e) Control of conception; 
f) Disinfection of medical devices; 


g) Providing information by means of in vitro 
examination of specimens derived from the human 
body; 


and does not achieve its primary intended action by 
pharmacological, immunological or metabolic means, 
in or on the human body, but which may be assisted in 
its intended function by such means. 
NOTE 1 — Products which may be considered to be medical 
devices in some jurisdictions but not in others include: 
a) Disinfection substances; 
b) Aids for persons with disabilities; 
c) Devices incorporating animal and/or human tissues; 
d) Devices for in vitro fertilization or assisted reproduction 


technologies. 


[SOURCE: GHTF/SG1/N071 : 2012, 5.1] 


3.12 Medical Device Family 


Group of medical devices manufactured by or for the 
same organization and having the same basic design 
and performance characteristics related to safety, 
intended use and function. 


3.13 Performance Evaluation 


Assessment and analysis of data to establish or verify 
the ability of an in vitro diagnostic medical device to 
achieve its intended use. 


3.14 Post-market Surveillance 


Systematic process to collect and analyse experience 
gained from medical devices that have been placed on 
the market. 


3.15 Product 
Result of a process. 
NOTE 1 — There are four generic product categories, as 
follows: 
a) Services (for example, transport); 
b) Software (for example, computer program, dictionary); 
c) Hardware (for example, engine mechanical part); and 
d) Processed materials (for example, lubricant). 


Many products comprise elements belonging to 
different generic product categories. Whether the 
product is then called service, software, hardware or 
processed material depends on the dominant element. 
For example, the offered product ‘automobile’ consists 
of hardware (for example, tyres), processed materials 
(for example, fuel, cooling liquid), software (for 
example, engine control software, driver’s manual), 
and service (for example, operating explanations given 
by the salesman). 
NOTE 2 — Service is the result of at least one activity 
necessarily performed at the interface between the supplier and 
customer and is generally intangible. Provision of a service can 
involve, for example, the following: 
a) An activity performed on a customer-supplied tangible 
product (for example, automobile to be repaired); 
b) An activity performed on a customer-supplied intangible 
product (for example, the income statement needed to 
prepare a tax return); 


IS 23485 : 2019 


c) The delivery of an intangible product (for example, the 
delivery of information in the context of knowledge 
transmission); 


d) The creation of ambience for the customer (for example, 
in hotels and restaurants). 
Software consists of information and is generally 
intangible and can be in the form of approaches, 
transactions or procedures. 


Hardware is generally tangible and its amount is 
a countable characteristic. Processed materials are 
generally tangible and their amount is a continuous 
characteristic. Hardware and processed materials often 
are referred to as goods. 


NOTE 3 — This definition of ‘product’ differs from the 
definition given in IS/ISO 9000 : 2015. 


[SOURCE: IS/ISO 9000 : 2015, 3.4.2, modified] 


3.16 Purchased Product 
Product provided by a party outside the organization’s 
quality management system. 


NOTE 1 — The provision of product does not necessarily infer 
a commercial or financial arrangement. 


3.17 Risk 
Combination of the probability of occurrence of harm 
and the severity of that harm. 


NOTE 1 — This definition of ‘risk’ differs from the definition 
given in IS/ISO 9000 : 2015. 


[SOURCE: ISO 14971 : 2007, 2.16] 
3.18 Risk Management 


Systematic application of management policies, 
procedures and practices to the tasks of analysing, 
evaluating, controlling and monitoring risk. 


SOURCE: IS/ISO 14971 : 2007, 2.22] 


3.19 Sterile Barrier System 


Minimum package that prevents ingress of 
microorganisms and allows aseptic presentation of the 
product at the point of use. 


SOURCE: IS/ISO 11607-1 : 2006, 3.22] 
3.20 Sterile Medical Device 


Medical device intended to meet the requirements for 
sterility. 


NOTE 1 — The requirements for sterility of a medical device 
can be subject to applicable regulatory requirements or 


standards. 


4 QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


4.1 General Requirements 


4.1.1 The organization shall document a quality 
management system and maintain its effectiveness 
in accordance with the requirements of this Indian 
Standard and applicable regulatory requirements. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


The organization shall establish, implement and 
maintain any requirement, procedure, activity or 
arrangement required to be documented by this Indian 
Standard or applicable regulatory requirements. 


The organization shall document the role(s) undertaken 
by the organization under the applicable regulatory 
requirements. 


NOTE — Roles undertaken by the organization can include 


manufacturer, authorized representative, importer or distributor. 


4.1.2 The organization shall: 


a) Determine the processes needed for the quality 
management system and the application of 
these processes throughout the organization 
taking into account the roles undertaken by the 
organization; 

b) Apply a risk based approach to the control of 
the appropriate processes needed for the quality 
management system; 


c) Determine the sequence and interaction of these 
processes. 


4.1.3 For each quality management system process, the 
organization shall: 


a) Determine criteria and methods needed to ensure 
that both the operation and control of these 
processes are effective; 


b) Ensure the availability of resources and 
information necessary to support the operation 
and monitoring of these processes; 


c) Implement actions necessary to achieve planned 
results and maintain the effectiveness of these 
processes; 


d) Monitor, measure as appropriate, and analyse 
these processes; 


e) Establish and maintain records needed to 
demonstrate conformance to this Indian Standard 
and compliance with applicable regulatory 
requirements (see 4.2.5). 


4.1.4 The organization shall manage these quality 
management system processes in accordance with the 
requirements of this Indian Standard and applicable 
regulatory requirements. Changes to be made to these 
processes shall be: 


a) Evaluated for their 
management system; 


impact on the quality 


b) Evaluated for their impact on the medical devices 
produced under this quality management system; 


c) Controlled in accordance with the requirements 
of this Indian Standard and applicable regulatory 
requirements. 


4.1.5 When the organization chooses to outsource 
any process that affects product conformity to 
requirements, it shall monitor and ensure control 


over such processes. The organization shall 
retain responsibility of conformity to this Indian 
Standard and to customer and applicable regulatory 
requirements for outsourced processes. The controls 
shall be proportionate to the risk involved and the 
ability of the external party to meet the requirements 
in accordance with 7.4. The controls shall include 
written quality agreements. 


4.1.6 The organization shall document procedures for 
the validation of the application of computer software 
used in the quality management system. Such software 
applications shall be validated prior to initial use and, 
as appropriate, after changes to such software or its 
application. 


The specific approach and activities associated 
with software validation and revalidation shall be 
proportionate to the risk associated with the use of the 
software. Records of such activities shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 


4.2 Documentation Requirements 


4.2.1 General 


The quality management system documentation (see 
4.2.4) shall include: 


a) Documented statements of a quality policy and 
quality objectives; 

b) A quality manual; 

c) Documented procedures and records required by 
this Indian Standard; 


d) Documents, including records, determined by the 
organization to be necessary to ensure the effective 
planning, operation, and control of its processes; 


e) Other documentation specified by applicable 
regulatory requirements. 


4.2.2 Quality Manual 


The organization shall document a quality manual that 
includes: 


a) The scope of the quality management system, 
including details of and justification for any 
exclusion or non-application; 

b) The documented procedures for the quality 
management system, or reference to them; 

c) A description of the interaction between the 
processes of the quality management system. 


The quality manual shall outline the structure of the 
documentation used in the quality management system. 


4.2.3 Medical Device File 


For each medical device type or medical device family, 
the organization shall establish and maintain one or 
more files either containing or referencing documents 
generated to demonstrate conformity to the requirement 


of this Indian Standard and compliance with applicable 
regulatory requirements. 


The content of the file(s) shall include, but is not limited 
to: 


a) General description of the medical device, 
intended use/purpose, and labelling, including any 
instructions for use; 


b) Specifications for product; 


c) Specifications or procedures for manufacturing, 
packaging, storage, handling and distribution; 


d) Procedures for measuring and monitoring; 
e) As appropriate, requirements for installation; 
f) As appropriate, procedures for servicing. 


4.2.4 Control of Documents 


Documents required by the quality management 
system shall be controlled. Records are a special type 
of document and shall be controlled according to the 
requirements given in 4.2.5. 


A documented procedure shall define the controls 
needed to: 


a) Review and approve documents for adequacy 
prior to issue; 


b) Review, update as necessary and re-approve 
documents; 


c) Ensure that the current revision status of and 
changes to documents are identified; 


d) ensure that relevant versions of applicable 
documents are available at points of use; 


e) Ensure that documents remain legible and readily 
identifiable; 


f) Ensure that documents of external origin, 
determined by the organization to be necessary 
for the planning and operation of the quality 
management system, are identified and their 
distribution controlled; 


g) Prevent deterioration or loss of documents; 


h) Prevent the unintended use of obsolete documents 
and apply suitable identification to them. 


The organization shall ensure that changes to documents 
are reviewed and approved either by the original 
approving function or another designated function that 
has access to pertinent background information upon 
which to base its decisions. 


The organization shall define the period for which 
at least one copy of obsolete documents shall be 
retained. This period shall ensure that documents to 
which medical devices have been manufactured and 
tested are available for at least the lifetime of the 
medical device as defined by the organization, but not 
less than the retention period of any resulting record 
(see 4.2.5), or as specified by applicable regulatory 
requirements. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


4.2.5 Control of Records 


Records shall be maintained to provide evidence 
of conformity to requirements and of the effective 
operation of the quality management system. 


The organization shall document procedures to define 
the controls needed for the identification, storage, 
security and integrity, retrieval, retention time and 
disposition of records. 


The organization shall define and implement methods 
for protecting confidential health information contained 
in records in accordance with the applicable regulatory 
requirements. 

Records shall remain legible, readily identifiable 
and retrievable. Changes to a record shall remain 
identifiable. 

The organization shall retain the records for at least 
the lifetime of the medical device as defined by the 
organization, or as specified by applicable regulatory 
requirements, but not less than two years from the 
medical device release by the organization. 


5 MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY 


5.1 Management Commitment 


Top management shall provide evidence of its 
commitment to the development and implementation 
of the quality management system and maintenance of 
its effectiveness by: 


a) Communicating to the organization the importance 
of meeting customer as well as applicable 
regulatory requirements; 


b) Establishing the quality policy; 
c) Ensuring that quality objectives are established; 
d) Conducting management reviews; 


e) Ensuring the availability of resources. 


5.2 Customer Focus 


Top management shall ensure that customer 
requirements and applicable regulatory requirements 
are determined and met. 


5.3 Quality Policy 
Top management shall ensure that the quality policy: 
a) Is applicable to the purpose of the organization; 


b) Includes a commitment to comply with 
requirements and to maintain the effectiveness of 
the quality management system; 

c) Provides a framework for establishing and 
reviewing quality objectives; 

d) Is communicated and understood within the 
organization; 


e) Is reviewed for continuing suitability. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


5.4 Planning 
5.4.1 Quality Objectives 


Top management shall ensure that quality objectives, 
including those needed to meet applicable regulatory 
requirements and requirements for product, are 
established at relevant functions and levels within the 
organization. The quality objectives shall be measurable 
and consistent with the quality policy. 


5.4.2 Quality Management System Planning 
Top management shall ensure that: 


a) The planning of the quality management system is 
carried out in order to meet the requirements given 
in 4.1, as well as the quality objectives; 

b) The integrity of the quality management system 
is maintained when changes to the quality 
management system are planned and implemented. 


5.5 Responsibility, Authority and Communication 


5.5.1 Responsibility and Authority 


Top management shall ensure that responsibilities and 
authorities are defined, documented and communicated 
within the organization. 


Top management shall document the interrelation of 
all personnel who manage, perform and verify work 
affecting quality and shall ensure the independence and 
authority necessary to perform these tasks. 


5.5.2 Management Representative 


Top management shall appoint a member of 
management who, irrespective of other responsibilities, 
has responsibility and authority that includes: 


a) ensuring that processes needed for the quality 
management system are documented; 


b) reporting to top management on the effectiveness 
of the quality management system and any need 
for improvement; 


c) ensuring the promotion of awareness of applicable 
regulatory requirements and quality management 
system requirements throughout the organization. 


5.5.3 Internal Communication 


Top management shall ensure that appropriate 
communication processes are established within the 
organization and that communication takes place 
regarding the effectiveness of the quality management 
system. 


5.6 Management Review 


5.6.1 General 


The organization shall document procedures for 
management review. Top management shall review 
the organization’s quality management system at 
documented planned intervals to ensure its continuing 


suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. The review 
shall include assessing opportunities for improvement 
and the need for changes to the quality management 
system, including the quality policy and quality 
objectives. 


Records from management reviews shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 
5.6.2 Review Input 


The input to management review shall include, but is 
not limited to, information arising from: 


a) Feedback; 

b) Complaint handling; 

c) Reporting to regulatory authorities; 

d) Audits; 

e) Monitoring and measurement of processes; 
f) Monitoring and measurement of product; 
g) Corrective action; 

h) Preventive action; 


j) Follow-up actions from previous management 
reviews; 


k) Changes that could affect the quality management 
system; 
m) Recommendations for improvement; 


n) Applicable new orrevised regulatory requirements. 


5.6.3 Review Output 


The output from management review shall be recorded 
(see 4.2.5) and include the input reviewed and any 
decisions and actions related to: 


a) Improvement needed to maintain the suitability, 
adequacy, and effectiveness of the quality 
management system and its processes; 


b) Improvement of product related to customer 
requirements; 


c) Changes needed to respond to applicable new or 
revised regulatory requirements; 


d) Resource needs. 
6 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 


6.1 Provision of Resources 
The organization shall determine and provide the 
resources needed to: 
a) Implement the quality management system and to 
maintain its effectiveness; 


b) Meet applicable 
requirements. 


regulatory and customer 


6.2 Human Resources 


Personnel performing work affecting product quality 
shall be competent on the basis of appropriate 
education, training, skills and experience. 


The organization shall document the process(es) for 
establishing competence, providing needed training, 
and ensuring awareness of personnel. The organization 
shall: 


a) Determine the necessary competence for personnel 
performing work affecting product quality; 


b) Provide training or take other actions to achieve or 
maintain the necessary competence; 


c) Evaluate the effectiveness of the actions taken; 


d) Ensure that its personnel are aware of the 
relevance and importance of their activities and 
how they contribute to the achievement of the 
quality objectives; 

e) Maintain appropriate records of education, 
training, skills and experience (see 4.2.5). 

NOTE — The methodology used to check effectiveness is 


proportionate to the risk associated with the work for which 
the training or other action is being provided. 


6.3 Infrastructure 


The organization shall document the requirements 
for the infrastructure needed to achieve conformity 
to product requirements, prevent product mix-up and 
ensure orderly handling of product. Infrastructure 
includes, as appropriate: 


a) Buildings, workspace and associated utilities; 
b) Process equipment (both hardware and software); 


c) Supporting services (such as transport, 
communication, or information systems). 


The organization shall document requirements for 
the maintenance activities, including the interval of 
performing the maintenance activities, when such 
maintenance activities, or lack thereof, can affect 
product quality. As appropriate, the requirements shall 
apply to equipment used in production, the control of the 
work environment and monitoring and measurement. 


Records of such maintenance shall be maintained (see 
4.2.5). 


6.4 Work Environment and Contamination Control 


6.4.1 Work Environment 


The organization shall document the requirements for 
the work environment needed to achieve conformity to 
product requirements. 


If the conditions for the work environment can have an 
adverse effect on product quality, the organization shall 
document the requirements for the work environment 
and the procedures to monitor and control the work 
environment. 


The organization shall: 


a) Document requirements for health, cleanliness 
and clothing of personnel if contact between 


IS 23485 : 2019 


such personnel and the product or work 
environment could affect medical device safety 
or performance; 


b) Ensure that all personnel who are required to 
work temporarily under special environmental 
conditions within the work environment are 
competent or supervised by a competent person. 


NOTE — Further information can be found in ISO 14644 and 
ISO 14698. 


6.4.2 Contamination Control 


As appropriate, the organization shall plan and 
document arrangements for the control of contaminated 
or potentially contaminated product in order to prevent 
contamination of the work environment, personnel, or 
product. 


For sterile medical devices, the organization shall 
document requirements for control of contamination 
with microorganisms or particulate matter and maintain 
the required cleanliness during assembly or packaging 
processes. 


7 PRODUCT REALIZATION 


7.1 Planning of Product Realization 


The organization shall plan and develop the processes 
needed for product realization. Planning of product 
realization shall be consistent with the requirements 
of the other processes of the quality management 
system. 


The organization shall document one or more processes 
for risk management in product realization. Records 
of risk management activities shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 


In planning product realization, the organization shall 
determine the following, as appropriate: 


a) Quality objectives and requirements for the 
product; 


b) The need to establish processes and documents 
(see 4.2.4) and to provide resources specific to 
the product, including infrastructure and work 
environment; 


c) Required verification, validation, monitoring, 
measurement, inspection and test, handling, 
storage, distribution and traceability activities 
specific to the product together with the criteria 
for product acceptance; 
d) Records needed to provide evidence that the 
realization processes and resulting product meet 
requirements (see 4.2.5). 
The output of this planning shall be documented 
in a form suitable for the organization’s method of 
operations. 

NOTE — Further information can be found in ISO 14971. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


7.2 Customer-related Processes 


7.2.1 Determination of Requirements Related to 
Product 


The organization shall determine: 


a) Requirements specified by the customer, including 
the requirements for delivery and post-delivery 
activities; 

b) Requirements not stated by the customer but 
necessary for specified or intended use, as known; 


c) Applicable regulatory requirements related to the 
product; 


d) Any user training needed to ensure specified 
performance and safe use of the medical device; 


e) Any additional requirements determined by the 
organization. 


7.2.2 Review of Requirements Related to Product 


The organization shall review the requirements related 
to product. This review shall be conducted prior to 
the organization’s commitment to supply product to 
the customer (for example, submission of tenders, 
acceptance of contracts or orders, acceptance of 
changes to contracts or orders) and shall ensure that: 


a) Product requirements are defined and documented; 


b) Contract or order requirements differing from 
those previously expressed are resolved; 
c) Applicable regulatory requirements are met; 
d) Anyusertraining identifiedinaccordancewith7.2.1 
is available or planned to be available; 
e) The organization has the ability to meet the defined 
requirements. 
Records of the results of the review and actions arising 
from the review shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). When 
the customer provides no documented statement 
of requirement, the customer requirements shall be 
confirmed by the organization before acceptance. 
When product requirements are changed, the 
organization shall ensure that relevant documents are 
amended and that relevant personnel are made aware 
of the changed requirements. 


7.2.3 Communication 


The organization shall plan and document arrangements 
for communicating with customers in relation to: 
a) Product information; 


b) Enquiries, contracts or order handling, including 
amendments; 


c) Customer feedback, including complaints; 
d) Advisory notices. 


The organization shall communicate with regulatory 
authorities in accordance with applicable regulatory 
requirements. 


7.3 Design and Development 


7.3.1 General 


The organization shall document procedures for design 
and development. 


7.3.2 Design and Development Planning 


The organization shall plan and control the design 
and development of product. As appropriate, 
design and development planning documents 
shall be maintained and updated as the design and 
development progresses. 


During design and development planning, the 


organization shall document: 

a) The design and development stages; 

b) The review(s) needed at each design and 
development stage; 

c) The verification, validation, and design transfer 
activities that are appropriate at each design and 
development stage; 

d) The responsibilities and authorities for design and 
development; 

e) The methods to ensure traceability of design and 
development outputs to design and development 
inputs; 

f) The resources needed, 
competence of personnel. 


including necessary 


7.3.3 Design and Development Inputs 


Inputs relating to product requirements shall be 
determined and records maintained (see 4.2.5). These 
inputs shall include: 


a) Functional, performance, usability and safety 
requirements, according to the intended use; [as 
stipulated in Section II of this standard] 


b) Applicable regulatory requirements and standards; 
c) Applicable output(s) of risk management; 


d) As appropriate, information derived from previous 
similar designs; 


e) Other requirements essential for design and 
development of the product and processes. 


These inputs shall be reviewed for adequacy and 
approved. 


Requirements shall be complete, unambiguous, able to 
be verified or validated, and not in conflict with each 
other. 


NOTE — Further information can be found in IEC 62366-1. 


7.3.4 Design and Development Outputs 
Design and development outputs shall: 


a) Meet the input requirements for design and 
development; 


b) Provide appropriate information for purchasing, 
production and service provision; 


c) Contain or reference product acceptance criteria; 


d) Specify the characteristics of the product that are 
essential for its safe and proper use. 


The outputs of design and development shall be in a 
form suitable for verification against the design and 
development inputs and shall be approved prior to 
release. 


Records of the design and development outputs shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.5). 


7.3.5 Design and Development Review 


At suitable stages, systematic reviews of design and 
development shall be performed in accordance with 
planned and documented arrangements to: 


a) Evaluate the ability of the results of design and 
development to meet requirements; 


b) Identify and propose necessary actions. 


Participants in such reviews shall include 
representatives of functions concerned with the design 
and development stage being reviewed, as well as other 
specialist personnel. 


Records of the results of the reviews and any necessary 
actions shall be maintained and include the identification 
of the design under review, the participants involved 
and the date of the review (see 4.2.5). 


7.3.6 Design and Development Verification 


Design and development verification shall be 
performed in accordance with planned and documented 
arrangements to ensure that the design and development 
outputs have met the design and development input 
requirements. 


The organization shall document verification plans 
that include methods, acceptance criteria and, as 
appropriate, statistical techniques with rationale for 
sample size. 


If the intended use requires that the medical device be 
connected to, or have an interface with, other medical 
device(s), verification shall include confirmation 
that the design outputs meet design inputs when so 
connected or interfaced. 


Records of the results and conclusions of the verification 
and necessary actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.4 
and 4.2.5). 


7.3.7 Design and Development Validation 


Design and development validation shall be performed 
in accordance with planned and documented 
arrangements to ensure that the resulting product is 
capable of meeting the requirements for the specified 
application or intended use. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


The organization shall document validation plans 
that include methods, acceptance criteria and, as 
appropriate, statistical techniques with rationale for 
sample size. 


Design validation shall be conducted on representative 
product. Representative product includes initial 
production units, batches or their equivalents. The 
rationale for the choice of product used for validation 
shall be recorded (see 4.2.5). 


As part of design and development validation, the 
organization shall perform clinical evaluations or 
performance evaluations of the medical device in 
accordance with applicable regulatory requirements. 
A medical device used for clinical evaluation or 
performance evaluation is not considered to be released 
for use to the customer. 


If the intended use requires that the medical device be 
connected to, or have an interface with, other medical 
device(s), validation shall include confirmation that the 
requirements for the specified application or intended 
use have been met when so connected or interfaced. 


Validation shall be completed prior to release for use of 
the product to the customer. 


Records of the results and conclusion of validation 
and necessary actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.4 
and 4.2.5). 


7.3.8 Design and Development Transfer 


The organization shall document procedures for 
transfer of design and development outputs to 
manufacturing. These procedures shall ensure that 
design and development outputs are verified as suitable 
for manufacturing before becoming final production 
specifications and that production capability can meet 
product requirements. 


Results and conclusions of the transfer shall be recorded 
(see 4.2.5). 


7.3.9 Control of Design and Development Changes 


The organization shall document procedures to control 
design and development changes. The organization 
shall determine the significance of the change to 
function, performance, usability, safety and applicable 
regulatory requirements for the medical device and its 
intended use. 


Design and development changes shall be identified. 
Before implementation, the changes shall be: 


a) Reviewed; 

b) Verified; 

c) Validated, as appropriate; 
d) Approved. 


The review of design and development changes shall 
include evaluation of the effect of the changes on 


IS 23485 : 2019 


constituent parts and product in process or already 
delivered, inputs or outputs of risk management and 
product realization processes. 


Records of changes, their review and any necessary 
actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


7.3.10 Design and Development Files 


The organization shall maintain a design and 
development file for each medical device type or 
medical device family. This file shall include or 
reference records generated to demonstrate conformity 
to the requirements for design and development and 
records for design and development changes. 


7.4 Purchasing 


7.4.1 Purchasing Process 


The organization shall document procedures (see 4.2.4) 
to ensure that purchased product conforms to specified 
purchasing information. 


The organization shall establish criteria for the 
evaluation and selection of suppliers. The criteria shall 
be: 


a) Based on the supplier’s ability to provide product 
that meets the organization’s requirements; 


b) Based on the performance of the supplier; 


c) Based on the effect of the purchased product on 
the quality of the medical device; 


d) Proportionate to the risk associated with the 
medical device. 


The organization shall plan the monitoring and re- 
evaluation of suppliers. Supplier performance in 
meeting requirements for the purchased product shall 
be monitored. The results of the monitoring shall 
provide an input into the supplier re-evaluation process. 


Non-fulfilment of purchasing requirements shall be 
addressed with the supplier proportionate to the risk 
associated with the purchased product and compliance 
with applicable regulatory requirements. 


Records of the results of evaluation, selection, 
monitoring and re-evaluation of supplier capability or 
performance and any necessary actions arising from 
these activities shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


7.4.2 Purchasing Information 


Purchasing information shall describe or reference the 
product to be purchased, including as appropriate: 
a) Product specifications; 
b) Requirements for product acceptance, procedures, 
processes and equipment; 
c) Requirements for 
personnel; 


qualification of supplier 


d) Quality management system requirements. 


The organization shall ensure the adequacy of specified 
purchasing requirements prior to their communication 
to the supplier. 


Purchasing information shall include, as applicable, 
a written agreement that the supplier notify the 
organization of changes in the purchased product prior 
to implementation of any changes that affect the ability 
of the purchased product to meet specified purchase 
requirements. 


To the extent required for traceability given in 7.5.9, 
the organization shall maintain relevant purchasing 
information in the form of documents (see 4.2.4) and 
records (see 4.2.5). 


7.4.3 Verification of Purchased Product 


The organization shall establish and implement the 
inspection or other activities necessary for ensuring 
that purchased product meets specified purchasing 
requirements. The extent of verification activities 
shall be based on the supplier evaluation results and 
proportionate to the risks associated with the purchased 
product. 


When the organization becomes aware of any changes 
to the purchased product, the organization shall 
determine whether these changes affect the product 
realization process or the medical device. 


When the organization or its customer intends to 
perform verification at the supplier’s premises, the 
organization shall state the intended verification 
activities and method of product release in the 
purchasing information. 


Records of the verification shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 


7.5 Production and Service Provision 


7.5.1 Control of Production and Service Provision 
Production and service provision shall be planned, 
carried out, monitored and controlled to ensure that 
product conforms to specification. As appropriate, 
production controls shall include but are not limited to: 
a) Documentation of procedures and methods for the 
control of production (see 4.2.4); 
b) Qualification of infrastructure; 
c) Implementation of monitoring and measurement 
of process parameters and product characteristics; 
d) Availability and use of monitoring and measuring 
equipment; 
e) Implementation of defined operations for labelling 
and packaging; 
f) Implementation of product release, delivery and 
post-delivery activities. 
The organization shall establish and maintain a record 
(see 4.2.5) for each medical device or batch of medical 


devices that provides traceability to the extent specified 
in 7.5.9 and identifies the amount manufactured and 
amount approved for distribution. The record shall be 
verified and approved. 


7.5.2 Cleanliness of Product 


The organization shall document requirements for 
cleanliness of product or contamination control of 
product if: 


a) Product is cleaned by the organization prior to 
sterilization or its use; 

b) Product is supplied non-sterile and is to be 

subjected to a cleaning process prior to sterilization 

or its use; 

c) Product cannot be cleaned prior to sterilization or 

its use, and its cleanliness is of significance in use; 

d) Product is supplied to be used non-sterile, and its 

cleanliness is of significance in use; 

e) Process agents are to be removed from product 

during manufacture. 


If product is cleaned in accordance with a) or b) above, 
the requirements contained in 6.4.1 do not apply prior 
to the cleaning process. 


7.5.3 Installation Activities 


The organization shall document requirements for 
medical device installation and acceptance criteria for 
verification of installation, as appropriate. 


If the agreed customer requirements allow installation 
of the medical device to be performed by an external 
party other than the organization or its supplier, the 
organization shall provide documented requirements 
for medical device installation and verification of 
installation. 


Records of medical device installation and verification 
of installation performed by the organization or its 
supplier shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


7.5.4 Servicing Activities 


If servicing of the medical device is a specified 
requirement, the organization shall document servicing 
procedures, reference materials, and reference 
measurements, as necessary, for performing servicing 
activities and verifying that product requirements are 
met. 


The organization shall analyse records of servicing 
activities carried out by the organization or its supplier: 


a) To determine if the information is to be handled as 
a complaint; 
b) As appropriate, for input to the improvement 
process. 
Records of servicing activities carried out by the 


organization or its supplier shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 


11 


IS 23485 : 2019 


7.5.5 Particular Requirements for Sterile Medical 
Devices 


The organization shall maintain records of the 
sterilization process parameters used for each 
sterilization batch (see 4.2.5). Sterilization records 
shall be traceable to each production batch of medical 
devices. 


7.5.6 Validation of Processes for Production and 
Service Provision 


The organization shall validate any processes for 
production and service provision where the resulting 
output cannot be or is not verified by subsequent 
monitoring or measurement and, as a consequence, 
deficiencies become apparent only after the product is 
in use or the service has been delivered. 


Validation shall demonstrate the ability of these 
processes to achieve planned results consistently. 


The organization shall document procedures for 
validation of processes, including: 


a) 


Defined criteria for review and approval of the 
processes; 
b) Equipment qualification and qualification of 
personnel; 


Use of specific 
acceptance criteria; 
As appropriate, statistical 
rationale for sample sizes; 


methods, and 


c) 


procedures 


d) techniques with 


e) 
f) 


g) 
The organization shall document procedures for the 
validation of the application of computer software used 
in production and service provision. Such software 
applications shall be validated prior to initial use 
and, as appropriate, after changes to such software or 
its application. The specific approach and activities 
associated with software validation and revalidation 
shall be proportionate to the risk associated with the 
use of the software, including the effect on the ability 
of the product to conform to specifications. 


Requirements for records (see 4.2.5); 
Revalidation, including criteria for revalidation; 


Approval of changes to the processes. 


Records of the results and conclusion of validation 
and necessary actions from the validation shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.4 and 4.2.5). 


7.5.7 Particular requirements for validation of processes 
for sterilization and sterile barrier systems 


The organization shall document procedures (see 4.2.4) 
for the validation of processes for sterilization and 
sterile barrier systems. 


Processes for sterilization and sterile barrier systems 
shall be validated prior to implementation and following 
product or process changes, as appropriate. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


Records of the results and, conclusion of validation 
and necessary actions from the validation shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.4 and 4.2.5). 


NOTE — Further information can be found in IS/ISO 11607-1 
and IS/ISO 11607-2. 


7.5.8 Identification 


The organization shall document procedures for 
product identification and identify product by suitable 
means throughout product realization. 


The organization shall identify product status with 
respect to monitoring and measurement requirements 
throughout product realization. Identification of product 
status shall be maintained throughout production, 
storage, installation and servicing of product to 
ensure that only product that has passed the required 
inspections and tests or released under an authorized 
concession is dispatched, used or installed. 


If required by applicable regulatory requirements, the 
organization shall document a system to assign unique 
device identification to the medical device. 


The organization shall document procedures to ensure 
that medical devices returned to the organization are 
identified and distinguished from conforming product. 


7.5.9 Traceability 
7.5.9.1 General 


The organization shall document procedures for 
traceability. These procedures shall define the extent 
of traceability in accordance with applicable regulatory 
requirements and the records to be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 


7.5.9.2 Particular 
medical devices 


requirements for implantable 


The records required for traceability shall include 
records of components, materials, and conditions for 
the work environment used, if these could cause the 
medical device not to satisfy its specified safety and 
performance requirements. 


The organization shall require that suppliers of 
distribution services or distributors maintain records of 
the distribution of medical devices to allow traceability 
and that these records are available for inspection. 


Records of the name and address of the shipping 
package consignee shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


7.5.10 Customer Property 


The organization shall identify, verify, protect, and 
safeguard customer property provided for use or 
incorporation into the product while it is under the 
organization’s control or being used by the organization. 
If any customer property is lost, damaged or otherwise 
found to be unsuitable for use, the organization shall 
report this to the customer and maintain records 
(see 4.2.5). 


12 


7.5.11 Preservation of Product 


The organization shall document procedures for 
preserving the conformity of product to requirements 
during processing, storage, handling, and distribution. 
Preservation shall apply to the constituent parts of a 
medical device. 


The organization shall protect product from alteration, 
contamination or damage when exposed to expected 
conditions and hazards during processing, storage, 
handling, and distribution by: 


a) Designing and constructing suitable packaging 
and shipping containers; 


b) Documenting requirements for special conditions 
needed if packaging alone cannot provide 
preservation. 

If special conditions are required, they shall be 
controlled and recorded (see 4.2.5). 


7.6 Control 
Equipment 


of Monitoring and Measuring 


The organization shall determine the monitoring and 
measurement to be undertaken and the monitoring and 
measuring equipment needed to provide evidence of 
conformity of product to determined requirements. 


The organization shall document procedures to ensure 
that monitoring and measurement can be carried out 
and are carried out in a manner that is consistent with 
the monitoring and measurement requirements. 


As necessary to ensure valid results, measuring 
equipment shall: 


a) Be calibrated or verified, or both, at specified 
intervals, or prior to use, against measurement 
standards traceable to Indian or national 
measurement standards: when no such standards 
exist, the basis used for calibration or verification 
shall be recorded (see 4.2.5); 


Be adjusted or re-adjusted as necessary: such 
adjustments or re-adjustments shall be recorded 
(see 4.2.5); 


b) 


c) Have identification in order to determine its 
calibration status; 

d) Be safeguarded from adjustments that would 
invalidate the measurement result; 

e) Be protected from damage and deterioration 
during handling, maintenance and storage. 

The organization shall perform calibration or 


verification in accordance with documented procedures. 
In addition, the organization shall assess and record the 
validity of the previous measuring results when the 
equipment is found not to conform to requirements. 
The organization shall take appropriate action in regard 
to the equipment and any product affected. 


Records of the results of calibration and verification 
shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


The organization shall document procedures for the 
validation of the application of computer software used 
for the monitoring and measurement of requirements. 
Such software applications shall be validated prior to 
initial use and, as appropriate, after changes to such 
software or its application. The specific approach 
and activities associated with software validation 
and revalidation shall be proportionate to the risk 
associated with the use of the software, including 
the effect on the ability of the product to conform to 
specifications. 


Records of the results and conclusion of validation 
and necessary actions from the validation shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.4 and 4.2.5). 


NOTE — Further information can be found in IS/ISO 10012. 


8 MEASUREMENT, 
IMPROVEMENT 


ANALYSIS AND 


8.1 General 


The organization shall plan and implement the 
monitoring, measurement, analysis and improvement 
processes needed to: 


a) Demonstrate conformity of product; 


b) Ensure conformity of the quality management 
system; 
of 


c) Maintain the effectiveness the 


management system. 


This shall include determination of appropriate 
methods, including statistical techniques, and the 
extent of their use. 


quality 


8.2 Monitoring and Measurement 


8.2.1 Feedback 


As one of the measurements of the effectiveness of 
the quality management system, the organization shall 
gather and monitor information relating to whether 
the organization has met customer requirements. The 
methods for obtaining and using this information shall 
be documented. 


The organization shall document procedures for the 
feedback process. This feedback process shall include 
provisions to gather data from production as well as 
post-production activities. 


The information gathered in the feedback process 
shall serve as potential input into risk management for 
monitoring and maintaining the product requirements 
as well as the product realization or improvement 
processes. 


If applicable regulatory requirements require the 
organization to gain specific experience from post- 
production activities, the review of this experience 
shall form part of the feedback process. 


13 


IS 23485 : 2019 


8.2.2 Complaint Handling 


The organization shall document procedures for timely 
complaint handling in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements. 


These procedures shall include at a minimum 
requirements and responsibilities for: 


Receiving and recording information; 


Evaluating information to determine if the 


feedback constitutes a complaint; 
Investigating complaints; 


Determining the need to report the information to 
the appropriate regulatory authorities; 


e) 
f) 


Handling of complaint-related product; 


Determining the need to initiate corrections or 
corrective actions. 


If any complaint is not investigated, justification shall 
be documented. Any correction or corrective action 
resulting from the complaint handling process shall be 
documented. 


If an investigation determines activities outside 
the organization contributed to the complaint, 
relevant information shall be exchanged between the 
organization and the external party involved. 


Complaint handling records shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 


8.2.3 Reporting to Regulatory Authorities 


If applicable regulatory requirements require 
notification of complaints that meet specified reporting 
criteria of adverse events or issuance of advisory 
notices, the organization shall document procedures 
for providing notification to the appropriate regulatory 
authorities. 


Records of reporting to regulatory authorities shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.5). 
8.2.4 Internal Audit 


The organization shall conduct internal audits at 
planned intervals to determine whether the quality 
management system: 


a) Conforms to planned and documented 
arrangements, requirements of this Indian 
Standard, quality management system 


requirements established by the organization, and 
applicable regulatory requirements; 


b) Is effectively implemented and maintained. 
The organization shall document a procedure to describe 
the responsibilities and requirements for planning and 
conducting audits and recording and reporting audit 
results. 


An audit program shall be planned, taking into 
consideration the status and importance of the 


IS 23485 : 2019 


processes and area to be audited, as well as the results 
of previous audits. The audit criteria, scope, interval 
and methods shall be defined and recorded (see 4.2.5). 
The selection of auditors and conduct of audits shall 
ensure objectivity and impartiality of the audit process. 
Auditors shall not audit their own work. 


Records of the audits and their results, including 
identification of the processes and areas audited and the 
conclusions, shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


The management responsible for the area being 
audited shall ensure that any necessary corrections and 
corrective actions are taken without undue delay to 
eliminate detected nonconformities and their causes. 
Follow-up activities shall include the verification 
of the actions taken and the reporting of verification 
results. 


NOTE — Further information can be found in IS/ISO 19011. 


8.2.5 Monitoring and Measurement of Processes 


The organization shall apply suitable methods for 
monitoring and, as appropriate, measurement of the 
quality management system processes. These methods 
shall demonstrate the ability of the processes to achieve 
planned results. When planned results are not achieved, 
correction and corrective action shall be taken, as 
appropriate. 


8.2.6 Monitoring and Measurement of Product 


The organization shall monitor and measure the 
characteristics of the product to verify that product 
requirements have been met. This shall be carried out 
at applicable stages of the product realization process 
in accordance with the planned and documented 
arrangements and documented procedures. 


Evidence of conformity to the acceptance criteria shall 
be maintained. The identity of the person authorizing 
release of product shall be recorded (see 4.2.5). As 
appropriate, records shall identify the test equipment 
used to perform measurement activities. 


Product release and service delivery shall not proceed 
until the planned and documented arrangements have 
been satisfactorily completed. 


For implantable medical devices, the organization 
shall record the identity of personnel performing any 
inspection or testing. 


8.3 Control of Nonconforming Product 


8.3.1 General 


The organization shall ensure that product which does 
not conform to product requirements is identified and 
controlled to prevent its unintended use or delivery. 
The organization shall document a procedure to 
define the controls and related responsibilities and 
authorities for the identification, documentation, 


14 


segregation, evaluation of 


nonconforming product. 


and disposition 


The evaluation of nonconformity shall include a 
determination of the need for an investigation and 
notification of any external party responsible for the 
nonconformity. 


Records of the nature of the nonconformities and any 
subsequent action taken, including the evaluation, any 
investigation and the rationale for decisions shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.5) 


8.3.2 Actions in Response to Nonconforming Product 
Detected before Delivery 


The organization shall deal with nonconforming 
product by one or more of the following ways: 


a) Taking action to eliminate the detected 


nonconformity; 
b) Taking action to preclude its original intended use 
or application; 


c) Authorizing its use, release or acceptance under 
concession. 


The organization shall ensure that nonconforming 
product is accepted by concession only if the 
justification is provided, approval is obtained and 
applicable regulatory requirements are met. Records of 
the acceptance by concession and the identity of the 
person authorizing the concession shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 


8.3.3 Actions in Response to Nonconforming Product 
Detected after Delivery 


When nonconforming product is detected after delivery 
or use has started, the organization shall take action 
appropriate to the effects, or potential effects, of the 
nonconformity. Records of actions taken shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.5). 


The organization shall document procedures for 
issuing advisory notices in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements. These procedures shall be 
capable of being put into effect at any time. Records of 
actions relating to the issuance of advisory notices shall 
be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


8.3.4 Rework 


The organization shall perform rework in accordance 
with documented procedures that takes into account the 
potential adverse effect of the rework on the product. 
These procedures shall undergo the same review and 
approval as the original procedure. 


After the completion of rework, product shall be 
verified to ensure that it meets applicable acceptance 
criteria and regulatory requirements. 


Records of rework shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


8.4 Analysis of Data 


The organization shall document procedures to 
determine, collect and analyse appropriate data to 
demonstrate the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness 
of the quality management system. The procedures 
shall include determination of appropriate methods, 
including statistical techniques and the extent of their 
use. 


The analysis of data shall include data generated as a 
result of monitoring and measurement and from other 
relevant sources and include, at a minimum, input from: 


a) Feedback; 
b) Conformity to product requirements; 


c) Characteristics and trends of processes and 
product, including opportunities for improvement; 


d) Suppliers; 
e) Audits; 
f) Service reports, as appropriate. 


If the analysis of data shows that the quality 
management system is not suitable, adequate or 
effective, the organization shall use this analysis as 
input for improvement as required in 8.5. 


Records of the results of analyses shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.5). 


8.5 Improvement 


8.5.1 General 


The organization shall identify and implement 
any changes necessary to ensure and maintain the 
continued suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the 
quality management system as well as medical device 
safety and performance through the use of the quality 
policy, quality objectives, audit results, post-market 
surveillance, analysis of data, corrective actions, 
preventive actions and management review. 


8.5.2 Corrective Action 


The organization shall take action to eliminate the cause 
of nonconformities in order to prevent recurrence. Any 
necessary corrective actions shall be taken without 
undue delay. Corrective actions shall be proportionate 
to the effects of the nonconformities encountered. 


15 


IS 23485 : 2019 


The organization shall document a procedure to define 
requirements for: 


a) Reviewing nonconformities 


complaints); 


(including 


Determining the causes of nonconformities; 


Evaluating the need for action to ensure that 
nonconformities do not recur; 

d) Planning and documenting action needed 
and implementing such action, including, as 
appropriate, updating documentation; 

e) Verifying that the corrective action does not 
adversely affect the ability to meet applicable 
regulatory requirements or the safety and 


performance of the medical device; 


f) 


Reviewing the effectiveness of corrective action 
taken. 


Records of the results of any investigation and of action 
taken shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


8.5.3 Preventive Action 


The organization shall determine action to eliminate 
the causes of potential nonconformities in order to 
prevent their occurrence. Preventive actions shall be 
proportionate to the effects of the potential problems. 


The organization shall document a procedure to 
describe requirements for: 


a) Determining potential nonconformities and their 
causes; 

b) Evaluating the need for action to prevent 

occurrence of nonconformities; 

c) Planning and documenting action needed 

and implementing such action, including, as 

appropriate, updating documentation; 

d) Verifying that the action does not adversely 

affect the ability to meet applicable regulatory 

requirements or the safety and performance of the 

medical device; 

e) Reviewing the effectiveness of the preventive 

action taken, as appropriate. 


Records of the results of any investigations and of 
action taken shall be maintained (see 4.2.5). 


IS 23485 : 2019 


MEDICAL DEVICES — ESSENTIAL 
PRINCIPLES OF SAFETY AND 
PERFORMANCE OF MEDICAL DEVICES 


SECTION II 


1.0 SCOPE 


This section of the standard identifies and describes 
the six general essential principles of safety and 
performance that apply to all medical devices, including 
IVD medical devices (in vitro diagnostic). 


This section also identifies and describes the additional 
essential principles of safety and performance 
which need to be considered during the design and 
manufacturing process, which are relevant to Non-[VD 
medical devices as well as to IVD medical devices. 


2.0 GENERAL 


The essential principles of safety and performance are 
the general, high-level criteria that when met indicate 
that a medical device is safe and effective. Regulatory 
requirements expect that a medical device be safe and 
effective during its life-cycle and so conformity with 
the essential principles of safety and performance has 
to be achieved throughout the life-cycle of the medical 
device. 


For the medical device manufacturer, this usually 
means that their medical device has to be: 
a) Designed to be safe and effective, complying with 
the essential principles, 


b) Manufactured 
characteristics, 


to maintain the design 
c) Used in a way that maintains the design 


characteristics, and 


d) In the case of findings while the medical device 
is in the post-production phase, there’s a need 
toevaluate the production and post-production 
information for relevancy to safety and 
effectiveness and a redesign might be needed to 
make the medical device compliant again with the 
essential principles. 


3.0 ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES OF SAFETY AND 
PERFORMANCE OF MEDICAL DEVICES 


Medical device performance can include technical 
functions in addition to clinical effectiveness. 
Performance is easier to objectively measure and 
quantify than clinical effectiveness. Performance may 
be described as how well or accurately a medical device 
carries out its use(s) as intended by its manufacturer. 
For some medical devices, medical benefit or clinical 
effectiveness can only be determined by conducting 
clinical investigations carried out in human subjects. 


16 


The manufacturer of a medical device is expected 
to design and manufacture a product that is safe 
and clinically effective throughout its life-cycle. 
This section describes fundamental design and 
manufacturing criteria, referred to as essential 
principles of safety and performance, to ensure this 
outcome. This section is structured to provide general 
essential principles that apply to all medical devices 
including IVD medical devices and additional essential 
principles of safety and performance that need to be 
considered during the design and manufacturing 
process. 


Essential principles of safety and performance provide 
broad, high-level, criteria for design, production, and 
post-production (including post-market surveillance) 
throughout the life-cycle of all medical devices, 
ensuring their safety and performance. The concept 
of essential principles was developed by the Global 
Harmonization Task Force. The concept is intended to 
encourage convergence in the evolution of regulatory 
systems for medical devices. 


3.1 General Essential Principles for all Medical 
Devices 


3.1.1 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way that, when used under the 
conditions and for the purposes intended and, where 
applicable, by virtue of the technical knowledge, 
experience, education or training and the medical and 
physical conditions of intended users, they will perform 
as intended by the manufacturer and not compromise 
the clinical condition or the safety of patients, or 
the safety and health of users or, where applicable, 
other persons, provided that any risks which may be 
associated with their use constitute acceptable risks 
when weighed against benefits to the patient and are 
compatible with a high level of protection of health and 
safety. This shall include: 


a) Reducing, as far as reasonably practicable and 
appropriate, the risk of use error due to the 
design of the medical device user interface and 
the environment in which the medical device is 
intended to be used (design for patient safety); 


Consideration of the technical knowledge, 
experience, education and training and, where 
applicable, the medical and physical conditions 
of intended users (design for lay, professional, 
disabled or other users). 


b 


ma 


3.1.2 The solutions adopted by the manufacturer for the 
design and manufacture of the medical device should 
conform to safety principles, taking into account the 
generally acknowledged state of the art. When risk 
reduction is required, the manufacturer should control 
the risks so that the residual risk associated with each 
hazard is judged acceptable. The manufacturer should 
apply the following principles in the priority order 
listed: 


a) Identify known or foreseeable hazards and 
estimate the associated risks arising from the 
intended use and foreseeable misuse; 


b) Eliminate risks as far as reasonably practicable 
through inherently safe design and manufacture; 


c) Reduce as far as reasonably practicable the 
remaining risks by taking adequate protection 
measures, including alarms or information for 
safety; 


d) Inform users of any residual risk. 


3.1.3 The medical device should achieve the 
performance intended by the manufacturer and be 
designed, manufactured and packaged in such a way 
that during normal conditions of use, they are suitable 
for their intended purpose. 


3.1.4 The characteristics and performances referred to 
in essential principles at 3.1.1, 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 should 
not be adversely affected to such a degree that the 
health or safety of the patient or the user and, where 
applicable, of other persons are compromised during 
the lifetime of the medical device, as indicated by the 
manufacturer, when the medical device is subjected to 
the stresses which can occur during normal conditions 
of use and has been properly maintained in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s instructions. 


3.1.5 The medical device should be designed, 
manufactured and packaged in such a way that their 
characteristics and performances during their intended 
use will not be adversely affected by transport and storage 
conditions (for example, fluctuations of temperature 
and humidity) taking account of the instructions and 
information provided by the manufacturer. 


3.1.6 Any undesirable side-effect shall constitute an 
acceptable risk when weighed against the performances 
intended. All known and foreseeable risks, and any 
undesirable effects, should be minimized and be 
acceptable when weighed against the benefits of the 
intended performance of the medical device during 
normal conditions of use. 


3.2 Additional Essential Principles of Safety and 
Performance of non-IVD Medical Devices 


3.2.1 Clinical Evaluation 


For those medical devices, where a clinical evaluation 
is required, the clinical evaluation should review 


17 


IS 23485 : 2019 


clinical data to establish that a favourable benefit-risk 
ratio exists for the medical device in the form of 


e Clinical investigation reports, 
e Literature reports/reviews, and 


e Clinical experience. 


NOTE — Content and format of a clinical evaluation report 
is specific to the authority having jurisdiction. [Further 
information can be found in IS/ISO 14155] 


3.2.2 Chemical, Physical, and Biological Properties 


3.2.2.1 The medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to ensure the 
characteristics and performance referred to in essential 
principles at 3.1. Particular attention should be paid to 
the following: 


a) The choice of materials used, particularly as regards 
toxicity and, where appropriate, flammability; 


b) The compatibility between the materials used and 
biological tissues, cells, and body fluids taking 
account of the intended use of the medical device; 


c) The choice of materials used reflecting, where 
appropriate, matters such as hardness, wear and 
fatigue strength; 


d) Where appropriate, the results of biophysical 
or modelling research whose validity has been 
demonstrated beforehand. 


3.2.2.2 The medical device should be designed, 
manufactured and packaged in such a way as to 
minimize the risk posed by contaminants and residues 
to the persons involved in the transport, storage and 
use of the medical device and to the patients, taking 
account the intended purpose of the product. Particular 
attention should be paid to the tissues exposed and to 
the duration and frequency of the exposure. 


3.2.2.3 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way that they can be used 
safely with the materials, substances and gases with 
which they enter into contact during their normal use or 
during routine procedures. 


3.2.2.4 If the medical device is intended to administer 
medicinal products, they should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to be compatible with 
the medicinal products concerned according to the 
provisions and restrictions governing these products 
and their performance and is maintained in accordance 
with the intended use. 


3.2.2.5 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to reduce as far as 
reasonably practicable and appropriate the risks 
posed by substances that may leach or leak from the 
medical device. Special attention should be given to 
substances which are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic 
to reproduction. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


3.2.3 Infection and Microbial Contamination 


3.2.3.1 The medical devices and manufacturing 
processes should be designed in such a way as to 
eliminate or to reduce as far as reasonably practicable 
and appropriate the risk of infection to patients, users 
and, where applicable, other persons. The design 
should: 


a) Allow easy handling, and, where necessary, 


b) Reduce as far as reasonably practicable and 
appropriate any microbial leakage from the 
medical device and/or microbial exposure during 
use, and 


c) Prevent microbial contamination of the medical 
device or specimen, where applicable, by the 
patient, user or other person. 


3.2.3.1 Medical devices labelled as having a special 
microbiological state should be designed, manufactured 
and packaged to ensure they remain so when placed 
on the market and remain so under the transport and 
storage conditions specified by the manufacturer. 


3.2.3.3 Medical devices delivered in a sterile state 
should be designed, manufactured and packaged in 
a non-reusable pack, and/or according to appropriate 
procedures, to ensure they are sterile when placed on 
the market and remain sterile, under the transport and 
storage conditions indicated by the manufacturer, until 
the protective packaging is damaged or opened. 


3.2.3.4 Medical devices labelled either as sterile or as 
having a special microbiological state should have been 
processed, manufactured and, if applicable, sterilized 
by appropriate, validated methods. 


3.2.3.5 Medical devices intended to be sterilized should 
be manufactured in appropriately controlled (for 
example, environmental) conditions. 


3.2.3.6 Packaging systems for non-sterile medical 
devices should maintain the integrity and cleanliness 
of the product. If the medical devices are to be 
sterilized prior to use, minimize the risk of microbial 
contamination; the packaging system should be 
suitable taking account the method of sterilization 
indicated by the manufacturer. The labelling of the 
medical device should distinguish between identical 
or similar products sold in both sterile and non-sterile 
conditions. 


3.2.3.7 For the medical devices incorporating a 
substance considered to be a medicinal product/drug, 
these essential principles are not intended to provide 
guidance on combination products as a whole since 
definitions have yet to be harmonized and practice 
varies between different jurisdictions. Where a medical 
device incorporates, as an integral part, a substance 
which, if used separately, may be considered to be 


18 


a medicinal product/drug as defined in the relevant 
legislation that applies in that jurisdiction and which 
is liable to act upon the body with action ancillary 
to that of the medical device, the safety, quality and 
performance of the medical device as a whole should 
be verified, as well as the safety, quality and efficacy of 
the substance in the specific application 


3.2.3.8 When considering combination products 
as described in essential principle 3.2.3.7, the non- 
medical device aspects (for example, substance, human 
blood derivative, ancillary substance) shall be assessed 
according to the requirements of the relevant authority 
having jurisdiction. 


3.2.4 Medical Devices Incorporating Materials of 
Biological Origin 


3.2.4.1 In some jurisdictions, products incorporating 
tissues, cells and substances of animal origin may be 
considered medical devices. In this case, such tissue, 
cells and substances should originate from animals 
that have been subjected to veterinary controls and 
surveillance adapted to the intended use of the tissues. 
National regulations may require that the manufacturer 
and/or the authority having jurisdiction maintain the 
information and the geographical origin of the animals. 
Processing, preservation, testing and handling of the 
tissue, cells and substances of animal origin should be 
carried out so as to provide optimal safety for patients, 
users and, by applicable, other persons. In particular, 
safety with regard to viruses and other transmissible 
agents should be addressed by implementation of 
validated methods of elimination or inactivation in the 
course of the manufacturing process. 


3.2.4.2 In some jurisdictions, products incorporating 
human tissues, cells and substances may be considered 
medical devices. In this case, the selection of sources, 
donors and/or substances of human origin, the 
processing, preservation, testing and handling of tissues, 
cells and substances of such origin should be carried out 
so as to provide optimal safety for patients, users and, 
where applicable, other persons. In particular, safety 
with regard to viruses and other transmissible agents 
should be addressed by implementation of validated 
methods of elimination or inactivation in the course of 
the manufacturing process. 


3.2.4.3 In some jurisdictions, products incorporating 
cells and substances of microbial origin may be 
considered medical devices. In this case processing, 
preservation, testing and handling of cells and 
substances should be carried out so as to provide 
optimal safety for patients, users and, where 
applicable, other persons. In particular, safety with 
regard to viruses and other transmissible agents should 
be addressed by implementation of validated methods 
of elimination or inactivation in the course of the 
manufacturing process. 


3.2.5 Environmental Properties 


3.2.5.1 If the medical device is intended for use in 
combination with other medical devices or equipment 
the whole combination, including the connection system 
should be safe and should not impair the specified 
performance of the medical device. Any restrictions 
on use applying to such combinations should be 
indicated on the label and/or in the instructions for use. 
Connections which the user has to handle, such as fluid, 
gas transfer or mechanical coupling, should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce 
as far as reasonably practicable and appropriate risks 
from incorrect connection. 


3.2.5.2 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce as 
far as reasonably practicable and appropriate: 


a) The risks of injury to the patient, user or other 
persons in connection with their physical and 
ergonomic features, 

b) The risks of use error due to the design of the 
medical device user interface and the environment 
in which the medical device is intended to be used, 
c) The risks connected with reasonably foreseeable 
external influences or environmental conditions, 
such as magnetic fields, external electrical and 
electromagnetic effects, electrostatic discharge, 
radiation associated with diagnostic or therapeutic 
procedures, pressure, humidity, temperature or 
variations in pressure and acceleration, 

d) The risks associated with the use of the medical 

device when it comes into contact with materials, 

liquids, and gases to which it is exposed during 
normal conditions of use, 

e) The risks associated with possible negative 

interaction between software and the environment 

within which it operates and interacts, 

The risks of accidental penetration of substances 

into the medical device, 


The risks of reciprocal interference with other 
medical devices normally used in the investigations 
or for the treatment given, and 


g) 


h) The risks arising where maintenance or calibration 
are not possible (as with implants) from aging 
of materials used or loss of accuracy of any 


measuring or control mechanism. 


3.2.5.3 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce 
as far as reasonably practicable and appropriate risks 
of fire or explosion during normal use and in single 
fault condition. Particular attention should be paid 
to a medical device whose intended use includes 
exposure to or use in association with flammable 
substances or substances which could cause 
combustion. 


19 


IS 23485 : 2019 


3.2.5.4 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way that adjustment, calibration, 
and maintenance, where such is necessary to achieve 
the performances intended, can be done safely. 


3.2.5.5 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to facilitate the safe 
disposal of any waste substances. 


3.2.6 Medical Devices with a Diagnostic or Measuring 
Function 


3.2.6.1 A diagnostic medical device or a medical device 
with a measuring function should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to provide sufficient 
accuracy, precision and stability for their intended 
purpose of the medical device, based on appropriate 
scientific and technical methods. 


3.2.6.2 The limits of accuracy should be indicated by 
the manufacturer. 


3.2.6.3 Any measurement, monitoring and display scale 
should be designed in line with ergonomic principles, 
taking into account the intended purpose of the medical 
device. 


3.2.6.4 Whenever possible values expressed numerically 
should be in commonly accepted, standardized units, 
and understood by users of the medical device. While 
generally supporting the convergence on the global 
use of internationally standardized measurement units, 
considerations of safety, user familiarity and established 
clinical practice may justify the use of other recognized 
measurement units. 


3.2.7 Protection Against Radiation 


3.2.7.1 General: 


The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured and packaged in such a way that 
exposure of patients, users and other persons to any 
emitted radiation should be reduced as far as reasonably 
practicable and be appropriate for the intended purpose, 
whilst not restricting the application of appropriate 
specified levels for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes. 


3.2.7.2 Intended radiation: 


a) Where a medical device is designed to emit 
hazardous, or potentially hazardous, levels of 
visible and/or invisible radiation necessary for 
a specific medical purpose the benefit of which 
is considered to outweigh the risks inherent in 
the emission, it should be possible for the user 
to control the emissions. Such a medical device 
should be designed and manufactured to ensure 
reproducibility of relevant variable parameters 
within an acceptable tolerance. 


Where a medical device is intended to emit 
potentially hazardous, visible and/or invisible 


b) 


IS 23485 : 2019 


radiation, they should be fitted, where reasonably 
practicable, with visual displays and/or audible 
warnings of such emissions. 


3.2.7.3 Unintended radiation: 


The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way that exposure of patients, 
users and other persons to the emission of unintended, 
stray or scattered radiation is reduced as far as 
reasonably practicable and appropriate. 


3.2.7.4 Instructions for use: 


The operating instructions for a medical device emitting 
radiation should give detailed information as to the 
nature of the emitted radiation, means of protecting the 
patient and the user, and on ways of avoiding misuse 
and of eliminating the risks inherent in installation. 


3.2.7.5 Ionizing radiation: 


a) A medical device intended to emit ionizing 
radiation should be designed and manufactured 
in such a way as to ensure that, where reasonably 
practicable and appropriate, the quantity, geometry 
and energy distribution (or quality) of radiation 
emitted can be varied and controlled taking into 
account the intended use. 

b) A medical device emitting ionizing radiation 
intended for diagnostic radiology should be 
designed and manufactured in such a way as to 
achieve appropriate image and/or output quality for 
the intended medical purpose whilst minimizing 
radiation exposure of the patient and user. 


A medical device emitting ionizing radiation, 
intended for therapeutic radiology, should be 
designed and manufactured in such a way as to 
enable reliable monitoring and control of the 
delivered dose, the beam type and energy and 
where appropriate the energy distribution of the 
radiation beam. 


3.2.8 Medical Devices that Incorporate Software and 
Software as a Medical Device 


3.2.8.1 A medical device incorporating electronic 
programmable systems, including software, or software 
that is a medical device itself, should be designed 
to ensure repeatability, reliability and performance 
according to the intended use. In the event of a single 
fault condition, appropriate means should be adopted to 
eliminate or reduce as far as reasonably practicable and 
appropriate consequential risks. 


3.2.8.2 For a medical device which incorporates 
software or for software that is a medical device 
itself, the software shall be validated according to the 
state of the art taking into account the principles of 
development life-cycle, risk management, verification 
and validation. 


20 


3.2.9 Active Medical Devices and Devices Connected 
to the Medical Devices 


3.2.9.1 For an active medical device, in the event of 
a single fault condition, appropriate means should be 
adopted to eliminate or reduce as far as reasonably 
practicable and appropriate consequential risks. 


3.2.9.2 The medical device, where the safety of the 
patient depends on an internal power supply, should be 
equipped with a means of determining the state of the 
power supply. 


3.2.9.3 The medical device, where the safety of the 
patient depends on an external power supply, should 
include an alarm system to signal any power failure. 


3.2.9.4 The medical device, intended to monitor one 
or more clinical parameters of a patient, should be 
equipped with appropriate alarm systems to alert the 
user of situations which could lead to death or severe 
deterioration of the patient’s state of health. 


3.2.9.5 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to reduce as far as 
reasonably practicable and appropriate the risks of 
creating electromagnetic interference which could 
impair the operation of this or other medical devices or 
equipment in the usual environment. 


3.2.9.6 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to provide an adequate 
level of intrinsic immunity to electromagnetic 
disturbance to enable them to operate as intended. 


3.2.9.7 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to avoid, as far as 
reasonably practicable and appropriate, the risk of 
accidental electric shocks to the patient, user or any 
other person, both during normal use of the medical 
device and in the event of a single fault condition 
in the medical device, provided that the medical 
device is installed and maintained as indicated by the 
manufacturer. 


3.2.10 Protection Against Mechanical Risks 


3.2.10.1 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to protect the patient and 
user against mechanical risks for example, connected 
with resistance to movement, instability and moving 
parts. 


3.2.10.2 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce 
as far as reasonably practicable and appropriate risks 
arising from vibration generated by the medical device, 
taking into account technical progress and of the 
means available for limiting vibrations, particularly at 
source, unless the vibrations are part of the specified 
performance. 


3.2.10.3 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce 
as far as reasonably practicable and appropriate risks 
arising from the noise emitted, taking account technical 
progress and the means available to reduce noise, 
particularly at source, unless the noise emitted is part 
of the specified performance. 


3.2.10.4 Terminals and connectors to the electricity, 
gas or hydraulic and pneumatic energy supplies 
which the user has to handle should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce as 
far as reasonably practicable and appropriate risks. 


3.2.10.5 The medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce as 
far as reasonably practicable and appropriate, the risk 
of error when certain parts within the medical device 
are intended to be connected or reconnected before or 
during use. 


3.2.10.6 Accessible parts of the medical device 
(excluding the parts or areas intended to supply heat or 
reach given temperatures) and its surroundings should 
not attain potentially dangerous temperatures under 
normal conditions of use. 


3.2.11 Protection Against the Risks Posed to the Patient 
by Energy Supplies or Substances 


3.2.11.1 A medical device for supplying the patient 
with energy or substances should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way that the delivered amount 
can be set and maintained accurately enough to assure 
the safety of the patient and of the user. 


3.2.11.2 The medical device should be fitted with the 
means of preventing and/or indicating any inadequacies 
in the delivered amount which could pose a danger. 
The medical device should incorporate suitable 
means to prevent, as far as reasonably practicable 
and appropriate, the accidental release of dangerous 
levels of energy or substances from an energy and/or 
substance source. 


3.2.12 Controls and Indicators 


3.2.12.1 The function of the controls and indicators 
should be clearly specified on the medical device. 


3.2.12.2 Where the medical device bears instructions 
required for its operation or indicates operating or 
adjustment parameters by means of a visual system, 
such information should be understandable to the user 
and, as appropriate, the patient. 


3.2.13 Protection against the risks posed by medical 
devices intended by the manufacturer for use by lay 
persons 


3.213.1 A medical device for use by lay persons should 
be designed and manufactured in such a way that they 


21 


IS 23485 : 2019 


perform appropriately for their intended purpose taking 
into account the skills and the means available to lay 
persons and the influence resulting from the variation 
that can be reasonably be anticipated in the lay person‘s 
technique and environment. The information and 
instructions provided by the manufacturer should be 
easy for the lay person to understand and apply. 


3.2.13.2 A medical device for use by lay persons 
should be designed and manufactured in such a way 
as to remove or reduce as far as reasonably practicable 
and appropriate the risk of error during use by the lay 
person in the handling of the medical device and also in 
the interpretation of results. 


3.2.13.3 A medical device for use by lay persons should, 
as far as reasonably practicable and appropriate, include 
a procedure by which the lay person can verify that, at 
the time of use, the product will perform as intended by 
the manufacturer. 


3.2.14 Label and Instructions for Use 


3.2.14.1 Each medical device should be accompanied 
by the information needed to use it safely and properly, 
and to ensure the intended performance, taking into 
account the training and knowledge of the potential 
users and to identify the manufacturer of the medical 
device. This information comprises the details and the 
data on the label and in the instructions for use. All this 
information should be easily understood. 


3.2.14.2 If the intended purpose of the medical device 
is not obvious to the user, the manufacturer shall clearly 
state it on the label and in the instructions for use. 


3.2.14.3 As far as practicable and appropriate, the 
information needed to use the medical device safely 
shall be set out on the medical device itself. If not 
practicable and appropriate, the information shall be 
on the individual packaging. If the medical device is 
not individually packaged, the information shall be set 
out in the leaflet supplied with one or more medical 
devices. Instructions for use shall be included in the 
packaging for every medical device. 


3.2.14.4 Where appropriate, this information should 
take the form of symbols. Any symbol or identification 
colour used shall conform to the relevant standards. 
The symbols and colours shall be described in the 
documentation supplied with the medical device. 


3.2.14.5 The label shall meet the requirements of the 
authority having jurisdiction and contain the following 
particulars: 


a) The name or trade name and address of the 
manufacturer and where the manufacturer does not 
have an address within the locale, an authorized 
representative within the locale, to which the user 
can refer; 


IS 23485 : 2019 


b) The details strictly necessary to identify the 
medical device and the contents of the packaging 
especially for the users; 


c) Where appropriate, the word ‘sterile’; 


d) Where appropriate, the batch code, preceded by 
the word ‘LOT’, or the serial number; 


e) Where appropriate, an indication of the date by 
which the medical device should be used (for 
example, expiration date), in safety, expressed as 
the year and month; 


f) Where appropriate, an indication that the medical 
device is for single use. A manufacturer’s 
indication of single use shall be consistent; 


g) If the medical device is custom-made, the words 
‘custom-made device’ or follow n) below; 


h) If the medical device is intended for clinical 
investigations, the words ‘exclusively for clinical 
investigations’ or follow n) below; 


j) Any special storage and/or handling conditions; 
k) Any special operating instructions; 
m) Any warnings and/or precautions to take; 


n) Year of manufacture for an active medical device 
other than that covered by e). This indication may 
be included in the batch or serial number; 


p) Where applicable, method of sterilization; and 


q) Where applicable, other requirements from 
authorities having jurisdiction. 

EXAMPLES Global Medical Device Nomenclature (GMDN), 
Unique Device Identifier (UDI), and Universal Medical Device 
Nomenclature System (UMDNS). 


3.2.14.6 Wherever reasonable and practicable, the 
medical device and detachable components shall be 
identified, where appropriate in terms of batches, to 
allow all appropriate action to detect any potential 
risk posed by the medical device and detachable 
components. 


3.2.14.7 Where appropriate, the instructions for use 
shall contain the following particulars: 


a) The name or trade name and address of the 
manufacturer and where the manufacturer does not 
have an address within the locale, an authorized 
representative within the locale, to which the user 
can refer; 


b) The details strictly necessary to identify the 
medical device and the contents of the packaging 
especially for the users; 


c) Where appropriate, the word ‘STERILE’; 
d) Where appropriate, an indication that the medical 


device is for single use. A manufacturer’s 
indication of single use shall be consistent; 


e) If the medical device is custom-made, the words 
‘custom-made device’ or follow t) below; 


f) If the medical device is intended for clinical 
investigations, the words ‘exclusively for clinical 
investigations’ or follow t) below; 


g) Any special storage and/or handling conditions; 
h) Any special operating instructions; 

j) Any warnings and/or precautions to take; 

k) Where applicable, method of sterilization; 


m) If the medical device shall be installed with or 
connected to other medical devices or equipment 
in order to operate as required for its intended 
purpose, sufficient details of its characteristics to 
identify the correct medical devices or equipment 
to use in order to obtain a safe combination; 


n) All the information needed to verify whether 
the medical device is properly installed and can 
operate correctly and safely, plus details of the 
nature and frequency of the maintenance and 
calibration needed to ensure that the medical 
device operate properly and safely at all times; 


p) Where appropriate, information to avoid certain 
risks in connection with implantation of the 
medical device; 


q) Information regarding the risks of reciprocal 
interference posed by the presence of the 
medical device during specific investigations or 
treatment; 


r) The necessary instructions in the event of damage 
to the sterile packaging and, where appropriate, 
details of appropriate methods of resterilization; 


s) If the medical device is reusable, information 
on the appropriate processes to allow reuse, 
including cleaning, disinfection, packaging and, 
where appropriate, the method of sterilization 
of the medical device to be resterilized, and any 
restriction on the number of reuses. Where the 
medical device is supplied with the intention 
that it be sterilized before use, the instructions 
for cleaning and sterilization shall be such that, 
if correctly followed, the medical device will 
still comply with the requirements in essential 
principles. Ifin accordance with essential principle 
3.2.14.3 no instructions for use are needed, the 
information shall be made available to the user 
upon request; 


t) Details of any further treatment or handling 
needed before the medical device can be used (for 
example, sterilization, final assembly, etc.); 


u) In the case of a medical device emitting radiation 
for medical purposes, details of the nature, type, 


intensity and distribution of this radiation; 
v) Where applicable, other requirements from 


authorities having jurisdiction. 


3.2.14.8 The date of issue or revision of the instructions 
for use relevant to the particular medical device. 


3.2.14.9 The instructions for use shall also include 
details allowing the medical staff to brief the patient 
on any contraindications and any precautions to be 
taken for a medical device intended to be used by a lay 
person. These details should cover in particular: 


a) Precautions to be taken in the event of changes in 

the performance of the medical device; 
b) Precautions to be taken as regards exposure, in 
reasonably foreseeable environmental conditions, 
to magnetic fields, external electrical influences, 
electrostatic discharge, pressure or variations in 
pressure, acceleration, thermal ignition sources, 
etc.; 


Adequate information regarding the medicinal 
product or products which the medical device 
in question is designed to administer, including 
any limitations in the choice of substances to be 
delivered; 

d) Precautions to be taken against any special, 
unusual risks related to the disposal of the medical 
device; 


Medicinal substances, or human blood 
derivatives incorporated into the medical device 
as an integral part in accordance with essential 
principle 3.2.3.7; 


f) 


Degree of accuracy claimed for a medical device 
with a measuring function. 


3.3 Additional Essential Principles of Safety and 
Performance of IVD Medical Devices 


3.3.1 Performance evaluation including analytical 
performance and, where appropriate, clinical 
performance 


3.3.1.1 For an IVD medical device, a performance 
evaluation should be conducted. The performance 
evaluation should review analytical performance data 
and, where appropriate, clinical performance data in 
the form of any: 


a) Scientific, peer-reviewed literature, 
b) Performance study reports, and 
c) Experience gained by routine diagnostic testing. 


To establish that the IVD medical device achieves 
its intended performance during normal conditions 
of use and that the known and foreseeable risks, and 
any undesirable effects, are minimized and acceptable 
when weighed against the benefits of the intended 
performance. 


3.3.1.2 Clinical performance studies using specimens 
from human subjects should be carried out in accordance 
with the spirit of the Declaration of Helsinki. This 
includes every step in the clinical performance study 
from first consideration of the need and justification of 
the study to publication of the results. In addition, some 


23 


IS 23485 : 2019 


countries may have specific regulatory requirements 
for informed consent. 


NOTE — Content and format of a performance evaluation 
report is specific to the authority having jurisdiction. 


3.3.2 Chemical, Physical and Biological Properties 


3.3.2.1 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to ensure the 
characteristics and performance referred to in essential 
principle at 3.1.6. Particular attention should be paid to 
the possibility of impairment of analytical performance 
due to incompatibility between the materials used and 
the specimens or analyte (measurand) to be detected 
(such as biological tissues, cells, body fluids and 
microorganisms), taking account of its intended use. 


3.3.2.2 The IVD medical device should be designed, 
manufactured and packaged in such a way as to 
minimize the risk posed by contaminants and residues 
to the persons involved in the transport, storage and 
use of the IVD medical device and to patients, taking 
account of the intended use of the IVD medical device. 


3.3.2.3 The IVD medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to reduce, appropriately 
the risks posed by substances that may leach or leak 
from the IVD medical device. Special attention should 
be given to substances, which are carcinogenic, 
mutagenic or toxic to reproduction. 


3.3.2.4 The IVD medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to reduce, appropriately 
the risks posed by the unintentional ingress or egress of 
substances into or from the IVD medical device taking 
into account the IVD medical device and the nature of 
the environment in which it is intended to be used. 


3.3.3 Infection and Microbial Contamination 


3.3.3.1 The IVD medical device and manufacturing 
processes should be designed in such a way as to 
eliminate or to prevent the risk of infection to user, 
professional or lay, or, where applicable, other person. 
The design should: 


a) Allow easy and safe handling, and, where 
necessary; 


b) Prevent any microbial leakage from the IVD medical 
device or microbial exposure during use; and 


c) Prevent microbial contamination of the IVD 
medical device or specimen, where applicable, by 
the user, professional or lay or other person. 


3.3.3.2 The IVD medical device labelled either as sterile 
or as having a special microbiological state should be 
designed, manufactured and packaged to ensure it 
remains so when placed on the market and remains so 
under the transport and storage conditions specified 
by the manufacturer until the protective packaging is 
damaged or opened. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


3.3.3.3 The IVD medical device labelled either as sterile 
or as having a special microbiological state should 
have been processed, manufactured and, if applicable, 
sterilized by appropriate, validated methods. 


3.3.3.4 The IVD medical device intended to be sterilized 
should be manufactured in appropriately controlled (for 
example, environmental) conditions. 


3.3.3.5 Packaging systems for a non-sterile IVD medical 
device should maintain the integrity and cleanliness of 
the IVD medical device. 


3.3.4 IVD Medical Devices Incorporating Materials of 
Biological Origin 


These essential principles are not intended to provide 
guidance on combination products as a whole since 
definitions have yet to be harmonized and practice 
varies between different jurisdictions. 


3.3.4.1 Where the IVD medical device include tissues, 
cells and substances originating from animals, the 
processing, preservation, testing and handling of 
tissues, cells and substances of animal origin should 
be carried out to provide optimal safety for user, 
professional or lay, or other person. 


3.3.4.2 Safety with regard to viruses and other 
transmissible agents should be addressed by 
implementation of validated methods of elimination or 
inactivation in the course of the manufacturing process. 
This may not apply to certain IVD medical devices if 
the activity of the virus and other transmissible agent 
are integral to the intended use of the IVD medical 
device or when such elimination or inactivation process 
would compromise the performance of the [VD medical 
device. 


National regulations may require that the manufacturer 
or the authority having jurisdiction retain information 
on the geographical origin of the animals. 


3.3.4.3 Where an IVD medical device includes human 
tissues, cells and substances, the selection of sources, 
donors or substances of human origin, processing, 
preservation, testing and handling of tissues, cells 
and substances of such origin should be carried out to 
provide optimal safety for user, professional or lay, or 
other person. In particular, safety with regard to viruses 
and other transmissible agents should be addressed by 
implementation of validated methods of elimination or 
inactivation in the course of the manufacturing process. 
This may not apply to certain IVD medical devices if 
the activity of the virus and other transmissible agent 
are integral to the intended use of the IVD medical 
device or when such elimination or inactivation process 
would compromise the performance of the [VD medical 
device. 


24 


3.3.4.4 Where an IVD medical device includes cells 
and substances of microbial origin, the processing, 
preservation, testing and handling of cells and 
substances should be carried out to provide optimal 
safety for user, professional or lay, or other person. 


In particular, safety with regard to viruses and 
other transmissible agents should be addressed by 
implementation of validated methods of elimination or 
inactivation in the course of the manufacturing process. 
This may not apply to certain IVD medical devices if 
the activity of the virus and other transmissible agent 
are integral to the intended use of the IVD medical 
device or when such elimination or inactivation process 
would compromise the performance of the IVD medical 
device. 


3.3.5 Environmental Properties 


3.3.5.1 If the IVD medical device is intended for use in 
combination with other medical devices or equipment, 
the whole combination, including the connection 
system should not impair the specified performance of 
the medical devices. Any restrictions on use applying 
to such combinations should be indicated on the label 
or in the instructions for use. 


3.3.5.2 The IVD medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce, 
appropriately the following: 


a) The risk of injury to user, professional or lay, or 
other person in connection with their physical and 
ergonomic features; 


b) The risk of use error due to the ergonomic features, 
human factors and the environment in which the 
IVD medical device is intended to be used; 


c) The risks connected with reasonably foreseeable 
external influences or environmental conditions, 
such as magnetic fields, external electrical and 
electromagnetic effects, electrostatic discharge, 
pressure, humidity, temperature or variations 
thereof; 


d) The risks associated with the use of the IVD 
medical device when it comes into contact with 
materials, liquids and gases to which it is exposed 
during normal conditions of use; 


e) The risk associated with the possible negative 
interaction between software and the environment 
within which it operates and interacts; 

f) The risks of accidental penetration of substances 
into the IVD medical device; 

g) The risk of incorrect identification of specimens/ 
samples; and 


h) The risks of reasonably foreseeable interference 
with other medical devices such as carry over 
between IVD medical devices. 


3.3.5.3 The IVD medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to minimize the risks of 
fire or explosion during normal use and in single fault 
condition. Particular attention should be paid to an IVD 
medical device whose intended use includes exposure 
to or use in association with flammable substances or 
substances that could promote combustion. 


3.3.5.4 The IVD medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way that adjustment, calibration 
and maintenance, where such is necessary to achieve 
the performance intended, can be done safely. 


3.3.5.5 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to facilitate the safe 
disposal of any waste substances. 


3.3.6 Performance Characteristics 


3.3.6.1 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way that the performance 
characteristics support the intended use based on 
appropriate scientific and technical methods. In 
particular, where appropriate, the design should 
address sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, which results 
from trueness (bias) and precision (repeatability 
and reproducibility), control of known relevant 
interferences and limits of detection. These performance 
characteristics need to be maintained during the 
lifetime of the [VD medical device as indicated by the 
manufacturer. 


3.3.6.2 Where the performance of an IVD medical 
device depends on the use of calibrators or control 
materials, the traceability of values assigned to such 
calibrators or control materials should be ensured 
through available reference measurement procedures 
or available reference materials of a higher order. 


3.3.6.3 Wherever possible, values expressed 
numerically should be in commonly accepted, 
standardized units and understood by the users of the 
IVD medical device. 


3.3.7 Protection Against Radiation 


3.3.7.1 The IVD medical device should be designed, 
manufactured and packaged in such a way that 
exposure of user, professional or lay, or other person 
to the emitted radiation (intended, unintended, stray or 
scattered) is reduced as far as reasonably practicable 
and appropriate. 


3.3.7.2 When the IVD medical device is intended 
to emit potentially hazardous, visible or invisible 
radiation, it should as far as reasonably practicable and 
appropriate be: 


a) Designed and manufactured in such a way as to 
ensure that the characteristics and the quantity of 
radiation emitted can be controlled or adjusted; 
and 


25 


IS 23485 : 2019 


b) Fitted with visual displays or audible warnings of 
such emissions. 


3.3.8 IVD medical devices that incorporate software 
and standalone IVD medical device software 


3.3.8.1 For the [VD medical device, which incorporates 
software or for standalone software that is an IVD 
medical device in itself, the software shall be validated 
according to the state of the art taking into account the 
principles of development life-cycle, risk management, 
verification and validation. 


3.3.9 IVD Medical Devices Connected to, or Equipped 
with, An Energy Source 


3.3.9.1 The IVD medical device, where the safety of 
the patient depends on an internal power supply in the 
IVD medical device, should be equipped with a means 
of determining the state of the power supply. 


3.3.9.2 The IVD medical device should be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to reduce, appropriately 
the risks of creating electromagnetic interference which 
could impair the operation of this or other medical 
devices or equipment in the usual environment. 


3.3.9.3 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to provide an 
adequate level of intrinsic immunity to electromagnetic 
disturbance to enable them to operate as intended. 


3.3.9.4 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to avoid, as far as 
reasonably practicable, the risk of accidental electric 
shocks to the user, professional or lay, or other person 
both during normal use of the IVD medical device and in 
the event of a single fault condition in the [VD medical 
device, provided the IVD medical device is installed 
and maintained as indicated by the manufacturer. 


3.3.10 Protection Against Mechanical and Thermal Risks 


3.3.10.1 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to protect the user, 
professional or lay, or other person against mechanical 
risks connected with, for example, resistance to 
movement, instability and moving parts. 


3.3.10.2 Where there are risks due to the presence of 
moving parts, risks due to break-up or detachment, 
or leakage of substances, then appropriate protection 
means shall be incorporated. 


3.3.10.3 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to reduce to 
the lowest practicable level the risks arising from 
vibration generated by the IVD medical device, 
taking account of technical progress and of the means 
available for limiting vibrations, particularly at 
source, unless the vibrations are part of the specified 
performance. 


IS 23485 : 2019 


3.3.10.4 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to reduce to the 
lowest practicable level the risks arising from the noise 
emitted, taking account of technical progress and of the 
means available to reduce noise particularly at source. 


3.3.10.5 Terminals and connectors to the electricity, gas 
or hydraulic and pneumatic energy supplies which the 
user, professional or lay, or other person should handle 
should be designed and constructed in such a way as to 
minimize all possible risks. 


3.3.10.6 The IVD medical device should be designed 
and manufactured in such a way as to reduce to the 
lowest practicable level the risk of error when certain 
parts within the IVD medical device are intended to be 
connected or reconnected before or during use. 


3.3.10.7 Accessible parts of the IVD medical device 
(excluding the parts or areas intended to supply heat 
or reach given temperatures) and their surroundings 
should not attain potentially dangerous temperatures 
under normal use. 


3.3.11 Protection Against the Risks Posed by IVD 
Medical Devices for Self-testing 


3.3.11.1 The IVD medical device for self-testing should 
be designed and manufactured in such a way that it 
performs appropriately for its intended use taking into 
account the skills and the means available to lay persons 
and the influence resulting from variation that can 
reasonably be anticipated in the lay person’s technique 
and environment. The information and instructions 
provided by the manufacturer should be easy for the 
lay person to understand and apply. 


3.3.11.2 The IVD medical device for self-testing 
should be designed and manufactured in such a way as 
to reduce, as far as reasonably practicable, the risk of 
use error by the lay person in the handling of the IVD 
medical device and, if applicable, the specimen, and 
also in the interpretation of results. 


3.3.11.3 The IVD medical device for self-testing 
should, where reasonably possible, include a procedure 
by which the lay person can verify that, at the time 
of use, the product will perform as intended by the 
manufacturer. 


3.3.12 General Requirements Regarding the 


Information Supplied by the Manufacturer 


3.3.12.1 Each IVD medical device shall be accompanied 
by the information needed to identify the IVD medical 
device and its manufacturer and communicate safety 
and performance related information to the user, 
professional or lay, or other person, as appropriate. 
This information should be easily understood. Such 
information may appear on the IVD medical device 
itself, on the packaging or in the instructions for 


26 


use. The accompanying information shall meet the 
requirements of the authority having jurisdiction and 
contain the following particulars. 


a) The medium, format, content, legibility and 
location of the label and instructions for use 
shall be appropriate to the particular IVD 
medical device, its intended use and the technical 
knowledge, experience, education or training of 
the intended user(s). In particular, instructions for 
use shall be written in terms readily understood 
by the intended user and, where appropriate, 
supplemented with drawings and diagrams. 
Some IVD medical devices may include separate 
information for the professional user and the lay 
person. 

b) The information required on the label, shall be 
provided on the IVD medical device itself. If this 
is not practicable or appropriate, some or all of the 
information may appear on the packaging for each 
unit or on the packaging of multiple [VD medical 
devices. Where multiple IVD medical devices 
are supplied to a single user or location, a single 
copy of the instructions for use may be provided 
if so agreed by the purchaser who in any case may 
request further copies to be provided. 


c 


wa 


In duly justified and exceptional cases, instructions 
for use may not be needed or may be abbreviated 
if the IVD medical device can be used safely and 
as intended by the manufacturer without any such 
instructions for use. 


d 


wm 


Labels shall be provided in a human-readable 
format but may be supplemented by machine- 
readable forms, such as radio-frequency 
identification (RFID) or bar codes. 


When the IVD medical device is intended for 
professional use only, instructions for use may 
be provided to the user in non-paper format 
(for example, electronic), except when the IVD 
medical device is intended for near-patient testing. 


Residual risks, which are required to be 
communicated to the user or other person, shall 
be included as limitations, contraindications, 
precautions or warnings in the information 
supplied by the manufacturer. 


e 


wm 


wa 


Where appropriate, this information should take 
the form of internationally recognized symbols. 
Any symbol or identification colour used shall 
conform to the accepted standards. The symbols 
and colours shall be described in the documentation 
supplied with the IVD medical device. 


8 


h) In the case of an IVD medical device containing 
a substance or a mixture which can be considered 
as being dangerous, taking account of the nature 
and quantity of its constituents and the form under 
which they are present, relevant hazard pictograms 


and labelling requirements shall apply. Where 


j 


k 


wa 


wa 


there is insufficient space to put all the information 
on the IVD medical device itself, the relevant 
hazard pictograms shall be put on the label and the 
other information required by that regulation shall 
be given in the instructions for use. 


The provisions on the safety data sheet for any 
substance or mixtures shall apply unless all 
relevant information as appropriate is already 
made available by the instructions for use. 

For a reagent derived from biological material, 
the source and, where applicable, a measure of its 
activity. 


3.3.12.2 The label shall meet the requirements of the 
authority having jurisdiction and contain the following 
particulars: 


a) The name or trade name of the IVD medical 


device; 


b) The details strictly necessary for the user to 


c 


d 


e 


8 


h 


) 


SN 


a 


wm 


identify the IVD medical device and, where it is 
not obvious for the user, the intended use of the 
IVD medical device; 


The name or trade name and address of the 
manufacturer and where the manufacturer does not 
have an address within the locale, an authorized 
representative within the locale to which the user 
can refer; 


An indication that the IVD medical device is for in 
vitro diagnostic use; 


The batch code/lot number or the serial number of 
the IVD medical device and separate components 
preceded by the word LOT or SERIAL NUMBER 
or an equivalent symbol, as appropriate, or the 
equivalent; 


Where applicable, the unique device identification 
(UDI); 

An unambiguous indication of the date until when 
the IVD medical device, or any of its components, 
may be used safely, without degradation of 
performance, expressed at least as the year, the 
month and, where relevant, the day, in that order, or 
where there is no indication of the date until when 
it may be used safely, the year of manufacture. 
This year of manufacture may be included as part 
of the batch or serial number, provided the date is 
clearly identifiable; 


Where relevant, an indication of the net quantity 
of contents, expressed in terms of weight, 
concentration, volume, numerical count, or 
any combination of these, or other terms which 
accurately reflect the contents of the package; 


j) An indication of any special storage or handling 


condition that applies; 


k) Where appropriate, an indication ofthe sterile state 


of the IVD medical device and the sterilization 


27 


m 


har] 


n 


wm 


p) 


ma 


q 


r) 
s) 


IS 23485 : 2019 


method or a statement indicating any special 
microbiological state or state of cleanliness; 


Warnings or precautions to be taken that need 
to be brought to the immediate attention of the 
user, professional or lay, or other person. This 
information may be kept to a minimum in which 
case more detailed information shall appear in the 
instructions for use; 


Where applicable, 
instructions; 


any particular operating 
If the IVD medical device is intended for single 
use or single-patient use, an indication of that 
fact. A manufacturer’s indication of single use or 
single-patient use shall be consistent for a model 
or type reference; 


If the IVD medical device is intended for self- 
testing or near-patient testing, an indication of that 
fact; 


If the IVD medical device is for ‘performance 
evaluation only’, an indication of that fact; and 


Where an IVD medical device kit includes 
individual reagents and articles that can be made 
available as a separate IVD medical device, each 
such IVD medical device shall comply with the 
labelling requirements contained 3.3.12.2. 


3.3.12.3 The instructions for use shall meet the 
requirements of the authority having jurisdiction and 
contain the following particulars: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 
e) 


The name or trade name of the IVD medical 
device; 


The IVD medical device’s intended use: 


1) What is detected or measured and whether it 
is qualitative, quantitative or a combination of 
both, 

The operating principle, 


Its function (for example, screening, 
monitoring, diagnosis or support of diagnosis), 


2) 
3) 


4) The specific disorder, condition or risk factor 


of interest that it is intended to detect, define or 
differentiate, 
5) 
6) 


The type of specimen(s) required, 

The intended user and intended patient 
population, and 

7) The use environment; 

An indication that the IVD medical device is for in 
vitro diagnostic use; 

A description of the test principle; 

Instructions from reception of the specimen to 
obtaining and analysing results to ensure that the 
IVD medical device performs as intended (for 
example, calibration, quality control, cleaning and 
disinfection); 


IS 23485 : 2019 


f) 


g) 


h) 


J) 


k) 


p) 


A description of the reagents, calibrators and 
controls and any limitation upon their use (for 
example, suitable for a dedicated instrument only) 
if applicable, 


A list of materials provided and a list of special 
materials or equipment required but not provided; 


For IVD medical devices intended for use together 
with other medical devices, including IVD medical 
devices, or equipment: 


1) Information to identify such IVD medical 
devices or equipment, in order to obtain a safe 
combination, or 


2) Information on any known restrictions to 
combinations of medical devices, including 
IVD medical devices, and equipment; 


An indication of any storage (for example, 
temperature, light, humidity, dust) or handling 
conditions which apply; 


An indication of any operating (for example, 
temperature, light, humidity, dust) or handling 
conditions which apply; 


Where relevant, any change in the shelf life 
following the first opening of the primary 
container, together with the storage conditions and 
stability of working solutions; 


If the IVD medical device is supplied as sterile, 
an indication of its sterile state, the sterilization 
method and instructions in the event of the sterile 
packaging being damaged before use; 


Information that allows the user to be informed of 

any warnings, precautions, measures to be taken 

and limitations of use regarding the IVD medical 
device. This information shall cover, where 
appropriate: 

1) Warnings, precautions or measures to be 
taken in the event of malfunction of the IVD 
medical device or its degradation as suggested 
by changes in its appearance that may affect 
performance, 


2) Warnings, precautions or measures to 
be taken in regard to the exposure to 
reasonably foreseeable external influences or 
environmental conditions, such as magnetic 
fields, external electrical and electromagnetic 
effects, electrostatic discharge, radiation 
associated with diagnostic or therapeutic 
procedures, pressure, humidity or temperature, 


3) Warnings, precautions or measures to be taken 
in regard to the risks of interference posed by 
the reasonably foreseeable presence of the IVD 
medical device during diagnostic procedures, 
evaluations or therapeutic treatments (for 
example, electromagnetic interference emitted 
by the IVD medical device affecting other 
equipment), 


28 


q) 


s) 


s) 


t) 


4) Precautions related to materials incorporated 
into the IVD medical device that are 
carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic, or that have 
endocrine disrupting properties or that could 
result in sensitization or allergic reaction of the 
patient or user, 


5) Ifthe IVD medical device is intended for single 
use or single-patient use, an indication of that 
fact. A manufacturer’s indication of single use 
or single-patient use shall be consistent for a 
model or type reference, and 


6) If the IVD medical device is reusable, 
information on the appropriate processes to 
allow reuse, including cleaning, disinfection, 
decontamination, packaging and, where 
appropriate, the validated method of re- 
sterilization. Information shall be provided to 
identify when the IVD medical device should 
no longer be reused, for example, signs of 
material degradation or the maximum number 
of allowable reuses; 


Any warnings or precautions related to potentially 
infectious material that is included in the IVD 
medical device; 


Where relevant, requirements for special facilities 
(for example, clean room environment) or 
special training (for example, radiation safety) 
or particular qualifications of the IVD medical 
device intended user; 


Conditions for collection, handling and 
preparation of the specimen including additive 
and preservatives necessary to maintain the 
integrity of the specimen and recommended 
storage, handling or shipping instructions for the 
protection and maintenance of stability of the 
specimen, if appropriate; 

Details of any preparatory treatment or handling 
of the IVD medical device before it is ready for 
use (for example, sterilization, final assembly, 
calibration, etc.); 


The information needed to verify whether the 
IVD medical device is properly installed and is 
ready to perform safely and as intended by the 
manufacturer, together with, where relevant: 


1) Details of the nature, and frequency, of 
preventative and regular maintenance, 
including cleaning and disinfection, 


2) Identification of any consumable components 
and how to replace them, 


3) Information on any necessary calibration to 
ensure that the IVD medical device operates 
properly and safely during its intended 
lifetime, and 

4) Methods of mitigating the risks encountered 
by persons involved in installing, calibrating 
or servicing the IVD medical device; 


u) 


v) 


v) 


w) 


y) 


aa) 


bb) 


Where relevant, recommendations for quality 
control procedures; 


The metrological traceability of values assigned 
to calibrators and trueness-control materials, 
including identification of applicable reference 
materials or reference measurement procedures of 
higher order; 


Assay procedure including calculations and 
interpretation of results and where relevant, if any, 
confirmatory testing is necessary; 


Performance characteristics, to the extent 
necessary for the IVD medical device to be 
used safely and effectively [for example, clinical 
sensitivity, clinical specificity, positive predictive 
value, negative predictive value, accuracy 
which results from trueness (bias) and precision 
(repeatability, reproducibility), limits of detection 
and measurement range, including information 
needed for the control of known relevant 
interferences, limitations of the method and 
information about the use of available reference 
measurement procedures and materials by the 
user]; 


Where relevant, reference intervals; 


Information on interfering substances or limitations 
(for example, visual evidence of hyperlipidaemia 
or haemolysis, age of specimen) that can affect the 
performance of the IVD medical device; 


Warnings or precautions to be taken in order to 

facilitate the safe disposal of the IVD medical 

device, its accessories, and the consumables used 

with it, if any. This information shall cover, where 

appropriate: 

1) Infection or microbial hazards (for example, 
consumables contaminated with potentially 
infectious substances of human origin), 


2) Environmental hazards (for example, batteries 
or materials that emit potentially hazardous 
levels of radiation), and 


3) Physical hazards (for example, explosion); 


The name, registered trade name or registered 
trade mark of the manufacturer and the address of 
his registered place of business at which he can be 
contacted and his location be established, together 


29 


cc) 


dd) 


ee) 


IS 23485 : 2019 


with a telephone number or fax number or website 
address to obtain technical assistance; 


Date of issue or revision of the instructions for use 
relevant to the particular IVD medical device; 


A notice to the user, professional or lay, that any 
serious incident that has occurred in relation to 
the IVD medical device should be reported to the 
manufacturer and the authority having jurisdiction 
where the IVD medical device was purchased or 
used; and 


Where an IVD medical device kit includes 
individual reagents and articles that can be made 
available as separate IVD medical devices, each 
such IVD medical device shall comply with the 
labelling requirements contained in 3.3.12.3. 


3.3.12.4 In addition, the instructions for use for the IVD 
medical device intended for self-testing or near-patient 
testing shall comply with the following: 


a) 


b) 


d) 


Details of the test procedure, including any reagent 
preparation, specimen collection or preparation 
and information on how to run the test and read 
the results; 


The results need to be expressed and presented in 
a way that is readily understood by the intended 
user; 


Information needs to be provided with advice to 
the user on action to be taken (in case of positive, 
negative or indeterminate result), on the test 
limitations and on the possibility of false positive 
or false-negative result. Information shall also be 
provided as to any factors that can affect the test 
result (for example, age, gender, menstruation, 
infection, exercise, fasting, diet or medication); 


For the IVD medical device intended for self- 
testing, the information provided shall include a 
statement clearly directing that the user should 
not take any decision of medical relevance 
without first consulting the appropriate healthcare 
professional; and 


For the IVD medical device intended for self- 
testing used for the monitoring of an existing 
disease, the information shall specify that the 
patient should only adapt the treatment if he has 
received the appropriate training to do so. 


(Continued from second cover) 


0.2 Clarification of Concepts 
In this Indian Standard, the following terms or phrases are used in the context described below. 


a) When a requirement is qualified by the phrase ‘as appropriate’, it is deemed to be appropriate unless the 
organization can justify otherwise. A requirement is considered appropriate if it is necessary for: 


1) Product to meet requirements; 
2) Compliance with applicable regulatory requirements; 
3) The organization to carry out corrective action; 

b) The organization to manage risks. 


c) When the term ‘risk’ is used, the application of the term within the scope of this Indian Standard pertains 
to safety or performance requirements of the medical device as stipulated in Section II of this standard or 
meeting applicable regulatory requirements. 


d) When a requirement is required to be ‘documented’, it is also required to be established, implemented and 
maintained. 


e) When the term ‘product’ is used, it can also mean ‘service’. Product applies to output that is intended for, 
or required by, a customer, or any intended output resulting from a product realization process. 


f) When the term ‘regulatory requirements’ is used, it encompasses requirements contained in any law 
applicable to the user of this Indian Standard (for example, statutes, regulations, ordinances or directives). 
The application of the term ‘regulatory requirements’ is limited to requirements for the quality management 
system and the safety or performance of the medical device as stipulated in Section II of this standard. 


In this Indian Standard, the following verbal forms are used: 

a) ‘Shall’ indicates a requirement; 

b) ‘Should’ indicates a recommendation; 

c) ‘May’ indicates a permission; and 

d) ‘Can’ indicates a possibility or a capability. 
Information marked as ‘NOTE’ is for guidance in understanding or clarifying the associated requirements. 
0.3 Process Approach 


This Indian Standard is based on a process approach to quality management. Any activity that receives input and 
converts it to output can be considered as a process. Often the output from one process directly forms the input to 
the next process. 


For an organization to function effectively, it needs to identify and manage numerous linked processes. The 
application of a system of processes within an organization, together with the identification and interactions 
of these processes, and their management to produce the desired outcome, can be referred to as the ‘process 
approach.’ 


When used within a quality management system, such an approach emphasizes the importance of: 
a) Understanding and meeting requirements; 
b) Considering processes in terms of added value; 
c) Obtaining results of process performance and effectiveness; and 
d) Improving processes based on objective measurement. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MHD 14 (13271). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


