NAT HA IS 17740 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


UIAATCHER «е 25 Weary 2187, 
чете AR EN — ofa аат 


Isolated Towers, Masts and Poles 
Using Structural Steel — 
Code of Practice 


ICS 91.080.13 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH HM, 4% Reef - 110002 


МИ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2022 Price Group 15 


Structural Engineering and Structural Sections Sectional Committee, CED 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Structural 
Engineering and Structural Sections Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Towers, masts and poles are tall structures usually of steel construction. They are used to support wide variety 
of radio, TV broadcasting, antenna and other communication equipment or flood lighting. These towers are key 
infrastructural components and must perform many functions satisfactorily. Amongst these functions are, the 
utility of the towers for broadcasting, mobile network and flood lighting, while meeting the structural safety 
and serviceability limit state requirements. The designs of the towers depend upon the minimum requirements 
prescribed for each one of the above functions. 


This standard has been brought out for providing guidance for safe design, fabrication and erection of towers, 
masts and monopoles using structural steel. This standard covers all type of freestanding towers including 
communication towers (broadcasting and tele-communication), antenna supporting structures and flood lighting 
structures. These are self-supporting lattice towers, guyed masts or steel monopoles, covering their materials, 
loads and design. The provision for fabrication, erection, inspection and testing of these towers are covered in 
IS 800 : 2007 ‘General construction in steel — Code of practice’ and IS 802 (Part 3) : 1978 ‘Code of practice for 
use of structural steel in overhead transmission line towers: Part 3 Testing’. 


The steel towers or masts are comparatively light structures. Hence, the wind load acting on them is usually the 
main criterion for their design. Since the simultaneous occurrence of earthquake and maximum wind pressures are 
unlikely to take place, the provisions of earthquake forces have not been specified in this standard. The provisions 
of earthquake forces have not been specified in this standard. To account for the effects of earthquake ground 
shaking, reference may be made to IS 1893 (Part 4) : 2005 ‘Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures: 
Part 4 Industrial structures’. 


The standard envisages for the present, the fabrication of these towers by means of bolted and shop welded 
connections only. The design provisions, when not covered in this standard may generally be adopted in accordance 
with IS 800. 


Ice loadings on towers and equipment located in the cold mountainous regions of the country subject to snow 
fall, may be taken into account on the basis of available meteorological data, with ice as well as with wind and 
without wind. 


Compliance with this standard does not relieve the user from the responsibility of observing state/local building 
regulations, fire and safety regulations, and civil aviation requirements, pertaining to such structures. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has also been derived from the following publications: 
ASCE 52: 1988 Guide for design of steel transmission towers, American Society of Civil 
Engineers 
ANSI/TIA-222-G : 2006 Structural standard for antenna supporting structures and antennas 
CANCSA-S37-M86 : 1986 Antennas, towers, and antenna-supporting structures, Canadian Standards 


Association 

ASCE/SEI 48 : 2011 Design of steel transmission line pole structures, American Society of Civil 
Engineers 

AS 3995 : 1994 Design of steel lattice towers and masts, Standard Australia 

DIN 4131 : 1991 Steel radio towers and masts, German Institute for Standardisation 

ASCE 10 : 2015 Design of latticed steel transmission structures, American Society of Civil 
Engineers 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex M. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall he rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


ISOLATED TOWERS, MASTS AND POLES USING 
SIRUCTURAL STEEL — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the structural design for static 
and dynamic wind forces, fabrication, and erection of all 
types of isolated steel towers including communication 
towers, antenna supporting structures and flood lighting 
structures, consisting of: 


a) Self-supporting lattice towers, 
b) Guyed masts, and 
c) Steel monopoles. 


1.2 The requirements of number, height, size, structural 
layout, location and spacing of towers arising out of 
mobile network planning considerations are not covered 
in this standard. 


1.3 This standard also does not deal with the packing 
material, antenna types, spacing of towers from 
buildings or human habitat and the method of testing the 
performance requirements of communication structures. 


1.4 This standard does not apply to structures with 
unconventional shapes, unusual locations, and materials 
other than steel as well as abnormal environmental 
conditions that have not been covered in this standard. 
Special investigations are necessary in such cases to 
establish loads and design procedures. 


1.5 In the cases of structures with unsymmetrical 
geometry, the checking may have to be carried out for 
special wind load effects that are not covered in this 
standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through references in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. All standards are subjected to 
revision, and parties to agreement based on this standard 
are encouraged to apply the most recent edition of the 
standard indicated. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following definitions 
shall apply. 


31 Actual Length — Тһе length between 
centre-to-centre of intersection points, with supporting 
members or the cantilever length in the case of a 
freestanding member. 


3.2 Angle of Attack — An angle between the direction 
of wind and a reference axis of the structure in plan. 


3.3 Antenna Supporting Structure — A structure, 
including guy assemblies, guy anchorages and 
substructures, that supports antennas or antenna 
arrays. 


3.4 Antenna — A conductor for radiating or 
receiving radio/electromagnetic waves exclusive of 
the connecting wires between its main portion and the 
appurtenances associated with it, and shall include 
any reflector, director and screen designed to produce 
a specific radiation pattern. 


3.5 Appurtenances — Items attached to the structure, 
such as antennas, antenna mounts, antenna cables, 
conduits, lighting equipment, climbing devices, 
platforms, signs, anti-climbing devices etc. 


3.6 Bearing Type Connection — A connection made 
using bolts in snug-tight condition, or rivets where 
the load is transferred by bearing of bolts or rivets 
against plate inside the bolt hole. 


3.7 Braced Member — A member in which the 
relative transverse displacement is effectively 
prevented by bracing. 


3.8 Breadth — The horizontal dimension of the tower 
like structures, measured normal to the direction of 
wind. 


3.9 Dead Load (DL) — The weight of the structure, 
and appurtenances, excluding guy assemblies and 
for foundation design, the weight of the soil and sub 
structure. 


3.10 Depth — The horizontal dimension of the tower 
like structures measured in the direction of the wind. 


3.11 Design Life/Mean Probable Design Life — 
Time period for which a structure or a structural 
element is required to perform its function without 
damage. 


3.12 Design Load/Factored Load — A load value 
obtained by multiplying the characteristic load with 
a load factor. 


3.13 Design Strength — The nominal strength 
divided by resistance factor. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


3.14 Design Wind Load — Equivalent static force to 
be used in the determination of wind loads. 


3.15 Developed Height — The height of upward 
penetration of the velocity profile in a new terrain. 
At large fetch lengths, such penetration reaches the 
gradient height, above which the wind speed may be 
taken to be constant. In case of lesser fetch lengths, a 
velocity profile of a smaller height but similar to that 
of the fully developed profile of that terrain category 
has to be taken, with the additional provision that the 
velocity at the top of this shorter profile equal to that of 
the un-penetrated earlier velocity profile at that height. 


3.16 Discrete Appurtenances — An appurtenance 
modelled as a concentrated load. 


3.17 Displacement — It is the deviation or deformation 
from the standard position of a member or structure due 
to service loads. 


3.18 Effective Frontal Area — The projected area of 
the structure normal to the direction of wind. 


3.19 Effective Lateral Restraint — Restraint that 
produces sufficient resistance to prevent deformation in 
the lateral direction. 


3.20 Effective Length — The actual length of a 
member between points of effective restraint or 
effective restraint and free end, multiplied by a factor to 
take account of the end conditions in buckling strength 
calculations. 


3.21 Effective Length Factor — A factor, K, to 
modify the unbraced length, L, to take into account the 
structural configuration and end conditions. 


3.22 Effective Slenderness Ratio — The slenderness 
ratio modified to take into account the structural 
configuration and end conditions for the purpose of 
calculating the design compression strength. 


3.23 Element of Surface Area — The area of surface 
over which the pressure coefficient is taken to be 
constant. 


3.24 Escarpment — A cliff or steep slope generally 
seperating two levels or gently sloping areas. 


3.25 Factor of Safety — The factor by which the yield 
stress of the material of a member is divided to arrive at 
the permissible stress in the material. 


3.26 Fetch Length — The distance of the tower 
measured along the wind from a boundary at which a 
change in the type of terrain occurs. When the changes 
in terrain types are encountered (such as, the boundary 
of a town or city, forest), the wind profile changes in 
character but such changes are gradual and start at 
ground level, spreading or penetrating upwards with 
increasing fetch length. 


3.27 Force Coefficient — А non-dimensional 
coefficient such that the total wind force on a body is the 
product of the force coefficient, the dynamic pressure of 
the incident design wind speed and the reference area 
over which the force is required. When the force is in 
the direction of the incident wind, the non-dimensional 
coefficient is called as drag coefficient. When the force 
is perpendicular in plan to the direction of incident 
wind, the non-dimensional coefficient is called as ‘lift 
coefficient". 


3.28 Friction Type Connection — Connection 
effected by using pre-tensioned high strength bolts 
where shear force transfer is due to mobilization of the 
friction between the connected plates due to clamping 
force developed at the interface of connected plates by 
the bolt pre-tension. 


3.29 Glaze Ice — The ice accretion, that is assumed to 
have a unit weight of 8.83 kN/m’. 


3.30 Gradient Height — It is the height above the 
mean ground level at which the gradient wind blows 
as a result of balance among pressure gradient force, 
coriolis force and centrifugal force. For the purpose of 
this standard, the gradient height is taken as the height 
above the mean ground level, above which the variation 
of wind speed with height need not be considered. 


3.31 Ground Roughness — The nature of the earth's 
surface as influenced by small scale obstructions such 
as trees and buildings (as distinct from topography). 


3.32 Gust — A positive or negative departure of wind 
speed from its mean value, lasting for not more than, 
say 2 min over a specified interval of time. 


3.33 Guy Assembly Dead Load (D ) — The weight 
of all guy assemblies including guys and end fittings. 


3.34 Guy Assembly Link Plate — A plate connecting 
two guy assemblies or a guy assembly to an anchorage 
or attachment point. 


3.35 Guyed Mast — A latticed or pole structure with 
supporting guys anchored to the supporting medium. 


3.36 Height of the Structure “Л? — Тһе total height 
of a structure above mean ground, including latticed or 
tubular poles mounted on the structure, but excluding 
lightning rods and similar appurtenance. 


3.37 Hill — A land surface characterized by strong 
relief in all horizontal directions. 


3.38 Limit State — A limiting condition beyond which 
the structure ceases to fulfil its intended function. 


3.39 Line of Action — A line that is parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of a member that passes through the 
centroid of the bolt group connecting the member to 
another member. 


3.40 Linear Appurtenances — Ап appurtenance 
modelled as distributed load. 


3.41 In-plane Buckling — The buckling in which 
direction of buckling is considered in the plane defined 
by the face of a latticed structure. 


3.42 Load Factor — A factor that accounts for 
deviations of the actual load from the nominal load for 
uncertainties in the analysis that transforms the load 
into load effects, and for the probability that more than 
one extreme load will occur simultaneously. 


3.43 Main Member — A structural member, which is 
primarily responsible for carrying and distributing the 
applied load or action. 


3.44 Mast Span — The distance between the base and 
the first guy level, the distance between two successive 
guy levels, or the distance above the top guy level to the 
top of the structure (cantilever span). 


3.45 Mean Ground Level — The average horizontal 
plane of the area enclosed by the boundaries of the 
structure. 


3.46 Nominal Strength — The capacity of a structure 
or member to resist the effects of loads. 


3.47 Out-of-Plane Bucking — Direction of buckling 
considered normal to the face of a latticed structure. 


3.48 Panel Points — The centreline location of bracing 
member connections to a leg. 


3.49 Peak Gust or Peak Gust Speed — The wind 
speed associated with the maximum short duration 
wind gust. 


3.50 Pressure Coefficient — The ratio of the design 
wind pressure acting at a point on the surface and the 
static pressure of the incident wind, where the static 
and design wind pressures are determined at the height 
of the point considered after taking into account the 
geographical location, terrain conditions and shielding 
effect. The pressure coefficient is also equal to 
[1 - Qr Vy], where V. is the actual wind speed at any 
point of the structure at a height corresponding to that 
of V. 

NOTE — Positive sign of the pressure coefficient indicates 

pressure acting towards the surface and negative sign indicates 

pressure acting away from the surface. 


3.51 Radius of Gyration — The square root of the 
moment of inertia about the axis of buckling under 
consideration divided by the area of a member. 


3.52 Required Strength — The sum of the load effects 
due to applied factored loads and load combinations. 


3.53 Return Period — The mean interval between 
recurrences of a climatic event of defined magnitude. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


The inverse of return period gives the probability of 
exceeding the event in one year. 


3.54 Ridge — An elongated crest characterized by 
strong relief in two direction. 


3.55 Safety — The ability of a system not to cause 
human injuries or loss of life. It relates, in this standard, 
mainly to protection of workers during construction 
and maintenance operations. 


3.56 Secondary Members — Members used primarily 
to reduce the unbraced length of a supported member. 


3.57 Service Loads — The load combination used to 
calculate serviceability limit state performance. 


3.58 Shielding Effect (or Shielding) — The condition 
where wind has to pass along some structures(s) or 
structural element(s) located on the upstream wind 
side, before meeting the structure or structural element 
under consideration. A factor called shielding factor, is 
used to account for such effects in estimating the 
wind force on the shielded structure(s) or shielded 
element(s). 


3.59 Slenderness Ratio — The ratio of the unbraced 
length, L, to the corresponding radius of gyration, r. 


3.60 Slip-Critical Connection — A bolted joint 
governed by shear using oversized or slotted holes 
parallel to the line of force. 


3.61 Solidity Ratio — The effective project area of all 
the individual elements of a frame normal to the wind 
direction divided by the area enclosed by the boundary 
of the frame normal to the wind direction. 


NOTE — Solidity ratio is to be calculated for individual 
frames. 


3.62 Strength Design — Method of proportioning 
structural members such that the computed forces 
produced in the members by the factored loads do not 
exceed the design strengths of the members. 


3.63 Suction — The phenomenon when pressure is less 
than the atmosphere (static) pressure and is taken to act 
away from the surface. 


3.64 Sway — The angular rotation under service loads 
of an antenna beam path in the local vertical plane of 
the antenna from unfactored no-wind load position. 


3.65 Symmetrical Appurtenance — An appurtenance 
for which the effective projected area is considered 
constant for all wind directions. 


3.66 Terrain Category — The category of land type 
indicating the roughness characteristics of the ground 
surface irregularities of an area, which arise from 
natural or constructed features. The categories are 
numbered in increasing order of roughness. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


3.67 Topography — The nature of the earth's surface 
as influenced by the hill and valley configurations. 


3.68 Twist — The angular rotation under service loads 
of an antenna beam path in the local horizontal plane 
of the antenna under unfactored no-wind load position. 


3.69 Unbraced Length, L — The length between panel 
points or nodes providing restraint, which may vary for 
different planes of buckling depending on the bracing 
pattern. For leg members, L shall not be less than the 
centreline distance between panel points. For bracing 
members, Z shall not be less than the length between 
the centres of connecting bolt or weld patterns. 


3.70 Velocity Profile — The variation of the horizontal 
component of the atmospheric wind speed at different 
heights above the mean ground level. 


3.71 Weak Axis Buckling — The direction of buckling 
considered about the weak principal axis of a member. 


4SYMBOLS AND NOTATIONS 


Symbols and notations used in this standard have been 
explained in this section or in respective sections, as 
applicable. Detailed notation information shall be 
sought from the reference standards, as mentioned: 


A — Effective net area 
a= End distance of a guy assembly link plate 


A, — Nominal unthreaded body area of a bolt or 
anchor rod 


— Equivalent slenderness ratio 
= Effective net area 


A 

A, 

A = Gross cross-sectional area 

А, — Gross area of the outstanding leg 


А = Gross area subject to tension 
A,, = Gross area subjected to shear 
a,= Spacing of intermediate connectors for a 
built-up member 
А = Net area of a member, bolt or anchor rod, 


Net area of the total cross-section 
A_ = Net area of the connected leg 
А = Net area subjected to tension 
А = Net area subjected to shear 
A 


= Cross section area of removed for an 
opening in a tubular section 
A — Cross section area of reinforcing for an 
opening in a tubular section 
А „= Effective shear area ofa guy assembly link 
plate 
A „А. Minimum gross and net area in tension 
B from the bolt hole to the toe of the angle, 
end bolt line, perpendicular to the line of 
force respectively 


2% 
І 


= Щщ 
| 


Minimum gross and net area in shear 
along line parallel to external force 
respectively 


Width of an angle leg, Width of the plate 
Moment amplification factor 


Effective edge distance of a guy assembly 
link plate 


Force coefficient or drag coefficient 
Torsional constant 


Diameter of cylinder; outer diameter ofa 
round member or outside flat width of a 
polygon member 


Nominal diameter of the bolt, pin or 
anchor rod 


Diameter of the bolt hole 
Root diameter of a threaded anchor rod 


Modulus of Elasticity of steel = 205 000 
MPa 


Flexural stiffness 

Force normal to the surface 
Effective yield stress 

Euler buckling stress = z?E/(KL/r)? 


= Design compressive stress 


Critical compression stress 
Elastic buckling stress 


Elastic buckling stress about the principal 
axis of a double angle member 


Torsional elastic buckling stress 
Critical shear stress for tension 
Critical shear for direct tension 


Axial design compressive force in a 
supported member 


Characteristic ultimate tensile stress 


Specified minimum tensile strength 


= Specified minimum tensile strength of a 


bolt or anchor rod 

Characteristic yield stress 

Specified minimum yield strength 
Specified minimum yield strength of 
reinforcement for an opening in a tubular 
section 

Gauge length between the bolt holes 
Shear modulus of elasticity, 77000 MPa 
Distance from the heel of an angle to the 
end connection centroid 

Flexural constant 

Height of development of a velocity 


profile at a distance x downwind from a 
change in terrain category 


H = 


Је = 


(КІ) = 


L= 
L/r = 
L, L, L, = 


u 


n= 


p 


Unbraced length for investigating buckling 
for horizontal bracing number 


Anchor rod projection 
Moment of inertias about the principal axes 


St. Venant torsional constant 


— Effective length factor 
— Probability factor (risk coefficient) 


Terrain, height and structure size factor 
Topography factor 


— Cyclonic factor 
— Effective length factor for the individual 


members of a built-up member 
Effective length 
Effective slenderness ratio 


Modified effective slenderness ratio of a 
built-up member acting as a unit 


Effective slenderness ratio of a built-up 
member acting as a unit 


Laterally unbraced length of a member 
Slenderness ratio of a member 


Unbraced lengths for investigating buckling 
for diagonal bracing members 


Connection length for a multiple bolt 
connection 


Clear distance for design bearing strength 


Length of member or greater horizontal 
dimension of a building 


Length of a tubular structure considered for 
shear strength 


Torsional constant shape coefficient for a 
member resisting torsion 


Nominal flexural strength 

Flexural moment due to factored loads 
Number of threads per inch 

Staggered bracing panel spacing ratio 


= Factored applied axial force 


Pitch of the threads 


= Staggered - pitch length between the bolt 


holes 

Design axial compressive strength 
Elastic critical buckling load 
Nominal axial strength 


Resistance required to provide lateral 
support at a panel point within a face of a 
latticed structure 


Minimum bracing resistance normal to 
a supported member required to provide 
lateral support 


Axial force due to factored loads 


"v 
|| 


ГА 
out 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Anchor rod axial compression force due to 
factored loads 


Anchor rod axial tension force due to 
factored loads 


Wind pressure at height, z in N/m? 

Radius of gyration 

Connection length reduction factor 
Minimum radius of gyration of an individual 
component a built-up member 

Radius of gyration of an individual 
component about its centroid axis in the 


— Minimum radius of gyration for a member 


Nominal bearing strength at a bolt or 
attachment hole 


Nominal buckling strength of an anchor rod 
acting as column 


Nominal compression yield strength of an 
anchor rod 


Nominal strength of a guy assembly link 
plate 


Nominal strength of a connecting element 
Nominal torsional strength (twisting) of a 
U-bolt connection 

Nominal sliding strength of a U-bolt 
connection 

Nominal tensile strength of a bolt or anchor 
rod 
Nominal shear rupture strength of a bolt or 
anchor rod 


Nominal shear yield strength of an anchor 
rod 

Polar radius of gyration about the shear 
center 


— Radius of gyration associated with out 


of-plane buckling with respect to the face of 
a latticed structure 


— Radius of gyration about the x-axis of 


buckling 

— Radius of gyration about the y-axis of 
buckling 

— Radius of gyration about the z-axis of 
buckling 

= Longitudinal centre-to-centre spacing 


(pitch) of any two consecutive holes 
Elastic section modulus 


— Thickness of a member or connected part 


Design strength under axial tension 


— Design strength of bolt under axial tension: 


Block strength at end connection 


Yielding strength of grass section under 
axial tension 


IS 17740 : 2022 


— Reduction coefficient for block 


— Partial 


Rupture strength of net section under axial 
tension 


— Nominal torsional strength 


Installed pretention in each leg of a U-bolt 
connection 


Torsional moment due to factored loads 
Bolt tensile force due to factored loads 


Torsional moment (twisting) applied to a 
member from a u-boil connection due to 
factored loads 


Tension force applied to a U-bolt assembly 
due to factored loads 

Reduction factor for effective net area 
calculation 

shear 
rupture 


— Design wind velocity in at height 


Regional basic wind speed 

Nominal shear strengths 

Transverse shear force due to factored loads 
Bolt shear force due to factored loads 


— Sliding force applied to a member from a 


U-bolt connection due to factored loads 


— Outstand leg width 


Width of the flat member 
Net width for area calculation 
Stress reduction factor ratio 


Location of reinforcement for an opening 
in a tubular section from the section center 
line 


safety factor against ultimate 


stress = 1.25 


Partial safety factor against yielding stress 
and buckling = 1.10 


Coordinates of shear center with respect to 
the centroid of a member 


Plastic section modulus 
Yield stress ratio (250/ гр” 


Non - dimensional effective slenderness 
ratio 


Resistance factor for connections 
Resistance factor for normal stress 
Resistance factor for compression 
Resistance factor for flexure 


Resistance factor for guy assembly link 
plates 


Resistance factor for connecting elements 
Resistance factor for torsion 
Resistance factor for tension 
Resistance factor for U-bolts 


Ф = Resistance factor for shear 


0 — Angle between the two longitudinal axis 
of two structural members of a latticed 
structure 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 Structural Steel 


The tower members including plates shall be of 
structural steel conforming to any of the grades of 
IS 2062, as appropriate. 


5.2 Bolts 


Bolts for tower connections shall conform to IS 12427 
or property class 4.6 or 5.6, 6.8 conforming to IS 6639. 
High strength bolts, if used shall conform to property 
class 8.8 and 10.9 of IS 3757. Foundation bolts shall 
conform to IS 5624. 


5.3 Nuts 


Nuts shall conform to IS 1363 (Part 3). The mechanical 
properties shall conform to property class 4 or 5 as the 
case may be as specified in IS 1367 (Part 6) except that 
the proof stress for nuts of property class 5 shall be as 
given in IS 12427. Nuts to be used with high strength 
bolts shall conform to IS 6623. 


5.4 Washers 


Washers shall conform to IS 2016. Heavy washers shall 
conform to IS 6610. Spring washers shall conform 
to type B of IS 3063. Washers to be used with high 
strength bolts and nuts shall conform to IS 6649. 


5.5 Galvanization 


Structural members of the towers, plain and heavy 
washers shall be galvanized in accordance with the 
provision ofIS 4759. Threaded fasteners shall be hot dip 
galvanized to conform to the requirements of IS 1367 
(Part 13). Spring washers shall be hot dip galvanized 
as per service Grade 4 of IS 4759 or electro-galvanized 
as per service Grade 3 of IS 1573 as specified by the 
purchaser. 


5.6 Guys and Shackles 

Material used in guys, other components of guy system 
and their behaviour are briefly discussed in Annex B. 
5.7 Other Materials 


Other materials used in the construction of the tower 
shall conform to appropriate Indian Standards as 
available. 


6 CLASSIFICATION OF STRUCTURE 


Structures shall be classified under different risk 
categories as given in Table 1, according to the location 
and purpose of use, for determining nominal wind and 
ice loads and the load factors to be used. 


Table 1 Risk Categorization of Structures 
( Clause 6 ) 


Use of Description of Structure 


(2) 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Risk Category 
(3) 


ii) 


iii) 


Towers and masts erected in urban locations, or where their failure is likely to cause injury or loss of life; 
towers and masts used for vital telecommunication facilities; other major structures where the consequences 
of failure would be likely to be very high. 


Towers and masts in this category are those that in the event of failure would threaten the life line functionality 
or integrity of facilities with the potential to cause mass disruption (loss of power, transportation, water, etc.) 
of day to day civilian life in the event of failure. Structures in this category are used for communication 
across non-redundant and hardened networks such as; civil or national defence; rescue or disaster operations; 
military and navigation facilities. 


All towers and masts that cannot be defined as class I or III. 


Towers and masts built on unmanned sites in open countryside; towers and masts, the failure of which would 
not be likely to cause injury to people and/or damage to surrounding facilities in the event of failure. 


Towers and masts in this category are used for services that are optional and/or where an extensive delay in 
returning the services would be acceptable such as: redundant wireless antennas; lower-power radio access 
nodes (small cell); single-appurtenance supporting structures that allow for rapid repair or replacement, 
residential wireless and conventional 2-way radio communications, television, radio and scanner reception; 


Ш 


П 


wireless cable; amateur and CB radio communications. 


7 LOADS 


7.1 General 


Loads in general shall be according to the relevant 
provisions of IS 875 series of standards, unless 
otherwise specified herein under. 


7.2 Types of Loads 


For the purpose of designing of a tower or a structure, 
the following loads are taken into account: 


a) Dead load of the system; 

b) Loadsresulting from attachment ofsupplementary; 
c) Live loads; 

d) Snow load, if applicable; 

e) Wind loads; 

f) Seismic load; and 

g) Any other loads as specified (wind on ice). 


7.2.1 Dead Load of the System 


The dead loads are the weight ofthe structure, and other 
superimposed dead loads, such as antenna supporting 
fixtures, platforms, ladders, attachments/appurtenances; 
the weight of the antennas, antenna mounts, 
power/signal cables, conduits, lighting equipment, 
climbing devices, sign boards, anti-climbing devices 
etc. 


7.2.2 Live Loads 


On ladders, platforms, etc, a uniformly distributed 
imposed load of 1500 N/m? shall be assumed. This 


also applies for the surfaces of bases with aerials. 
The individual parts of the ladders, platforms, etc 
shall also be checked for a single concentrated load of 
1330 N at the most unfavorable locations at 3 m 
interval. On hand railing, a horizontal load of 500 N/m 
and a concentrated load of 1.5 kN acting inward or 
outward at the most unfavourable location shall also be 
assumed. 


7.2.3 Snow Loads 


Snow load shall be taken as given in IS 875 (Part 4). If 
the data for snow loads in the zone, where the tower is 
to be erected, are not available and if the snow load is 
to be taken into account, a uniform 30 mm of icing on 
structural members, cables and aerials may be assumed 
or as specified by the authorities concerned. 


7.2.4 Design Ice Thickness 


Atmospheric ice loading on masts and towers can grow 
to considerable thickness, for exposed sites. Combined 
with wind the increased wind drag due to iced members 
might in some instances govern the design, even though 
the associated wind speeds with ice are less than the 
maximum wind speeds during no ice conditions. When 
combining ice and wind load, the magnitude of ice 
deposit on structures as well as the density, the placing 
and the shape of the ice on mast and towers heavily 
depends on the local meteorological conditions and 
topography and the shape of the structure itself. 


7.2.4.1 The design ice thickness, f, shall be escalated 
with height when calculating ice weight and wind 


IS 17740 : 2022 


on ice loads in accordance with the following 
equations: 


t, = 2.0 t, (KP k, (I)? 


iz 


0.1 
Zar <1.4, Z in metres 
10 


where 


і,- Factored thickness of radial glaze ice at height, 
Z; 

t,— Design ice thickness; 

К. = Height escalation factor for ice thickness; and 


iz 


Z= Height above ground level at base of structure. 
The coefficient 2.0 is the limit state conversion factor 


7.2.4.2 For purpose of calculating the additional 
projected area of 1ce, ice thickness shall be considered 
to accumulate with a uniform thickness around 
the exposed surfaces of the structure, guys and 
appurtenances (refer to Fig.1). The additional projected 
area of ice may be considered round and round member 
force coefficients be used, when calculating wind on 
ice loads even though the bare projected areas are flat. 


7.2.4.3 For purposes of calculating the weight of 
ice, the density shall be taken as 8.83 kN/m? and the 


cross-sectional area of ice shall be determined by the 
following equation: 


А, = л f (D, + 1) 


where 
A „= Cross sectional area of ice at height z; and 
1, = Largest out-to-out dimension of a member 
(refer Fig. 2). 
7.3 Wind Loads 


7.3.1 IS 875 (Part 3) shall be referred to evaluate the 
basic wind pressure and the wind loads on the structure. 
To determine the design wind velocity, the following 
design life/Mean probable design life shall be used as 
per the risk category of the tower/mast. 


Category Design life/Mean Probable 
design life 
I 25 years 
II 50 years 
Ш 100 уеагв 


NOTE — Ав per IS 875 (Part 3), only structures and ground 
based freestanding towers of heights of less than or equal to 
50 shall be designed for Category I and II. 


tz 


Fic. 1 PROJECTED AREA OF ICE 


8 


D, 
Dc 


IS 17740 : 2022 


V 


7 


Dc 
Dci | 


NOTE — D, is the Larger of Р, and Оу, 


Fic. 2 Ост-То-Оот DIMENSION FOR CALCULATING ICE WEIGHT 


7.3.2 Design Wind Load 


The design wind load shall include the sum of the 
horizontal design wind forces on the structure in the 
direction of the wind and the design wind forces on 
guy and appurtenances. All appurtenances, including 
antennas, mounts and lines, shall be assumed to remain 
intact and attached to the structure. 


Design forces shall be based on the wind directions 
resulting in the maximum responses. For lattice 
structures, each of the wind directions indicated in 
Fig. 3 shall be considered for each face. 


The design wind load, F „ shall be determined in 
accordance with the following: 


Fa B fu + Fy + Fo 
where 


F „= Design wind force on the structure [refer 
IS 875 (Part 3)] and section 7.4; 


Ho Design wind force on appurtenances as per 
section 7.5; and 


Е = Design wind force on guys as per section 7.10. 


7.4 Design Wind Force on Hybrid Tower Structure 


In equilateral triangular towers with circular members 
for legs and flat sided members for other members, the 
force coefficient shall be calculated separately for both 


circular members and flat sided members individually 
by using the (same) solidity ratio of that particular 
panel (for example, solidity ratio for a given panel 
shall be calculated based on the ratio of total covered 
area (sum of the exposed areas of both circular and 
flat sided members) divided by the panel area. The 
total wind load F on the hybrid tower surfaces shall 
be calculated as given below and shall be assumed as 
acting horizontally: 


F E (Criat o: Акы + Cic di Aa) = Р, 
Where, 
C,,," Force coefficient for flat sided members; 
Са,“ Force coefficient for circular members; 
Лаа“ Exposed area of flat sided members; 


Ас,- Exposed area of circular members; and 


Р,- Design wind pressure. 


7.5 Design Wind Force on Appurtenances 


The design wind force on appurtenances (either discrete 
or linear but excluding microwave antennas), Ғ,, shall 
be determined from the equation: 


= Ca * Pa X A. 
where 


P, = design wind pressure at the centerline height of the 
appurtenance; 


IS 17740 : 2022 


| 90 deg 
180 deg 
0 deg --”- = 
| 270 deg 
ы” дед 


4 STAYED CIRCULAR MAST SIMILAR 


+ 2404 


TRIANGULAR TOWER 


NOTES 


SQUARE TOWER 


1 Wind directions given in Fig. 3 are applicable only in case of antenna/equipment wind exposed area is symmetrically on all faces of 
the tower. All critical wind directions around tower need to be investigated in case of unsymmetrical exposed area on different faces of 


the tower. 


2 The design wind forces F, + F, need not exceed the wind force calculated for a structure using a solidity ratio of 1.0 (solid faced) 
plus the wind load on externally mounted appurtenances that are outside the normal project area of the structure in the direction of the 


wind. 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL WIND DIRECTIONS TO BE CONSIDERED 


effective projected area of the appurtenance 
including ice for loading combinations that 
include ice. Appurtenance shall be considered as 
consisting of flat and round components; and 


„= drag force coefficient for appurtenances. 


The design wind force, F’,, shall be applied at the centroid 
of the effective projected area of the appurtenance in the 
direction of the wind. For a linear appurtenance, the 
design wind pressure corresponding to the segment or 
panel shall be considered. 


In the absence of more accurate data, the design wind 
force on microwave antenna shall be determined using 
Annex L. 


10 


NOTE — The wind load on ladders, power conductors or 
conduits, antennae, transmission lines, service struts etc. or 
those members occurring in only one face of the structure, shall 
be obtained by considering the unit basic wind pressure with 
appropriate force coefficient as acting, normal to one time, the 
exposed projected area, including the specified ice covering, if 
any, on such attachment. 


7.6 Antenna Mounting Pipes 


The projected area of a mounting pipe above and 
below an antenna shall be included in the term (4,) The 
effective projected area associated with the windward 
face normal to the azimuth of a mounting frame A, shall 
be determined. 


7.7 Individual Members 


The force coefficient given in IS 875 (Part 3) refers to 
member of infinite length. For the members of finite 
length, the coefficient should be multiplied by a factor 
K, given in IS 875 (Part 3), that depends on the ratio //b 
where / is the length of the member and b is the width 
across the direction of wind. 


7.8 Effective Projected Area of Pole Structures 


The effective projected area (EPA) of pole section shall 
be determined from the equation: 


(EPA), = C, A, 


where 
C,= Force coefficient for cantilevered pole structure 
[IS 875 (Part 3)]; and 
A — Actual projected area based on the pole 


p B 4 . 
outside diameter (for rounds), the outside 


point-to-point diameter (for polygon), or 
overall width, including ice thickness for load 
combinations that include ice. 


7.9 Shielding 


Shielding, except as noted herein, may be considered 
for intersecting or parallel elements. The unshielded 
element shall be considered as flat unless both 
elements are round. Full shielding may be considered 
when the clear distance, О, between the elements 
in the direction of the wind under consideration for 
determining effective projected areas (4,) is less than 
or equal to 2.0 times the smallest projected dimension 
of the element in the direction normal to the direction 
of the wind under consideration. No shielding shall be 
considered when the above ratio is greater than 4.0. 
Linear interpolation shall be allowed for the values of 
the above ratio between 2.0 and 4.0 (Fig. 4). 


7.10 Design Wind Force on Guys 


The design wind force on guys, F_, shall be determined 
using the following equation: 


F, = C, d L P, Sin'6, 


where 

Ке = Force applied normal to the chord of the guy 
in the place containing the guy chord and the 
wind, (refer Fig. 5); 

C,= 1.2, drag factor for the guys; 

d= Guy diameter including ice for loading 

combinations that include ice; 

Те = Length of guy; 

Р = Wind pressure at height, z; and 


11 


IS 17740 : 2022 


0, — True angle of wind incidence with respect to 
the plane of the guy along with its chord. 
NOTE — A higher drag factor, С, or an increase effective guy 
diameter may be required when attachments to guys, such as 
spoilers, insulators, makers etc. are present. 
The design wind force and ice thickness may be 
assumed to be uniform based on the velocity pressure 
and ice thickness at the mid-height of each guy or guy 
segment. The length of each guy or guy segment may 
be assumed to equal the chord length. The design wind 
force shall be considered as a distributed force normal 
to the guy chord (see Fig. 5). 


For ground supported structures, mid-height shall be 
referenced to the ground elevation at the base of the 
structure. For structures supported on building or other 
supporting structures, the mid-height of a guy shall be 
measured from the mid-height elevation of the guy to 
the ground level of the building or other supporting 
structure. The height for a guy segment shall not be 
less than zero. 


8 DYNAMIC EFFECTS 


8.1 Dynamic Pressure of Wind, P 


On the basis of measured maximum wind velocities for 
different parts of the country including wind of short 
durations as in squall, the country has been divided into 
different wind zones (IS 875 Part 3). The dynamic wind 
pressure, as given in clauses 9 and 10 of IS 875 (Part 3) 
shall be considered. 


8.2 Flexible slender structures and structural elements 
shall be investigated to ascertain the importance of 
wind induced oscillations or excitations in along wind 
and across wind directions. 


In general, the dynamic effects of wind induced 
oscillations shall be considered when the tower/mast 
natural frequency in the first mode, f, is less than 
1.0 Hz (or the natural time period, 7, is greater than 
1s). 


For calculation of the along wind loads and response 
(bending moments, shear forces, or tip deflections) the 
Gust Factor (GF) method is to be used as specified in 
IS 875 (Part 3). 


8.3 The fundamental time period (7) may either be 
established by experimental observations on similar 
structures or calculated by any rational method 
of analysis. In the absence of such data, T may be 
determined as: 


1. 
T =— in seconds 
1 


IS 17740 : 2022 


4Dg 


ЛАА 


N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 


N 


Q 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 


N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 


72 


АТАРА, 


SHIELDING 
FACTOR 


Fic. 4 SHIELDING FACTOR 


12 


IS 17740 : 2022 


8.4 Natural frequency, / is calculated as follows for 


following different structures: 


a) Natural Frequency of Self-supporting Latticed 


Structures: 
K W, ; 
== б) | in Hertz 
h W +W, 
where 
2 
W, 
= W [5 +0.15 
К = 1500; 
W= total height of the structure including 
appurtenances; 
W,= weight of structure and appurtenances within 


top 5 percent of the structure height; 


w,= average face width of structure [m]; 
w, — face width at base of structure [m]; and 
h= height of structure [m]. 
b) Natural Frequency of Self-supporting Pole 
Structures: 
PE 3E Lg 
' 2z NP (W, +0.236 0, ) 
where 
— modulus of elasticity of structure material, 
MPa; 
Ts = e top + ad: mm’, 
I," moment of inertia at the top of the structure, 
пат“; 
I," moment of inertia at the base of the structure, 
mm’; 
= weight of discrete appurtenances in the top 
third of structure, N; 
И = W-W,N; 
W = total weight of the structure including 


appurtenances, N; 

height of pole structure, mm; and 
— acceleration due to gravity, mm/s?. 

c) Natural Frequency of Guyed Masts: 


=C |= 
f =C, W. 
к S A) 
p (ы) 
where 
С,- 14.66; 


A equivalent stiffness of guys; 


14 


W = weight of structure including appurtenances 
and the total weight of all guys, Kn; 
n= number of guy levels; 
i= number designating guy level starting from the 
base to the uppermost guy level; 
М,= number of guys at guy level i; 
А,- area of an individual guy at level 7, mm?; 
С. = average guy radius for guys at level i, m; 
Ho height above base to guy level i, m; 
h= height of structure, m; and 
L = average chord length of guys at level i, m. 


d) Alternatively, the following simplified equation 
may be used for the self-supporting latticed and 
pole structures: 


кез 


8.5 If preliminary studies indicate that wind-induced 
oscillations are likely to be significant, investigations 
should be pursued with the aid of analytical methods 
or if necessary, by means of wind tunnel tests on 
models. 


8.6 Across-wind motions may be due to lateral gustiness 
of the wind. Unsteady wake flow (for example, vortex 
shedding), negative aerodynamic damping or due to a 
combination of these effects. This cross-wind motion 
may become critical in the design of tall towers. 


8.7 Motions in the direction of wind (known also 
as buffeting) are caused by fluctuating wind force 
associated with gust. The excitation depends on gust 
energy available at the resonant frequency. 


9 ANALYSIS 


9.1 Analysis Models 
The structure can be modeled as the following: 
a) Self-supporting latticed towers 


1) An elastic three-dimensional truss model made 
up of straight members pin connected at joints, 
producing only axial forces in the members. 

2) An elastic three-dimensional frame-truss 
model where continuous members (legs, 
K-type bracing horizontals without plan 
bracing) are modelled as 3-D beam elements 
producing both moments and axial forces in 
the members while the remaining bracing 
members which are subjected primarily to 
axial loads may be modelled as 3-D truss 
elements producing only axial forces in the 
members. 


b) Self-supporting pole structures 


An elastic three-dimensional beam-column model 
producing moments, shears and axial forces in the 
pole structure. Unless the analysis model considers 
second order effects within each element, the minimum 
number of beam elements shall be equal to five per pole 
section and the maximum beam element length shall 
not exceed 1.8 m 

NOTE — Due to modelling complexity (for example, meshing, 

element interconnection) of plate or shell models, the stresses 


obtained from such plate shell models shall not be less than the 
stresses obtained from the beam-column model noted above. 


Guyed masts 


1) An elastic three-dimensional beam-column 
where the mast is modeled as equivalent 
three-dimensional beam-column members 
supported by cables represented either as 
non-linear elastic supports or cable 
elements. This analysis produces moments, 
shear and axial forces in the mast, from 
which individual member forces may be 
evaluated. For finite element beam-column 
models, unless the analysis model considers 
second-order effects within each element, a 
minimum of five elements shall be used in 
any span or cantilever. The guy connection 
eccentric to axis of the member shall be 
included in the model. 

2) Anelastic three-dimensional truss model where 
individual members of the mast are modeled 
as straight members connected at joints 
producing only axial forces in the members. 
The cables are represented either as non-linear 
elastic supports or as cable elements. 
3) An elastic three-dimensional frame-truss 
model where continuous members (legs) of 
the mast are modeled as 3-D beam elements 
producing both moments and axial forces in 
the members while other members may be 
modeled as 3-D truss members. The cables 
are represented either as non-linear elastic 
supports or as cable elements. 


9.2 Application of Wind Forces to Structural Models 


9.2.1 The horizontal design wind force on the structure, 
Ер shall be equally distributed to each leg joint of the 
cross-section at the panel points for three-dimensional 
truss or frame-truss or frame-truss models. For 
three-dimensional beam-column models, wind forces 
shall be applied as either uniform loads or as concentrated 
loads distributed to the nodes on the beam-column. 


The horizontal design wind force, Ғ,, for appurtenances 
shall be distributed to the appropriate nodes in the 
middle according to the location of the appurtenance 
(that is, lateral load and torsion considered). For three- 
dimensional beam-columns, this will require applying 
torsional moments at the appropriate nodes. 


15 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Local bending shall be considered for structural 
components supporting appurtenances that are 
supported in the middle half of the component. For 
main bracing members, under this condition, local 
bending shall be considered for the condition of wind 
normal to the plane of the bracing members with no 
axial member load considered. 


NOTE — Weight and earthquake forces shall be distributed 
and considered in a similar manner. 


9.2.2 Displacement Effects 


The analysis of all structures, except as provided herein, 
shall take into account the effects of displacements 
on member forces (P-A effects). For guyed structures 
the effects of displacements of the guy points as well 
as the effects of displacements between guy points 
shall be considered. For finite element beam-column 
models, unless the analysis model considers second 
order effects within each element, the minimum 
number of beam elements between guy levels shall be 
equal to five. P-A effects need not be considered for 
self-supporting latticed towers with heights less than 
135 m provided that the height to face width ratios, 
h/f аге less than 10. (Л, = Height of structure and 
« = face width of structure at the level under 
consideration) 


9.3 Wind Loading Patterns for Guyed Masts 


For guyed masts with three or more spans and with at 
least one mast span greater than 24 m within the top 
one-third of the height of the structure, the following 
wind loading patterns (refer Fig. 6) shall be investigated 
for load combination | as specified in 10 by varying the 
wind pressure as follows: 


a) Wind pressure corresponding to basic wind speed 
over the entire height of the structure. For masts 
greater than 137 m in height, full wind pressure 
over the entire structure need not be considered 
when pattern loading is investigated. 

b) Wind pressure corresponding to mean wind 

speed on the top mast span and full pressure 

corresponding to basic wind speed on the 
remaining spans. 


Wind pressure corresponding to mean wind speed 
on the second mast span from the top and wind 
pressure corresponding to basic wind speed on the 
remaining spans. 

d) Wind pressure corresponding to mean wind speed 
on the third mast span from the top and wind 
pressure corresponding to basic wind speed on the 
remaining spans. 

e) Full wind pressure shall be applied on guys for all 
pattern loadings. 


The wind pressure, P, (design hourly mean wind 
pressure) is corresponding to mean wind velocity, 
апа is obtained as 0.6 V. (N / m), Ка = design 
hourly mean wind speed at height z, in m/s. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


r— h/3 MEAN WIND 
VELOCITY 
| d | 
! ONE OR MORE 
SPANS > 24m 


FULL WIND 
VELOCITY 


LOAD CASE 1 2 3 


MAST HEIGHT > 137 m TOTAL LENGTH OF TOP 3 SPANS > h/3 


r— h/3 MEAN WIND 
VELOCITY 


ONE OR MORE 
SPANS > 24 m 


FULL WIND 
V VELOCITY 


LOAD CASE 1 2 3 4 


MAST HEIGHT > 137m TOTAL LENGTH OF TOP 3 SPANS « h/3 


FULL WIND MEAN WIND 


i VELOCITY VELOCITY 
| — —— | ONE OR MORE 


N к= =— SPANS > 24m 
| = =| jd 


LOAD CASE 1 2 3 4 


HEIGHT LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO 135 m 


NOTES 


1 For masts with cantilevers (for example, broadcast antenna structures, spines, or the mast itself) the cantilevers shall be considered as 
the top span. 

2 For masts where the total length of the top three mast spans is less than one-third of the height of the structure, the above wind loadings 
patterns shall be continued for each subsequent span until the total length of the considered spans is greater than one-third the height of 
the structure (refer Fig. 6). 

3 When the distance between two guy elevations is less than 3 times the larger face width between the guy elevations, the wind pressure 
patterns shall extend to the mid-point of the two guy elevations. The short span shall not be considered as an independent span for 
purposes of this section. 


Fic. 6 LOADING PATTERN FOR GUYED MASTS 


16 


9.4 Mast Shear and Torsion Responses for Guyed 
Masts 


For all latticed masts, the mast face shear in a 
non-cantilever span due to mast shear and torsion shall 
not be less than 40 percent of the maximum absolute 
value of the face shear in the span. For all tubular 
masts, the mast shear in a non-cantilever span shall not 
be less than 40 percent of the maximum absolute value 
of the shear in the span. 


9.5 Equivalent Beam Model for Latticed Masts 


Latticed masts in a guyed structure can be replaced 
by series of equivalent beams. This 1s required for a 
manual analysis and it can also be done for a simplified 
computer analysis. The alternate is to model all the 
members in the mast. 


The main loading on the mast having triangular, square 
or rectangular is the axial load P and lateral wind load, w 
(see Fig. 7). The axial load P is obtained from an overall 
analysis of the entire guyed structure. In addition to P 
and w, there might be small transverse and longitudinal 
end moments, as well as mid-mast moments caused by 
out-of-straightness including that due to bolt slippage 
during lifting of the mast and under full load (or test). 
This must be assumed and added to elastic deflection 
due to wind on the mast to evaluate the total lateral 
deflection (A) value. An out-of-straightness of between 
L/200 and L/500 is often assumed. 


The mast can be analyzed as a beam-column simply 
supported at its ends А and В. The moments, M, 
obtained using a first order linear analysis that 1gnores 
the effects of deflection (also called primary moments) 
should be amplified to get the design moment, M, as 
given below: 


M,- My - PIP.) 


17 


IS 17740 : 2022 


where P „is ће buckling load of the mast. Ignoring the 
effect of end tapers, that can be calculated as: 


Рос ОГЕШ) 
уућеге 


Е 1, = modulus of elasticity and mast moment of 
inertia, respectively; and 


correction factor to account for the decrease 
the buckling strength due to deformation 
of bracings. A reduction of 10 percent, 
(for example, C, — 0.90) may be used. 


C, 


Moments and shears are finally resolved into individual 
member axial forces. 


9.6 Towers with Four Guys 


Approximate manual methods for calculating guy 
tensions can be used in towers supported by four guys. 
For this, assumptions are made regarding the guy or 
guys that are slack under a specific load case. The slack 
guys are simply removed from consideration. 


Figure 8 shows top views of a typical four-guy patterns. 
The thick solid lines indicate the guys that are expected 
to be taut under the wind direction shown. Dotted lines 
indicate the slack guys that may be ignored. 


10 LIMIT STATE DESIGN 


To arrive at the design values of loads for the limit 
states of serviceability and strength the load factors 
given in Table 2 may be multiplied with appropriate 
characteristic values. Structures and foundations shall 
be designed so that their design strength equals or 
exceeds the load effects (design actions) of the factored 
loads in each of the limit state of strength combinations 
given in Table 2. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


= 


Fic. 7 GUYED MAST 


Fic. 8 TYPICAL Four Guys 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Table 2 Partial Safety Factors for load, y for Limit States 
( Clause 10 and 10.3) 


SI No. Type of effect on 5 Strength load factors 
member force 8 Variable actions 
= >= 
8% ты Other than earthquake? Earthquake 
55 E 
= = 
ae = A = 
= 2 2 
«= S = 
> m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Unfavourable’ 1.0 1.1 1.4 1.1 1.0 
ii) Favourable‘ 0.0 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 


Actions that cause increase in the design forces 
6 Actions that cause a decrease in the design forces 


NOTES 


Exceptions: 


Actions, such as dead load of structure, appurtenances, guy assemblies etc., 
Actions such as weight of ice due to considered ice thickness, wind load, live load, temperature effects 
Singly acting variable action or the most critical variable among multiple variable actions 


Less critical among the multiple variable actions acting simultaneously 


A limit state conversion factor for ice load is applied to ice thickness as per 7.2.4. 
Unfactored dead loads shall be used to determine earthquake loads, Е. 


For foundation designs, the weight of soil and substructure shall be considered as dead load in all loading combinations. 


Temperature effects need not be considered for self-supporting structures. 
Ice and earthquake loading need not be considered for Class I structures. 
No load factor shall be applied to the initial tension of Guys. 


Load combination corresponding to favourable apply to self-supporting structures only. 


10.1 Limit State of Serviceability 


Serviceability limit state is related to the criteria 
governing normal use beyond which the service criteria 
specified below are no longer met: 


a) Deflection limit; 
b) Durability consideration; and 
c) Fire resistance. 


The deflection under serviceability loads of the tower 
should not impair the performance of the structure 
or components the intended function. Deflections 
are to be evaluated for the most adverse but realistic 
combination of service loads and their arrangements by 
elastic analysis using the load factor of 1.0. 


10.1.1 Service Loads 


Service loads shall be defined by the following loading 
combination: 


1.0 D, + 1.0 D, * 1.0 W, 

D, — Dead load 

D,— Dead load of guy assemblies 
W — Wind load without ice 


19 


10.1.2 Limit State of Deformation 


The deformation under service loads at any point on 
a structure intended for microwave communication, 
unless otherwise required, shall not exceed the 
following: 


a) A rotation of 4 degrees about the vertical axis 
(twist) or any horizintal axis (sway) of the 
structure. 

b) A horizontal displacement of 3 percent of the 

height of the structure. 


For cantilevered tubular or latticed spines, poles or 
similar structures mounted on latticed structures, a 
relative horizontal displacement of 1.5 percent of 
the cantilever height measured between the tip of 
the cantilever and its base. 


10.2 Minimum Thickness 


The minimum thickness of galvanized and other 
equivalently protected tower members shall be taken 
as given in Table 3. Gusset plates shall be designed to 
resist the shear, direct and flexural stresses acting on 
the weakest or critical section. Re-entrant cuts shall 
be avoided as far as practical. Minimum thickness of 


IS 17740 : 2022 


gusset shall be 2 mm more than the thickness of the 
bracing member it connects, when the bracing member 
is connected to the gusset outside of the leg member. In 
no case, the gusset shall be less than 5 mm in thickness. 
Galvanized protection shall be preferred method 
for both members and connecting gussets, unless 
the painting method is proved to give an equivalent 
protection. 


10.3 Limit State of Strength 


Limit state of strength is reached when the design forces 
(actions) evaluated based on any load combinations 
with load factors given in Table 2 exceeds the design 
strength of the structure or its components evaluated 
using the partial safety factors as given below. 


The ultimate strength calculation may 
consideration of the following: 


require 


a) Loss of equilibrium of the structure or any part of 
it; and 

b) Failure by excessive deformation, rupture or 
loss of stability of the structure or any part of it 
including support and foundation. 


10.4 Design Strength 


10.4.1 Design strength, S, is obtained dividing ultimate 
strength, 5, by the partial safety factors for materials, 
у given in Table 4. 


10.4.2 Minimum Bracing Resistance 


In order to consider a reduction in the unbraced length 

of a supported member at a node or panel point in the 
plane of buckling under consideration, the bracing 
and secondary members shall provide a minimum 
resistance of 2.5 percent of axial load carried by the 
member. The resistance required for leg members 
at a panel point within a face of a tower, is given in 
Annex C. The minimum required design strengths of 
multiple members connecting at a panel point within a 
face can be predicted as per Annex D. 


10.4.3 Design Values of Material Strength 


For design purposes, the minimum nominal values for 
the yield strength and ultimate tensile strength for the 
type and grade of steel specified is to be used. 


Table 3 Minimum Thickness of Tower Members 


( Clause 10.2 ) 
SI No. Member Type Minimum Thickness, mm 
— 
Galvanized Equivalent Protection 
Coating Methods 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Angles Leg members and main bracing members 3 6 
ii) Other members 4 5 
iii) Hollow sections/Pipes All members 2.6 3.2 
iv) Monopoles 3 3 
Table 4 Partial Safety factors for Materials, y 
( Clause 10.4.1 ) 
SI No. Definition Partial Safety Factor 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Resistance, governed by yielding, y, 1.10 
ii) Resistance of member to buckling, y... 1.10 
iii) Resistance governed by ultimate stress, y, 1.25 
iv Resistance for guys and their terminations 2.0 
A € 
v) Resistance of connection Shop fabrication Field fabrication 
a) Bolts friction type, y, . 1:25 1.25 
b) Bolts bearing type, ү, 1.25 1.25 
c) Welds, y. 1.25 1.50 


mw 


20 


10.4.4 Normal Framing Eccentricities 


10.4.4.1 Leg members 


Eccentricities at connections shall be considered unless 
the following conditions are met: 


a) For solid round and tubular leg members, the lines 
of action of the bracing members meet at a point 
within the diameter of the leg (see Annex G); 


b 


wm 


For angle leg members, the lines of action of the 
bracing members meet at a point within a distance 
equal to 75 percent of the angle width 5, on either 
side of the centroid of the leg angle member; and 


с 


ma 


For built-up leg members, the lines of action of 
the bracing members meet at a point with in the 
cross-section of the built-up leg. 


10.4.4.2 Bracing members 


The effective slenderness ratio formulas specified in 
12.2 accounts for the effects of eccentric axial loading 
for angles connected by one leg with normal framing 
eccentricities. Normal framing eccentricity shall be 
defined as the condition where the centroid of the bolt 
or weld group is located between the heel of the angle 
and the centreline of the connected leg of the member. 
When a joint eccentricity exceeds this condition, the 
bracing member resistance shall be multiplied by the 
factor b/2g, where b is the width of the connected 
leg and g, is the distance from the heel of the angle 
to the centroid of the connection. If the width of the 
connected leg is 75 mm or less or the slenderness ratio, 
L/r, is greater than 120, the reduction factor need not 
be applied. Lacing bars shall be inclined at an angle 
not less than 40° nor more than 70° to the axis of the 
built-up member. 


11 DESIGN OF TENSION MEMBERS 


11.1 Tension Members 


Tension members are linear members in which the 
axial forces act to cause elongation (stretch) causing 
essentially tensile stresses. Such members can sustain 
loads up to the ultimate load, at which stage they may 
fail by rupture at a critical section (usually consisting of 
bolt holes). However, if the gross area of the member 
yields over a major portion of its length before the 
rupture load is reached, the member may become 
non-functional due to excessive plastic elongation 
and hence the tensile strength is limited to the gross 
area yield strength. Plates and other rolled sections 
in tension may also fail by block shear of end bolted 
regions. The factored design tension action 7, in the 
members shall be less than the design tensile strength 
of the member, which is the lowest of the three modes 
of failure, as given in IS 800. 


21 


IS 17740 : 2022 


12 DESIGN OF COMPRESSION MEMBERS 


12.1 Design Strength 


Common hot rolled and built-up steel members used 
for carrying axial compression, usually fail by flexural 
buckling. The buckling strength of these members is 
affected by residual stresses, initial bow and accidental 
eccentricities of load. To account for all these factors, 
the strength of members subjected to axial compression 
is defined by various buckling classes a, b, c and d as 
in IS 800. 


12.1.1 Struts 


12.1.2 Concentric Loading — When a single angle 
and other hollow sections is concentrically loaded in 
compression, the design strength may be evaluated 
using compressive design strength, as per IS 800 
(see in Annex E). 


12.1.3 Eccentrically Loaded Members — Strength 
of compression members may be evaluated using 
the equivalent slenderness ratio based on their end 
conditions. 


12.2 Slenderness Ratios for Bracing Members 


12.2.1 The equivalent slenderness ratio of compression 
and redundant members of plated sections shall be 
determined as given in Annex F. The effective length 
factors, K, for round members welded directly to leg 
members shall be taken from Annex F. 


12.2.2 Built-Up Members 


Individual components of built-up members composed 
of two or more shapes shall be connected to one another 
at intervals, a, such that the maximum slenderness 
ratio (a/r,) of each of the component shapes between 
the connectors shall not exceed 100 percent of the 
governing effective slenderness ratio of the built-up 
member for composite action for the different end 
condition as given below: 


a) A minimum of two bolts or equivalent in welding 
shall be provided in line across the connected 
width (that is, connected leg width of a double 
angle) at each intermittent connector point when 
the connected width is greater than 127 mm. 


For buckling modes that involve relative 
deformations that produce shear forces in the 
connectors (for example, buckling about the 
axis parallel to the back-to-back legs for double 


b 


wm 


angles), the effective slenderness ratio, 


2 
m 


shall be modified by the following equations: 


IS 17740 : 2022 


1) When either end or intermediate bolted 
connectors are snug-tight bearing connections 
and a minimum of 2 intermediate connectors 
are used over the length considered for 
out-of-plane buckling such that a/r, is not 
greater than 0.75(KL/r) : 


KL a fay RE 
= +|— | < 
r m r o ћ Vp 
2) When both the end апа intermediate 


connectors are welded or bolted using high 
strength bolts tensioned to 70 percent of the 
published ultimate tensile bolt strength and the 
spacing of intermediate connectors result in 
a/r, not greater than 0.75(KL/r) : 


<40 (=) -(&) < КЁ 
ћ r m r o V 
2 2 
1r &> (22) 8 (ка) «= 
қ r Ja rj, on A 


3) For all other conditions: 


modified effective slenderness 
ratio of built-up member; 


effective slenderness ratio of 
built-up member acting as a 
unit; 


P — radius of gyration of individual 
component about its centroidal 
axis for the direction of buckling 
under consideration for the 
built-up member; 

2 largest slenderness ratio of 

== = individual components; 

ћ 

а, _ largest distance between 
connectors; 

r, _ minimum radius of gyration of 
individual component; and 

К, = 0.5 for angles back to back. 


0.75 for channels back to back 
0.86 for all other cases 


When lacing is used to connect built-up compression 
members consisting of two or more components, the 
lacing shall be triangulated and extend the full length 
of the member. Built-up compression members without 


22 


triangulated lacing shall be modelled as a Vierendeel 
truss considering combined bending and axial forces. 
In addition, the design strength of the lacing system 
shall be capable of providing the resistance equal to 
2.5 percentage of the connected member force. 


12.3 Design of Bracings/Diagonals 


The angle between any two members common to a 
joint of a trussed form shall preferably be greater than 
20? and never less than 15? due to uncertainty of stress 
distribution between two closely spaced members. 


Itis assumed that in X-bracings system, one diagonal is 
subjected to compression and the other one is subjected 
to tension. The effective length factors are valid only if 
the other diagonal is subjected to a tensile force of not 
less than 75 percent force in the compression diagonal. 


12.4 Triangular Towers 


In an X-braced panel of triangular tower, one of the 
main diagonals (main bracings) in adjacent faces will 
be subjected to compression. In that case even if hip 
bracings are provided as in the case of square tower, the 
out of plane buckling of compression bracing cannot 
be prevented. The bracing design is governed by minor 
axis buckling if no elevation redundant is provided or 
major axis buckling if an effective elevation redundant 
is provided. 


13 CONNECTIONS 


13.1 Bolted Connections 


13.1.1 Design Strength 

The design strength of bolted connections shall be 
evaluated as per the provisions of IS 800. 

13.1.2 Minimum Diameter of Bolts 


The diameter of the bolt shall not be less than 12 mm. 
Preferred diameter of bolts used for the erection of 
tower, mast shall be 12, 16 and 20 mm. 


13.1.3 The high strength friction grip bolts shall be 
tightened to 70 percent of the proof load corresponding 
to the bolt grade. Bearing type bolts shall be tightened 
to 60 to 70 percent of the proof load. 


13.2 Welded Connections 

Welded connections are not common in these towers. 
However, if they are used, the design strength of 
such welded connections may be evaluated as per the 
provisions of IS 800. 

13.3 Base Plate 

Base plate without gussets and with gussets shall be 
designed in accordance with IS 800. 

13.4 Anchor Bolts 

Anchor bolts shall be designed as per IS 800. 


13.5 Connections in Monopoles 


Monopole sections are generally connected by slip, 
telescopic, flange and butt joint. 


14 GUY DESIGN 


14.1 Guy Pretension 


The pretensions of multiple guys, attached to rigid or 
hinged single poles of steel are of critical importance 
in determining the behavior of the combined structural 
system. 


For all guyed structures the amount of pretension in the 
guys will have little effect on load carrying capability 
unless the pretension is extreme and exceeds 50 percent 
of the design maximum tension. Pretensions in guy 
wires typically range from 5 to 10 percent of the rated 
breaking strength (RBS). For practical considerations, 
the minimum pretension should be such that the leeward 
guys do not go slack under frequently occurring winds 
(say, yearly wind) or other load combinations. A 
tolerance of + 10 percent of the specified pretension is 
considered practical during construction. 


14.2 Allowable Tensions 


The maximum stress limit on guys under service loads 
such as extreme wind, wind and ice, and extreme ice 
is usually limited to 65 percent of the guy's RBS, to 
prevent exceeding the elastic limit of the guy. This 
limit is to ensure that the tension does not reach the 
yield point of the stranding and produce permanent set, 
which would require re-tensioning the guys. This limit 
also gives a cushion or margin to the terminal devices, 
which frequently do not reach the RBS of the guys 
when installed in field. 


14.3 Guy Slope 


Guy slope is usually defined as the angle in degrees 
between horizontal and the guy or as the ratio V/H of 
elevation to horizontal projection. The guy effectiveness 
decreases for the very steeper slopes and shallower 
slopes. Therefore, an optimum guy slope can be found 
by a trial-and-error process. Guy slopes in the range of 
45 to 60 degrees from horizontal are common. 


14.4 Guy Anchorage 


Designer should be aware ofthe duration ofthe potential 
guy forces. The guy loads from everyday tensions are 
permanent in nature and should be matched with long 
term strength properties of the anchors. The forces from 
extreme wind may last only a few seconds. For these 
loads of shorter duration, the anchors will normally 
creep less and have a greater design strength. 


14.5 Guyed Poles 


The guyed poles should be set in a straight vertical 
position. The horizontal offset tolerance should be 
within 75 mm. The vertical tolerance should be within 
150 mm from the specified setting depth. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


The guy anchors can be relocated within 1 m radius 
of the original design location and the repositioning 
of the anchor should be documented and reported to 
the engineer for further analysis. A tolerance of 
10 percent of the specified guy pretension is considered 
practical. 


The guyed poles or masts are vertical and are capable of 
resisting both axial compression and bending moment. 


15 FREE STANDING AND GUYED POLES 


The poles may be circular or polygonal in cross section. 
The adequacy of the section, for combined effect 
of axial force and bending moment obtained from 
analysis, may checked as given below. 


15.1 Regular Polygonal Members 
The design tensile stress evaluated as given below shall 
not exceed f: 
T MC 
= — + —_ 


f A I 


In formed, regular polygonal tubular members, the 
maximum compressive stress, f, at the extreme fibre 
under combined axial force and bending moment, 
evaluated as given below, shall not exceed the design 
strength, F , given below: 


P MC 
— + — 
A I 


c 


where, 
T= Design tensile force (-ve if compressive); 
P= Design compressive force; 
M = Maximum design bending moment; and 
A, I= Areaand moment ofinertia ofthe cross section, 
respectively (equations given in Annex H). 
15.2 Design Strength 


15.2.1 Design Tensile strength 


The design for tensile stress should satisfy the 
following: 


P 
FE € А. where = ЕЛҮ 


в 


m0 


ml 


P <F 
rig | Where F, = F /y 


F = specified minimum ultimate Tensile strength; 
F = Design Tensile strength; 

E Specified Minimum yield strength; 

P= Axial tension force; 

A, = Gross cross-sectional area; and 


А = Net cross sectional area. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


15.2.2 Design Compressive Strength 


The design for compressive stress shall satisfy the 
following: 


a) Octagonal, hexagonal, or rectangular members 
(bend angle > 45°) 


F-F' 
a y 


when - <436 


F =1.42 PO — 0.0069, 


BEE 
t 


724362 
—— < 


when 43 e << 58 2 
t 


when luct 58& 
t 


b) Dodecagonal members (12 sided members with 
bend angle = 30°) 


Е-Е 
di. when > < 40 
t 
F, = 1.45 F; (1.0 — 0.0078, | when 
[2] =, 43e<—< 626 
724362 


when 2% 62€ 


c) Hexadecagonal members (sixteen sided members 
with bend angle = 22.5°) 


Е-Е! 
| Ы when 25575 
t 


F = 1.42 F/(1.0 — 0.00823 | when 


B 
t 


35.7 €< ^ «6856 


A) u when 7 > 68.5¢ 
~) | 
то 7 
where 
F; =F s 
E specified minimum yield strength; 


F = design compressive strength; 
F = Specified minimum ultimate tensile strength; 
t= wall thickness; and 


24 


w= flat width of a side (calculated using actual 
bend radius, subjected to maximum bend 
radius of 42). 


250 
é= [em 
Е, 


d) Other Sections 


1) Rectangular Members — The design strength 
specified for octagonal is used. If the design 
stress value exceeds 6.9 MPa, then the 
equations for dodecagonal members are used. 


Polygonal Elliptical Members — The bend 
angle and flat width associated with elliptical 
cross section are not constant. The smallest 
bendangle associated with a particular flat shall 
be used to determine the design compressive 
strength. 


2 


— 


Round Members — For round members or 
polygonal members with more than sixteen 
sides, the design compressive stress shall 
satisfy the following: 


Á LÁ <\ 
FR 


3) 


= the compressive stress due to axial load; 

= the compressive stress due to bending; and 
design compressive strength. 

F when (D /t) < 104.8 2? 


y 


.. 6555 
03537 = 


о 


when 104.8/ < (ОЛ) 
33122 


3 ; |; 
is design bending strength, 
F' when (D /t) < 165.6 & 


y 


0.70 t ET 


IA 


12420 


when 165.6/° < (О) 
331.28 


IA 


о 


t 
D, is the outside diameter of the tubular section 
(flat to flat outside diameter for polygonal 
members with more than sixteen sides); 


t is the wall thickness. 


15.2.3 Shear 
The shear stress resulting from applied shear forces, 
torsional shear, or a combination of the two shall not 
exceed the following: 

4 

VQ | Tc 

Ib J 


SR; 
where 
= (0.58F. у 


Е = the specified minimum yield stress; 


mo 


F = the shear strength; 
V — the shear force; 
О = the moment of section about neutral axis; 
— the moment of inertia; 
T= the torsional moment; 
J= the torsional moment of cross section: 
c= the distance from neutral axis to extreme fibre; 
and 
b= 2 times the wall thickness. 
15.2.4 Bending 


The stress resulting from bending shall not exceed 
either of the following: 


Mc 


г EF, pn er 


Where F is the design tensile stress; F is the design 
compressive stress; / is the moment of inertia; M 1s the 
bending moment; and c is the distance from neutral axis 
to the extreme fibre. 


15.2.5 Combined Stresses 


For all polygonal and round members, the combined 
stress at critical points on the cross section shall not 
exceed the following: 


1 
2 2 
P Мс Ме, VO TcY 
+ У +3 Q + € F, or F, 
AT, 1, Ib J 
where 
," design tensile strength; 
F = design compressive strength; 
F,— design bending strength; 
— axial force in the member; 
— cross sectional area; 
„ = bending moment about X-X axis; 
," bending moment about Y-Y axis; 
„= moment of inertia about X-X axis; 
„= moment of inertia about Y-Y axis; 
— torsional stiffness of the cross section; 
с = distance from Y-Y axis to the point where 
stress is checked; 
су- distance from X-X axis to the point where 
stress is checked; 
V — shear force; 
О = moment of section about neutral axis; I is the 
moment of inertia: 
T= torsional moment of cross section; 


25 


IS 17740 : 2022 


c= distance from neutral axis to the point where 
stress 15 checked; and 


t= wall thickness. 
16 FOUNDATION DESIGN 


16.1 General 


Foundations for freestanding towers and masts shall 
be designed to resist all load combinations applied to 
the structure in both vertical and horizontal directions 
combined with bending moments. 


16.2 Performance of Foundation 


The performance of the foundation under short term 
and long-term loadings shall be considered. The 
resulting strength and deflection shall be considered 
in the design of the tower. The effect of variation of 
water content of the soil shall be taken into account 
while evaluating the soil strength and shall include 
the allowance for reduction in the weight of materials 
due to buoyancy. The design of the foundation shall be 
carried out as per IS 11233. 


16.3 Soil Properties 


A soil investigation to determine the soil properties 
required for the design of footings shall be carried 
out. 


16.4 Safety Factors and Design Stresses 


16.4.1 Design of foundation shall be evaluated as per 
the provisions of IS 456, IS 4091 and IS 11233 except 
the provisions mentioned in these clauses. 


16.4.2 While calculating the stability of foundations, 
the factor of safety of 1.5 shall be provided on the 
unfactored tower support reactions obtained from 
structural analysis. A factor of safety of 2.5 should be 
provided for safe uplift resistance in cases of piles and 
rock pull out anchors. 


17 MAINTENANCE AND CONDITION 
ASSESSMENT OF COMMUNICATION 
TOWERS 


A check list of items to be evaluated in maintenance 
and condition assessment are given in Annex J. 


18 FIELD MAPPING OF STRUCTURES AND 
APPURTENANCES 


Mapping of structures and components in a tower is 
the first step which contains all the data necessary to 
evaluate the loads, analysis and design of the structure 
and assists in fabrication and erection. Guidance for 
mapping of structures and components in a tower is 
given in Annex K. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


IS No. 
456 : 2000 
800 : 2007 
802 
(Part 1) 
(Sec 1) : 2015 
(Sec 2) : 2016 
(Part 2) : 1978 
(Part 3) : 1978 
875 


Part 1 : 1987 


Part 2 : 1987 


Part 3 : 2015 
Part 4 : 2021 
Part 5 : 1987 


1161:2014 


1363 (Part 3) : 
2018 


1367 (Part 13): 
2020 


1367 (Part 6) : 
2018 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2) 


LIST OF INDIAN REFERENCES 


Title 


Plain and reinforced concrete 
(fourth revision) 

General construction in steel — 
Code of practice (third revision) 
Use of structural steel in overhead 
transmission line towers 

Part 1 Materials, loads and design 
strengths 

Section 1 Materials and loads 
(fourth revision) 
Section 2 Design 
(third revision) 


strengths 


Part 2 Fabrication, galvanizing: 
inspection and packing 

Part 3 Testing 

Design loads (other than 
earthquake) for buildings and 
structures — Code of practice 
Part 1 Dead loads — Unit weights 
of building materials and stored 
materials (second revision) 


Part 2 Imposed 
(second revision) 


Part 3 Wind loads (third revision) 
Part 4 Snow loads (third revision) 


Part 5 Special loads апа 
combinations (second revision) 


loads 


Steel tubes for structural 
purposes — Specification 
(fifth revision) 


Hexagon head bolts, screws and 
nuts of product grade ‘c’: Part 3 
(Style 1) hexagon nuts (size range 
M 5 to M 64) (fifih revision) 


Technical supply conditions for 
threaded steel fasteners Part 13 
Hot dip galvanized coatings on 
threaded fasteners (third revision) 


Technical supply conditions 
for threaded steel fasteners: 
Part 6 Mechanical properties of 
fasteners made of carbon steel and 
alloy steel — Nuts with specified 
property classes Coarse 
thread and fine pitch thread 
(fourth revision) 


26 


IS No. 


1573: 


2016: 


2062 


2266 


2315: 


3063 : 


3757 


4091: 


4759: 


4923 


5624: 


6132 (Part 2): 


1972 
6610 : 


6623 


6639: 


6649: 


8500: 


1986 


1967 


: 2011 


: 2019 


1978 


1994 


1985 


1979 


1996 


: 2017 


2021 


1972 


: 2004 


1972 


1985 


1991 


Title 


Specification for electroplated 
coatings of zinc on iron and steel 
(second revision) 

Specification for plain washers 
(first revision) 

Hot rolled medium and high 


tensile structural steel 
Specification (seventh revision) 


Steel wire ropes for general 
engineering purpose 
Specification (fifth revision) 


Specification for thimbles for 
wire ropes (first revision) 


Fasteners — _ single соп 
rectangular section spring 
lock ^ washers specification 


(second revision) 
Specification for high strength 
structural bolts (second revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundations for 


transmission line towers and 
poles 

Hot-dip zinc coatings on 
structural steel and other allied 
products — Specification 
(third revision) 

Hollow steel sections for 


structural use (third revision) 


Foundation bolts — Specification 
(second revision) 

Shackles: Part 2 Dimensions of 
dee shackles 

Specification for heavy washers 
for steel structures 


High strength 
(second revision) 


structural nuts 


Specification for hexagon bolts 
for steel structures 


Specification for hardened and 
tempered washers for high 
strength structural bolts and nuts 
(first revision) 

Structural steel — Micro alloyed 
(medium and high strength 
qualities) 


IS 17740 : 2022 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
11233 : 1985 Code of practice for design and 12427 : 2001 Fasteners — Threaded steel 
construction. of radar antenna, fasteners — Hexagon head 
microwave and TV tower transmission tower bolts — 
foundations Specification (first revision) 
IS/ISO 2415 : Forged shackles for general 
2004 lifting purposes — Dee shackles 
and bow shackles 
ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.6 ) 
GUYS AND APPERTENANCES 
B-1 GENERAL B-2.2 Protection of Wires and Ropes 


Guy assemblies shall be constructed of appropriate 
types of materials. For guy assembly components, 
such as preformed guy grips, mechanical sleeves, 
clips and other fittings, the manufacturer shall provide 
test results to prove the performance of the product 
including strength and efficiency. Guy assembly 
components made from ferrous materials shall be hot 
dip galvanized. All the design calculations shall be 
made for the ambient temperature of 20 degrees Celsius 
and adjusted in the field during erection on the basis of 
the prevailing temperature. 


B-2 WIRE ROPE AND WIRE STRAND 


B-2.1 The guys are typically of strand construction 
which permits sufficient flexibility for installation. 
Greater individual wire sizes give better corrosion 
resistance and higher effective modulus of the 
complete stranding than do wire ropes. Typical strand 
configuration is shown in Fig. 9. The wire ropes are 
made of multiple strands but are not normally used in 
guyed structures. These ropes are more flexible as they 
are made of smaller individual wires. They are also 
more susceptible to corrosion and the effective modulus 
of elasticity of the rope is lowered in an almost inverse 
relationship to the flexibility. 


Galvanized high-strength strands are most common. 
The tensile (rope grade) designated are 1570, 1770 
and 1960. The type of ropes shall be round, oval and 
flattened. The oval type is restricted to sizes from 8 to 
40 mm. The flattened strand is for special applications 
and ranges from 13 to 48 mm sizes. The different types 
of steel wire ropes, their mass and breaking strengths 
are given in IS 2266. The typical wire rope construction 
of 6 x 7 (6-1) is shown in Fig. 10 pre-formed wire ropes 
are generally used as they have superior flexibility and 
have better bending resistance. 


27 


The wire ropes unless properly protected against 
oxidation tend to corrode fast and result in fatigue 
failures. Therefore, the wires and the ropes are 
galvanized unless otherwise demanded. In order to 
reduce friction, wire ropes are well lubricated. The 
lubrication requirement is dependent on the application 
of the wire rope. In case of ropes for general engineering 
purposes, the grease used shall be free from solvents, 
acidity, alkalinity, moisture or any other aromatic 
compound. 


B-3 SHACKLES AND TURNBUCKLES 


Guyed structures have traditionally been erected with 
guys attached at their tops and with temporary fittings 
and tackle to the anchors while the structure is made 
almost plumb. Permanent grips are installed and final 
positioning and pre-tensioning done with some form 
of threaded device. These can be simple threaded 
extensions of anchor rods, turnbuckles which can be 
very expensive in the larger sizes, or threaded U-bolts 
with keepers. 


Shackles and turn buckles shall be forged steel 
or equivalent material and suitably heat treated 
[see IS/ISO 2415, IS 6132 (Part 2)]. 


B-3.1 Take-up Devices 


Turnbuckles or other suitable means of length 
adjustment that do not necessitate disconnecting end 
attachments shall be provided for all guys. 


B-3.2 Thimbles 


A thimble or other means shall be used to maintain as 
adequate radius at the inside of the end attachments 
consisting of loops. Thimbles shall be of the heavy duty 
or solid type and the size shall be in accordance with 
IS 2315 or with the manufacturers’ recommendations. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


TN 292 SINGLE LAYER 


49/W TWO LAYER 


THREE LAYER 


Fic. 9 STRAND CONFIGURATION 


4 (> М (СА 
VN 
< 2 os. ју 


WITH FIBER CORE (CF) WITH STEEL CORE (CWR) 


Fic. 10 WIRE ROPE CONSTRUCTION OF 6 x 7 (6-1) 


28 


B-3.3 Preformed Guy Grips 


Preformed guy grips shall be designed specifically 
for the type of the guy being used. This includes 
electrochemical compatibility of the material and the 
number, size, and lay of wires in the strand. 


B-3.4 Mechanical or Pressed Sleeves 


Loops may be secured by means of mechanical type 
splice consisting of metal ferrule made cold under 
heavy pressure. The ferrule shall be of rustproof 
material, electrochemically compatible with the rope 
being spliced. Care shall be taken in the application of 
the sleeves to ensure that the individual wires of the 
strand or rope being spliced are not broken or crushed. 


B-3.5 Clips 


Twin- base or U-bolt wire rope clips may be used to 
secure looped ends. The clips shall be of the same size 
as the guys within tolerance of + 1.2 mm. Clips shall 
be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions regarding number, spacing and tensioning. 


B-3.6 Sockets 


Sockets shall be cast such that they transmit the full 
load of the guy without permanent deformation of the 
socket and they shall be heat treated. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


B-3.7 Guy Link Plates 


Where guy link plates are used, two plates shall be 
parallel and connected so that there is no relative 
moment of the plates. Strand or wire ropes shall not be 
spliced by means of a running or woven type of splice. 


B-3.8 Guy Fittings 


There are many different and suitable termination 
devices (Fig. 11) for the smaller and relatively flexible 
strand sizes up to 12 mm diameter. Bolted clamps, 
fittings with wedges, preformed grips, and countless 
other types have been used with success and the 
selection depends on local availability and confidence 
in long-term holding strength. 


The overall rigidity of strands above 12 mm diameter 
precludes devices, such as the three-bolt clamp that 
must deform the strand to perform. Clamps that depend 
on surface friction can become very lengthy on large 
strands as the needed holding strength varies as the 
diameter squared whereas the surface area varies only 
with the diameter. 


Standard preformed grips or helical wire terminals 
perform well up to about 25 mm stranding diameter. 
Beyond that point, special long grips are required or 
the twisted grip part may have to be supplemented by a 
cone wedge device. Preformed grips may be reapplied 


CORRECT METHOD 


INCORRECT (CLIP REVERSED) 


Fic. 11 THIMBLE OF Guy ROPE AND POSITION OF CLAMPS 


29 


IS 17740 : 2022 


up to two times for the purpose of re-tensioning with 
no significant loss of holding strength, but if installed 
for more than about three months, they should be 
replaced after removal. The apparent and actual ease of 
installation and removal sometimes at tracts vandalism 
which can be thwarted by compressing a ring clip to the 
upper end of the assembly. 


Swaged or compressed fittings are economical and 
easily applied in the shop or field but care must be taken 
in the selection of the steel. Some compressed fittings 
have cracked in brittle fracture under a combination 
of extremely low temperature and high internal stress 
levels that are produced during the swaging operation. 
This problem is no different than that of correct steel 
selection for the dead-end fittings for the conductor 
although larger stronger fittings are sometimes required 
for the guys. 


B-3.9 Cable Behaviour 


The cable behaviour is most often modelled similar to 
that of straight bars of similar mechanical properties. 
It is important that the designer of guyed structures 
understand conditions under which the straight bar 
model is applicable. 


The relationship between tension and elongation is 
assumed linear; that is, the guy effective modulus of 
elasticity E is assumed constant. If the guy cable were 
a straight steel bar, its modulus of elasticity would be 
that of steel, Е = 200 000 MPa. However, because а 
guy is normally made of wound strands, its effective 
modulus of elasticity E is smaller than Е. A value of 
160 000 MPa is often used. 


B-4 GUY INSTALLATION 


The top ends ofthe guys have a permanent nonadjustable 
dead-end fitting and these are attached to the masts 
before erection of the structure. The remainder of the 
operation of attaching the guys to the anchors, the 
plumbing of the structure, and then the pre-tensioning 
of the whole system can be done by at least two different 
methods. 


B-4.1 Traditional Method 


The guys are cut to approximate length (but always 
slightly longer than needed), permanently attached at 
their tops to the structure, and then attached at their 
bottoms with temporary grips or other wedge-type 
devices. The structure is held in approximate plumb 
position by crane or helicopter while some block 
and tackle or tensioning device takes up the slack in 
each guy and holds the structure in place. Surveying 
equipment and plumb bobs are used while the structure 
is brought into proper alignment by tightening and 
slackening the guys; the loads are then transferred to the 
permanent fitting which contains threaded tensioning 
devices used to apply the specified pretension. This 


30 


operation can involve many person-hours, especially if 
close and rigid specifications have been set regarding 
the positioning of the tower and the pretension levels. 


B-4.2 Alternate Method 


This method is advantageous if one accepts the fact 
that relaxed or more liberal than usual tolerances can 
be applied to the erection of guyed rigid frames and 
masted towers. These relaxed tolerances often will have 
negligible effect on the strength or performance of the 
structures, the tolerances on erection, and positioning of 
the structure being limited to what is needed to ensure 
that the structure does not appear other than vertical. 


The human eye cannot detect mast or tower is out 
of plumb by less than about one degree. One-half 
of a degree has been accepted by some as a limit. 
Furthermore, the tensions in guys, in the absence 
of wind, are all equal and any pre-tensioning can be 
introduced by using a threaded tensioning device in the 
guys. À survey is made of the elevations of the tops of 
the anchors and of the mast footing and calculations 
made of the needed guy lengths. Guys are then cut and 
fixed with simple dead-end fittings; an adjustable device 
added to one only. Upon erection of the structure, it is 
moved slightly at the top to permit direct attachment 
of the guys to their anchors and final one is attached 
and the desired pretension introduced. The alternate 
method requires that the lengths of the guys and their 
fitting be accurate to about 0.3 percent of calculated 
length, which is a reasonable degree of precision. 


B-5 GUYED MASTS 


B-5.1 The following geometrical and mechanical 
properties are used to characterize a guy cable. 


h — structure height to lower guy (m); 


L — chord length-from anchor to structure 
attachment point (m); 
а = guy slope-angle measured from 
horizontal to chord (degree); 
A = horizontal displacement of structure 
attachment point (mm); 
D = outside diameter (mm); 
A = cross-section area (mm); 
W — bare weight per unit length (N/m); 
RBS = rated breaking strength or ultimate 
tension capacity (kN); 
Fe — tension force in guy-assumed constant 
along guy (kN); 
HF, — horizontal component of tension 
force in guy (kN); 
VF — vertical component of tension force 


in guy (kN); 


Pf. —  pretension force-value of tension in 
unloaded structure expressed as a 
fraction of RBS (percent); 

E — guy effective modulus of elasticity 
(MPa); and 

K = horizontal guy stiffness-horizontal 


guy reaction HFc caused by a unit 
horizontal displacement A (kN/m). 


B-5.2 Single Guy Level and Hinged Base 


Figure 12 shows a guyed pole with a single back guy 
subjected to a transverse force H. Because the pole is 
hinged at the base, the entire transverse force is resisted 
by the horizontal component of the guy tension; that 
is, HF, = H. The vertical component VF, follows from 
the guy slope. That component creates compression in 
the pole: 


VF = VF. 


VFp 


HINGE 


Fic. 12 GUYED Mast 


In Fig. 13, the transverse force is resisted by a pair of 
back guys. The top view of the system shows how each 
guy shares the transverse load equally. The force in 
each guy can be obtained by similar prisms: F= (H/2) 
L/t, where t, 1, and h are the transverse, longitudinal, 
and vertical projections of the guy, and L is the guy 
length. 


31 


IS 17740 : 2022 


In Fig. 14, the pole is held by a pair of 45? prestressed 
guys, a back guy AC, and a head guy BC. Assume that 
the guys are prestressed at 14.14 kN. This pretension 
causes an axial force of 20 kN in the pole. When 
the transverse load is increased from zero to 30 kN, 
the tension in the back guy increases from 14.14 to 
42.43 kN, whereas that in the head guy decreases 
from 14.1 kN to zero. The head guy becomes slack 
for loads larger than or equal to 20 kN. For a load of 
30 kN, the back guy tension is 42.43 kN, exactly the 
same as if there had been no prestress. From this it 
may be noted that as long as a guy prestress does not 
exceed 50 percent of the maximum loaded guy tension, 
the prestress will not have an effect on the maximum 
tension. Before the head guy becomes slack, the guy 
tensions are simply calculated as the superposition of 
the initial guy preloads and the forces in the truss made 
up of the mast and two straight bars replacing the guys. 


When a hinge exists or is assumed to exist at the base of 
a pole, the corresponding model is referred to herein as 
a ‘column or strut’ model and the analysis as a ‘column 
or strut’ analysis. 


B-5.3 Single Guy Level and Fixed Base 


Figure 15 shows a pole fixed at its base and supported 
by a single back guy. The system is now statically 
indeterminate. The transverse load H is shared between 
the horizontal component of guy tension HF, and the 
shear in the pole НЕ; that is, Н = HF, + HF, The 
relative magnitudes of the forces HF, and HF, depend 
on the horizontal stiffness's K, and К, of the guy and 
the pole, respectively. The situation 1s similar to that 
of two springs sharing the load. It can easily be shown 
that: 


AF =H x KJ(K, + КЪ); and 
HE -H*EXAK + КЪ) 
The ratios К/К. + К) and K,/(K,,+K,) are distribution 
factors distributing the transverse load to the two 


components of the system. The moment at the base of 
the pole is: 


M=hxHF, 


For a constant cross-section pole of height h, modulus 
of elasticity Е, and moment of inertia J,: 


K,=3 x E, x L/h? 


IS 17740 : 2022 


H/2 


Fic. 13 HINGED Mast wirH Two Guys 


e 
14.14 
- 20 
10 10 
D 


PRETENSION 10 kN TRANSVERSE 


A 


B A D B 


A D B 
20 kN TRANSVERSE 30 kN TRANSVERSE 


Fic. 14 HINGED MAST WITH INLINE BACK AND FRONT Guys 


32 


HFG 


—"Hü—— — — 


HFp 
тм 


Fic. 15 FIixED BASE POLE WITH IN-LINE GUY 


33 


IS 17740 : 2022 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 10.4.2 ) 


BRACING RESISTANCE REQUIRED FOR LEG MEMBER 


Leg Shape 


Tower Cross 


Bracing Resistance, P, Required in a face at a 


Section Panel Point 
Square When weak-axis buckling (KL/r.) governs: 
P PU x 0.707) = 0.707 P. 
When in-Plane buckling (KL/r or Кит) governs: 
P=P, 
Triangular When weak-axis buckling (KL/r,) governs: 
P =P 62 х 0,866) = 0.577 P. 
When in-plane buckling (KL/r.) governs: 
pou 
vm When in-plane buckling (KZ/r,) governs: 
P =P /(0.866) = 1.15 P, 
Y Square When in-Plane buckling (KL/r, or KL/r ) governs: 
| P, = P; 
Triangular Out-of-plane buckling (KL/r. ) governs: 
X= (UR P = P (0.866) = 1.15 P. 
| 
Y 
TUBULAR OR SOLID 
where 
KL 
Са) 
Е Е 
p= |15+— = 5 <P рл стаі Е 
| 60 100 100 100 


Р = Resistance required to provide lateral support at a panel point within a face of a latticed structure; 


P.— Minimum bracing resistance normal to a supported member required to provide lateral support; 


NOTES 


1 Alternatively, P, may be determined using the worst case effective slenderness ratio (highest ratio) to determine P, and multiplying 
the result by 1.15 for triangular cross sections or by 1.00 for square cross sections. 


2 One value of P. applies for both faces when investigating a segment of a leg. The larger value shall be used considering the leg 


segment above and below a panel point. 


3 Weak-axis buckling governs angle legs for symmetrical bracing patterns. In-plane, out-of-plane or weak-axis buckling may govern 


staggered bracing patterns. 


34 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 10.4.2 ) 
MINIMUM REQUIRED RESISTANCE AT PANEL POINTS 


NOTE - For leg slopes greater than 15 degrees from vertical, Pr shall be divided by the Cosine of the leg slopes 


35 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 12.1.2 ) 
EFFECTIVE SLENDERNESS RATIO FOR LEG MEMBERS 
E-1 EFFECTIVE SLENDERNESS RATIO OF LEG MEMBERS OF BRACING SYSTEMS 


E-1.1 Symmetrical Bracing System 


Leg Shapes Effective Slenderness 
Ratios К = 1.0 
Кит, 
L 
u KLir, 
Y 
| 
= —X 
у КЇ, 
| 
Y 
TUBULAR OR SOLID 


36 


IS 17740 : 2022 


E-1.2 Staggered Bracing Patterns 


Effective Slenderness Ratios 


Leg Shapes 
K-1.0 


Кит, KL/r „[(1+2N)/3]KLlr, 


Кіл, КІ. „(8 + 2N)/3] KLrr,, 
[а + 2N)/3] КІЛ. 


Where, т, = Equivalent radius 
of gyration governing torsional 
flexural buckling 


NL 
М>05 | 
х = КІЛ, 
| 
Y 
TUBULAR OR SOLID 
NOTES 


1 L shall equal the panel spacing measured along the axis of the leg. 
2 The maximum effective slenderness ratio shall be used to determine the design compression strength and the bracing resistance 


required to provide lateral support. 


37 


IS 17740 : 2022 


E-2 EFFECTIVE SLENDERNESS RATIO OF DIFFERENT ANGLE LEG SHAPES 


Leg Shapes 


Effective Slenderness Ratios K—1.0 


u 


2. 


-— k2- 
SHEAR ~~ 
CENTER 


The design stress shall be computed for the larger of KL/r, and 


KLir,, given by 
2 2 
2 1 1 u 
-=— +— + | va{ 
Fig ћ қ К» 
0.04J(K,Ly 
қ 4e ul zZ 
I 
where 


C,- Warping Constant: 
J= St. Venant’s torsion Constant: 
К = Effective length coefficient for warping restraint: 
L= Unbraced Length of member: 
r,= Radius of gyration about u-axis: 
u,— Distance between shear centre and centroid: 


|І 
t= P Polar radius of gyration about shear centre, 


I = 1,+1,+ Лиу = Polar moment of inertia about shear center: 
I = Moment of inertia about u-axis: 
1 = Moment of inertia about z-axis: 
A= Area of cross section. 
K=1 
KLir, | КІ. 
r = Varies with length 
r.— equivalent radius of gyration 


38 


IS 17740 : 2022 


E-3 EFFECTIVE SLENDERNESS RATIO OF LEG MEMBER OF DIFFERENT BRACING 
SYSTEMS 


LEG MEMBER USING SYMMETRICAL BRACING 


y у 
v y 
x 
T Method of loading/Rigidity of Joints Slenderness ratio 
L Concentric Loading Lir, from 0 to 120 
p (Кт = Lir...) 
No restraint at ends Lir, from 120 to 200 


(Кт = Lir...) 


LEG MEMBER USING STAGGERING BRACING 


Method of loading/Rigidity of Joints Slenderness ratio 

Concentric Loading Lir or Lir y ог 0.67 L/r... 
from 0 to 120 (KL/r = L/r) 

No restraint at ends Lir or Lir. ог 0.67 Lir, 


from 120 to 200 (KL/r — L/r) 


LEG MEMBER USING STAGGERING BRACING (NUMBER OF STAGGERED PARTS UPTO 3) 


CENTRE LINE y Y 
OFTOWERLEG V y 
x [LEG 


| 90°! 
Method of loading/Rigidity of Joints Slenderness ratio 
| Concentric Loading Lir or Lir. or Lir 
1+ {— from 0 to 120 (KL/r = L/r) 
Е No restraint at ends Lir or Lir. or Lir 
from 120 to 200 (KL/r = L/r) 
" 
018 


* MEASURED LENGTH 


NOTE — If total number of staggered parts up to 3 as shown in figure 


39 


IS 17740 : 2022 


E-4 EQUIVALENT SLENDERNESS RATIOS 
BASED ON END CONDITIONS 


E-4.1 The equivalent slenderness ratios of leg members, 
based on end conditions and types of members, are 
given at Table 5. 


Table 5 Equivalent Slenderness Ratios Based on 
End Conditions 


( Clause E-4.1 ) 


SI No. Type of Member and End Conditions Value 
KL/r 


(1) (2) (3) 


40 


Concentric at both ends (for example, double angles or 
channels, round members with concentric end plates) 


i) Leg sections or members bolted on either 
ends in both flanges 


ii) Member with concentric loading at both ends Lir 
of the unsupported panel with value of L/r up 
to and including 120 


NOTE 
Limiting value of KL/r of Leg members = 150 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 12.2.1 ) 
EFFECTIVE SLENDERNESS RATIO OF BRACINGS 


F-1 X-BRACING SYSTEM WITH AND WITHOUT SECONDARY BRACINGS 


Cross over point Cross over point 
Providing support Connected but 
no support provided 


L 
L, У 


Cross over point Cross over point 
Providing support Connected but 
no support provided 


L L4 ил L4 Imin 
L2 3 L5 Imax L5 [fmax 


Internal bracing at No internal bracing at 
Cross over point Cross over point 


E min L4 min 
і It nin L2 Imin 


Н, Ты 
H, Imin P 


“А 2H, [fmax 


41 


IS 17740 : 2022 


A v 1 
` ` ABI rw 
B x у 
D 
% AC/rw ог CB/rw 
5 “АВ/гхх ог “АВ/г,у or “АП/гуу 
B 
D 
A И AC/ry, or CB/rw 
1 1 РА *AD/rw 
с 
B ойне STAY 


AD/rw or *AF/rxx 

DC/rw ог AE/ry, 
CB/tw 

*AB/rxx ОГ *AB/r,, 


AD/rw ог “АҒ /Гхх 

DC/rw or AE/rw 
СВ/гуу 
“АС/гуу 


HIP BRACING 


AD/rw or *AF/rxx 
DC/rw or CB/rw 


*AE/tw 


AE/rw or *AF/rxx 
ED/rw or *AE/rw 


DC/rw ог СВ/гуу 


X- BRACINGS WITH AND WITHOUT SECONDARY MEMBERS 


* Application for tension compression system only i.e tensile stresses in one bracing 
must be atleast equal to 75 percent of the compressive stress in other bracing 


# The corner stay should be designed to provide lateral support adequately 


42 


IS 17740 : 2022 


F-2 K-BRACING SYSTEM WITH AND WITHOUT SECONDARY BRACINGS 


A MEG 
YN УК Y 
в x AB/ rw 
A 
АСТм or CB/tw 
» AB/nx АВ/г,, 
B 
A 
# 
B VIEW 1-1 
A 
AD/rw 
В DC/tw 
E CB/tw 
в AB/rxx ОГ АВ/г,, 
А 
AD/rw 
\ DC/tw 
Га 1 CB/ry, 
B AC/r« or АС/г,, 
HIP BRACING 
A A A 
AD/tw 
25 p Ж DC/rw 
c CB/rw 
B B 
2” VIEW 2-2 
A HIP BRACING 
A 
8 E AElrw 
ED/tw 
2 DC/tw 
Y CB/tw 
37 views -3 
K-BRACINGS WITH AND WITHOUT SECONDARY MEMBERS 
# The Corner stay should be designed to provide lateral support adequately 


43 


IS 17740 : 2022 


F-3 BELT MEMBERS WITH AND WITHOUT SECONDARY BRACINGS 


EFFECTS OF END CONNECTIONS ON MEMBER CAPACITY 


ті 


у METHOD OF LOADING/ 
RIGIDITY OF JOINTS 
Y 
Tension system 
with compression strut : 
(Eccentricity in critical axis) 
* MEASURED LENGTH 


BRACING REQUIREMENT 
(SINGLE ANGLE MEMBERS) 


Single bolt connection, no 
restraint at ends 


| | | | Multiple bolt connection, partial 


restraint at both ends 


CONCENTRIC LOADING TWO ANGLE MEMBER 


uia 


METHOD OF LOADING/ 
RIGIDITY OF JOINTS 

| 

Y— Tension system 

with compression 
concentric loading 

x 

* MEASURED LENGTH 


SLENDERNESS RATIO 


L/rw from 0 to 120 
(KL/r = 60+0.5L/r) 


L/rw from 120 to 200 
(KL/r = L/r) 


L/w from 120 to 250 
KL/r = (46.2+0.615 L/r) 


SLENDERNESS RATIO 


L/r« or L/r,, from 0 to 120 
(KL/r = L/r) 


BRACING REQUIREMENT (TWO 


ANGLE MEMBERS) 


Single bolt connection, no 
restraint at ends 


Multiple bolt connection, partial 


restraint at both ends 


44 


Шг or L/r,, from 120 to 200 
(KL/r = L/r) 


Litxx or Шуу from 120 to 250 
KL/r = (46.2+0.615 L/r) 


IS 17740 : 2022 


F-4 BELT MEMBERS IN K-BRACING SYSTEMS BACK TO BACK WITH AND WITHOUT 


SECONDARY BRACINGS 


HORIZONTAL MEMBER OF K-BRACING-TWO ANGLE MEMBER 


L 0.5 L* 


* MEASURED LENGTH 


METHOD OF LOADING/ 
RIGIDITY OF JOINTS 


Tension Compression system 
with compression strut : 
Multiple bolt connection partial 


restraint at ends and intermediate 


BRACING REQUIREMENT 
(TWO ANGLE MEMBER) 


Concentric load at ends, 
eccentric loading at intermediate 
in both direction 


Concentric load at ends, 
and intermediate 


45 


SLENDERNESS RATIO 


0.5L/tyy or L/rxx from 120 to 250 
KL/r = (46.2+ 0.615L/r) 


0.5L/tyy or L/rxx from 0 to 120 
KL/r = (30+ 0.75L/r) 


0.5L/tyy or L/rxx from 0 to 120 
KL/r = L/r 


IS 17740 : 2022 


F-5 BELT MEMBERS BACK TO BACK WITH AND WITHOUT SECONDARY BRACINGS 


METHOD OF LOADING/ 
RIGIDITY OF PANEL 


Tension system 
with compression strut : 
Concentric loading 


BRACING REQUIREMENT 
Single bolt connection, no 
restraint at ends and 
intermediate 

Multiple bolt connection at 


ends.Single bolt connection at 
intermediate point 


Partial restraint at one end no 
restraint at intermediate 


Partial restraint at both ends 


Multiple bolt connection 


Partial restraint at ends and 
intermediate 


CONCENTRIC LOADING TWO ANGLE MEMBER, SUBDIVIDED PANELS OF A HORIZONTAL MEMBER 


SLENDERNESS RATIO 


0.5L/ry, or L/r« from 0 to 120 
(KL/r = L/r) 


O.5L/r,, or L/rxx from 120 to 200 
(KL/r = L/r) 


0.5 ћу from 120 to 220 
KL/r = (28.6+0.762 L/r) 


L/rxx from 120 to 250 
KL/r = (46.2+0.615 L/r) 


0.5L/r,, or L/r« from 120 to 250 
KL/r = (46.2+0.615 L/r) 


46 


IS 17740 : 2022 


F-6 BELT MEMBERS BACK TO BACK WITH AND WITHOUT SECONDARY BRACINGS 


EFFECT OF SUBDIVIDED PANELS FOR THE HORIZONTAL MEMBER AND END 
CONNECTION ON MEMBER CAPACITY 


METHOD OF LOADING/ SLENDERNESS RATIO 
RIGIDITY OF JOINTS 
Tension system 


* MEASURED LENGTH 


with compression strut : O.5L/rw or то from О to 120 
Eccentricity in critical axes (KL/r = (60+0.5L/r) 


BRACING REQUIREMENT 


Single bolt connection, no O.5L/ry, or L/rx from 120 to 200 
restraint at ends for intermediate (KL/r = L/r) 


Multiple bolt connection at 
ends.Single bolt connection at 
intermediate point 


0.5L/rw from 120 to 225 


Partial restraint at one end, no (Кит = 28.6+0.762 Lir) 


restraint at intermediate 


L/rxx from 120 to 250 


Partial restraint at both ends KLir = (46.240.615 Шт) 


Multiple bolt connection 


Partial restraint at ends and 0.5L/rw or L/rxx from 120 to 250 
intermediate KL/r = (46.2+0.615 L/r) 


47 


IS 17740 : 2022 


F-7 EQUIVALENT SLENDERNESS RATIOS based on end conditions and types of members, are 
BASED ON END CONDITIONS given at Table 6. 


The equivalent slenderness ratios of bracing members, 


Table 6 Equivalent Slenderness Ratios of Bracing Members 
( Clause F-7 ) 


SI No. Type of Member and End Conditions Value KL/r 
Q) (2) (3) 


Members with eccentric loading (for example, single angle or channels, round members with eccentric end plates, round members with 
flattened ends 


1) Member with concentric loading at one end and normal eccentricities at the other end of the 30 + 0.75 L/r 
unsupported panel with values of L/r up to and including 120 


ii) Members with normal framing eccentricities at both ends of the unsupported panel for value 60 + 0.50 L/r 
of L/r up and including 120 


Unrestrained condition (for example, single bolt connection) 


ш) members unrestrained against rotation at both ends of the unsupported panel for value of L/r L/r 
from 120 to 200 


Partially restrained condition (for example, multiple bolt or welded connections to a stiffer member/component or group of 
members/components) 


iv) Members partially restrained against rotation at one end of the unsupported panel for values 28.6 + 0.762 L/r 
of L/r over 120 up to and including 225 


v) Members partially restrained against rotation at both ends of the unsupported panel for value 46.2 + 0.615 L/r 
of L/r over120 up to and including 250 


NOTES 

1 Different equations may apply for each direction of buckling under consideration. The maximum effective slenderness ratio shall 
be used to determine the compressive strength. 

2 The restrained member must be connected to the restraining member by at least two bolts. 

3 The restraining member must have a stiffness factor //L in the buckling plane (Z = Moment of Inertia, L= Length) that equals or 
exceeds the sum of the stiffness factors in the buckling plane of the restrained members that are connected. 

4 Angle members connected by one leg should have the holes located as close to the outstanding leg as feasible. Normal framing 
eccentricities at load transfer connection imply that connection holes are located between the heel of the angle and the center line of 
the framing leg. 

5 Where test and/or analysis demonstrates that any other type of bracing pattern is found technically suitable, the same may be 
adopted. 

6 A single bolt connection shall not be considered as offering restraint against rotation. A multiple bolt connection properly detailed 
to minimize eccentricities shall be considered to offer partial restraint if connection is to a member having adequate flexural strength 
to resist rotation of the joint. Points of intermediate support shall not be considered as offering restraint to rotation unless they meet 
the criteria outlined under the slenderness ratio. 


7 Limiting value of KL/r shall be as follows: 


3) Main bracing members = 150 
b) Members carrying computed stresses = 200 
c) Redundant members and those carrying nominal stresses = 250 
d) Members used for supporting ancillaries subjected to tension = 400 


48 


IS 17740 : 2022 


F-8 EFFECTIVE LENGTH FACTOR, K, FOR ROUND BRACING MEMBERS DIRECTLY 


SLENDERNESS RATIO OF BRACE MEMBER 


WELDED TO LEGS 


BRACING PATTERN 


L 


BRACING CUT AT ENDS 


L/r«80 


80 < L/r S 120 L/r>120 


K=0.7+0.3(120-L/r)/40 


BENT CONTINUOUS 
BRACING 


і 
| 


L 


INTERSECTION 
POINT 


BRACING CUT AND 
CONCENTRIC 
AT CENTER POINT 


See Note 2 


INTERSECTION 
POINT 


L 
BRACING CONTINUOUS 
LAYERED AND 


CONNECTED 
AT CENTER POINT 


See Note 2 


NOTES 


K=0.7+0.4(120-L/r)/40 


K=0.75+0.25(120-L/r)/40 


K=0.90+0.20(120-L/r)/40 


1 L shall be determined using the panel spacing and the clear distance between the legs. 


2 When tension force in the tension member of double braced pattern is less than 75 percent of the compression force in the compression 
member, the value of KL shall be determined based on a single braced condition. 


49 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX G 
[ Clause 10.4.4.1 (a) ] 
TUBULAR MEMBERS 
G-1 CONNECTIONS IN TUBULAR MEMBERS 


Bracing connection in tubulars members and its panel assembly are given in Fig. 16 and Fig. 17 respectively. 


EDGE CRACK FLAT FACE CRACK 
(CLOSED BY WELDING) (CLOSED BY WELDING) 


TYPICAL LEG BRACING CONNECTION 


9 


SECTION B-B SECTION C-C 


SECTION A-A 


BRACING AND TIE MEMBER CONNECTION WITH LEG MEMBER 


Fic. 16 BRACING CONNECTION 


50 


IS 17740 : 2022 


VERTICAL LOG 


DIAGONAL 


NUT 


VERTICAL LOG AT 


OTHER SEGMENT 


PANEL ASSEMBLY DETAILS 


CENTRAL GUSSET 


LOCK WASHER 


ҚЫ 
% 


N 
N 
N 


NNNNNNNNNS 
# 


Fic. 17 PANEL ASSEMBLY 


51 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX H 
( Clause 15.1 ) 


PROPERTIES OF VARIOUS TUBULAR SECTIONS 


A -3.4 Dt 
L=1,=0.393 D° t 
C, = 0.5 (D +1) Cos (a) 
C, - 0.5 (D + i) Sin (a) 


r=0.354 D 


Мах [^ = 0.637 


d, Dt 


us C O68 (D 1) 


J D't 
ROUND 
v A,=3.19 Dt r=0.356D 
I =I =0.403 Dt 
28. Max © _ 9:634 
C, — 0.510 (D + f) Cos (a) a uH 
zi. +?) Si 
C, = 0.510 (D + t) Sin (o) Max. С _ 55280) 
E ó aX. = —— 
а = 11.25 Ј Dt 
HEXDECAGONAL РА 
Y 4,7322Dt г= 0.358 D 
1=1=041 Dt MAE 
m. Max 2 _ 9631 
C, - 0.518 (D + f) Cos (a) i, oe 
= + t) Si 
C, = 0.518 (D + 1) Sin (а) Max E _922(0+!) 
NM аА 
а. = 15 Ј D't 
у = 0.268 (D—1t— 2 BR) 
DODECAGONAL 
A,=332 Dt r=0.364D 
I =I =0.438 Dt 
= Max. 2, _ 0618 
C, = 0.541 (D + t) Cos (a) E 


x 


C, = 0.541 (0 + 1) Sin (a) 


C 0.603(D+t) 
Um mE ыз cm 


= о Ма. 
а =22.5 Dii 
OCTAGONAL w=0.414 (D-t-2 BR) 
4,7346Dt r=0.373 D 
I =I =0.481 D't 
ie Мә = 9906 
С = 0.577 (D + À Cos (a) L Dt 


HEXAGONAL 


С,= 0.577 (0 + t) Sin (a) 
а = 30° 


t 


с 0577(р +1) 


Мах | 
Ј Dt 


w= 0.577 (D — t — 2 BR) 


52 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Y 4,7400 Dt 
I, =I, = 0.666 D t 

C, — 0.707 (D t) Cos (а) 

Moe X C, — 0.707 (D + ђ Sin (a) 

а = 45° 


SQUARE 


r=0.408 D 


1, 9.0568 


I Dt 


t 


uu E _ 050000 +) 
J Dit 


w=(D-t-2BR) 


NOTE - For Polygons, all properties (except w) assume a sharp cornered section. 


where 


= Angle between the x-axis and the r 
corner of the polygon (degrees); ОЛ (max) 


= Mean diameter (mm) = D,-t; 


= Outside diameter for round 
or across flats for polygonal C/J(max) 
members (mm); 


= Thickness (mm); 


= Gross area (mm?); J 
= Moment of inertia (тат); id 
— Distance from x axis to point 

BR 


(mm); 


= Distance from y axis to point 
(mm); 


BR 


Radius of gyration (mm); 


Value for determining the 
maximum flexural shear stress 
(1/ mm’); 


Value for determining the 
maximum torsional shear stress 
(1/mm?); 


Polar moment of inertia (mm); 


Flat width of a side of a polygon 
(mm) (see Fig. 18); 


Effective bend radius (mm); if 
bend radius « 4t; 


Actual bend radius (mm); if bend 
radius > 4t, BR = 4t. 


BR 


Fic. 18 FLAT WIDTH AND BEND RADIUS 


53 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX J 
( Clause 17 ) 


TYPICAL CHECKLIST FOR MAINTENANCE AND CONDITION ASSESSMENT OF TOWERS 


(Means and methods for RF protection 1s not given) 


(ОК; NG — Needs maintenance or assessment) 


ASSESSMENT 


OK NG 


a) Super Structure and Appurtenances 


1) Condition of the Structure 
i) Damaged leg, horizontal belts, main and secondary bracings 

ii) Missing members and loose members 

iil) Ladders, handrails, steps, platforms, guard rails 

iv) Loose, missing bolts, nut locking devices 

v) Undersized bolts, oversized bolt holes 

vi) Visible cracks in welded connections 
vil) Tower alignment — Tower plumb and twist 


2) Finish 
1) Condition of galvanizing/painting 
ii) Corrosion/rust in members, ladders and accessories 
iii) Aviation colour marking condition 


iv) Collection of water in members “(to be remedied eg, unplug drain holes etc) 


3) Lighting 
1) Condition of conduits, junction boxes, and fasteners (weather tight and 

secure) 

ii) obstructions in drain/vent openings 

iii) condition of electrical wiring 

iv) Bulb condition 

v) Controllers 
* Flasher 
* Photo control 


* Alarms 


4) Grounding 
i) Connections, corrosion 


ii) Lightning protection 


5) Antennas and Lines 
1) Antenna and antenna mount condition 
il) Ice shield condition 
iil) Feed line condition 
iv) Hanger condition 


v) Secured to structure 


6) Other appurtenances (walkways, platforms, sensors, floodlights, etc.) 
i) Condition 


ii) Secured to structure 


54 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ASSESSMENT OK NG 


7) Guys 
1) Corrosion, broken strands, kinks etc. 
ii) Turnbuckles, thimbles 
iil) Service sleeves 
iv) Cable connecting end fittings and cable clamps 
v) Slippage or damage to the strands 
vi) Socket condition 


vii) Shackles and cotter pins 


8) Guy Tensions 
i) guy tensions shall be verified 
ii) Measure wind speed and temperature 


NOTE — Minor variations in guy tensions are expected. If significant, then the cause should be identified 
and rectified. Loosening during construction, exposure to extreme wind, disturbance to anchor, base 
settlement, or connection slippage may be some causes for variation in guy tensions. Tension variations at 
a single level are to be expected because of anchor elevation differences, construction deviations, and wind 
effects. 


b) Concrete Foundations 
1) Ground Condition 
i) Settlement, movement or earth cracks 


ii) Erosion 


iii) Site condition (standing water, drainage, trees, etc.) 


2) Anchorage Condition 
i) Nuts and/or nut locking device (tightened) 
ii) Grout condition 
11) Anchorages and/or anchor rod condition. 
3) Concrete Condition 
i) Cracking, spalling, or splitting 


ii) Chipped or broken concrete 

iii) Honeycombing 

iv) Low spots to collect moisture 
4) Guyed Mast Anchors 


1) Settlement, movement or earth cracks. 


ii) Backfill heaped over concrete for water shedding. 


ш) Anchor rod condition below earth (Maintain required structural capacity 
of anchor during exploration. Attachment to temporary anchorage may be 
required). 

iv) Corrosion control measures (galvanizing, coating, concrete encasement, 
cathodic protection systems, etc). 


v) Anchor heads clear of earth. 


55 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX K 
( Clause 18 ) 
FIELD MAPPING OF STRUCTURES AND APPURTENANCES 


K-1 MAPPING OF APPURTENANCES 


The mapping of appurtenances shall provide sufficient 
dimensional data in order to calculate the effective 
projected area, weight and location of all appurtenances. 
The mapping of appurtenances shall include, as a 
minimum: 
a) Inventory of existing antennas: 

1) 
2 
3) 
4) 
5) 
Inventory of other appurtenances (such as 
climbing ladders, platforms, etc.): 


Elevation; 


МУ 


antenna type and dimensions/model number; 
support mount and location; 

spacing and orientation on cross-section; and 
corresponding transmission lines/cables. 


b 


wm 


1) Elevation appurtenance type and dimensions, 
location; and 


2) spacing and orientation on cross-section. 


K-2 MAPPING 
COMPONENTS 


OF STRUCTURAL 


In order to perform an analysis of a structure, the 
structural configuration and the size of all structural 
members must be mapped in order to calculate wind 
loading and member capacities. 


K-2.1 Self-Supporting Latticed Structures 
a) Sketch of overall structure, numbering all sections. 
b) The Configuration of each section: 
1 
2 
3 


w 


Section height; 
) 
) 


Panel height and number of panels; 
Configuration of the panels (X, X with 
horizontal, K); 


Face width (center to center of legs) at all taper 
change locations; and 


4 


— 


5 


— 


Sketch indicating the above for each typical 
section. 


c) Member sizes for each section: 

1) Leg member sizes — That is, pipe diameter 
(outside diameter and wall thickness using ultra 
sound device), solid round diameter, or angle 


size and thickness (60 degree or 90 degree). 
2 


— 


Diagonal member sizes — That is, pipe 
diameter (outside diameter and wall thickness 
using ultra sound device), angle size, thickness 
and orientation (long leg back to back-LLBB, 
or short leg back to back-SLBB). 


56 


3) Horizontal member sizes — That is, pipe 
diameter (outside diameter and wall thickness 
using ultra sound device), angle size, thickness 
and orientation (LLBB, SLBB). 


Sub-brace member sizes (if applicable) — 
That is, pipe diameter (outside diameter and 
wall thickness using ultra sound device), angle 
size, thickness and orientation (LLBB, SLBB). 


4) 


K-2.2 Guyed Masts 


a) Structure base type (fixed or pinned) and tapered 
or flat base. 

b) Guy anchor dimensions: distance from base to guy 
anchors and their relative elevations to base and 
their orientation. 


с 


— 


Sketch of overall structure numbering all sections. 
Locate and label all guy wire levels: 


1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 


The configuration of each section; 
Section height; 
Panel height and number of panels; 


Configuration of the panels (X, X with 
horizontals, K); 


5 


— 


Face width (centre to centre of legs) at all taper 
change locations; and 

6) Sketch indicating the above for each typical 
section. 

d) Member sizes for each section: 

1) Leg member sizes — That is, pipe diameter 
(outside diameter and wall thickness using ultra 
sound device), solid round diameter, angle size 
and thickness (60 degree or 90 degree). 


Diagonal member sizes — That is, pipe 
diameter (outside diameter and wall thickness 
using ultra sound device), angle size, thickness 
and orientation (long leg back to back, LLBB, 
or short leg back to back, SLBB). 


Horizontal member sizes — That is, pipe 
diameter (outside diameter and wall thickness 
using ultra sound device), solid round diameter, 
angle size, thickness and orientation (LLBB, 
SLBB). 


Sub-brace member sizes (if applicable) — 
That 1s, pipe diameter (outside diameter and 
wall thickness using ultra sound device), angle 
size, thickness and orientation (LLBB, SLBB). 


Guy wire elevation, size and type for each guy 
level. 


2 


МУ 


3 


— 


4) 


e) 


K-2.3 Connections 


In order to perform a rigorous structural analysis of a 
structure the details of all structural connections must 
be mapped in order to calculate connection capacities. 
The mapping of the structure connections shall include, 
as a minimum, the following: 

a) Member end connection details; 

b) If bolted: number, type and size of end bolts and 

centre bolts; 


с) Size and thickness of gusset plate with related 
details (hole sizes, edge distances, weld size and 
length); 


d) If Welded: weld size and length of end and centre 
connections; 


e) Splice connection details; 

f) Number, type and size of bolts; 

g) Size and thickness of splice plate with related 
details (hole sizes, edge distances, weld size and 
length,) and distance from panel intersection 
point; 

h) Anchor rod type, size, number, and bolt circle; 

j) Guy Assembly and connection details; 

k) Preformed size/type, turnbuckle size, shackle size; 


57 


IS 17740 : 2022 


m) Socket size, pin size, link plate dimensions with 
related details; 

n) Size and thickness of guy pull-off plate with 
related details (hole sizes, edge distances, weld 
size and length, stiffener size); and 

p) Guy anchor head plate size, thickness, holes 
size, spacing, and edge distances of holes, shaft 
type, size and extension length and angle from 
horizontal plane and weld size and length of 
connection between shaft and fan plate. 


K-2.4 Pole Structures 
a) Sketch of overall structure numbering all sections; 
b) Configuration of each section; 


c) Section height — For flanged type, the length from 
splice to splice. For telescoping poles, the length 


from butt to butt; 
d) If multi sided, number of sides; 
e) Flat to flat dimension or diameter and 


circumference at top and bottom of each section; 
f) Port hole opening size, reinforcing and location; 
and 


g) Size of each section: wall thickness of each 
section. 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEXL 
( Clause 7.5) 
DESIGN WIND FORCE ON TYPICAL MICROWAVE ANTENNAS 


L-1 Wind force data presented in Table 7 for typical 
microwave antennas (including grid antennas) are 
described in the antenna axis system having the origin 
at the vertex of the reflector. The axial force Ма; acts 
along the axis of the antenna. The side force, F y acts 
perpendicular to the antenna axis in the plane of the 
antenna and the wind vector. The twisting moment, M» 
acts in the plane containing F’,,, and F y (see Fig.19). 


In all cases, the magnitude F,.,, Е, and М, depend on 
the wind pressure of the wind, the projected frontal area 
of the antenna, and the aerodynamic characteristics of 
the antenna body. The aerodynamic characteristics vary 
with wind angle. The values of F w Рам and М, shall 
be determined from the following equations. 


WIND ANGLE, 0 
> WIND 


WITHOUT RADOME 


WIND ANGLE, Ө 
~ WIND 


Fam 


EIERN 


y 
Fsm 


WITH CYLINDRICAL SHROUD 


Pu 7 C, A 
Pf. СА 
M,-P,C,AD 


Р = Design wind pressure (refer 7.5) 
С, С, and С, are the coefficient contained in 
Table 7 as a function of wind angles, 0; 
0- wind angle, see Figure K for positive sign 
conventions; 


A= Outside aperture area of microwave antenna; 
and 


D = Outside diameter of microwave antenna. 


WIND 


WIND ANGLE, 0 WIND 


GRID 


Fic. 19 WIND FORCES ON TYPICAL MICROWAVE ANTENNAS 


58 


Table 7 Wind Force Coefficients for Typical Microwave Antenna 


( Clause L-1 ) 


IS 17740 : 2022 


WIND ANGLE Antenna without Radome Antenna with Radome Antenna with Cylindrical Grid Antenna without 
0 (Degrees) Shroud Ice 
C, G; Си С, C. См С, Ç: С, С, C. Су 
0 1.55 0.00 0.00 0.86 0.00 0.00 1.26 0.00 0.00 0.54 | 0.00 0.00 
10 1.54 —0.05 —0.03 0.86 0.15 —0.08 1.26 0.10 | —0.03 | 0.52 | 0.10 0.02 
20 1.55 —0.05 —0.04 0.82 0.30 -0.11 1.25 0.18 | -0.05 | 0.51 0.18 0.03 
30 1.55 —0.03 —0.04 0.76 0.41 -0.11 1.21 0.23 | -0.05 | 0.46 | 0.23 0.04 
40 1.59 0.01 —0.05 0.66 0.49 —0.08 1.16 0.28 | -0.05 | 0.41 0.26 0.04 
50 1.66 0.09 —0.07 0.55 0.53 —0.04 1.09 0.30 | -0.03 | 0.34 | 027 0.05 
60 1.65 0.24 —0.09 0.42 0.50 0.00 0.95 0.37 | -0.01 | 023 | 028 0.05 
70 1.37 0.46 —0.01 0.31 0.46 0.05 0.67 0.48 0.02 0.13 | 0.27 0.06 
80 0.76 0.38 0.10 0.23 0.44 0.10 0.27 0.58 0.07 0.04 | 0.25 0.05 
90 —0.01 0.34 0.13 0.13 0.41 0.15 -0.11 0.63 0.10 | -0.05| 0.24 0.04 
100 —0.40 0.38 0.13 0.03 0.39 0.17 —0.34 0.60 0.11 | —0.12 | 027 0.05 
110 —0.46 0.41 0.13 -0.07 0.37 0.16 -0.54 0.53 0.11 |-0.19 | 0.29 0.05 
120 —0.46 0.46 0.14 —0.16 0.35 0.16 -0.71 0.44 0.10 | —0.27 | 028 0.05 
130 -0.47 0.47 0.15 -0.29 0.32 0.14 -0.86 0.31 0.00 | -0.34 | 0.26 0.05 
140 -0.57 0.45 0.13 -0.41 0.30 0.09 -0.93 0.23 0.08 |-041| 023 0.04 
150 -0.77 0.39 0.11 —0.52 0.27 0.05 —0.96 0.18 0.06 |-0.48 | 0.20 0.04 
160 —0.87 0.29 0.08 —0.60 0.23 0.02 —0.97 0.15 0.04 | –0.55 | 0.16 0.03 
170 —0.95 0.14 0.05 —0.66 0.15 0.01 — 1.00 0.10 0.02 | —0.59 | 0.09 0.01 
180 -1.05 0.00 0.00 -0.69 0.00 0.00 -1.02 0.00 0.00 | -0.59 | 0.00 0.00 
190 0.95 0.14 0.05 0.66 0.15 0.01 1.00 | -0.10 | -0.02 | -0.59 | -0.09 | -0.01 
200 0.87 0.29 0.08 0.60 0.23 0.02 0.97 | -0.15 | —0.04 | -0.55 | -0.16 | -0.03 
210 -0.77 -0.39 0.11 0.52 0.27 0.05 0.96 | -0.18 | -0.06 | -0.48 | -0.20 | -0.04 
220 0.57 0.45 0.13 0.41 0.30 0.09 0.93 | -023 | —0.08 | -0.41 | -0.23 | -0.04 
230 0.47 0.47 0.15 0.29 0.32 0.14 0.86 | —0.31 | —0.09 | -0.34 | —0.26 | -0.05 
240 0.46 0.46 0.14 0.16 0.35 0.16 0.71 -0.44 | -010 | -0.27 | -0.28 | -0.05 
250 0.46 0.41 0.13 0.07 0.37 0.16 0.54 | -0.53 | -0.11 | -0.19 | -0.29 | -0.05 
260 0.40 0.38 0.13 0.03 —0.39 | -0.17 —0.34 | -0.60 | -0.11 | -0.12 | -0.27 | -0.05 
270 0.01 0.34 0.13 0.13 -0.41 | -0.15 -0.11 —0.63 | —0.10 | —0.05 | -024 | -0.04 
280 0.76 —0.38 —0.10 0.23 —0.44 | -0.10 0.27 -0.58 | —0.07 | 0.04 | -0.25 | -0.05 
290 1.37 —0.46 0.01 0.31 —0.46 | -0.05 0.67 -0.48 | –0.02 | 013 | -027 | -0.06 
300 1.65 —0.24 0.09 0.42 | —0.50 0.00 0.95 -0.37 | 0.01 0.23 | -0.28 | -0.05 
310 1.66 —0.09 0.07 0.55 —0.53 0.04 1.09 —0.30 | 0.03 0.34 | -0.27 | -0.05 
320 1.59 —0.01 0.05 0.66 | —0.49 0.08 1.16 —0.28 | 0.05 0.41 | -0.26 | -0.04 
330 1.55 0.03 0.04 0.76 | -0.41 0.11 1.21 —0.23 | 0.05 0.46 | -023 | -0.04 
340 1.55 0.05 0.04 0.82 | —0.30 0.11 1.25 —0.18 | 0.05 0.51 | -0.18 | -0.03 
350 1.54 0.05 0.03 0.86 | —0.15 0.08 1.26 –0.10 | 0.03 0.52 | -0.10 | -0.02 


59 


IS 17740 : 2022 


ANNEX M 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Structural Engineering and Structural Sections Sectional Committee, CED 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Block 2, Flat 2A Rani 
Meyyammai Tower, MRC Nagar, RA 
Puram, Chennai 600028) 


Ashwathnarayana and Eswara, Chennai 
Bhilai Institute of Technology, Durg 


C.R. Narayana Rao, Architects and Engineers, 
Chennai 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Construma Consultancy Private Limited, Mumbai 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Private 
Limited, New Delhi 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


GAIL India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon Engineers and Contractors Private Limited, 


Mumbai 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited, 


Kolkata 
Geodesic Techniques Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 


Institute for Steel Development and Growth, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


Dn V. KALYANARAMAN (Chairman) 


SHRI H. E. SRIPRAKASH SHASTRY 
DR MoHAN KUMAR GUPTA 


DR C. N. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI C. К. ARVIND (Alternate) 


SHRI A. К. JAIN 

DIRECTOR (TRANSMISSION) (Alternate) 
ӛнкі D. K. GARG 

SHRI №. K. BANSAL (Alternate) 
DIRECTOR - GATES (NW & S) 

DIRECTOR - GATES DESIGN (N & W) (Alternate) 
DR HARSHAVARDHAN SUBBARAO 
SHRI S. GHOSH 

Dn B. C. Roy (Alternate) 
DR G. S. PALANI 

DR NAPA PRASADA RAO (Alternate) 
SHRI A. SINHA 

SHRI VIRENDER GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SHASHI RANJAN 
SHRI S. AsHISH VAIDYA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR MEHTA 
SHRI ABHILASH KUMAR SUDHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SOMNATH BANERJEE 
SHRI PRANIT Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI SRINIDHI ANANTHARAMAN 
SHRIMATI JYOTI C. UBHAYAKAR (Alternate) 


DR SAIBAL KUMAR GHOSH 
DR SUBRATA CHACKRABORTY (Alternate) 


DR Dipti RANJAN SAHOO 
Dr ALOK MADAN (Alternate) 


DR S. ARUL JAYACHANDRAN 
Dr КОРЕМ GoswamI (Alternate) 


SHRI T. BANDYOPADHYAY 
Suni P. V. RAJARAM (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUIT GUHA 
SHRI LAKHAMANA Rao PyDi (Alternate) 


60 


Organization 
Jindal Steel and Power Limited, Gurugram 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 
M N Dastur and Company Private Limited, Kolkata 
MECON Limited, Ranchi 
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in- Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence 
(Army), New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, Noida 

Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 

RITES Limited, Gurugram 

Steel Authority of India Limited, Ranchi 

Steel Re-Rolling Mills Association of India, Kolkata 

STUP Consultants Private Limited, Kolkata 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 
Visakhapatnam Steel Project, Visakhapatnam 


In Personal Capacity (4/197 Vishwamitry Township, 
Opp Gujarat Tractors, Vadodara 390011) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ASHWANI KUMAR 
SHRI SANJAY NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH BABU REDDY 


SHRI SHUVENDU CHATTOPADHYAY 
SHRI GARGI ADITYA Basu (Alternate I) 
SHRI MoHUA CHATTERJEE (Alternate ЇЇ) 


Suri B. K. PANDEY 
SHRI J. К. SARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK 
SHRI SUMANA MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


BRIG GIRISH JOSHI 
LT COL GAURAV KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


SHRI HIMANSHU KUNDU 
SHRI CHANDER SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (B & S)/SB-II 
DIRECTOR (В & S)/SB-I (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KHANNA 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANURAG UPADHYAY 
Suri C. M. CHUGH (Alternate) 


ӛнкі B. M. BERIWALA 
SHRI RAJESH VIJAYAVERGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. GHOSHAL 
DR N. BANDOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Ms Surovi GANGULY 
SHRI SHRIPRASAD T. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. Н. JAIN 


SHRI ADINARAYANA MURTHY 
SHRI Т. S. Алт KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. M. TAKALKAR 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST “С? (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


61 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Use of Steel in Overhead Line Towers and Switch Yard Structures and Masts for 
Telecommunication and Flood Lighting Subcommittee, CED 07 : 1 


Organization 


In personal capacity (4/197 Vishwamitry Township, 
Opp Gujarat Tractors, Vadodara 390011) 


Bhakara Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 
Birla Vishvakarma Mahavidyala, Vallabh Vidyanagar 
Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Electronics Corporation of India Limited, Hyderabad 
GTL Limited, Navi Mumbai 

Gujarat Electricity Board, Vadodara 

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Kalpataru Power Transmission Limited, Gandhinagar 


KEC International Limited, Mumbai 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Ministry of Communications, Deptt of 
Telecommunications, New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 
NHPC Limited, Faridabad 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Nippon Koei Company Limited, New Delhi 
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, Gurugram 


Projects and Development India Limited, Noida 


Ramboll India Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 


Skipper India Private Limited, Pune 
Telecom Factory, Jabalpur 


Transmission Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
Hyderabad 


Triveni Structurals Limited, Allahabad 


2 


Representative(s) 
SHRI S. M. TAKALKAR (Convener) 


Suni P. S. TULSI 
PROF А. N. DESAI 


DIRECTOR (TRANSMISSION) 
SHRI SIDHARTH Mitra (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SELVARAJ 
SHRI VIJAYA Kumar K. (Alternate) 


DR NAPA PRASADA RAO 
Suri R. P. ROKADE (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI GIRISH GARG 

SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA 
Dr D. C. Rat 


DR S. ARUL JAYACHANDRAN 
Dn КОРЕМ GoswaMI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI NITIN PATEL 
SHRI MILIND NENE (Alternate) 


Suni E. V. RAO 
SHRI RAHUL KAIRAM (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH BABU REDDY 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 


SHRI P. N. KAPOOR 


SHRI KAMAL KAPOOR 
ӛнкі R. P. Lar (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GHOSH 
ӛнкі С. Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI M. L. SACHDEVA 


SHRI ABHISHEK 
SHRI SUMANA MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Suni B. K. JAISWAL 
SHRI A. K. PaL (Alternate) 


SHRI D. SANKARA GANESH 


JoiNT DIRECTOR (B & S) - SB П 
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR (B & S) - T I (Alternate) 


SHRI DAYANAND K. 


SHRI K. C. BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI КООР NARAIN (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (TRANSMISSION) 
SuPTDG ENGINEER (TRANSMISSION) 


SHRI K. K. SAXENA 
SHRI VIBHAV KUMAR (Alternate) 


62 


Working Group on Telecommunication Towers, CED 07 : 1/WG 1 


Organization 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Ramboll India Private Limited, Hyderabad 
Skipper India Private Limited, Pune 


In Personal Capacity (Block 2, Flat 2A Rani 
Meyyammai Tower, MRC Nagar, RA 
Puram, Chennai 600028) 


63 


Representative(s) 


Dr NAPA PRASADA RAO (Convener) 
SHRI R. P. ROKADE (Alternate) 


DR S. ARUL JAYACHANDRAN 
SHRI D. SANKARA GANESH 
SHRI DAYANAND K. 

DR V. KALYANARAMAN 


IS 17740 : 2022 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 07 (16865). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


