-IS 13990

: 1994

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard

PRECASTREINFORCEDCONCRETEPLANKS ANDJOISTSFORROOFINGANDFLOORTNG SPECIFICATION
UDC 691*328-413 : 692*4/.5

-

0

BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR . MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August 1994

Price Group 5

Housing

Sectional

Committee,

CED

51

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the Housing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering DiviGon draft finalized Council. by the

Considerable shortage of houses in the country, which is also increasing continuously, has led to increasing stress being laid in the development programmes of central and state governments, on facilitating speedy and economical cnnstruction of houses. Problem of housing being greatest amongst the lower income groups, both rural and urban, the enormous stress is being laid on housing for these target groups. This calls for development and standardization of new building which are simple and economical, commensurate with structural order to ensure speedy and rronorr&-al construction. materials and construrtion techniques and hygeinic safety and ~durability, in constructinn in addition flooring and

This standard is one of the series of standards on new materials and techniques of roof/floor which when implementrd will result in substantial savings in materials and ctjsf of construction, to achirving speedy construction. The other standards being published in the series are: a) Specification roofing, c) Specification for prefabricated brick pane1 and partially precast concrete joist for

b) Code of practice d) Code of practice units, e) Code of practice joists, f) Specification g) Code of practice h) Code of practice

for design and construction reinforced concrete for design and construction for design and construction L-panel

of roofs and floors with prefabricated channel unit for roofing and flooring, with reinforced of floor and roof of floor and roof

brick panel, concrete channel planks and

for precast

with reinforced

concrete

for precast

units for roofing, of roof with L-panel units, and blocks. supported over pouring iwsitu joists. Monoliand providing pouring in-situ RC of walls using prec.ast concrete stone masonry

for design and construction for construction

Precast reinforced concrete planks are partially precast rectangular slab elements which are partially precast RCC joists side by side. These are joined together and also to the joist by concrete over the haunches provided in the planks and the gaps between the planks over the thic action of the slab elements is ensured by leaving stirrups projecting out of joists reinforcement across the joists over haunched portion of planks, tying them together and concrete over it. Roofs and floor made with precast RC planks slabs mainly due to the following reasons: a) Components b) Quality used for construction better are found econoniical shuttering as compared

to conventional

being precast, in precast

is eliminated. handling and erection

can be controlled

elements. eliminating need for mechanical for construction. this standard by the Central B. Building

c) Moderate size components equipment. d) Prefabrication

are used thereby reduction

leads to substantial

in time required of

Considerable assistance has been rendered in the preparation Research Institute, Roorkee, who has developed this technique. The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard

is given in Annex

For the purpose of drcidine: whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules fnr rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in~this standard.

IS 13390 : 1994

Indian Standard

PRBCASTREINPORCEDCONCRETEPLANKS ANDJOISTSFORROOFINGANDFLOORING SPECIFICATION
1 SCOPE This standard lays down requirements for precast reinforced concrete planks and joist used for construction of roofs and floors. The planks length up to 1.5 m long only are covered. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 432 ( Part 1 ) : 1582 Title Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement: Part 1 Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars ( third reuisia~~) Code of practice for plain and ( third concrete reinforced reuisian ) Methods for random sampling Code of practice for design and construction of tloor and roof with precast reinforced concrete planks and joist are necessary

-

in view the requirements of modular co-ordination as also to keep the weight of the planks low so as to facilitate manual handling. However to suit to the room size, the width may be suitably changed to up to f 50 mm. 4.1.2.2 Length V:e !crq~h of the planks shall be limited to a maximum of 1 l-5 m. Smaller lengths required for varying room dimensions shall be permitted. However, it is preferable to use lengths in multiple of 300 mm only, keeping in view the requirements of modular co-ordination. 4.1.2.3 Thickness To achieve monolithicity of roof/floor and to achieve T-beam effect with the joists in composite roof/floor made with these planks, the plank shall be made partly 30 mm and partly 60 mm thick as shown in Fig. 1. A 100 mm wide tapered concrete filling shall be provided for strengthening the haunch portion for shear during handling and erection. Length of' the tapered concrete filling at both ends shall be kept 300 mm for all lengths of planks and the length of central 60 mm thick portion shall be decreased for lengths of planks smaller than 1.5 m. 4.2 Partially Precast Joists The width of precast joists shall be kept equal to required width of web of T-beam ( see IS 13994 : 1994 ) and the depth shall be kept equal to the required overall depth of T-beam less the thickness of flange, that is, the maximum thickness of RC planks ( 60 mm ). 4.3 Tolerances dimensions Tolerance f5mm f3mm & 2 mm f2mm of plank Casting tolerances on various shall be as given below: Dimension Length Width Thickness Bow ( deviation from intended line or plane ) Twist ( distance of any corner from the plane Containing other three corners ) 1

456 : 1978

4905

: 1968

13994 : 1994

3 MATERIALS 3.1 Concrete Concrete used for making the planks, partially precast joists as also in-situ concrete shall conform to grade Ml5 of IS 456 : 1978. Coarse aggregate used for making concrete shall be well graded with maximum size of 10 mm, while for joist the maximum shall be 20 mm. 3.2 Reinforcement Steel for reinforcement in IS 456 : 1978. shall be as recommended AND Concrete Planks

4 SNAPES, DIMENSIONS TOLERANCES 4.1 Precast 4.1.1 ShcjJe Reinforced

Shape of the planks shall be rectangular with haunches as shown in Fig. 1. Top surface shall be chequered finish. 4.1.2 4.1.2.1 Dimenciuw Width

1 mm

The width of the planks shall be 300 mm. The dimension of 360 mm has been selected keeping

IS 13990-: 1994

ISOMETRIC

VIEW

OF

R.C.C.

PLANK

RElNfORCEMENT AS PER DESIGN

I

SECTION

XX

05mm

CLEAR

l------B------+ SECTION YY

SECTION All dimensions
FIG.

22 PLANK

AS

PER

DESIGN

in millimetres.

1 PRECAST RCC

4.3.1

Squareness

The long edge of planks shall be taken as the base line. The shorter side shall not vary in its length from perpendicular distance between long edges by more than 3 mm. 4.3.2 Flatness

loamd of floor finish and/or water proofing treatment. The design shall be in accordance with the limit state method of IS 456 : 1978. 5.2 Reinforcement 5.2.1 Reinforcement for the planks shall comprise three equally spaced bars of required diameter along the length of planks as main reinforcement. Distribution reinforcement shall be equal to or more than the minimum recommended for slabs in IS 456 : 1978. The main reinforcement shall also fulfil the requirement of maximum permissible spacing given in IS 456 : 1978. 5.2.2 floors at 1.5 steel 2 Reinforcement for planks for roofs and of residential buildings for spacing of joists m, shall comprise 3 bars of 6 mm of mild grade I conforming to IS 432 ( Part 1 ) :

The maximum deviation from a 1.5 m straight edge placed in any position on a nominal plane surface shall not exceed 2 mm. 5 DESIGN 5.1 The planks shall be designed as simply supported for self weight including in-du concrete and as a continuous slab for a over haunches, load comprising live load, self weight and dead

IS 13990 : 1Y94
1002 as r0d111 reiill;m;ellierlt at~d ti IIIIII dia bars, of tnild steel grade I conforming to IS 432 \ Part 1 ) : 1982, at 200 mm c/c as transverse I t:ini-OJTCIJlfXlt. In the absence OI detailed design same reinforcement may he used for spacing 01 toist smaller than 1.5 m. 5.2.3 Kcintorctrment for RCC joist shall he provided as per design ( SCYIS 13994 : 1994 ). 6 CASTING

ELEMENTS

AND CURING RC Planks
lx: generally made

OF PRECAST

good quality timber or an equivalent wood substitute. However, in case of mass production, steel, plastic or FRP moulds may be used with advantage. Any material used for making rnoulds shall be rigid, non-absorbant and non-corrodible and shall maintain the dimensions within the specifitd limits. Typical sketches of timber as well as steel moulds are shown in Fig. 2A and 1Tig. 2B.

6.1 Precast
Moulds may

6.1.1 ~lfoultir
from well seasoned

Inner sides of mould shall be applied suitable bond release agent and it shall

with a be kept

ISOMETRIC

VIEW

OF

MOULD

L AT

Z SECTION RR

SECTION 75mm HINGE

AT M

/I/

r

SECTION

AT

PP

bETAlL

AT

V

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 2A TYPICAL SKETCH OF TIMBER MOULD FOR RC PLANK 3

IS 13990 : 1994

75 LONG

HINGE

19. M.S. HANDLE

L25x25x3

20 SECTION A A' SECTION B B' 25X25x3fnm

5mm THICK
MS PLATE

610,

M.S. HANDLE

300

PLAN All dimensions in millimetres.

FIQ. 2B

TYPICAL

SKETCH OF STEEL MOULD FOR RC PLANK 6.2 6.2.1 Partialiy Moulds Precast RC Joists

on a smooth concrete platform coated with the bond release agent. Alternatively wrinkle free old newspaper may be used over the concrete platform. Reinforcement cage shall be placed inside the mould in such a way as to provide a cover of 15 mm. Concrete with well graded aggregate of maximum size 10 mm shall be poured to a depth such that after compaction with a plate vibrator, shall become 30 mm. The upper side of the longitudinal members of the mould and the two tapering members shall be then placed over the mould. Concrete shall then be poured in middle and the sides and compacted with a plate vibrator. Concrete ~shall be finished level with the mould and the top surface shall be made rough by trowel markings. After about half an hour of casting, the two tapering members may be lifted off, The mould may be stripped off in about 2 hours ( depending on the weather ). About 24 to 30 hours after casting ( depending on the weather ), the cast unit shall be first slid by push and then tilted through right angles on long edge. It shall then be transported in vertical position for curing. 6.1.3 Cwing

Moulds may be made from the same material as recommended for moulds for planks ( see 6.1.1 ). Typical details of timber and steel moulds are shown in Fig. 3A and 3B. 6.2.1.1 Tolerances as given below: Dimension Length Width Depth 6.2.2 Casting on mould dimensions Tolerance (mm) f4mm *Zmm &2mm shall be

The units shall then be stacked against a vertical support in nearly vertical position and cured for at least two weeks by sprinkling water. It shall further be aircured for another two weeks before it can be used for construction. 4

The mould shall be assembled and bond release agent applied on the inner side. Reinforcement cage with a gap from bottom of 25 mm for cover shall be placed in the mould with the stirrups projecting out as shown in Fig. 4. The top spacer pieces shall be fixed over the mould. Cement concrete with well graded aggregate of 20 mm maximum size shall then be poured in the mould and compacted either with a plate vibrator by placing it on the top of the mould or by inserting a needle

MS ANGLE 25x25~3 HOLE a 190 C/C TO ACCOMODATE ,+ 6' PIN

, MS AHGLE
DETAIL OF CLAMP A DETAIL OFCLAMP B 25X25X3

All dimensions in millimetres. Fro. 3A TYPICAL SKETCHOF TIMBERMOULD FOR PARTIALPRECAST JOIST

WELDED SECTION x.x M.S.

TO ISJC 150 PLATE

+lO

M S. BOLT\

x4-J

LLONGITUDINAL ISJC 150

MEMBER M. S. PLATE IcRoss PIECE)

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 3B TYPICAL SKETCH OF STEEL MOULD FOR PRECAST RC 7 SAMPLING 7.1 All the precast reinforced concrete units of the same size, manufactured from similar condition of productions shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. JOIST

vibrator. The mould may be stripped after 3 to 4 hours depending on weather. After 48 to 72 hours ( dependin-g on weather ), the joists shall be first slid by push and then transported to the curing area by holding them near the ends. 6.2.3

Curing

The precast joists shall be water cured for a minimum period of two weeks and aircured further for at least two or more weeks before they can be used for construction.

7.2 Five units shall be selected at random out of a lot consisting of 300 units or less. For lot bigger than 300 units 5 units shall be selected for every additional 300 units or part thereof, In order to ensure randomness of selection, procedure given in IS 4905 : 1968 may be followed. 5

IS 13990 :I994

SPACING

OF

STIRRUPS \

FROM EITHER

EDGE SIDE

OF

JOIST

ON

5Omm

L = CLEAR

SPAN

+

ZOOmm

FIQ. 4

ILLUSTRATIVE

SKE-UXI OF FARTIALLY PRECAST JOIST for where 1 is the effective span in mm and D, the coverall depth of the seclion in mm, it is not necessary for the deflection recovery to be measured and the recovery provision mentioned in this clause earlier shall not apply In case of the failure load performed in accordance with Annex A, the unit shall carry a load at least equal to 1.33 times the characteristics load to pass the test. If the load at failure is less than l-33 times the characteristic load, the lot represented by the sample shall be rejected. 10 MARKING 10.1! Each component shall be indelibly marked with the following: a) Identification turer, and b) Month 10.2 BIS of the source legibly and

7.3 The samples shall be suitably marked future identification of the lot it represents. 8 TEST Tests shall be conducted as given in Annex A. on samples

of the units

8.1 Dimensional test and deflection recovery test shall be routine test whereas failure load test shall be a type test. Type test is intended to prove the suitability and performance of a new design and size of a component. Failure load test be applied at the time of design of a component of a particular size or at the time of any change in the design/size. 9 CRITERIA OF CONFORMITY

9.1 If four out of the five samples satisfy the shape and dimensional requirements given in 4, the lot represented by the sample shall be deemed to have passed the dimensional requirements given in 4, otherwise it shall be rejected. 9.2 In the deflection recovery test performed in accordance with Annex A, if the deflection after 24 h of the removal of the imposed load is at least under the load for 75 percent of the deflection 24~h, the units shall be deemed to have passed the test. If the deflection recovery is less than 75 percent the lot represented by the unit shall be rejected, If the maximum deflection in mm, shown during 24 h under load is less than 40 ls/ n,

of manufac-

and year of manufacture, Marking also be marked with

Certification may

The components Standard Mark.

10.2.1 The use of Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details of conditions under which the licence for the use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

IS 13990 : 1994

ANNEX A ( Clauses 8 and 9 )
TEST FOR PRECAST A-l AGE OF TESTING REINFORCED CONCRETE PLANKS AND JOISTS
concrete or steel. Alternatively, uniform load can be applied by hydraulic jacks through a self reacting frame and a set of beam to distribute the load. The load shall be retained for 24 h. After recording deflection at the end of this period, the load shall be removed. The residual deflection shall be recorded~again after twenty-four_hours of removal of the load for dellection recovery. A-4 FAILURE

The precast reinforced concrete planks shall be tested at an age of 28 days after in-situ concrete has been laid in the haunch portion as mentioned in A-3. Precast joists shall be tested at an age of 28 to 33 days after casting.

A-2 DIMENSIONAL 5 Samples

CONFORMITY

of planks and joist selected in accordance with 7.2 shall be checked for conformity with the shape and dimensional requirements as given in 4. Length of unit shall be measured with a steel tape at least 5 m long having graduation in mm. Other dimensions shall be measured with 1 m long steel scale having~graduation in mm.

LOAD TEST

A-3 DEFLECTION RECOVERY TEST OF -REINFORCED CONCRETE PLANK
One unit selected at random out of the units which have satisfied shape and dimensional requirements shall be subjected to deflection recovery test, The precast units shall be simply supported with a bearing of 50 mm over brickwall finished level and smooth with cement mortar 1 : 4 as shown in Fig. 5. The haunches around the plank shall be filled with Ml5 concrete using 10 mm and down graded aggregate. The haunch concrete shall be water cured for 14 days. Design dead load other than due to self weight of the unit shall be applied uniformly over the unit through loading blocks or by other means. A dial gauge having least count of 0.02 mm or less and a range of 50 mm or more shall be fixed at midspan of the units. The dial gauge shall be adjusted to indicate zero Yeading under self weight of the units and applied dead load. A-3.2 The plank shah be subjected to a uniformly distributed load equal to I *25 times the imposed design load, applied through loading blocks of

A-3.1

The RC plank which has passed the deflection recovery test shall be subjected further to failure load test. Loading shall be done uniformly through loading blocks or through hydraulic jacks and a set of beams to distribute the load. If loading is done through blocks to sufficient gap shall be provided between adjacent tiers of blocks to ensure that they do not touch each other even at the final stages of loading, to prevent transfer of load to supports of units through arch action. Loading shall be preferably done from an independent scaffold as a safety precaution. A-4.2 The loading shall continue till the plank fails. If no failure occurs by crushing or breaking of the unit, the load causing a defIection equal to 1 in 60 of clear span of the unit shall be considered as the failure load. To check that the limiting deflection is not exceeded, a steel marker shall be fixed below the unit at midspan, leaving a gap of 1 in 60 of clear span before the start of the test. A-4.3

A-4.1

Load

Test

for RC Joist

similar to the test for RC planks, except that instead of uniform load, point loads shall be applied at middle third points and the bearing of the joist at each ends shall be 100 mm.

The test shall be done

INSITU

CONC.

DIAL

GAUGE BASE BLOCK

A11 dimensions in millimetres.
FIG.

5

LOADING TEST 7

IS 13990 : 1994

ANNEX B ( Foreword )
COMMlTTLE
Composition
Chairman DR P. S. A. SUN~ARAM ivfembcrs Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi The Action Research Unit, New Delhi School of Planning and Architect, New Delhi Housing and Urban In Development Corporation, New Delhi ;V~U, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi

COMPOSITION
Sectional Committee, CED 51

of Housing

SHRI S. N. CHAT.:.ERJFIT

CHIEF A~cnrrr:~c.~ SENIOR AR(?FTITE~~~ ( H & TP ) I ( Alternate )
CHIEE ENQINEER, Au~nom~Y ARCHITEW, ,~UTHORITY CHIEF ENGINEER (I>)
(

Personal Capacity ( I, Sadfzlza Enclaoe, Panchshe:l Pa7k, Delhi 110017 ) Calcutta M:Inicipal Corporation, Calcutta Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Maharashtra Central Public Housing and Area Development New Delhi Authority,

Rombay

Alternate )

SUPI~ttlNlE~l)INo EN~INXER (D) ( Alternate ) ENQINEBR Mn:nrnn~, DDA SHRI Y. K. GaaQ SERI CJIJ>`I'ANVAIUYA ( Alte7t?atG) DK N. K. JAIN ( Alter~cit? ) SARI T. N. GOPT~ SHnI Hnn IIINDU~C SIr;c: H SHRI Ii. N. AGAl:WAL ( Ah7tZate DR K. S. J~oumn
SHRI O.P.GARYALI

Works Department,

Delhi Dcvrlopmcnt Authority. New Delhi National Housing Bank, New Delhi National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi Public Works Department, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur
)

Centre for Application of Science ( ASTRA ), Bangalore CIDCO, Tamil Mabarashtra Nadu Slum Clearance

and

Technology

to Rural

Area

DR B. V. V~NI~A~ARA&I,~NREEDY ( _4lternate) SHRI N. N.,JAV~F~KAR SHRI P. M. DFSHP-NT)E ( Alttrnate ) SHRI T. P. KALIAPPAN SHRI J. BHLIVANXSHWARAN ( Alterrde ) MISS NINA KAPOOR SHRI A. K. &I. KhRIX SHRI K. R. P. KXIS~NAN SHRI RAJ.~ S:~;GH SHRI S. SELVAXTXPN (Alternate ) Dn A. G. M~~)IIAv.& Rno Sac11 I. Ii. MAN1 ( il~tWflC7te ) COL D. V. PAl~S_~I.r,IIrAR SHRI T. K. SAIIA Sar<r R. K. h4lTTAL ( Alternale ) SERI J. S. SIIARRIA SERI B. B. GANG ( Alternate ) SHRI J. VIXN~ATAXAMAN, Director ( Ci:il Engg )

Board,

Madras

The Mud Village Society, New Delhi Housing Department, Government of Meghalaya, Shillong Department of Science and Technology ( DST ), New Delhi IRCON, New Delhi Structural Engineering Research Centre

( CSIR

), Madras

B. G. Shirke and Co, Pune Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Central Director Building General, Research BIS

New Delhi Institute, Roorkee

( Ex-o&o

Member )

Member Secretary Joint Director
SHR~ J. K. PRASAD

( Civi! Engg ), BIS

i Contirruedon f,uge 9 )

8

IS13990:
( Continuedfrm @ge 8 )

1994

Composition

of the Panel for Modular Coordination and Prefabrication Mass Scale Housing, CED 51 : P2
Repesenting Ministry National ) of Urban Housing Development, Bank, New Delhi

for

Convene7
SHXI T. N. GUPTA

Member>
SHRI Y. K. Gam SHRI SUNIL BEKY ( Alfernate
SHJXI

New Delhi New Delhi

PRVF V. P. RAOKI PROF P. K. CHAIJIIH~RY ( Alternote ) SHRI G. S. RAO REPRESENTATIVE DR A. G. MADHAVA RAO SRRI K. MANJ ( Alternate ) Sam S. ROY SHRI M. Kmwu ( Alkrnnte ) SHRI .J. 5. SH41LM.4 SH~I M. P. J.XISIW:FI ( Alternate ) SUPEKINTENDINC~ ENQINEER (D) EXEWIJTIVI~ ENQINEER ( HQ) ( Alternate

M. N.

~OGLEKAR

Housing and Urban Development Corporation, School of Planning and Architects, New Delhi

National Building Construction -Corporation, New Delhi B. G. Shirke and Co, Pune Structural Engineering Resraarch Centrr, Madras Hindustan Central Central Prefab Ltd:

New Delhi
Institlltr, Koorkec

Building Public

Rmearch

Works Depar:ment

)

9

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade of implementing the standard, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments IS reaffirmed when such review indicates that if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. no changes are needed; Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No. CED 51 ( 5041 ).

Ameudments Amend No.

Issued Since -Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: ~Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Offices : : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 335-336, Sector

OF TNDTAN

STANDARDS

Marg.

New Delhi

110002

Telegrams : Mnnaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone

Shah Zafar

Mar-g Maniktola I 37 86 84 26, 99,

331 01 31 331 1375 37 85 86 61 62

VII M, V. I. P. Road, 34-A, CHANDIGARH Road, MADRAS

160022 I CO 60 20 38 43 25 600113 I 235 02 15 19, 16, 235 23 04 42 I5 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. 1. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY

IV Cross

E9 MIDC, 400093

Marol,

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BIiOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPIJRAM.

