( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR RADIO TRANSMITTERS
PART 3 OUTPUT POWER AND POWER CONSUMPTION

Radio
Chairman SIIRI H. S. JOLLY Members

Communications

Sectional
All India Radio,

Committee,
Representin,< New Delhi

LTDC

20

0. P. Kzrrrs~u I Alternate to Shri H. S. Jolly ) . ADDITIONAL DIHECTOI(. STANI)- Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ): Luchnow ARDS(S & T) JOINT DIRECTOR STANIIA~LDS (S & T)-IV ( Alternate ) hiinistry of Defence ( DPI ) (N), New Delhi CUR S. S. BAIDWAN ~LT CDR A. Briow~xrc~ ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industry, SHRIA. K.B~sar; New Delhi SHRI V. V. R. PRA~II~J ( Altenrate ) Indian Television SHIU H. ikf. BJI.1TNhGAR Manufacturers Association, New Delhi SrrnrV. K. SIWHI ( Alternate ) SHRT H. S. CHANDlUXOULI Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalorr Sang K. RA~~ASESHU ( Alternate ) \h'ireless Planning SHRI R. G. DEOUJTAR and Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry of Communications ), New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI M. L. D~IAR SHIU P. K. DHING~C.\ ( Alternate ) S~rzr A. K. Grios~ Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, kmgalorc SHRI Tu`. KRISIIXAII KUTTU ( Alternate) National Test House, Calcutta SamB. P.Grsosa SHRI B. C. MU~IZEII.II.:I.: ( Alternate ) The Radio Electronic & `Television hlanufarturerp SH~I J. GUSTY Association ( RETMA \. Bombav SHRI T. S. Bcxr ( Altermzte ) Peico Electronics & Electric& Ltd, Bomba) Sira~ J. Gr;p~a SJ~ILI P. S. Sacrr~~~v ( Alternate ) Federation of Associations of Small Industries of SHEI i;. S. GUETA India, New Delhi SRRI

i

( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright 1984 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 ( Continued from page
Members DR S. K. H_~JELA

1)
Representing

Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers, New Delhi Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ) SHKI S. JANAKIRAM`IN ( Ministry of Home Affairs ), New Delhi SHHI R. P. M.~THu~ ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi Lr-COL KRISHAN L*\L LT-COL B. S. NATRAJAN ( Alternate) Posts S; Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SIIRI R. LALWANI SHRI V. V~. CH~U~II~RY ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence (DTD 8s P) (AIR), SRRI R. C. PANDEY Bangalore SHR~ C. M. KRISHN.~ Musrrny ( Alternate ) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI A. K. N. PRASAD SHRI M. G. SRIDEIAXAN( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI W. V. R;\MANA Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi SrrRI K. P. RAMASW.~MY Sunr K. B. BORI~ER ( Alternate ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute SHRI P. K. R.~NQOLI~ ( CSIR), Pilani SHRI H. K. J 41x ( Alternate ) of Supplies & Disposals, Directorate General SHIU M. SANIE~RAI~IN~AM New Delhi SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI S. SHARMA DR K. S. K. S.41 ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI SURESH CHANDRA Electronics Trade and Technology Development SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ISHWAR DUTT ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI I(. K. TANEJA New Delhi SHRI H. S. DUBEY ( Alternate ) Gujarat Communications and Electronics Ltd, SRRI C. M. THIRUMURTHY Vadodara Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics ) Secretary D. K. NAYYAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1
SHRI
L

Panel Convener SHRI P. S. DHAQAT Members ASRISTANT WIRELESS ( CO-ORDINATION )-I

for Transmitters,

LTDC

2O,iP6

All India Radio, New Delhi

ADVISER

Wireless Planning & Co-ordination Wing of Communications ), New Delhi

( Ministry

( Continued on page 13 )

2

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984

Indian S-tandard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR RADIO TRANSMITTERS
PART 3 OUTPUT POWER AND POWER CONSUMPTION

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1984, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council.
0.2 The object of this standard is to standardize the conditions and methods of measurements to be used to ascertain the performance of a radio transmitter and to make possible the comparison of the results of measurements made by different observors. 0.3 This standard is one of a series of standards on methods of measurement for assessing the performance of radio transmitters for various classes of emission and covers the measurements relating to output power and power consumption. Other characteristics likely to be covered in this series arc:

a) General conditions of measurements; b) Frequency; cl Band-width, out of band-power; 4 Power of non-essential oscilations; e) Wanted and unwanted modulation; characteristics f) Amplitude/frequency
in transmitters for radio-telephony

and non-linearity distortion and sound broadcasting; and transpowers 1 GHz; for

L

9) h) 3 k) ml

Measurements monochrome Cabinet Cabinet

particular and colour

to transmitters television; between above

radiation radiation

at frequencies at frequencies

130 kHz and 1 GHz;

Vestigial sideband demodulators for use transmitters or transposers for monochrome and Transposers for monochrome 3 and colour

in conjunction with or colour television`.

television.

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 0.4 This standard
is largely based on IEC Pub 244-l ( 1968 ) `Methods of measurement for radio transmitters : Part 1 General conditions of measurement, frequency, output power and power consumption', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ).

0.5 In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is-to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : ?-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) lays down the methods of measurement characteristics relating to output power and power consumption applicable to radio transmitters for all classes of emission. 1.2 This standard
( Part 2. 1 )-lP84t. ( Part 3 ) shall be read in conjunction of as

with IS : 10853

GENERAL

2.1 Dependent

on the class of emission the output power of a radio transmitter is expressed in terms of mean power, carrier power or peak envelope power as defined in 2 of IS : 10853 ( Part 1 )-19847.

3.

MEASUREMENT

OF MEAN

POWER

as defined in 2.1 3.1 Conditions of Operation - The transmitter shall be operated under the conditions given in 3 of IS : 10853 ( Part 1 )1984t. These conditions shall be clearly stated with the results of the measurements. The characteristics of the test~load to which the transmitter is to be connected [ see 3.2.3 of IS : 10853 ( Part 1 )-19841_] shall remain constant during the time of the measurement so as to make possible direct calculation or evaluation by comparison of the dissipated power. It is recommended to verify that other necessary requirements quoted in the relevant equipment specification ( for example, the amplitude/modulation frequency characteristic and/or the non-linearity distortion ) are satisfied before making final power measurements. 3.2 Condition of Modulation - The condition in the relevant equipment specification shall apply.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( raised ). TMethods of measurement for radio transmitters: measurements.

of modulation

given

Part 1 General

conditions

of

4

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 3.3 Method Measurement - One of the following methods may being taken to ensure that the time taken for the measurement is such that the condition of 2.5.1 of IS : 10853 ( Part 1 )1984* is fulfilled. of
care

be chosen,

3.3.1 Calorimetric Method -- A resistor which forms the dissipative element of the test load is cooled by a flow of water or other fluid, surrounding the rejistance; the fluid itself may also~be the tlissipative element. The power dissipated is calculated from the temperature rise, the rate of flow of the coolant or of the fluid in volume units per unit time, and the specific properties of the coolant, according to the following formula:

where P = power p = dissipated, in watts; per litre ( 1 for water ); per kilogram Celsius mass density, in kilograms

c = specific heat capacity, m joules degree ( 4 187 for water ); 4 = flow, in litres per second; At -= temperature and rise, in Celsius degrees.

results, At shall be kept as 10~ as practical in view of the variation of the specific ~properties of the coolant. In this case, however, the precision of the temperature
grading and the accuracy of the temperature reading become predominant.

NATE 1 - To avoid inaccuracies due to heat radiation and convection losses, it is recommended that At be centred on the ambient temperature. For most accurate

NOTE 2 - Care shall be taken that the indication of the instrument used to determine the temperature rise will not be influenced bv rf fields present at the place of these instruments. For example, eddy currents in the column of a mercury

thermometer

may heat the column independently

of the heating

of the coolant.

3.3.2 Comparison Method - This method may be realized by measuring the temperature rise of the resistor of the test load or of the cell coolant of this resistor by means of a suitable instrument. For comparison, th& same temperature rise is then reproduced in the same circuit ( or in agreed alternative circuits with identical characteristics ) under the same conditions of cooling, using a dc or ac power which may be measured with conventional instruments.
*Methods measurements. of measurement for radio transmitters: Part 1 General conditions of

5

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984
NOTE 1 - When the resistoris power shall not cause electrolysis water-cooled, care shall be taken that the comparison and hence influence the measurement.

NOTE 2 - Care shall he taken that the indication of the instuments used to determine the temperature rise will not be influenced by rf field present at the place of these instruments. For example, eddy currents in the column of a mercury thermometer may heat the column independently of the heating of the coolant.

3.3.3 Resistance Variation Method - In this method, a temperature dependent resistor ( for example, a bolometer or thermistor ) in one of the branches of a balanced bridge-circuit constitutes the load or a part Due to the rf power dissipated, the resistance varies a small thereof. amount; this variation is used to unbalance the bridge-circuit, the meter of which may dir-ectly be calibrated in power.
Alternatively, the bridge may be restored to balance and the restoring power used as a measure of the rf power after suitable calculations have been made. In this case, the load resistor is restored to its original value, thus avoiding an impedance mismatch.
NOTE 1 - Thrsc methods are useful for the measurement of low power ( 1 mW or less) up to and including Band 10. For high power measurements, accurately calibrated attenuators, directional couplers or similar devices shall be used.

thermistors are used, NOPE:! -When changes of ambient temperature during errors may arise, particularly in Band 10 losses in the material ( for example, glass

care shall be taken to avoid errors due to the time of one measurement. Additional ( centimetric waves ) and upwards, due to ) of the enclosure.

3.3.4 Current-Resistance Method - The series resistive component R, of the impedance of the test load shall be determined and the current I to the test load measured, using a true rms, current measuring device the any resonance phenomena, frequency characteristic of which, including is known. The mean power P is calculated from:

p =z 12 R,
NOTE - This method shall not be used in the case of a complex signal when the series resistive component depends substantially on the frequency of the oscillations applied to the test load.

3.3.5 Voltage-Resistance Method - The parallel resistive component Rp of the impedance of the test load shall be determined and the voltage V across the test load measured, using a suitable voltage measuring device, the frequency characteristic of which, including any resonance phenomena, is known. The mean power is calculated from:

IS : 10853 ( Part
Care shall be taken that the measured rms terms, irrespective of the wave-form. voltage

3 ) - 1984
in

may be evaluated

NOTE - This method shall not be used in the case of a compIex signal when the parallel resistive component depends substantially on the frequency of the oscillations applied to the test load.

3.3.6 Directional
reflected couplers between terminal

Coupler Method - In power are each determined inserted in the transmission line the two measured powers gives load.

this method, the incident and by using a pair of directional to the test load. The difference the mean power supplied to the

The use of such devices for power measurements in the sense of this recommendation assumes that the instrument has been calibrated by comparison with one of the methods mentioned in 3.3.1 and 3.3.2. 4. MEASUREMENT

OF CARRIER

POWER
power; under

4.1 The carrier

power is considered to be a special form of mean it shall be measured according to 3.3 in the absence of modulation the operating conditions given in 3.1.

5. MEASUREMENT

OF PEAK -

ENVELOPE
Same as in 3.1.

POWER

5.1 Conditions
5.2 Condition in the relevant

of Operation

- The condition of Modulation equipment specification shall apply.

of modulation

given

Though the concept of peak envelope power may be applied to all classes of emission, the measurement of peak envelope~power of a transmitter is of particular interest to amplitude-modulation single-sideband and independent-sideband transmitters with reduced or suppressed The recomcarrier and for vestigial-sideband television transmitters. mended modulating signal for the first mentioned group of transmitters is specified in 5.2.1. 5.2.1 Conditions of Modulation for Amplitude-Modulation Transmitters for Single Channel and Multi-Channel Telephony, Either Single Sideband OY Independent-sideband and for h/r&i-Channel Voice-Frequency Telegraphy - Unless otherwise specified, tu o modulating sinusoidal oscillations are simultaneously applied at the input to the transmitter, each oscillation giving a rf signal of equal amplitude at the output terminal device. Supposing that the carrier is sufficiently suppressed and the intermodulation distortion is negligible, the envelope of the rf output signal will sensibly exhibit the form of two intersecting sine curves, as shown in Fig. 1. 7

IS : 10853 ( Part

3 ) - 1984

FIG.

1

ENVELOPE

OF THE rf OUTPUT SIGNAL OF A SINGLE-SIDEBAND OR INDEPENDENT-SIDEBAND TRANSMITTER MODULATEDRY Two SINUSOIDAL OSCILLATIONSOF EQUAL MAGNITUDE

When measuring the peak envelope power, it shall be verified that the relative amplitude of each intermodulation component with respect to the level of either modulating oscillation, is within the tolerances given in the relevant equipment specification.
NOTE-The measurement of the peak envelope power may advantage with the measurement of the inter-modulation distortion. 5.3 be combined to

Method of Measurement - An appropriate instrument, connected to the test load, is used to determine the highest crest AC of the modulation envelope. This instrument may be an inertia-less indicator ( for example, a cathode ray oscilloscope ) or a peak voltage indicator with suitable time constants. the specified modulating signal has been removed, the is operated under conditions such that a sinusoidal oscillation to the test load at a level that depends on the power-handling the transmitter, as follows:

After transmitter is supplied capacity of

a) The transmitter is preferably operated at a level equal to the peak value A, initially The peak shown by the indicator. envelope polver is then- equal to the power in the test ioad measured according to one of the methods of 3.3.

b)

If the transmitter cannot be mean power is equal to the period of power measurements, highest power level that may be the equipment.

operated at a level such that the peak envelope power during the the transmitter is operated at the maintained without damage to

At this power level, the deflection A, of the indicator is determined and the corresponding power Pm in the test load measured according to~one of the methods of 3.3. Assuming 8

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) -1984 a linear relation between the deflection of the indicator and the applied voltage, the peak envelope power may be calculated from: Peak envelope power = P,

- If a method of measurement according 5.4 Method of Evaluation to 5.3 cannot be applied, the peak envelope power may be evaluated from the corresponding mean power as follows: The specified modulating signal is applied at the input to the transmitter and the mean power measured according to one of the The peak envelope power is evaluated from the methods of 3.3. measured mean power by dividing the mean power by the conversion factor ( mean power )/( peak envelope power ) for the relevant type of emission and the applied modulating signal.

Example:
For a double-sideband transmitter modulated by a sinusoidal oscillation with a modulation factor m = 1, the conversion factor amounts to 0'375. For values of m < 1, the conversion factor may be calculated from:

( J + $)/( 1 +

m)B

NOTE - It will be noticed that the conversion factors are theoretical figures and that, due to non-linear or other effects in the transmitter, the result of this method may differ from that of the methods described in 3.3, the latter being in full accordance with the definition of peak envelope power.

6. OUTPUT

POWER/RADIO-FREQUENCY

CHARACTERISTICS as a

6.1 When the output power of a transmitter is to be determined function of frequency, two principal concepts shall be distinguished. a) with tuning of the radio-frequency circuits, and of the b) without tuning of the radio-frequency or of parts thereof. circuits

transmitter

6.2 Method of Measurement of Output Power/rf Characteristic Within the Rated Frequency Range - The measurement shall be made at the two boundary frequencies of each range and at any other specified frequency, the transmitter being returned for operation at each chosen frequency. The mean power able, shall be measured or the peak envelope power, whichever is applicaccording to one of the methods given in 3 or 5.

IS : 10853 ( Part The

3 ) - 1984 be given in a graphical form

result shall preferably

6.3 Method of Measurement of Output Power/rf Characteristics Within the Rated Radio-Frequency Pass Band - The measurements shall be made at the frequencies specified in the relevant equipment specification. The transmitter shall be tuned each time to one of these specified frequencies. At the input of the transmitter as a part thereof, the frequency shall be changed by suitable means to result in a frequency variation within the limits of the rated radio-frequency pass-band, without the transmitter or the part to be measured being retuned. cable, The mean power or the peak envelope power, whichever is applishall be measured according to one of the methods given in 3 or 5.

Care shall be taken to avoid a variation in the level of the radiofrequency oscillation at the input of the part to be measured. If this level cannot -be kept constant, the magnitude of the variation shall be stated with the results. The results shall preferably be given in a graphical CONSUMPTION form.

7. MEASUREMENT

OF POWER

7.1 Conditions of Operation - The transmitter as defined in 2.1 of IS : 10853 ( Part 1 )-1984" ( see Note ) shall be operated under the conditions given in 3. These conditions shall be clearly stated with the results of the measurements. It is recommended to verify that other necessary requirements in the relevant equipment specification ( for example, the ou'tput are satisfied before measuring the power consumption. quoted power )

NOTE - For multi-purpose auxiliaries ( for example, measuring equipment, monitors and equipment in stand-by position ) it is deemed impractical to include the relevant part of their power in the power consumption of the transmitter. Such exclusions shall be stated with the results of the measurement\.

c

7.2 Condition in the relevant 7.3 Method two concepts a) input b) input

of Modulation - The condition equipment specification shall applt'. of Measurement shall be disccrnec!: active power apparent power. as indicated in.7.3.1 and 7.3.2. With respect to

of modulation power

given

consumption ), and

( the actual

power

consumption

both to be measured
*Methods measurements.

of measurement

for radio

transmitters:

Part 1 General

conditions

of

i (1

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984
If the transmitter is simultaneously power source, the power consumption source. 7.3.1 Input Active Power sup& The input supplied from more than one shall be measured for each power

7.3.1.1 Input active power for dc primary power active power shall be measured with a wattmeter.

If the requirements of 3.4.2 of IS : 10853 ( Part 1 )-1984" are met, the input active power may also be measured using voltmeters and amperemeters. 7.3.1.2 Input active power for ac primary power supply - When the transmitter is connected to a single-phase supply source, the input active power shall be measured with a wattmeter. When the transmitter is connected to a three-phase supply system, the input active power shall be measured with three wattmeters. If there is no current in the neutral, the `two wattmeters method' may be used. 7.3.2 Input Apparent Power (for' ac Primary Power supp~ ) - The input apparent power is calculated ~from the rms line voltages and line currents of the primary power supply of the transmitter under test. As the rms line currents influence the choice of protecting devices and the size of conductors, it is recommended that these currents be measured, also when no measurement of the input apparent power is required. For a transmitter connected to a single-phase input apparent power amounts to the product of line current. For apparent a transmitter connected to a three-phase power is calculated as follows: supply source, the voltage and line supply system, the

a) when the supply system apparent power amounts and line current, multiplied

is symmetrically loaded, the input to the product of line-to-line voltage by 2/3 ;

c

b) when the supply system is not symmetrically loaded and there is no neutral present, the input apparent power shall be taken as the product of the line-to-line voltage and the sum of the three line current-s,
*Methods measurements.

divided

by 1/3< and
transmitters: Part 1 General conditions of

of measurement

for radio

11

IS : -10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 c) when the three-phase supply system is not symmetrically loaded and a neutral is present, the input apparent power may be taken as the product of the line-to-neutral voltage and the sum of the three line currents.
NOTE -- For a three-phase power supply system, with voltages that are not perfectly symmetrical, but within the limits of 3.4.1.2 of IS : 10853 ( Part 1 )-1984* the arithmetic mean of the three phase-to-phase or phase-to-neutral voltages shall be taken as the line-to-line or the line-to-neutral voltage, respectively.

8. MEASUREMENT 8.1

OF

TOTAL

POWER

FACTOR

The total power-factor

is determined

by calculation. than one separately

If the transmitter is simultaneously supplied from more primary power source, the total power-factor shall be calculated for each power source. 9. MEASUREMENT OF OVERALL EFFICIENCY

9.1 The overall efficiency is determined by calculation after the mean output power ( see 3 ) and the input active power have been measured simultaneously or in rapid succession. If the transmitter is simultaneously supplied from more than one power source, the input active powers measured at each power source shall be added to obtain the total input active power.

*Methods measurements.

of

mcasuremeut

for radio

transmitters:

Part 1 General

conditions

of

12

IS : 10853 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 ( Centinucd from page 2 )
Members
sRRIA.K.BANBAL

R.+senting Directorate General of Civil Aviation,

New Delhi SHRI_B. S. KOCRAR ( Alternate ) SHRI H. S. CHNDRA~~ISULI Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS Research, Designs and Standards Organization, Lucknow ( S & T )-I Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ) SRRI S. JANAKIRAMAN ( Ministry of Home Affairs ), New Delhi LT-COL KRISHAN LAL Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi LT-COL B. S. NATARAJAN ( Alternate ) Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI R. LALWANI SHRI V. V. CRAUDHARY ( Alternate ) SHRI R. C. PANDEY, SSO-I Ministry of Defence [ DTD & P ( AIR ) ] SHRI C. M. KRISHNA MURTHY, SSO-II ( Alternate) Overseas Communications Services, Bombay SHRI S. K. RAIC~AND Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi SHRI K. P. RAMASWAMY SHRI K. B. BORKER ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( EME ) MAJ B. K. VO~RA

1 `;

