IS : 5793 - 1970 
Reaffirmed - 2012 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
ANEROID BAROMETERS 


UDC 551.508.4 



,, , ,. -4 ni-i P . 

Intranet PrinM * j 



© Copyright 1971 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


March 1971 




AMENDMENT NO.l AUGUST 2002 
TO 

IS 5793 : 1970 SPECIFICATION FOR ANEROID 
BAROMETERS 

Substitute 'hecta Pascal (hPa' for 'millibar (mb)' wherever appears. 

( Page 2, clause 1.1, line 2) — Substitute 'land'/or 'laid'. 


(BP21) 


Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



18 : 5793-1970 


Indian Standard 

SPECMCATION FOR 
ANEROID BAROMETERS 


Meteorological Instruments Sectional Committee, EDC 69 


Chairman Representing 

MISS A. MANI India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 

Members 

SHRI N. R. CHAKRABORTY The National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta 

SHRI N. R. DAS GUPTA {Alternate ) 

DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( METEOROLOGY ) Indian Navy 

STAFF OFFICER ( METEOROLOGY ) 

(Alternate ) 

JOINT DIRECTOR, RESEARCH ( B & F ) Research, Designs & Standards Organization 

( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

DEPUTY DIRECTOR, RESEARCH 
( B & F ) ( Alternate ) 

DR R. N. MATHUR Central Scientific Instruments OrganizationCSIR ), 

Chandigarh 

SHRI D. D. PURI ( Alternate ) 

DR R. H. MENDONSA Lawrence & Mayo (India) Private Limited, 

Calcutta 

SHRI S. VARADARAJAN ( Alternate ) 

SHRI PREM PRAKASH National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

SHRI OM PRAKASH ( Alternate ) 

SHRI K. K. ROHATGI Government Precision Instruments Factory, Calcutta 

Gp CAPT S. DAS SARMA Indian Air Force 

WG CDR P. SRINIVASAN {Alternate ) 

SHRI M. V. PATANKAR, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Mech Engg ) 


Secretary 

SHRI S. M. RAZVI 

Deputy Director ( Mech Engg), ISI 


INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 





IS : 5793 -1970 


Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
ANEROID BAROMETERS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 4 September 1970, after the draft finalized by the Meteorological 
Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Atmospheric pressure is generally measured by means of a mercury or 
aneroid barometer. The requirements of mercury barometer are covered 
in IS : 5798-1970=^ 

0.3 With the increasing requirements in the country for these instruments, 
the formulation of an Indian Standard for aneroid barometers and their 
test and certification by ISI has become necessary. This standard has 
been prepared in the interests of standardization of aneroid barometers and 
the accurate measurement of atmospheric pressure. The test and examina¬ 
tion of all mercury and aneroid barometers and their initial certification 
after manufacture shall in future be the sole responsibility of ISI. 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard, due consideration has been given 
to the requirements laid down by the World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, as well as the special circumstances obtaining in the country. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express¬ 
ing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements of aneroid barometers 
suitable for use both on laid and on board ships. 


^Specification for mercury barometer. 

fRules tor rounding off numerical values ( revised). 


2 



IS : 5793 - 1970 


2. DESCRIPTION 

2.1 An aneroid barometer consists of a closed metal chamber or capsule 
completely or partly evacuated and a strong spring system which prevents 
the chamber from collapsing due to the external atmospheric pressure. 
The aneroid chamber expands and contracts with the variations of the 
external pressure and these variations are magnified by a system of levers 
and indicated by a pointer on a graduated dial. The aneroid barometer 
is usually compensated for the effect changes in ambient temperature. A 
screw in the base plate enables the position of the carriage to be adjusted 
slightly and the zero to be altered. The complete machanism is hosed in 
a cylindrical brass case with a bevelled glass front. A movable index fitted 
to the glass face may be set independently of the pointer and is useful in 
showing changes in pressure (^^^Fig. 1 ). 

3. TYPES 

3.1 The aneroid barometers shall be of two types: 

a) Short range, graduated from 850 to 1 050 millibar in units of whole 
millibars; and 

b) Long range, graduated from 400 to 1 050 millibar in units of 2 
millibar. 

4. MATERIAL 

4.1 The aneroid element shall be made from steel, beryllium copper or 
other suitable alloys. 

4.2 The spring shall be made of spring steel and the arbor chain from 
steel. 

4.3 The spindles and pivots in the linkage system shall be of silver steel. 

4.4 The axle which holds the needle shall revolve in jewel bearings. 

4.5 All other parts, unless otherwise specified, shall be of good quality 
brass. 

5. DIMENSIONS 

5.1 The dimensions of the various components of the aneroid barometer 
are left to the manufacturer and no rigid dimensional restrictions are 
indicated provided the product satisfies all the other requirements 
prescribed in the specification. 

6. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

6.1 The graduated dial of the aneroid barometer shall have a diameter 
of not less than 125 mm. Larger diameters giving greater accuracy of 
reading shall be preferred. 


3 



1 Vacuum Chamber 

2 Spring 

3 Arm 

4 Connecting Link 

5 Rocking Bar 


6 Pr 

7 Hai 

8 Art 

9 Pul 


FIG. I ANEROID BAROME' 


6.2 The aneroid shall have the graduations on th 
or two. In the latter case, the design shall be such 
of making two complete revolutions over the dia 
the extremes of pressure within its range. 






IS : 5793 - 1970 


6.3 The aneroid shall be compensated for the effects of temperature such 
that the temperature errors do not exceed the limits of tolerance 
prescribed in the standard over the full range of the instrument. 

6.4 A zero adjusting screw shall be provided for operation through an 
orifice in the back of the case. The screw shall have the capacity to alter 
the position of the pointer by at least 50 mb. 

6.5 The case shall have an eye bolt fitted to it for suspending the 
instrument. 

6.6 The material of the aneroid capsule and the spring shall be subjected 
to suitable treatment such that the secular change of the instrument defined 
as the gradual change in the error which goes on constantly irrespective of 
the current changes due to its immediate pressure and temperature history, 
is minimum. 

6.7 A moveable index shall be fixed to the glass plate on top. It shall 
carry a short knurled head to enable it to be set by hand at any desired 
position on the dial. The free movement of the pointer, however, shall not 
be obstructed by the index. 

7. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

7.1 The outer brass case shall be well-polished and gold lacquered. 

7.2 The dial shall be matt white and the graduations shall be fine black 
lines of uniform thickness and depth throughout. 

7.3 The pivots and bearings shall be well-polished and smoothened to 
minimize friction. The pivots and spindles shall be in correct alignment 
and lubricated very lightly. 

7.4 The surface of the aneroid capsule shall be nickel plated and finished 
bright. 

7.5 The complete mechanism shall be sturdy and be capable of withstand¬ 
ing ordinary transit risks without introducing inaccuracies outside the limits 
specified in the standard. 

7.6 The pointer needle shall be well-balanced. 

8. ACCURACY 

8.1 The aneroid barometer shall be so compensated for temperature that 
the reading does not change more than 0.5 mb for a change of temperature 
of 30‘^C. 

8.2 When tested in a suitably designed and operated vacuum chamber 
against a standard barometer whose errors are known and allowed for, the 


5 



IS : 5793 - 1970 


scale errors at any point shall not exceed 1 mb for those having range up to 
850 mb and 2 mb for those having longer range. The scale errors 
shall remain within these limits over periods of at least a year when in 
normal use. 

8.3 The hysteresis shall be sufficiently small to ensure that the differences 
in reading before a change of pressure of 50 mb and after return to the 
original value does not exceed 1 mb. 

8.4 The positional error of the instrument, that is, the difference in reading 
in the vertical and horizontal positions shall not be greater than 1 mb. 

9, MARKING 

9.1 All aneroid barometers shall have engraved on their dials the name of 
the units in which the barometer indicates the pressure, for example 
'millibars'. The name of the instrument 'Aneroid Barometer' and the 
serial number and year of manufacture, for example, No. 123/1969, shall 
also be engraved on the dial. 

9,1.1 The aneroid barometers may also be marked with the ISI Certi¬ 
fication Mark. 

NOTE — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated 
by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are 
continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, 
under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

10, PACKING 

10.1 Each aneroid barometer shall be provided with a leather carrying 
case with strap or a suitable wooden box. In either case the inside shall 
have a suitable soft lining to protect the glass cover from damage and 
provide some degree of cushioning against shocks to the mechanism. 

11, TESTING AND INSPECTION 

11.1 Each barometer shall be tested individually for conformity to all the 
requirements of this specification. 


6 



pubucahons of Indian standards inshtution 

INDIAN STANDARDS 


Over 6 000 Indian Standards, broadly classified under the following 


main heads, have been issued so far: 

Agriculture & Food 
Chemical 
Civil Engineering 
Consumer Products 

Of these, the standards belonging 
fall under the following categories: 

Basic Engineering Standards 

Abrasives 

Bearings 

Bicycle Components 
Chemical Engineering 
Engineering Metrology 
Gas Cylinders and Fittings 
Gaskets and Packings 
Gears 

Hand Tools 

IC Engines and Automotive 
Vehicles 

Instruments ( Drawing, Optical 
and Surveying ) 

Machine Tools and Small Tools 


Electrotechnical 
Mechanical Engineering 
Structural & Metals 
Textile 

the Mechanical Engineering Group 

Marine Engineering and Ship¬ 
building 

Material Handling, Lifting Gear 

Mining 

Pumps 

Refrigeration and Air- 
Conditioning 
Sewing Machines 
Steam Tables 

Threaded Fasteners and Rivets 
Transmission Devices, Pulleys 
and Bells 

Weights and Measures 

Wire Ropes and Wire Products 

Unclassified 


OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) Rs 

Single Copy ... ... ... ... 3.00 

Annual Subscription .. ... ... 25.00 

Annual Reports ( horn 19-18-19 Onwards ) ... ... 2.00 to 5.00 each 

Handbook of ISI Publuations. 1970 ( Pages viii + 629, Price Rs 12.00 ) 
incorporating annotations on all Indian Standards, and also listing ISO 

_ Recommendations and Publications of lEC _ 

Available from 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 
Telephone 27 01 31 ( 20 lines ) Telegrams Manaksanstha 


Branch Offices 


Telegrams Manaksanstha 


Syndicate Bank Building, Gandhinagar 
534 Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Road 
5 Chowringhee Approach 
5-9-201/2 Cnirag Ah Lane 
117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 
54 General Patters Road 


Bangalore 9 Telephone 
Bombay 7 
Calcutta 13 
Hyderabad 1 
Kanpur 5 „ 


2 76 49 
35 69 44 
23-08 02 
5 34 35 
82 72 


Madras 2 „ 8 72 78 


Printed at Neelkamal Printers, Delhi'6, India 



