( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS:7931(PartII)-1975

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR AUTOMATIC AND SEMI-AUTOMATIC WELDING EQUIPMENT WITH S-ELF-ADJUSTING ARCS ( MI'GIMAG PROCESSES )
PART II TRANSFORMER-RECTIFIER
Welding Equipment Sectional

POWER
Committee,
Rcprcsmting

SOURCE
ETDC 21

Electric
Chairman

SHRI J. A. MULIYIL

Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta

A. C. LAHIRI ( A!tcmatc to Shri J. A. Muliyil ) ASSIST.AXTDIRECTOR, WEAPON Naval Headquarters EQU~~WEXT ( ~:XIF.R-M(ATER EQurPIVIRxT) STAFF GPFICRK ( WEaPON EQUIPXENT ) ( Alternate ) Philips India Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. BH.ATI.A SHRI H. D. CHVXERMANE ( Alternate ) SW iron & Steel Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI P. GOOFtAR SHRI P. K. NEOGI ( Alternote ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( InsprcSHRI K. L. G.~RQ tion Wing ), New Delhi SIIRI V. S. KR~PALANI ( Alternate ) hialik Electricals ( Private ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI SUDHIR KUXAR HARI SKRI S. K. CHAUDHARY ( Altmmtr ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI N. K. MATHUR LT.GOI, N. 1. K. ~fI?tTIIY Department of Defence Production, Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defencc SRRI v. S. SUGUR ( d&Wld~ ) Advani-Oerlikon Privatr Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. T. NIHAL~N~ SHRI J. K. GH~NDNA ( Alternote ) Triveni Structurals Ltd, Allahabad SHRI KESHAR SIXCR Railway Board, Ministry of Railways SRRI T. A. RAMACAANDRAS SRRID. KALTANASUNDARAM ( Altmak)
SRRI

( Continued on page 2 )

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protrctrd undrr the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shalJ be deemed to he an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :7931( Part II ) - 1975
( Continurd.from pagr

1)

Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bomba) SHRI H. I.. ROBERTS Bharar Heavy Elwtl-icAl< l,rd, Tirwhirapalli SHRI M. K. SRLDH.~I: SHHI 11. A. KESAVAX (Alternate ) Kirlosknr Electric Co Ltd. Bangalorc SHR1N.S.SUBBANX.A SRRI M. GURCBASWARAJ (llknalr) Director Genwai, BIS ( Ex-oflcio h'embrr ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAX, Director ( Elec tech )

S~RIN.DASSHARMA Deputy Director

( Elcc tech ), BIS

2

1!3:7931 (PmtII)-1975

Indian Standard
` SPECIFICATION FOR AUTOMATIC AND SEMI-AUTOMATIC WELDING EQUIPMENT WITH SELF-ADJUSTING ARCS ( MIG/MAG PROCESSES)
PART II TRANSFORMER-RECTIFIER POWER SOURCE

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 December 1975, after the draft finalized by the Electric Welding Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 There are numerous variations of arc welding processes using consumable electrode wires. The wire may be solid or composite, and with or without flux. In all these cases, the melting generally takes place in the presence of a shielding gas. This gas may be inert ( for example, argon ) or have a definite chemical activity at the high temperature of the electric arc ( for example, carbon dioxide ). When the shielding gas is inert the welding process is known as MIG process and when this gas has a definite chemical activity at the high temperature of the electric arc this process is called MAG process. 0.3 This standard on automatic and semiautomatic welding equipment is being issued in three parts. This part covers transformer rect%er power sources while Part I covers dc, generator power sources and Part III welding gun and ancillary equipment. 0.4 In preparing following: this standard, assistance has been derived Corn the

IS0 Dot: TA-76/72/E Specification of arc-welding equipment using consumable wires ( MIG/MAG processes ). International Organization for Standardization. Dot: 71/42369 Draft British Standard Specification for arc welding plant, equipment and accessories ( reaision of BS 638 : 1966 ). British Standards Institution. NEMA EW-l-1970 Electric arc welding apparatus. Manufacturers' Association, USA. National Electric

IS : 7931( Part II ) - 1975 0.5 Rectifier output only. output only. type power source could be either with ac/dc output or dc This standard is intended to cover power source with dc

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II j covers transformer-rectifier power source of the substantially flat load characteristics type incorporating monocrystalline and polycrvstalline rectifiers for semiautomatic and automatic arc welding with self-adjusting arc ( MIG/MAG processes ). Equipment covered b)this standard will normally be of the air cooled or forced air cooled type. 1.1.1 This standard
source. 1.2 The windings of transformer-rectifiers insulation classes A, E, B, F and H. 1.3 Welding transformer-rectifier ratings on the basis of duty cycle. covered covered by this standard are of does not cover oil cooled transformer rectifier power

by this standard

are

assigned

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard,
(Part I)-1975t, in addition to 2.1. the definitions shall apply. given in 2 of IS : 7931 A transformer-rectifier and indicating devices

2.1 Transformer-Rectifier

Power

Source -

with associated reactors, control windings, control required to produce direct current for arc welding. 3. DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION

3.1 The
double against

rectifier assembly shall be isolated from the mains supply by a All output terminals shall be suitably shielded wound transformer. accidental or inadvertant contact.

*Rules for rounding off numerical valurs ( rtvisrd ). $Specification for automatic and semiautomatic welding equipment with self-adjusting arcs (MIG!MAG processes) : Part I DC welding generator powtr source.

4

IS : 7931(

Part II ) - 1975

3.2 Monocrystalline rectifiers shall be of adequate current-carrying capacity and able to withstand, with surge protection devices if fitted, transient voltages likely to occur from arc welding and allied processes. Monocrystalline semiconductor rectifiers shall comply with IS : 4540-1968*. with 3.3 Polycrystalline rectifiers ( metal rectifiers ) shall complv 1S : 3136-19657 in so far as it does not conflict with the requiiements specified in this standard. 3.4 Where forced draught cooling is used, an automatic device which switches off the rectifier or reduces the output to a safe level in the event nf inadequate airflow shall be fitted. 3.5 The loading of rectifier assembly shall be such that its temperaturerise shall not exceed the value stipulated by the rectifier manufacturer at the rated output. 3.6 It is recommended that t.he minimum rectifier plant shall be drip-proof. standard of enclosure for the

3.7 The welding power source shall be capable of withstanding the full specified supply voltage without the necessity for reforming the rectifier The welding power source cells by the application of reduced voltage. shall also be capable of withstanding an ac voltage instantaneously applied and maintained for 5 minutes which is 10 percent higher than the voltage It shall also be able appropriate to the selected primary voltage tapping. to withstand repeated switching of the ac supply at the same excess voltage when the dc output terminals are not connected to an external load. 3.8 Capacitor-F; may be used to improve the power factor to approximately O-8 lagging at 50 percent of the maximum continuous automatic,/semiautomatic welding current and the corresponding load voltage. 3.8.1 The capacitors if provided as part of the welding conform to IS : 2834.1964:. 3.8.2 The capacitors shall be so connected with the welding plant. 4. RATING 4.1 Voltage - It is recommended that the voltage between the output terminals of a rectifier should not exceed a mean dc value of 100 V.
*Specification for monocr)%tallinc semiconductor rectifier assemblies and equipment. tSpccification for polycrystalline semiconductor rectifier equipment. SSpecification for shunt capacitors for power systems.

plant,

shall OK

that they are switched

5

IS : 7931 ( Part II ) - 1975
4.2 Rated Current - The welding transformer rectifier shall be rated at currents at duty cycle corresponding to maximum continuous semiautomatic welding current and maximum automatic welding current. Preferred current ratings shall be 150, 200, 250, 300, 400, 500, 600 and 800 A.

4.3 The maximum continuous automatic welding current for air cooled rectifier plant for automatic single metal-arc welding shall be that corresponding to 100 percent duty cycle. 4.4 The maximum continuous semiautomatic welding current for air cooled rectifier plant for semiautomatic single metal arc welding shall be This comprises a complete that corresponding to an 85 percent duty cycle. cycle consisting of a period of 4'25 minutes under the conventional operating conditions followed by a period of 0'75 minute of no-load operation. 5. MARKING
5.1 Rating Plate Information-

given on the rating plates:

The

following

information

shall

be

4 b)

Manufacturer's Manufacturer's

name and/or trade-mark; type, designation and serial number; current/Maximum automatic

c) Maximum

continuous automatic welding continuous semiautomatic welding current; Maximum semiautomatic welding current;

d) 4 f) h) j)

welding current/Maximum

Maximum

open circuit voltage;

Input volts, current, frequency; of cooling; class; and

Type EC)

Insulation

A warning as follows: `Warning - Currents in excess of the foIlowing are for intermittent use only: 1) For semiautomatic 2) For automatic welding... . . . . . . Amp.

welding . . . . . . . . . ._. . Amp.
6

IS:7931 52 The transformer the Standard Mark.

(PatiII)-1915 the

rectifier assembly may also be marked with

NOTE - The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian StandardsAct, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made there. under. The Stindard Mark 011 products COWI&by an Indian Standardconveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well deened system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licencc for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturera or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

6.0 Tests shall be made to prove compliance witli all the requirements this standard.

of

6.1 Type Test - These tests may be made by mutual agreement between the purchaser and the supplier and if the records of type tests on a transformer rectifier power source which in essential details is representative of the one being purchased are furnished, the purchaser may accept these as evidence of type tests instead of actual test. The type tests and their sequence shall be as follows: a) Insulation resistance test ( see 63 ); b) Overvoltage test ( see 6.4 ); c) Open-circuit voltage test (see 6.5 j; ( see 6.6 );

d) Test for load characteristic e) Temperature-rise

test ( see 6.7 ); and

f ) High voltage test ( see 6.8 ). 6.2 Routine Tests Routine tests shall comprise the following:

4 Insulation resistance test ( see 6.3 ); b) Open-circuit voltage test ( see 6.5 ); c) Test for load characteristic (see 6.6); 4 High voltage test ( see 6.8 ).

and

6.2.1 _ A __ certificate of routine test _ . _.shall be furnished by the manufacturer. which shall show that each welding set has been tested and has been found to be sound electrically and mechanically and is in working order in all particulars and that it complies with the terms of this specification. 7

SS : 7931 ( Part

II ) - 1975

6.3 Insulation Resistance Test -The insulation resistance shall be measured with a dc voltage of about 500 volts applied for a sufficient time for the reading of the indicator to become practically steady, such source or generated in the voltage being taken from an independent The insulation resistance shall be not less than measuring instrument. two megohms.
KOTE -

Rectifier

cells shall

br short-circuited

before

performing

the tc`st.

6.4 Overvoltage Test 2 The overvoltage test shah be carried out at the voltage specified in 3.7 followed by repeated switching of the ac supply, 50 times at the same excess voltage when the dc output terminals are not connected to an external load. 6.5 Open-Circuit Voltage Test - With the input side connected to the supply voltage and output side open-circuited, the open-circuit voltage shall be measured. Open-circuit voltage for the various positions of the coarse and fine controls on the machine shall be measured. The permissible tolerance for maximum value of open-circuit voltage shall be &5 percent. 6.6 Test for Load Characteristic - With the transformer connected to the supply, the associated load currents and load are measured at the output terminals of the transformer rectifier a resistive load. rectifier voltages through

The values of welding currents and associated voltages shall be as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. For general guidance the associated load currents and load voltages shall be given by the following equation:
u2 =

14 + 0'05

12

where lJ2 = welding Ioad voltage, and current. of current shall be 1, = corresponding The permissible * 10 percent. 6.7 Temperature-Rise tolerances value of the welding for rated values

Test

k .7.1 7~s~ Conditions 6.7.1.1 The load should be a non-inductive resistance and at the ;jppropriate load voltage. A tolerance of f IQ percent should be allowed on the value of this load voltage.

8

Is:7931 (PartII)-1975 6.7.1.2 Test shall be made using the input winding tap corresponding to the voltage being applied. 6.7.1.3 The temperature-rise test shall be carried out at a current equal to the maximum continuous automatic welding current and at a The measurement of temperature shall duty cycle equal to 100 percent. he made in accordance with Appendix A. 6.7.1.4 If the transformer is for semiautomatic welding only, it shall he tested at an equivalent continuous maximum welding current arrived at by using the formula: Maximum continuous automatic = welding current 0'92 x maximum semiautomatic welding current

6.7.1.5 The test shall continue until steady maximum temperature is obtained. If the temperature-rise does not vary by more than 2�C per hour it is considered that steady temperature has been achieved. 6.7.2 The in Table 1. temperature-rise shall not exceed the limits specified

6.7.3 Reduced Temperature-Rises for Transformers Designed for High Altitudes - For transformers designed for operation at an altitude greater

than 1 000 m, but tested at normal altitudes, the limits of temperature-rise given in Table 1 are reduced by the following amounts for each 500 m by which the intended working altitude exceeds 1 000 m: aj Oil-immersed, natural-air-cooled transformers 2-O percent 2.5 percent 3'0 percent 5'0 percent
to water-

bj Dr)--type, natural-air-cooled c) Oil-immersed, d) Drv-type,

transformers transformers

forced-air-cooled

forced-air-cooled

transformers

x0-E - These reductions coolrd transformers.

in temperatke-r&e

limits are not applicable

6.8 High Voltage Test 6.8.1 The high voltage test shall be carried out once and to a new machine only. It shall be carried out at the manufacturers works at the If the manufacturer conclusion of the temperature-rise test if conducted. has carried out this test, at his works, this shall not be repeated by the testing authority.
~VOTE 1 -

short-circuited
NOTE

Protective or filter devices or capacitors or fans shall be disconnected as desired. The rectifier cells shall be short-circuited, before performing the test.

or

2-

9

Is:7931 (Paell)-1875

TABLE

1

LIMITS

OF P( Clousc 6.7.2 )

TEMPFaATuRE-RISE

IN "C

SL

PARTS

CLASS 0R IRSULATI~R --* lClass A RT (4) 60 -Class E e (5) 65 Class B Class H Class F 7-7 -7 RT RT Rl- -2 (6) 75 -(7) 70 (8) 80 -_ 1

NO.

(1) 3
ii) iii)

(2) Winding Oil Insulated parts including cores. not in contact with insulated windings. R=hy resistance

(3) 55 50

(9)
85

(10) (11)
loo -105

(12)
125 -

The temperature-rise shall in no case reach such a value that there is risk of injury to any insulating material on adjacent parts or to the welding plant in any respect

T= by thermometer
NOTE 1 - The numerical values quoted for classes E and H should be considered as tentative only and may be revised when more practical experience is available. If class C insulation is used, the temperature-rise shall be a matter of agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. ?~OTE 2 - For details of classes of insulation, set IS : 1271-1958 `Classification of insulating materials for elrctrical machinery and apparatus in relation to their thermal stability in servicr'.

6.8.2 The test shall be made with a single-phase alternating nearly as possible of sinewave form and of any convenient between 40 and 60 Hz. The rms value shall be 2 kV.

voltage as frequency

6.8.3 The appropriate voltage, obtained from a separate source, shall be applied for 60 seconds to each winding in turn, between the winding under test and the remaining windings, core, frame and tank or casing of the transformer rectifier assembly, connected together and to earth. 6.8.4 The test shall be commenced at a voltage not greater than onethird of the test value, and shall be increased to the specified value as rapidly as is consistent with its magnitude being indicated by the measuring instrument. At the end of the test the voltage shall be reduced rapidly to less than one-third of its full value befate switching off. 10

IS : 798

( Part II ) - 1975

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.7.1.3 )
TEMPERATURE A-l. A-l.1 METHODS
Two methods a) Resistance h) Thermometer of measuring method, and ttmpcraturc

A

MEASUREMENTS

are recognized,

namely:

method.

A-l.2 Resistance Method - In this method, the temperature-rise of the winding shall he determined by the increase in the resistance of the However, if desired, a check may be made by thermometers windings. applied to the accessible surfaces of the windmgs and the temperature-rise thus determined shall not exceed the permissible limit specified for the resistance method. A-1.2.1 The temperature of the windings as measured by thermometer before commencing the test shall not differ from that of the ambient. The initial resistance and initial temperature of the windings shall be measured at the same time. A-1.2.2 Since the resistance over the range of temperature referred to in this standard varies in direct proportion to the temperature above a particular value, the hot temperature is obtained from the following equation: ts=(Rz/Rt) where (il+X)--X in "C,

t, = temperature

of hot windings of hot windings, of cold windings, of cold windings and 229'8

R, = resistance RI = resistance
tl = temperature
S = 234.5
NOTE -

in "C, and for aluminium.
condition and If the conduc-

for copper

The value of 229.0 for nluminium is based on 3/4H conductivity of 60.6 percrnt Internatioual Annealed Copprr Srandard. tivity is difkrmt, this may have to br altered.

A-1.2.3 If the variation of resistance method is not applicable ( for example, in the case of a low resistance winding where the resistance of the joints and connections constitute a considerable part of the total resistance j as far as possible use is made of thermometer set up during the test on the external face of the windings and the temperature-rise limit given in Table 1 is retained.
11

IS : 7931 ( Part II ) - 1975 A-l.3 Thermometer Method - When using this method, the temperature shall be measured by thermometers applied to the hottest accessible during the test period. surfaces*, of transformer or alcohol bulb A-1.3.1 The term ` thermometer ' means mercury In measuring temperature, thermocouples or resistance thermometer. thermometers may be substituted for liquid-in-glass thermometers provided such instruments were inserted in narrow interstices which would be accessible to the bulb of normal thermometer not less than 5 mm. A-1.3.2 The bulb of the thermometer, except at the point of contact, shall be covered with a pad of felt, cotton wool or other non-conducting material 3 mm thick extending at least 20 mm in every direction from the bulb and pressed into contact with the surfaces to which this is applied, to prevent loss of heat by radiation and convection from the bulb. A-2. PRECAUTIONS RESISTANCE TO BE OBSERVED MEASUREMENTS IN MAILING

A-2.1 Special care should be taken when measuring the temperature of windings by this method to ensure that apparatus and niethod of adequate accuracy are used. A-2.2 To determine temperatures of the windings when measurement of resistance and associated temperature when the windings are cold. A-3. MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE OF hot, an accurate should be taken

AMBIENT

A-3.1 In general, the temperature of the ambient shall be measured by means of several thermometers placed at different points around and halfThese way up the transformer and at a distance of I to 2 m away from it. thermometers shall be so placed as to indicate the temperature of the current of air flowing towards the transformer and shall be protected from heat radiation and stray draughts.
*The term ` accessible surfaces ' is intended to convey that the established limits of temperature-rise of windings measured by thermometer arc based on the use of thermometers placed on the external surfaces of the windings or iron cores with which the windings may be in contact. The measurements are not intended to cover readings which might be obtained by inserting thermometers into narrow interstices between coils, or between insulating flanges and coils. In such locations the temperature may be higher and allowancr is made for thi\ in fixing the permissible temperature-rises measured at the surface. The fact that the type of construction renders a winding difficult of access is not to be taken as permission to operate such windings at higher temperature than are allowed on those wmdings or portions of windings on which the thermometers can bc more easily placed, and the standard limits of temperature-rise should not be exceeded on any winding surface. If a reasonable proportion of the windings is readily accessible to a thermometer, temperature-rise should be determined by a thermometer placed on these, portions of the windings.

12

lsr7931

(PurIl)

-1975

A-3.2 Where temperature tests are carried out under such conditions that parts of a transformer are in a position in which ventilation may be impeded, for example, in a pit, the temperature, in such a restricted area shall be deemed to be the ambient temperature. A-3.3 If the air is admitted into the transformer through a definite inlet opening or openings, the temperature of the ambient shall be measured by means of thermometers placed in the current of incoming air near the place it enters the transformer. A-3.4 The value to be adopted for the temperature of the ambient during the temperature-rise test shall be the average of the reading of the thermometers mentioned above, taken at the beginning and the end of the last half hour of the test. A-3.5 To avoid errors due to the time lag between the temperatures of a large transformer and the variation in the temperature of the ambient and all reasonable precautions shall be taken to reduce those variations and the errors arising from them. A-4. TIME, AT WHICH TEMPERATURES ARE TO BE TAKEN

A-4.1 The temperature of transformer shall, whenever possible, be taken during working as well as after shutting off the transformers. The highest temperature thus obtained shall be adopted. When successive measurements show increasing temperature after shut-down, the highest value shall be taken. A-5. TEMPERATURE-RISE A-5.1 The temperature-rise shall be the difference between the highest temperature measured under A-4 and the mean temperature measured under A-3.

13

INDIAN ON ELECTRIC

STANDARDS

WELDING

EQUIPMENT

IS

:
Single operator Electrical type arc welding transformers ( second rcoision ) ( s~coad rc.vlrioa ) dc electric welding generators welding accessories rectifier type dc arc welding power source welding equipment: equipment: equipment: Part I Single-phase Part Part transformers rocker-arm spot and II Single-phase III IV Single-phase Single-phase Resistance Single operator

1851-1975 2635-1975 2641-1964 4559-1968

4804 ( Part I )- 1968

4804 ( Part II t-1968 Resistance welding spot welding machines 4804 ( Part III )-1969 Resistance welding projection welding machines

4804 ( Part IV )-1973 Resistance welding equipment: Part press type roll-spot and seam welding machines 6008-1971 Single operator ac/dc arc welding power source

stationary,

7931 ( Part I )-1975 Automatic and semiautomatic welding equipment with self-adjusting arcs (MIG/MAG processes): Part I DC welding generator power source 7931 ( Part II )-I975 Automatic and semi-automatic welding equipment arcs ( MIG/MAG processes ): Part II Transformer-rectifier with self-adjusting power source

7931 ( Part III )-I975 Automatic and semi-automatic welding equipment with selfadjusting arcs ( MIG/MAG processes ): Part III Welding gun and ancillary equipment

AMENDMENT

NO. 1
TO

JULY

1989

IS : 7931 ( Part 2 ) - 1975 SPECIFICATION FOR AUTOMATIC AND SEMI-AUTOMATIC WELDING EQUIPMENT WITH SELF-ADJUSTING ARCS ( MIG/MAG PROCESSES ) PART 2 TRANSFORMER-RECTIFIER
( Page 6, clause 4.4 ) POWER SOURCE

Substitute the following for the existing clause:

`4.4 The maximum continuous semi-automatic welding current for aircooled rectifier plant for semi-automatic single metal arc welding shall be that corresponding to 60 percent duty cycle in case of general applications and 75 percent duty cycle in case of heavy duty applications.'
( ETDC 21)

Printed

at Printwell

Printers,

Delhi,

India

