( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 11702( Part 1 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT' OF AIRBORNE NOIS-E EMITTED BY PNEUMATIC TOOLS AND MACHINES
PART 1 ENGINEERING METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF SOUND POWER LEVELS

Acoustics
Chairman
SHRI

Sectional

Committee,

LTDC

5

Representing Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani Research Institute

K. D. PAVATE Members

SEIII M. K. KAPOOR ( Alternate to Shri K. D. Pavate ) Ahuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI SAND~EP AHUJA SHRI K. R. GURUXURTHY ( Alternate ) Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi SHRI R. K. BEATIA SHRI T. R. WADHWA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI K. CHANDRACHUDAN Railway Board, New Delhi SHRI P. GUOSH SHRI SHANKAR ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR P. N. GUPTA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) Con KRI~~IAN LAL SHJU B. S. RUPRAI ( Alternate ) Laboratory National Physical DR V. MOHANAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi Bolton Private Ltd, New Delhi SHRI J. S. MON~A SHRI M. S. MONQA ( Alternate ) Component Industries Association Electronic SH~I J. S. MON~A ( ELCINA ), New Delhi SHRI GHANISHA~~~ Dass ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI B. S. NARAYAN SHRI K. NAQARAJ ( Alternate ) All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore DR ( MISS ) SHAILAJA NIKAM SHRI S. S. MURTHY ( Alternate) ( Continued on Page 2 ) 0 INDIAN CopVright 19g7 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright AC% ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the pubiisher shall be deemed to be au infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986
(Continued from page 1 ) Members PROE B. S. RAXAKRISHNA SHRI S. L. REDEY SHRI,M. M. J~SHI ( Alternate) SHR~ M. SHANEARALIN~AX Representing Central University, Hyderabad P&co Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay

Directorate General of Supplies & ~Disposals, New Delhi of All India Radio, Directorate General SHRI S. K. SEN New Delhi SHRI W. V. B. RAMALINQAM ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) CDR P. K. SINHA LT R. S. DATYA ( Alternote ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SUPERINY~ENDENT SURVEYOR OB WORKS ( FOOD ) SURVEYOR OB WORKS I/FOOD ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN,. Director ( Electromcs ) Secretary SERI PAVAN KUUAR Deputy Director ( Electronics

), ISI

2

IS : 11702 ( Part I ) - 1986

Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE NOlSE EMITTED BY PNEUMATIC TOOLS AND MACHINES
PART 1 ENGINEERING METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF SOUN~D POWER LEVELS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 26 May 1986, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard specifies methods acoustic characteristics of pneumatic 0.3 The purpose of this standard mance of machinery for acoustic with noise limits. for determining and tools and machines. presenting the

is to provide data on acoustic perforplanning and for checking compliance

0.4 For acoustic planning, the determination of both A-weighted and octave band sound power levels are normally required, whereas normally for checking compliance with noise limits normally only the A-weighted sound power level is required. 0.5 The more comprehensive data obtained in this part may be used not only for acoustic comparison of different types of machines and for prediction of disturbance in the near vicinity ( in the case of a machine on a building site ), but also as a contrioperating outdoors, for example, bution towards assessing the risk of hearing damage for people operating or working close to the machine. 0.6 This standard deals, firstly, with the determination of surface sound pressure levels and, secondly, with the calculation of sound power levels. The measurements shall be made in a free field over a reflecting plane. An example of the recommended form of test report is also included in Appendix A. 3

IS : 11702( Part 1 ) - 1986
0.7 This standard has been divided into two parts. Part 1 is an engineering method for determination of sound power levels, and gives information for acoustic planning, Part 2 is a method for checking compliance with noise limits, and is primarily used for type approvals in accordance with legal or contractual requirements. Both parts are complete in themselves and independent of each other. 0.8 The operating conditions in this part are as far as possible conditions met in everyday use of the machinery which tend to give a relatively high degree of uncertainty. The operating conditions in Part 2 are chosen so as to give the best possible repeatability of test results, involving, if necessary the isolation of machine noise and suppression of the tool and process noise. 0.9 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from ISO/ DSS 3481/1.2 `Acoustics - Measurement of airborne noise emitted by pneumatic tools and machines: Part 1 Engineering method for determination of sound power levels', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ). 0.10 In reporting the result of a test made in standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, it shall be done in accordance with IS : Z-1960*. accordance with is to be rounded this off,

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) specifies an engineering method for determining the airborne noise emitted by pneumatic tools and machines and it also stipulates precise instructions for conducting the tests and reporting the results. 161.1Typical machines to which this standard is applicable include sinkers and feedleg drills ), paving-breakers, rock-drills ( for example, picks and spades, chippers, rivetters, scalers, sheeting, spike- and pindrivers, rammers and tampers, grinders, sanders, polishers, drills, tappers, nibblers, files, saws, motors, pumps and winches, screwdrivers and nutsetters, impact wrenches, hoists.
1.1.2 Devices emitting isolated sound bursts, for example, low-frequency pile-drivers, or series of sound pulses with a repetition frequency lower than 10 Hz are not covered by this part. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

4

IS t 11702 ( Part 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms IS : 1885 ( Part 3 )-1974* shall apply.
3. REFERENCE

1 ) - 1986

and

definitions

given

in

PRESSURE

AND REFERENCE

POWER

3.1 In this

standard, the reference pressure of 20 PPa is used for the expression of sound pressure level and the reference power of 1 pW is used for the expression of sound power level. 4. MEASUREMENT

ACCURACY
part tend to result in those given in Table 1. the cumulative effects the sound power level
POWER LEVELS

4.1 Measurements

made in conformity with this standard deviations which are equal to or less than The standard deviations given in Table 1 reflect in of all causes of uncertainty, excludin g variations of the machine king tested.
TABLE

1 UNCERTAINTY IN DETERMINING SOUND FOR ENGINEERING MEASUREMENTS OCTAVE BAND CENTRE FREQUENCIES HZ 125 250 to 500 1 000 to 4 000 8 000

STANDARD DEVIATION dB 3.0 2'0 ::"5

For a source which emits noise with a relatively `flat' spectrum, the standard deviation of A-weighted sound power level will be approximately 2 dB. For outdoor measurements, the standard deviation in the ~octave band centred on 63 Hz will be approximately 5 dB.
NOTE - Often the variations in sound power of the machine being tested will exceed the standard deviations given in Table I, due to the operating and loading conditions of the machine itself.

5. INSTRUMENTATION 5.1 Instrument -Requirements
carrying out the tests specified

- The instrumentation required in this part is as follows ( see Appendix

for B ).

5.1.1 A sound level meter and microphone system fulfilling at least the requirements for a type 1 instrument conforming with IS : 9779-1981t. Alternatively, or additionally, an integrating device or system may be used to determine the mean-square value of the weighted sound pressure level over a fixed time-interval. This integration may be performed either by digital or analogue means.
-*Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 3 Acoustics. 9Specification for sound level meters.

5

IS 1 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 5.1.2 1973*. 5.2 An octave band analyser fulfilling the requirements of IS : 6964-

Calibration

of Equipment and after

5.2.1 The entire instrumentation system - microphone, cable at a convenient frequency before and meter - shall be calibrated each test series on each day the equipment is used.

5.2.2 For this, a pistonphone or similar device is recommended. The frequency response of the entire system shall be checked periodically, at least every 2 years; for this, a reciprocity calibrator is recommended. 5.2.3 The method for checking the instruments specified in 5.1 shall be in accordance with IS : 9779-198lt and IS : 6964-1973* respectively. 5.3 Recorders

5i3.1 If a tape recorder or graphic level recorder is used, its response shall be equivalent to that of the equipment sepecified in 5.1 for use as in 8.3. 6. RANGE OF FREQUENCIES AND LEVELS

6.1 Frequencies 6.1.1 The range of frequencies generally considered is that covered by the octave bands the centre frequencies of-which lie between 63 and 8 000 Hz inclusive. NOTE - Mrasurements may be made at lower frequencies, but it shall be borne

in mind that measurement accuracy declines with decreasing frequency. In casts, where the level in the 8 kHz band is higher than the level of the 4 kHz band, the frequency range should extend to the 16 kHz band.

6.2

Levels

6.2.1 Octave bands of interest are defined as those where the band pre$sure levels produced by the machine are within 50 dB of the highest measured octave band level. Band sound pressure levels which are more than 50 dB below the highest octave band are considered to be of no interest. 7. OPERATING 7.1 General 7.1.1 The machine continuous service. *Specification shall be operating in stable condition as for normal AND LOADING

sound and vibrations. $Specification for sound level meters.

for octave, half-octave and third octave band filters for analysis of

6

IS : 11702 ( Part I ) - 1986 7.1.2 The machine shall be operated at rated energy supply. During testing, air pressure shall be measured at the machine with the machine in operation. The machine shall be operated normally, restriction of the exhaust by freezing shall be avoided. The type, quality and quantity of lubricant shall be as recommended by the manufacturer. 7.1.3 When practically possible, the geometric centre of the machine being tested shall be approximately 1 m above the reflecting plane. Direct discharge of exhaust air onto the loading device, onto the reflecting plane or directly towards the microphone positions shall be avoided as far as possible. 7.1.4 readings 7.2 Unavoidable load and space conditions that should always be recorded in the test report of Equipment Being Tested could influence test

Loading

7.2.1 It is essential that the instructions for layout, operating and loading given in 7.3 and 7.4, and specified and illustrated in Fig. 1 to 13, are carried out with great care to ensure repeatability of results. The microphone positions are specified in 8.3.3 and in Fig. 1 to 13. 7.3 Loading 7.3.1 of Percussive Machines

Rock-Drills and feedleg

7.3.1.1 The different types of rock-drills, such as sinkers drills ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ), shall be operated as follows:

a) The drill shall be drilled into granite or other stone material, with a compressive strength of 15 000 to 25 000 N/cm*; b) The steel shall he drilled at least 0.5 m into the rock until between 0.5 and 2.0 m remains out of the rock; and c) The feeding force shall be that which gives maximum guaranteed penetration rate; details of the mounting and feeding device shall be recorded. Track-Drills

7.3.2

7.32.1 For rock-drills and similar carrier-mounted machines normally used in free-field conditions, the determination of sound power or sound pressure levels in accordance with a survey method, based on Indian standard on determination of sound power levels of noise source - Survey method ( under preparation ) is often adequate ( see Fig, 3 ). Operating conditions are, however, 7 to be as specified in 7.3.1.

IS : 11702( Part 1 ) - 1986

FIG.

1

NOISEMEASUREMENT ARRANGEMENT WITH MICROPHONE POSITIONS FOR SINCF.RS
Picks and Spades 7.3.3.1

7.3.3 Paving-Breakers,

These machines ( see Fig. 4 ) shall be operated as follows: a) The machine shall be operated vertically with a standard steel embedded in a concrete block.
NOTE -- In Part 2, suitable concrete is specified; for testing this part, no reinforcement shall, however, be used. complying with

b) The machine shall be firmly held down; and c) The exposed lenqth of steel, with the machine between 0.2 and 0.3 m. 8 in place, shall be

I!3:I1702 ( Part 1 )-l!ISf_i

NOTE - The feed leg is not considered as an integralpart the purposes of determining the geometric centre.

of the machine

To<

FIG. 2

Nom

MEASURFMENT

ARRANGEMENT WITH MICROPHONE FOR FEEDING DRILLS

POSITIONS

-9

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986

FIG. 3

NOISE MEASUREMENT ARRANGEMENT WITH MICROPHONE POSITION I;OR TRACK DRILLS Chifijwrs, Rivetters, Scalers, Sheeting, Spike and Pin-drivers

7.3.4

7.3.4.1 In general, the process noise so far exceeds the noise output of the machine itself that measurement, except under specific working conditions, is irrelevant. Should it, however, be necessary to consider the machine on its'own, it shall be run with the working tool embedded in a wooden block resting on a bed of sand ( see Fig. 5 ). 7.3.5 Rammers and Tampers The machine shall be held vert!cally, ramming sand ( see

7.3.5.1 Fig. 6 ). 7.4 Loading 7.4.1

of Non-percussive

Machines

Rotary Machines drills, tappers, set up in the

7.4.1.1 Machines, such as grinders, sanders, polishers, nibblers, files, saws, motors, pumps and winches, shall be arrangements shown in Fig. 7 to 10. 10

IS : 11702( Part 1 ) - 1986
The noise shall conditions, namely: be measured with the machine in two operating

4

Running

free;

b)

On-load, running at the speed at which maximum power occurs. If the speed at maximum power is not known, the machine shall be run at 50 percent of free speed, if it has no governor, and at 80 percent, if it is fitted with a governor. The noise produced by the energy-absorption device shall be at least 10 dB below the noise output of the machine itself in each octave band of interest. Nibblers, circular saws and similar -machines that are difficult to test on-load, because of the influence of process noise, shall be tested in the free-speed condition only.

sizes, the geometric NOTE - For certain machines at a height othnr than the 1 m laid down.

centre

may,

_of necessity

I,

be

F1c.4

NOISE ,&it%AsuaxMENT ARRANGEMENT WITH lkmxms FOR PAVING-BREAKERS

MICROPHONE

11

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986

FIG. 5

NOISEMEASUREMENT ARRANGEMENT WITH MICROPHONE POWIONS FOR RIVETTERS

7.4.2 Screwdrivers and Nut-runners 7.4.2.1 The machine shall be set up in the arrangements shown in Fig. 7 and 8. The noise measurement shall be carried out as below: a) Machines without clutches or machines with automatic means for complete disengagem.ent of the motor or automatic means of shut-off of the motor shall be tested as in 7.4.1.
12

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986
Machines with clutclters that continue to ratchet when the set torque has been reached shall be tested either running free or in the ratchetting condition, with the clutch set at 50 pcrccnt maximum torque and run with the output shaft stationary.

FIG. 6

NOISEMEASUREMENT ARRANGEMENT WI'III MICROFHCXE POSITIONS FORTAMPERS
13

IS

: 11702( Part 1 ) - 1986

FIG, 7

NOISE MEASURWENT ARRANGEMENT WITH MICROPHONE POSITIONS FOR ROT,IRY AIR MACHINES RUNNING FREE

14

IS I 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986:

Positions 5 and 6 after rotamg grinder through 90"

NOTE -

The machine may be held in a support.

FIG. 8

NOISE MEASUREMENT ARRANGEMENT WITH MICROPHONE RJSITIONS FOR LOADED ROTARY AIR MACHINES

15

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986

Pro.

9

NOISE MEASUREMENT ARRANGEMENT U'ITI~ MICROPHONE POSITIONSFOR AIR MOTORS OR WINCHES

7.4.3

Im?act Wrenches The machine shall be set up in the be measured arrangement machine shown in

7.4.3.1 Fig. 11.

7.4.3.2 The noise shall operating conditions, nemely: a) Running free;

with the

in two

b) Loaded SO that the output shaft rotates at less than 50 rev/min. The noise produced by the energy-absorbing device shall be at least 10 dB below the noise output of the machine itself in each octave band of interest. An example of a suitable test set-up is shown in Fig. 12.

16

IS : 11702( Part 1 ) - 1986

FIG. 10

NOISE MEAXJREMENT ARRANGEMENT WITH MICROPHONE POSITIONSFOR Punts

17

IS : 11702~( Part 1 ) - 1986

NOTE- The machinemay be held in a support. FIG. 11 NOISE MEASUREMENT ARRANGEMENT WITH MICROPHONE POSITIONS FOR IMPACTWRENCHES

Fig.

7.4.4.1 13.

The machine

shall be set up in be measured

the arrangement

shown

in

7.4.4.2 The noise shall ting positions, namely:

with the machine

in two opera-

running free; at rated load and rated speed. The load conditions may be applied by actual weight or by an energy-absorbing device. The noise produced by this device shall be at least 10 dB below the noise olltput of hoist itself in each octave band of interest. 18

IS : 11902 ( Part 1 ) - 1986

Friction block: maPIe. oak or 0th

\-

Rubber padding

FIG. 12 8, NOISE

EXAMPLE OF TEST FOR LOADING IMPACT WRENCHES

MEASUREMENT

8.1 Test Environment
8.1.1 Free Field Over a Rejecting Plane Outdoors

8.1.1.1 A suitable test area will be a hard reflecting surface of such diameter that all microphone positions are within its perimeter. A qualified procedure for determining the adequacy of the acoustical environment and methods for determining the environmental correction factor, if necessary, are given in Indian standard on determination of sound power levels of 19

IS : 11702( Part 1) - 1986
method for free-field conditions over a reflectnoise sources - Engineering ing plane ( underfmparation ). For indoor measurements, it is recommended to use either the absolute comparison test using a reference sound source or the reverberatiou test, and, for outdoor measurements, the absolute comparison test, is recommended. 8.1.1.2 The presence of large objects, such as buildings and machines, within a radius of 10 m from the acoustic centre of the machine being tested shall be avoided.
NOTE - Care shall also be taken to ensure that gusts of wind do not distort the results of the measurements. A microphone wind-screen shall be used, if necessary; in this case, a specified calibration correction may be required. Wind speed should not exceed 8 m/s.

.

Geometric centre at 1 m

FIG. 13 NOISE MEASUREMENT ARRANGEMENT WITH MEROPHONE POYITIONS I;OR HOISTS ( TIIE CEILING IS REGARDED AS THE REFLECTING PLANE ) 20

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 8.1.2 Indoor hrensurement The test room shall have a reflecting floor meeting the of 8.1.1 for the reflecting plane outdoors. The room shall be accordance with Indian standard determination of sound of noise sources - Engineering method for free-field condireflecting plane ( under preparation ), for the position used for being tested. Noise

8.1.2.1 requirements qualified in power levels tions over a the machine 8.2

Background

8.2.1 The "sound pressure level of the background noise with the machine being tested when not running shall be determined for small machines ( largest dimension, maximum 1 m ) at one position and, for large-machines, at all of the microphone positions to be used during the tests. The position and level shall be noted down in the test report. The period of measurement shall be long in relation to any fluctuation in the background sound pressure level observed so that a correct average reading can be obtained with the `slow' response setting of the sound level meter.
NOTE - Noise generated by the machine being tested is not necessarily radiated by it, for example, the noise radiated from the accessory and concrete block when testing paving breakers. When this noise is part of the normal working operation of the machine being tested, such noise should not be included in the background noise. Where the noise is not part of the normal working operation, for example, noise from the artificial load when testing air motors, it should be included in the background noise.

8.2.2 The readings at each position, with the machine running should preferably exceed the background sound pressure level by at least 10 dB in each octave band of interest. If the difference is less, corrections shall be applied as shown in Table 2.

TABLE

2

CORRECTIONS

TO BE APPLIED CORRECTION TO BE SUBTRACTED FROM SOUND PRESSURE LEVFL MEASURED WITHSOUNDSOURCEOPERATINOTO ORTAIN SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL DUETOSOUNDSOURCEALONE dB 1.0 1'5

DIFFERENCEBETWEEN SOUNDPRESSURE LEVELMEASUREDWITHSOIJNDSOURCE OPERATINQAND BACEUHOUNDSOUND PRES~URELEVRL ALONE dB 6 to 8 9 to 10 Greater than 10

0

21

IS : 11702 ( Part 1) - 1986 8.2.3 If the difference between the measured sound pressure level and the background sound pressure level in any octave band in A-weighted level is less than 6 dB, a valid result cannot be obtained in that octave band according to this part. The survey method specified in Indian standard on determmation of sound power levels of noise sources - Engineering method for free-field conditions over a reflecting plane ( under p~eparution ) may be used. 8.3 Measurements 8.3.1 General

8.3.1.1 Observers and measuring instruments shall be at least 1 m behind the microphone and further than that from the machine being tested. Care shall be taken to ensure that operating personnel do not come between or in line with the machine and the microphone while readings are being taken so as not to impair the validity of the mcasurements. 8.3.2 Readings to be Taken

8.3.2.1 The following measurements shall be made at each microphone position as specified in 8.3.3, with the machine being tested when running as laid down in 7.2 to 7.4: a) sound pressure b) octave 8.3.2.2 setting. 8.3.3 The Icvel, using the A-weighting levels; network; and network. band pressure using the ` flate ' response

sound level meter shall be used on the ( slow ' response

Microfihone Positions

8.3.3.1 ~There shall be at least five key positions at 1 m from the machine. Four positions shall be equally spaced 1 m from the outline of the machine on a surface at right angles to the major axes of the machine and passing through its geometric centre. The fifth position shall be 1 m from the major outline of the machine on its major axis away from the workpiece. 8.3i3.2 The centre line of the exhaust of the machine being tested shall be equidistant from two measurement positions. If the exhaust impinges directly on a microphone, this would distort the measurement and hence make that measurement meaningless. In order to obtain the four measurement points in this case, they shall be selected as uniformaly spaThe microphone positions shall be ced as possible around the machine. 22

.

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986
clearly illustrated in the test report. Any microphone position between the machine and the reflecting plane shall be omitted. If a machine is norrnally used both vertically and horizontally, preference shall be given to the position that results in the simplest loading device and acoustic environment ( see Fig. 14 ).

Positions 1 to 5 are the key positions Positions 6 to 9 are the additional positions FIG. 14 MICROPHONE POSITIONS

8.3.3.3 The four additional positions ( positions 6 to 9 in Fig. 14 ) should be used ifit is shown that the result so obtained deviates by more than 1 dB from the value obtained using five microphone positions. 8.3.3.4 tools should In order to enable the repeatability of readings, be tested operating vertically, if possible. all percussive

8.3.3.5 If loading conditions so demand, it is permissible to rotate the machine with respect to the microphone instead of moving the microphone with respect to the machine. 8.3.4 Measurement Technique in 8.3.3,

8.3.4.1 With the microphone in each of the positions given sound pressure levels shall be recorded as specified in 8.3.2.

8.3.4.2 The period of measurement should be long in relation to any fluctuation of sound pressure level observed in order to obtain an estimate of the level to an accuracy of f 5 dB. If the indicating meter of a sound

23

IS : 11702 ( Part 1) - 1986 If the fluctulevel meter is used, the ` slow ' characteristic shall be used. ations of the indicating pointer on the sound level meter are less than &3 dB, using the ` slow ' meter characteristic, the noise is considered to be steady for the purposes of this part and the level is taken to be average of the maximum and minimum levels during the period of observation. If the meter fluctuations during the period of observation are greater than f3 dB, the noise is considered to be non-steady and the procedures outlinedin Appendix B shall be tised. 8.3.4.3 The microphone shall be directed turer's recommendations for obtaining the response. according to the manufacmost uniform frequency

NOTE - If the noise from the machine being tested contains strong audible discrete-frequency componrnts, errors in the measurement results may occur. Where the discrete-frequency components are of high frequency, the errors can be reduced by slowly raising and lowering the microphone position. During the movement, care shall be taken to avoid the generation of noise, either mechanical or aerodynamic in If the moving microphone techniorigin, which could influence the measurements. que is used, this shall be reported.

9. CORRECTIONS 9.1 Application

AND CALCULATIONS of Corrections corrections and wind-screen correc-

9.1.1 Instrumentation calibration tions shall be applied, as appropriate. 9.1.2 Readine;s shall be corrected in accordance with Table 2. 9.2 Calculation sure Level 9.2.1

for the influence

of background Sound

noise Pres-

of Sound Pressure

Level and Surface

Sound Pressure Level Averaged

Over the Measurement

Surface

9.2.1.1 The sound pressme level averaged over the measurement surface, either A-weighted or the values for each octave band of interest, is calculated according to either of the two methods below. 9.2.1.2 If the spread ~between the readings for one set of microphone positions in accordance with 8.3.3 does not exceed 5 dB, the surface level can be obtained by arithmetically averaging the readings.
Nwr11:- `The deviation from the average calculated below is not more rhan 0.7 dB, from the actual mean. according to the formula

24

IS : 11702 ( Part

1 ) - 1986

9.2.1.3 If the spread exceeds 5 dB, the sound pressure level or band in decibels, is calculated using the following formula: pressure level, L,,, L,, -L antilog $ + antilog + + __+ antilog $I_N ( L1 is the A-weighted or band pressure level at microphone position No. 1, in decibles, corrected in accordance with 9.1; is the A-weighted or band pressure level at microphone position No, n, in decibels, corrected in accordance with 9.1; and is the number of microphone positions at a given distance. = 10 log

)I

L, X 9.2.2

Surface Sound Pressure Level

9.2.2.1 The surface sound pressure level, LPI, is obtained by correcting the value L,, for reflected sound to approximate the sound pressure level which would have been obtained under free field conditions. L,f = L,, x

where EC is the environmental correction, in decibels, as determined by one of the procedures specified in Indian standard on determination of sound power levels of noise sources - Engineering method for free-field conditions over a reflecting plane (under prejmrahon) for test environments meeting the requirements of 8.1.1, K = 0. of Kis 9.2.2.2 For the purpose of this part from -2 dB to +-2 dB. OF THE SOUND Surface the maximum allowable range

10. CALCULATION

POWER

LEVEL

10.1 Area of the Measurement

lO.l;l For the purposes of calculating sound power level, the area S, of the measurement surface, in square metres, shall be calculated from the formula: S=4(ab+bc+ca) where 2a is the width, in metres, of the measurement mally the width of the machine plus 2 m ); surface ( nor( nor-

26 is the depth, in metres, of the measurement surface mally the depth of the machine plus 2 m ); and c is the height, in metres, of ( normally equal to the height ground plus 1 m ). 25

the measurement surface of the machine above the

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 10.2 Calculation Band Power of A-weighted Levels Sound Power Level and Octave

10.2.1 The determination method specified in this part

of sound power levels complying with the has an uncertainty in accordance with 4.

10.2.2 The A-weighted sound power level or the octave band power level, L,, m decibels, of the machine being tested is given by the formula:

L,
where

= Lpf + 10 log +(
0

1

L Pi is the surface sound pressure

level or surface pressure level of the machine being tested, in decibels, calculated in accordance with 9.2, in square metres,

S is the area of the measurement surface, calculated in accordance with 10.1; and So is equal to 1 mz. 11. TEST REPORT shall include at least the following

11.1 The test report

information:

4 the reference 1,) a description
and serial

to this standard; being tested ( including make, model

of the machine number ) ;

c) 4 e)

the operating conditions ( including ambient temperature, wind speed and air pressure at the machine ) and nature of energyabsorbing device; a sketch showing the test layout, pinpointing the microphone positions and indicating the direction and distance to large objects within the test area; the make, model and serial number of the acoustic instrumentation used, including any device used for protecting the microphone against the effect of wind; A-weighted background sound pressure level, in decibels, and octave band pressure levels of the background noise at one microphone position ( which shall be indicated on the sketch );

f 1 the 9)

the sound pressure level and octave band pressure levels at each in the table in the test microphone position at 1 m, reported report ( after the corrections for background noise and windscreening have been made );

26

IS : 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986

h) .i) k) 6
The

the environmental the test report;

correction

factor,

to be stated by the

in the table environmental octave

in

the surface sound pressure correction factor;

level, corrected

graphs giving surface sound pressure level and surface pressure levels at a distance of 1 m; the area of the measurement the sound power levels, surface; A-weighted

band

PI graphs giving sound power level and octave band power levels. recommended format for the test report-is shown in Appendix A.

n>

and in octave bands;

and

APPENDIX

A

( czauses 0.5 and 11.1)
FORMAT FOR HAND-HELD Report 1-A. The following noise test TOOL REPORT

on Tool Noise Test has been carried out/made in accordance

with this standard. 1. Description of Tool _.. . . .

Manufacturer: Model: Rated ._. . . . speed

...

. . . ._. . . . ...

. . . . . . ._. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._
Serial No . . . . . _.. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .
l

. . . . . . . . . . . ._. and capacity:

. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . ..f - . . ..a. . . . . . .A . . .. . .. .. . ... ... .. . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Description: 2. Operating 2.1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . * ,.....

Conditions frequency, bar: r/min: ...................

On load-Rotational/blow Air pressure supplied,

.........

............

Air flow, I/s: .................

2.2 2.3

Running Nature

free-Speed,

rev/min: ................................................ device: 27 ................... *. ...................

of energy-absorbing

fS t 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986

3. Test Conditions Barometric Reflecting Remarks: 4. pressure, plane, bar: . ..~.. . . . Ambient temperature, "C: . . . . . . . . . Wind speed, m/s: . . . ._. .._ . . . . . . . . . . . . ,..._. . . . . . . composition and dimensions, _._. . . . . . . . . . . . ._.

. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .
m: ..* . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .- . . . . . . *... . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .., . . .

Instrumentation Microphone: Octave Other, . . . ,.. . . .-. . . .

. . . . . . . . . * .. . . . .

Serial

No. : _ . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Sound level meter: Calibrator: for recorder: 5. Test Layout

._. . -. ,.. .-. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Serial No. : . . . . . . . -- . . . . . . . . . Serial Serial No. :... . .._.. . . . . . . . . . No. : _.. . . . . . .. . . . . . . .

band analyser: example

_ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . *. . . Serial No. : -- . . . . . . . . . . ..a..
wind-screen or

. . . . . .~... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a... . . . . . . - . .._......

Area of the measurement

surface,

ms: .._..............

* . . . . . . . . . .v . . . . . . . . . .

Sketch showing microphone positions, orientation of machine, direction of exhaust, direction and distance to large objects near machine being tested.

Height

above

reflecting

plane:

............................................... position diagram Date: Date: No.:

Background The test page. results

noise measured are given in

at microphone the table and

...............
following

on the

Reported Approved

by: . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . ,...

. . . . . . . . . .-. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.

by: .._ ,.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

... ... ... . ... .., ... ... ... ...
L .

28

IS I 11702 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 Sound Pressure
Microphone Test conditions position
NO.

Levels at 1 m Distance

Graph of Sound Pressme
frequency. loo0 Hz Zoo0 4C00 8ooO

or Sound Power Levels

A-weighted sound
sure

preslevel 63

B,and centro 125 250 500

dB

Background Micmphone coriected if any

noise 1 2 3 4

,

I

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

readings, for background

npise and wind-screen,

OCTAVE

BAND

CENTRE

FREQUENCY

NOTE

-

Readings

that need correction

for background

noise shall be shown

in parentheses

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 11782 ( Part

1 ) - 1986

APPENDIX B ( C2ause 5.1 )
EXAMPLES B-l. General OF SUITABLE JNSTRUMENTATION SYSTEMS

Basically, the instrumentation system consists of a microphone, an amplifier with filters, a squaring and averaging circuit and an indicating device. There are several methods of processing of conditioning the filter outputs that may be used to obtain an estimate of the mean-square value of the output. These include use of detection equivalent to RC-smoothing, integration of the squared value of the filter outputs and digital methods. Some general aspects are described below.

B-l.1

RC-smoothing,

Sound

Level

Meter
with.

Many analogue IS : 9779-1981*

devices, including use RC-smoothing.

a sound level meter in accordance average pressure

For the sound level meter set on `slow' response, the meter deflection is close to the mean-square sound fluctuations are less than 5 dB.

value of the level if the

on the sound level meter shall have a uniform freNOTE - The microphone quency response at the angle of incidence specified by the manufacturer. A condenser microphone with a diameter of 13 mm will be suitable for this purpose. The micronhone and its associated preamplifier ( if any ) shall be placed in the test room and connected with the sound lcvcl meter by a cable that complies with the reqirements of 5.1.The system shall be calibrated with the cable inserted between the preamplifier and the sound level meter.

The sound level meter and the observer shall be located in a room adjacent to the test room. The sound level meter shall bs set on `slow' response and the readings taken described in 8.3.4. Other analogue devices can provide smoothing with longer and shall be used if the fluctuations exceed 5 dB. B-l.2 time-constants

Analogue

Integrators
analogue integrator that

Another approach to r.m.s. detection is the `true' computes ( approximately ) the integral:

where e, (t) is the filter output. *Specification for sound level meters.

31

IS : 11702 ( Park 1 ) - 1986
The square and square roots are usually achieved by non-lin-ear analogue elements. The integral may be computed either by conversion of e,(t) to a current and accumulation of charge on a capacitor or by counting the number of cycles in a signal the frequency of which is proportional to 4 (4 * B-l.3

Digital Systems

The r.m.s. value of the filter outputs may be determined by sampling, conversion to digital values, squaring and accumulating the results. The sampling rate can be either: a) high compared output, or with the highest frequency present in the filter

b) relatively low compared with the highest frequency present so that the resulting samples are ( approximately ) statistically independent. In either case, the output of the detector after a specified time interval should be within 3% of the true r.m.s. value of the time function for all frequencies within the frequency range of interest. B-2. Level Recorders averaging and indicat-

A level recorder may be used either as a squaring, ing device or exclusively as an indicating device.

In the first case, the time-constant of the instrumentation system is determined by the writing speed of the level recorder. Since the level recorder is a complicated electromechanical system, a simple rule for the determination of the resulting time-constant cannot be given. It is advisable to consult the manufacturer on this matter. If the level recorder is used for indication only, the recorder will normally be set for recording of the d.c. output of a preceding squaring and averaging device, the time-constant of which will determine the resulting timeconstant of the instrumentation system. In both cases, approximation 5 dB. the avrrage to the r.m.s. value obtained will only be value if the pen fluctuations an acceptable are less than

32

