IS 3023 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


IRA AAP 
ata Bepa ant fdfesu.sm d fen aqeifta ea 
( Weel Jero ) 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENED PRACTICE FOR BUILDING-UP BY 
THERMAL SPRAYING 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 25.160.10 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


October 2013 Price Group 7 


Welding Applications Sectional Committee, MTD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Welding Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council 


This standard was first published in 1965. While reviewing this standard in the light of experience gained during 
these years, the Committee decided to revise it to bring it in line with the present practice. 


Metal build-up is a rapid and effective method that can be used to apply almost any metal to a base material. It is 
used to restore worn mechanical equipment, to salvage mismachined or otherwise defective parts, and to protect 
metals against corrosion. Compared to original component replacement costs, metal build-up is a low-cost, high- 
quality method of restoration. 


There are two major fields in which thermal spraying find applications, namely, for providing protection to 
surfaces against corrosion and for building-up surfaces to desired dimensions. In this standard, it is intended to 
deal only with the latter aspect. 


This standard covers recommendations for build-up by thermal spraying. The processes covered are flame spray, 
high velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), wire arc spray and plasma spray. The consumables like wire, powder and gases 
are also covered. The surface preparation prior to spraying which is an important step is covered. Post spraying 
operations and quality control are also covered. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to the standards and practices prevailing in 
different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This is met by basing the 
standard on the following publications: 


a) Thermal Spraying-Practice, Theory and Application, AWS Publication-1985. 


b) ASTMC 633-01(2008) — Standard test method for adhesion or cohesion strength of thermal spray 
coatings. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3023 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENED PRACTICE FOR BUILDING-UP BY 
THERMAL SPRAYING 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers recommendations for building- 
up by thermal spraying. The processes covered are 
flame spray, high velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF), wire arc 
spray and plasma spray. The consumables like wire, 
powder and gases are also covered. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provision which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard listed below: 


IS No. Title 
3073:1967 Assessment of surface roughness 


3 SURFACE PREPARATION 


3.1 Surface preparation is the most critical step in a 
thermal spray operation. Coating adhesion quality is 
directly related to the cleanliness and the roughness of 
the substrate which depends on the mechanical 
interlocking of the first layer to the interstices of the 
roughened surface. 


The heat of spraying will not remove contaminants, 
and contamination will inhibit bonding. Surface must 
remain uncontaminated by lubricants from handling 
equipment or body oils from hand and arms after it is 
prepared. The parts should be protected from airborne 
debris and fingerprints, and should be handled with 
clean fixtures and materials. The surface preparation 
is almost the same for all types of processes. 


3.2 Preliminary Cleaning 


Grease, scale, oil, paint and other foreign contaminants 
must be removed from the area to be sprayed as well 
as adjoining areas, since they stand in the way of proper 
adhesion of the sprayed metal to the surface. 


3.2.1 Solvent Cleaning 


A chemical solvent, such as, acetone, trichloroethylene 
or carbon tetrachloride or heating or combination of 


both methods should be employed for cleaning. The 
part should be soaked for a period of 15-30 min to 
remove oil from interstices and surface pores. If objects 
are too large for soaking then manual cleaning may be 
employed. 


3.2.2 Abrasive Blasting 


Dry abrasive blasting can be used to remove scales 
and oxides. Abrasive blasting is accomplished by 
directing a compressed air stream containing abrasive 
particles through a nozzle and against the surface of 
the substrate. Careful consideration is required in 
selecting the type and size of abrasive. 


3.3 Inspection After Preliminary Cleaning 


The surface should be carefully examined for freedom 
from cracks and other flaws. This shall be done with 
nondestructive inspection methods. Structural flaws in 
the part will produce similar flaws in the coating, thus 
rendering it unsuitable for repair. 


3.4 Roughening 


After cleaning several methods can be employed to 
produce a surface to which a sprayed coating will 
adhere. 


The principal methods are: 


a) abrasive grit blasting; 
b) macroroughening; and 
c) applying a bond coating. 


Combinations of these methods shall be employed. 
These include grit blasting with a subsequent bond 
coating, or machine roughening followed by grit 
blasting. 


The degree of roughness required for producing a 
sound and serviceable coating is dependent upon the 
material being applied, the process and the subsequent 
service conditions of the finished part. See IS 3073 for 
measuring surface roughness. 


3.4.1 Abrasive Grit Blasting 


Abrasive grit blasting is the most commonly used 
roughening technique. The surface to be coated is 
disturbed by impingement of abrasive particles. 


IS 3023 : 2013 


3.4.1.1 Factors influencing grit selection 


Care must be exercised in grit selection. Factors that 
must be taken into consideration for proper grit 
selection include the following: 


a) Part material and hardness, 


b) Part construction and thickness in the area 
being grit blasted, 


c) Part size, 


d) Type of coating and roughness requirement 
for good adhesion, 


e) Service requirements, 

f) Grit particle size, 

g) Blast pressure and nozzle size, and 
h) Ambient conditions. 


3.4.1.2 Abrasive grit type and size 


The effects of grit blasting depend on the type and size 
of abrasive. Sharp, hard, angular particles provide the 
best results. Spherical or rounded particles should not 
be used. All abrasives must be clean, dry and free from 
oil, or other contaminants. 


3.4.1.2.1 Abrasive grit types 


The most commonly used abrasive for grit blasting is 
aluminium oxide. It is cubic in shape. The hardness of 
virgin aluminium oxide is 76 HRC whereas that of 
reclaimed aluminium oxide is 66 HRC. Virgin 
aluminium oxide may be used on hard substrates, such 
as, martensitic steel. When used on soft substrates like 
copper and copper alloys, low blasting pressure shall 
be employed or subsequent air blasting may help to 
remove any embedded particles. 


3.4.1.2.2 Abrasive grit sizes 


Since the roughness of the finish depends on the size 
of the grit, abrasives are furnished in different grades. 
Smaller sized particles will allow for the preparation 
of more area per hour. Larger abrasive particles result 
in more rapid removal of material from the substrate, 
and produce rougher finishes. It is recommended that 
particles size should be 0.25-1.4mm for metal substrates. 
The general recommendations for grit size selection 
are given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Recommendations Concerning the Grit 
Sizes Used in Substrate Roughening 


SI Grit Grit Size Application 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Coarse -2000 +600 For coatings thicker than 250 Um 


and best adherence 
ii) Medium -1400 +425 For coatings thinner than 250 um, 
fair adherence and smooth surfaces 
—600 + 800 For coatings thinner than 250 um, 
used in 'as-sprayed' conditions (no 
finishing) 


ii) Fine 


3.4.1.3 Surface roughness 


The surface roughness required for most spray coatings 
is 25 um to 13 um arithmetic average (AA). For thin 
metal parts, roughness of around 1.3 um is 
recommended. 


Adhesion bond strength normally increases with 
surface roughness, although the rate of improvement 
decreases above 10 um. 


The best adhesion bond strength is associated with a 
roughness dimension comparable to three-fourths of 
the diameter of particles sprayed. 


3.4.1.4 Blasting procedures 


In addition to the abrasive grit type and size, other 
process variables of importance are air pressure, blast 
angle, distance, and time. 


All substrate areas that can be damaged by the blast 
operation must be protected by suitable masking 
(see 6.1). 


Dust or grit adhering to the substrate surface must be 
removed by air blast before starting a spraying 
operation. 


Air pressures for blasting are in the range of 30 to 
100 psi (2.1 to 7.03 kg/cm2), depending on the 
substrate material; the required surface finish; the flow, 
weight, and size of abrasive particles; and the machine 
and nozzle type used. Low blasting air pressures and 
soft or fine grit should be used for substrates, such as, 
aluminium and copper alloys, bronzes, to minimize 
the likelihood of embedding the grit. 


High air pressures, in addition to rapid breakdown of 
grit produce compressive stress which can distort thin 
substrates. 


Grit equipment used for metal spray should not be used 
for other purposes because dirt, paint, paint and 
lubricants contaminating the grit can redeposit on the 
grit blasted surface. 


Care must be taken to ensure that substrate is free from 
traces of residual grit which adversely affect coatings. 


3.4.1.5 Grit recycling 


Abrasives can be recycled, cleaned and screened so 
that they can be used again. When an abrasive is reused, 
it should be cleaned of dust and resized, with a 
minimum of 80 percent conforming to the original size 
requirements. Contaminated abrasive grains, or those 
of questionable quality should not be reused. 


3.4.2. Macro-Roughening 


Macro roughening is another surface preparation 
method usually accomplished by machining or 


grinding, and is performed in conjunction with grit 
blasting, the use of bond coating, or both. 


3.4.2.1 Undercutting 


Undercutting is the operation of machining or grinding 
away surface to provide space for the thermal spray 
deposit. It removes some good material as well as the 
damaged surface in order to provide uniform flat 
surface to accept the new coating. It is almost always 
necessary to undercut the surface to be built-up. 


This is done in order to allow for an adequate and 
uniform thickness of sprayed deposit on the finished 
job. 


It should also be carried out to remove metal from 
surface affected due to work hardening, chemical 
contamination, and oxidation. 


Undercutting reduces the effective cross-section of the 
part to be metal sprayed. 


Since sprayed metal deposits do not restore any 
qualities, such as, tensile strength or resistance to 
fatigue stress, all parts to be built-up by thermal 
spraying should be examined carefully from a design 
standpoint to determine that adequate strength is 
maintained in the part as prepared for thermal spraying. 


3.4.2.1.1 Procedure 


The undercutting is accomplished on a lathe or similar 
device by either machining or grinding to the required 
dimensions, care must be taken to see that the undercut 


UNDERCUT = 


ORIGINAL DIAMETER 


IS 3023 : 2013 


section is concentric with the original axis of the shaft. 


In cases where the degree of initial wear is such that 
adequate amount of metal needs to sprayed to get 
required thickness of metal deposit, machining or 
grinding should be done solely for the purpose of 
correcting the eccentricity in the wear. 


The undercutting operation should be preferably done 
dry, but where this is not feasible it should be followed 
by a further degreasing treatment and drying. 


3.4.2.1.2 Length of undercut 


The length of undercut section should generally extend 
beyond both ends of the sleeve, bearing or packing 
gland in which the shaft operates. 


3.4.2.1.3 Depth of undercut 


The depth to which the shaft should be undercut is 
determined by a number of factors, such as, the diameter 
of the shaft, the severity of service and the amount of 
wear to be expected in service. In general, the minimum 
specified depth of the undercut should be at least equal 
to the recommended minimum thickness of the coating, 
plus the wear or corrosion tolerance for the application. 
In any case it shall not be less than 0.5 mm. 


3.4.2.1.4 Ends of undercut 


The sprayed metal requires to be mechanically 
anchored into the base metal at the ends of extremities 
of the undercut section. The ends of the undercut should 
be at 15° to 45° to the base metal (see Fig. 1). 


MINIMUM COAT THICKNESS PLUS WEAR 
ALLOWANCE 


UNDERCUT 


Fic. 1 Enps DEPTH oF UNDERCUT 


IS 3023 : 2013 


3.4.2.2 Surface roughening 


The undercut section shall be roughened to ensure good 
bonding between the sprayed coating and the base 
metal. Before the roughening operation is commenced, 
1t should be made certain that all traces of oil, grease 
and other foreign matter on and adjacent to the undercut 
surface are removed. The cleanliness and roughness 
greatly affect the strength of the bond between the base 
metal and the sprayed coating. 


The roughening operation is carried out on a lathe. 
Narrow low pitch shallow grooves or threads are cut 
on the undercut surface. The work should be rotated 
such that 6 to 12 threads/cm, with a depth of 0.5 to 
0.8 mm each, are cut. A 90° cutting tool with a rounded 
tip should be used for this purpose. Large diameter 
shafts usually require coarser threads which would also 
be correspondingly deeper. The threading operation 
may be done in one or more passes or cuts. No coolant 
should be used and the surface should always be kept 
free from grease. 


In case of grooving the machining time may be reduced 
by use of multiple cutters which permit the making of 
several grooves at a time. Grooving should proceed 
from both ends towards the centre so that an outsize 
groove or land, if it occurs, is in the centre of the area 
to be sprayed. The grooving should cover entire length 
of the undercut section except for 0.6 to 0.9 mm at 
each end. 


3.4.3 Bond Coating 


The use of bond coating is another method of surface 
preparation, which is based on the fact that a thin layer 
of bonding material serves as an anchoring subcoat 
for subsequently applied coating layers. 


It is particularly applicable for substrates that are too 
thin or too hard to be prepared by abrasive grit blasting 
or macro-roughening. They are also applicable when 
size or configuration makes blasting or roughening 
difficult. 


3.4.3.1 Procedure 


The bond coating involves applying by metal spraying 
a thin coating of the bond coating material on to the 
surface. 


The surface should be clean, free from grease and 
slightly roughened with medium grade emery cloth. A 
light grinding cut or light grit blasting is usually 
adequate. Grit blasting is definitely of benefit in that it 
produces compressive stresses in the surface of the steel 
and offsets the tendency to the lowering of the fatigue 
strength. The bond coating should be sprayed coarse 
since such a coating provides a better key for the 
following coat. The operating conditions recommended 


by manufacturers of the thermal spraying equipment 
should be carefully followed. Since the bond coating 
material sticks even to smooth surfaces, it is necessary 
to mask areas adjacent areas of the portion to be treated 
with tape or a masking compound. Oil holes in the 
area to be treated should be protected by the use of 
carbon, wood or brass plugs and keyways by inserting 
a brass, bronze or carbon dummy key. 


3.4.3.2. Bond coat thickness 


The bonding material shall be applied sufficiently thick 
to cover the substrate, usually 0.08 to 0.18 mm. It 
should also be remembered that there is no practical 
economic or engineering advantage in a thick bond 
coating. 


3.4.3.3 Bond coat materials 


Commercially available bonding materials include 
nickel-aluminium composites and alloys which 
produce some metallurgical interaction with the 
substrate during spraying. Table 2 lists common bond 
coating materials and their service temperatures. 
Nickel-aluminium has good high temperature 
properties and can be easily applied to various 
substrates. 


Table 2 Approximate Maximum Dervice 
Temperature Limits for Bond Coatings 


SI No. Bond Coating Temperature °C 
d) (2) (3) 
i) 80 Ni-20 Al 620 
ii) 95 Ni- 5 Al 1010 
iii) 80 Ni-20 Cr 1 260 


3.4.3.4 Process specific bond coating 
3.4.3.4.1 Wire arc spray 


The inherently high adhesive bond strengths achieved 
with the electric arc process make it possible to 
eliminate surface roughening for certain applications 
by using bond coating of nickel-aluminium alloy. This, 
however, should be an exception rather than the rule. 
Surface roughening as described previously is always 
recommended. 


3.4.3.4.2. Flame spray 


Grit blasting and bond coating are usually required for 
most applications using flame spraying ( both wire and 
powder) because of the low heat of combustion and 
low particle velocities. 


3.4.3.4.3 Plasma spray 


Roughening (grit blasting) and bond coating are both 
essential for plasma processes. 


4 EQUIPMENT 


The certification and verification of equipment to apply 
coatings may be through calibration of meters and 
gauges, or through demonstration of coating 
application. A combination of these methods proves 
most suitable. Electrical meters are easy to calibrate. 
The instrument/ equipment shall be installed in a test 
rig and its performance evaluated against known 
standard. Gas flow and pressure gauges should be 
similarly calibrated with a known standard. The 
equipments used for different thermal spraying process 
are described below. 


4.1 Flame Spray 
4.1.1 Wire Flame Spray 


The equipment for wire spraying is shown in Fig. 2. 
A typical wire thermal spraying gun cross-section is 
shown in Fig. 3. The feedstock material is drawn by drive 
rolls into the rear of the gun. Suitable means of adjustment 
of feed speed are also provided. The rolls are powered by 
an electric motor, an air motor, or an air turbine. The 


COMPRESSED AIR 


GAS 
FLOW 
METERS 


OIL MOISTURE FILTER 


IS 3023 : 2013 


feedstock proceeds through a nozzle where it is melted 
by a coaxial flame of burning gas. One of the following 
fuel gases may be combined with oxygen for use in flame 
spraying: acetylene, propane, LPG or natural gas. 
Acetylene is widely used because higher flame 
temperatures are attainable. Table 3 gives the temperature 
attained by different fuel gas-oxygen combinations. A 
fuel gas flame should be used for melting only, and not 
for propelling or conveying the coating material. The 
flame shall be surrounded by a stream of compressed 
gas, usually air which atomizes the molten metal and 
propels onto the substrate. In special applications, an inert 
gas may be used. Oxygen and fuel gas flow controllers 
should be used to provide good control of the gas ratios 
and flame intensity. An adequate supply of dry air at 
optimum operating pressures shall be arranged. Care 
should be taken to prevent oil or water from mixing with 
compressed air to prevent fluctuations in the flame which 
results in poor or irregular atomization of spray material, 
reduce bond strength and affect the quality of deposit. 
Other ancillary equipments like pressure regulators and 
hoses must be arranged. 


WIRE 
CONTROL 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL WIRE FLAME SPRAYING INSTALLATION 


GAS NOZZLE 
WIRE, CORD OR ROD 


OXYGEN——* p~ Z ¿ <= 


— 


FUEL G6aS— 


ATOMIZING AIR 


AIR CAP 


SPRAY DEPOSIT 
BURNING GASES 
MOLTEN MATERIAL 


SPRAY STREAM 


41N.—10IN. 
102 TO 254mm 


PREPARED SUBSTRATE 


Fic. 3 CROoSS-SECTION or TYPICAL WIRE FLAME SPRAY GUN 


IS 3023 : 2013 


Table 3 Heat Source Temperatures 
(Clause 4.1.1) 


SI No. Source Temperature °C 
(1) Q) (3) 
i) Propane-Oxygen 2 640 
ii) Natural Gas-Oxygen 2 735 
iil) Acetylene-Oxygen 3 100 


4.1.2 Powder Flame Spray 


The equipment for powder flame spray is shown in 
Fig. 4. A typical powder flame spraying gun cross 
section is shown in Fig. 5. Powder flame spray guns are 


lighter and compact than other types of thermal spraying 
equipment. The coatings produced generally are of lower 
adhesive strength, lower overall cohesive strength, and 
higher porosity than coatings produced by other spraying 
processes. The feedstock is stored in a hopper may be 
integral with or connected to the gun. A small amount 
of gas is diverted to carry the powder into the oxygen- 
fuel gas stream, where the powder is melted and carried 
by the flame onto the substrate. Additional air jets may 
be used to accelerate the molten particles. In special cases 
a remote powder feeder with an inert gas can also be 
used to convey powder through a pressurized tube into 


GAS FLOW METERS 


POWDER HOPPER 


m 
= 
— 


POWDER 
FLAME GUN 


Fic. 4 TYPICAL INSTALLATION OF A POWDER FLAME SPRAY PROCESS 


POWDER 


NOZZLE 


4 IN.-10 IN. 
(102 TO 254mm) 


SPRAY STREAM 


SUBSTRATE 


i 
N 
N 
Š 


Fic. 5 CROoSS-SECTION OF A POWDER FLAME SPRAY GUN 


the gun. Such refinements tend to improve powder flow 
rate, bond strength and spray deposit density. Powder 
particle velocity and feed rate affects the structure and 
the deposit efficiency of the coating. Hence, proper care 
must be taken to heat the raw material, which will 
otherwise lead to decrease in deposit efficiency and 
trapping of unmelted particles in the coating. If the 
particle velocity is too low, some powder may be 
volatized and result in coating deterioration and increase 
in operating cost. A typical powder feeding device must 
contain a container and a metering device which 
regulates the feed rate of the material into the carrier 
gas stream. This process uses the same combustion 
principles as described for flame spraying with wire. 


4.2 High Velocity Oxy-fuel (HVOF) 


HVOF spraying differs from conventional flame 
spraying in that combustion occurs at higher pressure 
inside the gun, with the resulting flame accelerated 
along a nozzle to achieve very high velocities. Gas flow 
rates and delivery pressures are much higher. 


A schematic of HVOF is shown in Fig. 6. All HVOF 
spraying equipment uses oxy-fuel combustion to heat 
a coating material, in powder form, and to accelerate 
the heated particles to very high velocities before 
impacting with the substrate. The combination of high 
fuel and oxygen flow rates, and high pressure in the 
combustion chamber generates a supersonic flame with 
characteristic shock diamonds. Flame speeds of 
2 000 ms"! and particle velocities of 400-800 ms"! are 
typically obtained. A range of fuels can be used, 
including propylene, propane, hydrogen, acetylene and 
kerosene (a liquid fuel). The major differences between 
current commercial systems include: use of gas or 
liquid fuels; water or air cooling; axial or radial powder 
injection; combustion chamber configuration; and 
nozzle design and length. Operational differences 
comprise combustion pressure, fuel and gas flow rates 
and powder feed rates. These parameters will determine 


FUEL — o= 


POWDER —> 


OXYGEN — 


7 


IS 3023 : 2013 


powder particle heating time and temperature, and 
ultimately the coating quality. With appropriate 
equipment, operating parameters and choice of powder, 
coatings with high density and with bond strengths 
exceeding 69 MPa can be achieved. 


4.3 Wire Arc Spray 


The wire arc process uses two consumable electrodes 
which are initially isolated from each other but 
automatically advance to meet at a point in an 
atomizing gas stream. The arc initiation is done by 
application of potential difference between the two 
consumable electrodes, resulting in the melting of the 
electrode tips. The potential difference is around 
18-40 V. Usually compressed air is used as the 
atomizing gas which is directed across the arc zone. 
The compressed air shears the molten metal into 
atomized spray of molten droplets. This process is 
limited to wires made of materials that can conduct 
electricity. The components of the wire arc spray 
system are shown in Fig. 7. 


4.3.1 Arc Spray Gun 


The spray gun is illustrated in Fig. 8. The wire 
electrodes (1), are fed through the wire guides (2), and 
into the contact tips (3). The atomizing nozzle (4), 
conducts the compressed air (5), and directs it across 
the arc zone. Insulated power cables connect the gun 
to the dc power source. Arc guns also include 
mechanisms for feeding the wire at a controlled rate. 
Contact tips are sized for a particular wire diameter. 
‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ switches are provided on the gun to 
control the wire feed, compressed air supply, and 
electric power supply. The arc temperatures 
considerably exceed the melting point of the spray 
material. This leads to high particle temperatures and 
can cause volatilization particularly in aluminium and 
zinc. The high particle temperature produces 
metallurgical interactions or diffusion zones, or both, 
after impact with the substrate. These localized 


| COMBUSTION i 


[ TA 
| CHAMBER 


COOLING WATER 


Fic. 6 SCHEMATIC OF HIGH VELOcITY Oxy-FUEL PROCESS 


WORKPIECE 


IS 3023 : 2013 


COMPRESSED AIR 
AIR CONTROL 


DC 


POWER 
SUPPLY 


ARC 
SPRAY GUN 


Fic. 7 Wire Arc SPRAY COMPONENTS COMBINED INTO A SINGLE UNIT 


reactions form minute weld spots with good cohesive 
and adhesive strengths. Thus, the coatings develop 
excellent strength. The wire spray process normally 
has higher spray rates than other processes. The 
application rate depends on the current rating of the 
power source and the permissible wire feed rate to 
utilize the available power. 


4.3.2. Power Source 


A dc power source providing a voltage between 
18-40 V is recommended for wire spraying. Such a 
source permits operations with various metals and 
alloys. Constant voltage sources should generally be 
used, because arc gap and spray particle size increase 
with increase in voltage. The voltage shall be kept at 
the lowest level, consistent with arc stability, to provide 
smooth and dense coatings. 


4.3.3 Wire Control Unit 


The wire control unit is comprised of two reel or coil 
holders, which are insulated from each other. Wires of 
larger diameters are usually in coil form, while smaller 
diameter wires are preferably layer level wound on 
reels or in barrels. The unit is connected to the gun by 
flexible insulated cables. 


4.3.4 Control Console 


The control console incorporates the switches and 
regulators necessary for controlling and monitoring the 
operating circuits that power the gun. 


4.4 Plasma Arc Spray 


This process uses powdered materials and plasma as 
heat source. Plasma generators provide controllable 
temperatures well in excess of the melting range of 


CONTACT TIPS 


WIRE GUIDES 


Fic. 8 Cross SECTION SCHEMATIC OF AN ARC SPRAY GUN 


most substances. In this process, a gas or gas mixture 
is passed through an electric arc between a coaxially 
aligned tungsten cathode and an orifice in a copper 
anode (see Fig. 9). During heating the gas is partially 
ionized, producing plasma. The gas ions and electrons 
recombine as they exits plasma to form gas molecules 
again liberating heat. The powder is introduced into 
the plasma, melted, and propelled onto the work piece 
by a high velocity stream. The heat content, 
temperature, and velocity of the plasma jet are 
controlled by the nozzle type, the arc current, the 
mixture ratio of gases, and the gas flow rate. The arc 
operates on direct current from a rectifier type power 


TUNGSTEN 


ais " ELECTRICAL 


(JCONNECTION GAS (*)CONNECTION 
AND WATER OUT AND WATER IN 


ELECTRIC 
ARC 


POWDER AND 
CARRIER GAS 


IS 3023 : 2013 


supply. The electric power to the arc is governed by a 
central control unit that also regulates the flow of 
plasma gas and cooling water, and sequences these 
elements to allow the process to be carried out reliably 
and precisely ( see Fig. 10 ). Either nitrogen or argon 
is used as the primary plasma forming gas. A secondary 
gas, either hydrogen or helium, may be added to 
increase heat content and velocity of the plasma. 


5 CONSUMABLES 
5.1 Wires 


The wire used in spraying shall always be certified for 


SPRAY DEPOSIT 


— 
e 
—— atit 
— M — 
a 
a as 


— ss 
DIE ET. 
men 
T 
s m 
w 


SPRAY SYSTEM 


212 IN— 6 N. 
(64 TO 152 mm) PRPARED 


SUBSTRATE 


Fic. 9 SECTIONAL VIEW OF PLASMA TORCH 


POWDER AND 
PLASMA 
ES 


DC POWER SUPPLY 


AC POWER 
IN 


DC POWER 


UT 
INLET 9 


WATER 


PLASMA AND GAS CONTROL 


DUEL POWDER 
FEEDER 


me = 
ter — J 1 
= g A eS 
— = ae ie SY —À 


Fic. 10 CoMPLETE INSTALLATION OF PLASMA SYSTEM 


IS 3023 : 2013 


coating applications. Some of the requirements are: 


a) Chemical composition, 

b) Physical dimensions, 

c) Surface appearance, 

d) Physical condition and strength, and 
e) Camber or cast. 


The roundness and diameter of the wires have direct 
effect on sprayability and feed. Oversized wires may 
not feed properly. Care should be taken to check that 
the wires are not oval shaped or loose fitted, because 
they cause combustion gases to flow backwards, behind 
the nozzle, into the drive rolls. This may result in fire, 
explosion or both. Wire should be in the range of 
10. mm of the indicated nozzle bore diameter. 
Wrought spray stock should be clean, have a smooth 
surface, and be free of shavings, nicks, or kinks which 
may cause binding within the nozzle. The material 
should not be oxidized, corroded, or contain sulfides 
and other contamination which may affect the quality 
of the spray deposit. The wire should be free from 
drawing/extruding lubricants, such as, grease, oils and 
graphite. Wires are provided in coils or on spools. 
Standard sizes and tolerances of diameter for the wires 
are given in Table 4. The wire should not overlap itself, 
so it can be freely fed to the gun without knotting. The 
cast or curvature of the wire should not be tight. Wire 
with a tight cast, if not properly straightened, may cause 
binding within the spray head or wandering of the 
electric arc. The wire must possess sufficient ductility 
and strength that on bending or pulling, it does not 
break. Materials should be properly packed, for 
protection during storage and transportation. 


Table 4 Wire Diameters and Tolerances for 
Thermal Spraying 
(Clause 5.1) 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


SI No. Size Tolerance 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) 1.60 +0-0.05 
ii) 1.62 +0-0.05 
ili) 2.00 +0-0.06 
iv) 2.30 +0-0.06 
v) 2.50 +0-0.06 
vi) 3.00 +0-0.07 
vii) 3.17 +0-0.07 
viii) 3.48 +0-0.07 
ix) 4.00 +0-0.07 
x) 4.76 +0-0.07 


Where a choice of the metal to be sprayed is possible, 
that metal should be selected which gives a coating 
with the lowest shrinkage rate ( lowest co-efficient of 
expansion). An instance is the rebuilding of steel shafts 
where as general rule, high carbon steel (0.7 ) is 


10 


preferred to low carbon mild steel ( 0.25 percent ) 
which has a higher shrinkage rate and also oxidizes 
excessively during spraying with resultant tendencies 
to cracking. Where finished surface has to be of a metal 
with a high shrinkage rate and deposit has to be 
relatively thick, a metal having a low shrinkage rate 
should be chosen for building-up to within 0.5-1.0 mm 
of the finished size and the job may then be completed 
by spraying the desired wire having higher shrinkage 
rate. Where an 18/8 chrome-nickel stainless steel 
deposit is required to serve under corrosive conditions, 
it is necessary that the wire chosen should contain, in 
addition to these alloying elements, a stabilizer, such 
as, niobium or titanium. The use of molybdenum 
coatings must be restricted to building-up of only small 
amount of metal, such as, for instance restoring a press 
fit. In such cases, after initial bond coating is sprayed, 
further building-up is done with the coarseness of the 
spray reduced slightly by an increase of propellant air 
pressure. This results in a finer surface which may be 
finished speedily and more economically. Heavy 
thickness of sprayed molybdenum coating is not 
recommended both on considerations of cost and 
cracking of the deposit. 


5.2 Powders 


The powder feedstock must adhere to the same 
compositional requirement as that of the equivalent 
wire material. Powder though manufactured by the 
same method may be different from lot-to-lot. The 
differences may be particle configuration and size 
distribution. The quality of powders for thermal 
spraying depends on several basics. Many methods can 
be employed to manufacture powders, but the powders 
manufactured by the following two methods are 
recommended. 


a) Mechanical processing of solid metals, and 
b) Atomization of liquid metals. 


Particle sizes and shapes can vary both within and 
between methods of manufacture. All powder 
particles for similar chemical composition may not 
behave in the thermal spraying gun in a manner 
identical to differently sized particles. 
Characterization of each powder must be done in 
detail for successful reproduction. Materials should 
be spray tested using the thermal spray devices 
intended for their deposition. The particle size 
distribution, apparent density and rate of flow are 
important parameters of powder to be characterized. 
The particle size distribution can be characterized by 
any of the standard methods available. The apparent 
density and rate of flow can be measured by the 
standard all flow meter. Testing of thermal spray 
materials includes determining the chemical and 


physical properties of each material and its behaviour 
in the thermal spray gun. Sprayability testing includes 
feed and deposition characteristics, plus an evaluation 
of the deposited products. Powder should be free 
flowing to prevent clogging of powder feeders, 
injectors, gun nozzles, or feed lines. Feed rate or spray 
rate is a measure of flowability. This is expressed as 
gram per minute (g/min). When determining spray 
rate, equipment configuration and gas pressures and 
flows should be specified, as they would for the actual 
spray operation. To begin a deposit efficiency test, 
powder flow should first be started, and the powder 
feeder should reach full speed (rpm ), achieving a 
smooth flow rate. Conditions should stabilize within 
10-20s; powder is then collected in a clean container 
for a prescribed period, such as, 1 min or 2 min. 
Efficiency may wary with target configuration, size 
and amount of overspray. Deposition efficiency is the 
ratio of sprayed material adhering to a large surface 
compared to the amount of material sprayed. Material 
counted shall be confined within the borders of that 
surface. Deposit efficiency, expressed as percentage 
is the ratio of coating mass to the mass of powder 
sprayed. 


5.3 Gases 
5.3.1 Compressed Air 


Compressed air is the single most widely used gas in 
thermal spraying. The compressed air utilized should 
be proper quality to assure a reliable end product. 
Atmospheric air contains a wide variety of trace 
contaminants such as, water and oil. Typical operating 
systems include in-line water and oil filters located 
between the compressor and the spray device. These 
should be inspected and cleaned periodically to assure 
uncontaminated dry air. There should be an established 
in-house standard practice. The water content required 
for any particular grade of compressed air may vary 
with the intended use from saturated to very dry. If a 
specific water limit is required, it should be specified 
as a limiting dewpoint or concentration in ppm. 
Dewpoint is expressed at one atmosphere absolute 
pressure (101.3 KPa) in temperature degree Celcius. 
Techniques and instruments to determine dewpoint 
must be used to achieve greater control. 


5.3.2. Oxygen 


Water content and dewpoint both affect build-up 
quality. The user should establish in-house standard 
practices to maintain oxygen quality. Water content is 
determined as outlined in 4.3.1 and by using a dewpoint 
analyzer, in which the temperature of the viewed 
surface is measured at the time frost first begins to form. 


11 


IS 3023 : 2013 


5.3.3 Fuel Gases 


The fuel gases refer to the combustible gases used in 
the flame spray process. The more common gases are 
acetylene, LPG, propane, and natural gas as outlined 
before. These gases must have a minimum purity of 
90.6 percent. Acetylene should not have an excess of 
acetone vapours, because they lower the flame 
temperature and propagation rate. Acetylene should 
not be drawn off at a rate greater than 1.5 percent of 
the total gas available in the cylinder or at pressures 
greater than 103 kPa. 


5.3.4 Plasma Gases 


Plasma forming gases include argon (Ar), nitrogen 
(N5), and hydrogen (H,). Argon should be controlled 
for water content, dewpoint, and oxygen/nitrogen level. 
Nitrogen should be controlled for water content, 
dewpoint, and oxygen. Hydrogen should be controlled 
for water content, dewpoint, and oxygen level. 


6 THERMAL SPRAYING OPERATION 


6.1 Masking 


Masking is an extremely important step in the overall 
process of thermal spray coatings application. When 
specific areas of a part must be thermally sprayed, the 
areas that are not to be coated must be masked. The 
masking method and materials used need to be selected 
based on the spray equipment and automation 
employed to apply the coating. The choice of masking 
material for each job is essential to the ultimate 
integrity of the coating and the total cost to process 
the part(s). 


6.1.1 Masking Materials 


Commonly used masking materials are silicon rubber, 
Teflon? tapes, aluminium foil, heat-resistant paints, 
metal, rubber, fibreglass sheet and carbon plugs or 
brushes. Metal is typically used for HVOF masking 
because the velocity of the particles sprayed by many 
HVOF systems cuts through common tape and 
masking compounds. The details of the materials for 
the thermal spraying are given in Table 5. 


6.1.2. Process Specific Masking 
6.1.2.1 Flame spray 


Both wire and powder flame spraying utilize a flame 
to melt the feedstock and propel it to the substrate. 
The maximum temperature reached with combustion 
spraying is 2 500°C to 3 500°C. The masking materials 
used do not see the full effects of the temperature but, 
because of the flame, they should have the capability 
to withstand an open flame that will tend to heat the 
masking materials over 100?C. 


IS 3023 : 2013 


Table 5 Details the Various Materials Used for Thermal Spraying 
(Clause 6.1.1) 


SI Material Form Application Masking for Masking for Removal 
No. Grit Blasting Spraying" 
d) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Fibreglass Tape Manual Light only All Peel 
ii) Silicone rubber-coated Tape Manual Normal All Peel 
fibreglass 
iii) Aluminium foil Tape Manual No All Peel 
iv)  Teflon& Tape Manual No All Peel 
v)  Electroplater's tape Tape Manual No All Peel 
vi)  Stop-off Paint Brush or spray No All Water Rinse 
vii) Printer's ink Paint Brush or spray No All Degreaser 
viii) Rubber sheet or preforms Rod, sheet Manual All All Peel 
preforms 
ix) Rubber masks Moulded Manual All All Manual 
pieces 
x) Brush or spray rubber Liquid Manually spray All All Soften in solvent 
compounds and peel 
xi) Teflon? Rod, sheet Cut to fit No All Manual 
Place manually 
xii) Fibreglass Sheet Cut to fit No All Manual 
Place manually 
xiii) Carbon Rod, bar Cut to fit No All Manual 


Place manually 


"For processes other than HVOF. 


6.1.2.2 High velcity oxy-fuel (HVOF) 


The comments under flame spraying apply but, because 
of the velocity of the particles against the substrate, 
most masking materials other than metal cannot be 
used. The problem of spray build-up on mask can be 
eliminated by the use of acid and/or by mechanical 
removal for some of the materials. Masks made up of 
inconel and stainless steel though expensive can be 
reused. Masks made up of plain carbon steel should 
be discarded when the build-up of overspray becomes 
unacceptable, however, it is recommended to discard 
them after every job. Holes shall be masked with 
Teflon®, rubber plugs, or epoxy. 


6.1.2.3 Wire arc spray 


Because of the efficiency and high air flows of the wire 
arc spray process, the masking area is much cooler 
than with other spray equipment. A wider range of 
materials can be used due to the lack of flame. Care 
should be taken where thick coatings are applied, 
because heat from the high volume of sprayed metal 
can adversely affect any tape used on the part. 


6.1.2.4 Plasma spray 


The plasma spraying process melts powder in a partially 
ionized mixture at temperatures ranging from 5 000 to 
17 000°C. This requires the masking materials selected 
to be the most heat resistant. Because the masking tends 
to lose definition on its edges during blasting, a separate 
masking layer may be required for the blast in order to 
maintain definition of the mask edge. 


12 


6.2 Spraying Procedure 


The operating conditions recommended by the 
manufacturers of the thermal spray equipment shall 
be strictly adhered to. The practice of increasing 
spraying rates over those recommended by increasing 
gas pressures is, in particular, to be avoided since this 
could give rise to poor results. The gun or pistol should 
be started and adjusted with the spray directed away 
from the work. The work should be held in a device, 
such as, a lathe and made to rotate at a surface speed 
of 20 m/min. During spraying the pistol should be at a 
distance of 150 to 250 mm from the work depending 
upon equipment and size of wire used. The ends of the 
undercut sections should be sprayed first with the angle 
of impingement continually varying from about 30 to 
60 degrees and then the remaining surface shall be 
sprayed. Whenever possible the spraying shall be done 
perpendicular to the surface and in no case the spraying 
angle will be less than 45° ( see Fig. 11 ). Corners 
should be built-up from quarter to half the depth of 
undercut before proceeding further. The spraying 
process shall be continuous and rapid passes of 0.15 
to 0.25 mm thickness should be applied progressively 
along the length of the surface sprayed. It is necessary 
to put on sufficient metal to allow for finishing ( usually 
about 0.25 to 0.40 mm on radius over the finished size ). 
The temperature of the work should on no account, be 
allowed to exceed 150°C. Spraying should be stopped 
periodically if it is not possible by other means, to keep 
down the temperature within this limit. After spraying 
is completed, the work should be allowed to cool slowly 


to room temperature. The plugs for the oil holes and 
dummy keys for the keyways may be removed at this 
stage but where possible, it is recommended that these 
are not removed until the finishing operation is also 
over. 


7 POST TREATMENTS 
7.1 Sealing 


Thermal spray coatings usually have a structure with 
inherent porosity that ranges from less than 2 to more 
than 15 volume percent depending on the process by 
which the coating is deposited and the material sprayed. 
At least some of this porosity is interconnected. In 
many cases, coatings are exposed to corrosive fluids 
( liquids or gases ) or hydraulic fluids that can infiltrate 
the pores, resulting in fluid leakage or corrosion 
throughout the coating or of the base material. These 
conditions can contribute to the premature failure of 
the coating. Many such cases, therefore, require the 
coating to be sealed. Sealing a coating may also help 
to reduce particle pullout from the surface during 
finishing for coatings with low cohesive strength. 
Sealants are used on thermally sprayed machine parts 
to prevent corrosive attack on parts, such as, high 
pressure hydraulic rams, and on pump shafts to prevent 
fluid seepage into the packing. They are also sealed to 
ensure a better and cleaner ground finish. Sealing 
before grinding prevents debris from entering the pores 
of the coating and facilitates wash cleaning after 
grinding. The sealant materials generally used are wax, 
phenolic resins and methylacrylate. Wax is inert 
material used to prevent infiltration of liquids and to 
provide lubricity at low service temperature. It melts 
at 93°C. It is inert to salt and fresh water. It will not 
resist organic solvents and hydrocarbons, and when 
used in lubricated service will be gradually displaced 
from the coating pores by oils and greases. A wax 
sealant cannot be used for hydraulic rams with fluids 
which will dissolve it. 


Phenolic resins in solution are widely used as sealant. 
Composition variations are available in air drying and 
baking types. Service temperature for these materials 
range from 150-260°C. When the resin is cured it 
exhibits good resistance to organic solvents and weak 
acids. A typical use of air drying phenolics is the sealing 
coatings applied to high pressure hydraulic rams. 
Methylacrylate sealing coatings can be used in 
application up to 20 MPa and service temperature of 
around 150°C. They are resistant to water, oils, fuels, 
hydraulic fluids, and solvents. To ensure as complete a 
sealing of the coating as possible, it is necessary to apply 
the sealant material as soon after coating as possible 
and prior to surface finishing. Generally, the sealant 
shall be applied after spraying and before finish grinding 
or machining operations. For some applications, 


13 


IS 3023 : 2013 


Fic. 11 THERMAL SPRAY STREAM POSITIONS 


however, sealing shall be done after finishing. However, 
surface is less porous after machining and the measured 
penetration is significantly less. 


7.2 FINISHING 


Thermal spray deposits can be ground and finished in 
many ways. The method chosen can range from simple 
hand polishing operations, to hand grinding with coated 
abrasive belts, or to more complex machining, such as, 
use of precision grinders. Factors which influence the 
choice of finishing method include type of material to 
be ground, shape of part, finish and tolerance required, 
type of equipment available and economics. Generally, 
with most spray applications, the finer and more uniform 
the material applied, the better is the final finish. 


7.2.1 Machining 


Carbide tools are generally used on machinable thermal 


IS 3023 : 2013 


spray coatings. Tool angles, and surface speeds and 
feeds are critical in the success of the machining 
operation. Improper tool angles and tool pressure can 
result in excessive particle pull-out and destruction of 
the coating-substrate bond. Properly sharpened tools 
can machine hard fused coatings with relative ease. 
Machining of a spray coating shall start with the 
removal of heavy overspray at the end of the coated 
area. Rough machining of the coating is accomplished 
at the same or slightly slower speeds (surface feet/ 
minute) and with approximately twice the amount of 
feed (inches per revolution) of finish machining. The 
depth of the cut can range up to 0.76 mm thickness. 
Approximately, 0.13 to 0.25 mm is recommended to 
be left for finishing. Removal may require multiple 
passes. A properly sharpened tool will wear flat at the 
contact point. This flattening has the effect of smearing 
the metal and can actually provide a better finish than 
would result with a sharp tool with a radius. However, 
caution must be taken to not let this flattening become 
excessive which may result in rapid heat build-up and 
particle pull-out. Newer cutting tools like cubic boron 
nitride (CBN), oxide coated carbides, ceramics and 
diamonds are recommended for successfully 
machining very hard metals at faster rate. For optimum 
results when using these cutters, the use of rigid 
machinery is mandatory. 


7.2.2 Grinding 


Material finish and tolerance requirements may dictate 
grinding as the only practical means of finishing 
thermal sprayed parts. Machines commonly used are 
outside diameter grinders, surface grinders, and internal 
grinders. When using any abrasive medium to grind 
and polish, it must be kept in mind that thermal sprayed 
coatings are vastly different from the same material in 
wrought or cast form. If wheels of excessive hardness 
are used, or if they do not cut freely, individual particles 
can be pulled from the coating surface. Excessive 
grinding pressure should not be applied because the 
ductility of the sprayed coating is low which may result 
in shifting or displacement of the spray materials. The 
grinding variables include the wheel speed, work speed 
and area of contact. A proper understanding of these 
variables is essential to achieve optimum surface finish 
and manufacturer’s recommendation on same must be 
followed. Always use the sharpest wheel possible. 
Sharp wheels cut rapidly without overheating. The 
sharpness of the wheel depends on grit size and grain 
type. Generally silicon carbide or diamond must be 
chosen depending on the coating to be ground. Fine 
grit abrasives will penetrate hard materials easier than 
coarse grit abrasives. Grits normally used to grind 
sprayed deposits range from 37 to 180 um, although 
smaller sizes may be used to generate finer finishes. 
Choose wheels with structures and grades which 


14 


provide free cutting action. Wheel structure is related 
to the spacing between the individual abrasive grains 
within the wheel. Wheels with open structure tend to 
cut more freely. Harder wheel last longer but they cut 
more slowly, generate more heat and require more 
frequent dressing than softer wheels. Choose a bond 
type best suited to the operation and equipment. 
Vitrified bonds, because of their porosity, rigidity and 
strength can provide high stock removal rates and 
precision tolerances. Most vitrified wheels, however, 
are limited to a safe operating speed of 33 m/s. They 
should only be used if it has been ascertained that the 
operating speed of the machine does not exceed the 
safe operating speed of the wheel. Resinoid bonds are 
designed to operate at speeds of 48 m/s for diamond 
resin bonded wheels. They are used for rapid stock 
removal and to generate fine finishes. Although resin 
bonded wheels operate safely at high speeds, the 
machine speed should never exceed the indicated safe 
operating speed. A proper knowledge and 
understanding of both the machines and equipment is 
essential for achieving proper surface finish. The 
following additional guidelines must be followed to 
achieve proper surface finish: 


a) Use soft, free cutting wheels. Chances of 
burnishing and pull-out will be greatly 
reduced. 

b) Maintain the wheel face in a clean and sharp 


condition. 


c) 
d) 


Observe proper dressing techniques. 


Use coarse grit wheels for maximum stock 
removal and fine grit wheels for finishing. 

e) Attempting to generate fine finishes with 
coarse grit wheels that have been dressed 
closed can result in particle pull-out, 


smearing, and burnishing. 


Use light cuts. Sprayed coatings are usually 
very thin. Excessive grinding pressure can 
cause delamination of the sprayed surface or 
pull-out of surface particles. 

Do not ‘spark out’ on the final pass; this tends 
to glaze or dull the wheel face. 


g) 
h) Grind wet whenever possible. Improved 
finishes, less chance of burnishing, and less 
contamination will result. 

j) Use finer grit wheels on dense, hard to 
penetrate, sprayed coatings. 

k) Always keep the coating under compression. 
By cutting down through the sprayed surface 
towards the substrate, delamination and pull- 
out will be minimized. 

m) To a great extent, the effectiveness of the 
thermal spray coatings is dependent on the 


finishing techniques employed. 


8 INSPECTION 


Inspection is done after the finishing operations are 
over. Both destructive and non-destructive methods of 
evaluation can be utilized. 


8.1 Destructive Tests 


In destructive testing finished parts are destroyed and 
a sample of the coating is removed and prepared for 
metallographic examination. Although this provides the 
most accurate assessment of coating quality, it is often 
somewhat impractical when the coated parts are large, 
costly, or limited in number. In such cases, a sample of 
the coating should be sprayed along with the actual 
part and used for evaluation. Sample test coupons so 
prepared are designed to provide information on tensile 
bond strength, microstructure, bend strength, hardness, 
etc. Information gathered on separate sample coupons, 
however, will always be somewhat subjective because 
it is indirect; that is, the data may not represent the 
coating as it was applied to the actual part if spraying 
was done at a different time or more likely onto a 
different substrate shape or substrate material. If 
possible, the sample should be sprayed simultaneously 
with actual parts, using the same substrate material and 
surface preparation. The destructive tests performed 
on the test coupon are given below and for more 
information literature related to the same may be 
referred. 


8.1.1 Tensile Adhesion Strength 


The tension adhesion strength test shall be done. The 
bond tensile strengths in psi, ksi, or MPa are 
recorded. An absolute minimum of three tests shall 
be carried out, although five or more are better from 
statistical standpoint. The bond strength of the 
adhesive used must also be measured as a part of 
each test batch. After failure, the sample surfaces 
must be examined to study the locus of failure. This 
can provide insight into the nature of the failure, 
within the adhesive, at the coating substrate interface 
(adhesive failure), or within the coating (a mixed 
mode failure). 


8.1.2 Metallography 


Samples of the coating/substrate are sectioned, 
mounted, polished, and studied using a light optical 
microscope, generally at magnifications ranging from 
50 to 100x. From analysis of a polished coating cross 
section, density, melting efficiency (unmelted 
particles), oxide content and distribution, thickness, 
grain size ( which may require etching to reveal the 
grain structure ), bond-line integrity and microhardness 
can be determined. 


15 


IS 3023 : 2013 


8.1.3 Bend Testing 


Coatings shall be sprayed onto a 7.87 mm thick coupon 
and it will be bent over a 25.4 mm diameter shaft to 
—90° and examined for cracking, chipping, and peeling 
as indicators of bond integrity and coating ductility. 


8.2 Non-destructive Tests 


Such testing/examination is done directly on the 
finished part without damaging its appearance or 
functional capability. It is possible to test every part 
and achieve 100 percent quality assurance. 
Non-destructive testing does not always provide 
quantitative information normally gathered by 
metallography or tensile bond testing. One must know 
the limitations for detecting each important 
characteristic, such as, debond size or debonds along 
edges. Calibration standards for each material/ 
geometry are required. The non-destructive tests 
performed on the part are given below and for more 
information literature related to the same may be 
referred. 


8.2.1 Thickness 


When the substrate size and shape permit, simple 
calipers or micrometers can be used. Ultrasonic 
thickness measuring devices can be used on more 
complex geometries and for better accuracies. 


8.2.2 Surface Texture 


Visual inspection and stylus-tracing profilometers can 
be used for measuring the same. 


8.2.3 Micro-Hardness 


Vickers micro-hardness at 300 g load shall be measured 
and reported. The impression should be spread over 
several particles. A minimum of three readings must 
be measured and their average reported. 


9 HEALTH AND SAFETY 


There are some health and safety concerns associated 
with thermal spray coating processes, as with most 
industrial processes. In general they are similar to those 
associated with welding processes. All plant or 
laboratory directives shall be followed. None of the 
thermal spray processes shall be attempted without 
proper training of all of the personnel involved and 
careful consideration of any hazards associated with 
the particular materials being used to prepare for or 
produce the coating. Proper care and maintenance of 
the equipment, including all gas and electric lines, will 
greatly reduce any hazards. In addition, design and 
procedure reviews for safety by qualified engineers are 
advisable. These should include the ancillary processes 
of surface preparation, part handling, and finishing as 


IS 3023 : 2013 


well as the coating process itself. In general, the hazards 
of thermal spray operations are associated with the 
following: 


a) Gases, 

b) Liquids, 

c) Electrical equipment, 

d) Feedstock material, 

e) Fumes and dust, 

f) Heat, sound and light, and 

g) Robotics and other mechanical equipment. 


9.1 Dust and Fumes 


All thermal spray processes produce dust and fumes, 
so operators must be protected and the dust and fumes 
collected. When possible, the coating process shall be 
conducted in a cubicle equipped with ventilation and 
dust collection equipment and with the operators 
outside. Each thermal spray process has its own airflow 
requirement to provide adequate ventilation, and the 
equipment manufacturer guidelines shall be followed. 
Nonetheless, dust monitors should be periodically used 
to ensure that the ventilation system is working 
properly. If the operators must be in the cubicle or the 
coating must be done in the open, the operators should 
wear respirators. It is no longer considered adequate 
to rely only on air flow away from the operator to 
provide adequate protection. The type of respirator 
used depends on the material being deposited. The 
effluent from the dust collection system should be 
periodically monitored to ensure compliance with all 
regulations. 


9.2 Noise 


Noise generated by thermal spray processes ranges 
from about 80 dB for some of the flame spray processes 
to over 140 dB for plasma spray processes. Individual 
ear protection is adequate for the former, but the latter 
must be operated in sound-reducing cubicles. Actual 
sound pressure levels depends strongly on specific 
spray environments, such as, booth size, wall material, 
and construction details. Sound levels at the operator’s 
position should be measured and compliance with all 


16 


regulations ensured. In addition, all personnel in the 
vicinity of the spray operation should have their hearing 
checked periodically. 


9.3 Light Radiation 


The spectrum of light emitted by the thermal spray 
devices ranges from the far infrared to extreme 
ultraviolet. Excessive exposure to the bright emissions 
from thermal spray guns can cause both acute injuries 
and chronic conditions, such as, cataracts. Helmets, 
hand-held shields, face shields, and safety glasses or 
goggles should be used to protect the eyes, face, and 
neck during thermal spraying. Shade 5 lenses may be 
sufficient for some flame spray processes, but shade 
12 is required for plasma spray and wire arc. Fire- 
retardant, closely woven fabrics should be worn to 
protect the skin from burns. Burns can be caused by 
heated particles bouncing from the substrate, hot gases, 
or light. Ultraviolet radiation will burn exposed skin 
and penetrate loosely woven fabrics, causing burns 
similar to severe sunburn in minutes. 


9.4 Heat 


Thermal spray guns, especially high-velocity oxy-fuel 
( HVOF ) devices, generate substantial quantities of 
heat. Without adequate ventilation, the booth can 
quickly become overheated, and excessive heat can 
damage the ductwork and dust filter system. It is 
recommended that the total exhaust airflow be 
sufficient to keep the exhaust air temperature below 
40°C; however, exceptionally high flow velocities 
exceeding 91 m/min at the front face of the spray hood 
may interfere with the spray operations. Thermally 
insulated gloves and handling tools shall be used to 
handle hot work pieces and tooling. Cotton clothing is 
recommended as it does not melt and does not support 
combustion as readily. 


10 ACCEPTANCE LIMITS 


Acceptance limits related to the porosity, bond shear 
strength, etc, of the thermally sprayed coatings shall 
be mutually agreed between the thermal spray 
contractor and the asset owner. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 12 (4958). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western  : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


