**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 5575-1 (1970) : Temperature Control Devices for Quartz 
Crystal Units (Heating Type) - Part I : General 
Requirements and Tests [LITD 5: Semiconductor and Other 
Electronic Components and Devices] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISt$S7iri'trtl)*l9IO 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

It^ian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

TEMPERATURE CONTROL DEVICES |FOR 

QUARTZ CRYSTAL UNITS ( HEATING TYPE) 

PART I GEMEIIM RS^yiHiilll^f^TS ANO TESTS 



First Reprim NOVEMBER 198$ 
i toeofpomtei! AmeadoMsits No. I an4 2 ) 



UDC 62ri73'5 : 536 552 




fHlll4ll STAN0AE0S IHSTITUXION 
MAtiAE 8HAVAH« » BAHADUR $HAH ZAPAJi MAHO 

NBW DBUll nOQOS 

Gt ^ NoHmber 1970 



I8t557S(P»rtI)-l»70 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

TEMPERATURE CONTROL DEVICES FOR 

QUARTZ CRYSTAL UNITS (HEATING TYPE) 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 

Piczo-Electric and Magnetic Materials Sectional Qimmittee, ETDC 41 

C/mrnum Rtprtsmting 

Shbi T. V. Ramamcrti National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Mimbtri 

Sbri a. Bambbjck Directorate General of Research & Development 

( DGRD ) ( Ministry of Defence ) 
Srbi K. V. Bhatt ( Alunutt ) 
Dr R. R. DtTTTA Gupta Miniitry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri R. S. Yadat ( Alltnati ) 
Shm C. V. Gamapatht National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Sriii B. p. GnosR National Test House. Calcutta 

Dh K. S. Irani Semiconductors Limited, Poona 

Shri N. Ramakribhna ( AlttnuiU ) 
Shri K. R. D. Iyrmoar Indian Telephone Industries Limited, Bangalore 

Shri S. D. Mami {AlltmaU) 
Dr J. D. Janf Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR). Pilani 
Srri p. S. Kolhatkar Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Hyderabad 

Srri H. D. Kribhra Prasad Civil Aviation Department ( Ministry of Tourism & 

Civil Aviation ) 
Srri S. Kitmar Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangalore 

Dr DoirALD E. Morris Morris Electronics ( P ) Ltd. Poona 

Srri K. S. Niqapx { AUtrmU ) 
Shri P. K. Patwardrais Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri M. G. Rao Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Srri K. G. NARATAVAir ( All*maU ) 
Wo Cdr S. Rao Directorate of Technical Development & Production 

( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ) 
Srri V. B. Gvrtk ( AlumaU ) 
RssRAROR Emqwrrh Dircctorat* GenersJ, All India Radio, New Delhi 

KtTKARi B. H. Sbamta Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( Tele- 

communication Research Centre ), New Delhi 
Shri A. S. Sbarma The Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturer's 

Association, Calcutta 
Srri V. V. Krtxar ( AUtnal* ) 
Srri Y. S. VatfKATEawARAN, Director General, ISI ( Ex-tfficio M*mttr ) 

Director (Elec tech) 

Sttrttaiy 

Srri S. Muxbopadbtat 

Assisunt Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR BiARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS:3575( Parti)- 1970 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

TEMPERATURE CONTROL DEVICES FOR 

QUARTZ CRYSTAL UNITS (HEATING TYPE) 

FART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian StaniJard (Part I) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 13 February 1970, after the draft finalized by the Piozn- 
Eloctrir and Magnetic Materials Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Llectrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 The object of this standard is to specify uniform requirements for 
electrical, mechaniral and clinr.atic properties of temperatuie control devices 
for qiiatlz crystal tmits and to describe test methods. 

0.3 TJiere arc three main types of temperature control devices which may 
be used for qiiartz crystal units [see 2.1) and this standard covers only the 
Tvpe 1 devices in which the temperature is kept reb'ively constant by 
heating alone. 

0.4 In electronic circuitry, the same temperature control devices are used 
for manv applications. It should be noted that this stanilartl is restricted 
to (he use <vifh rrystal units and that for other applications, the adiliiional 
requirements ;ind peculiarities should be taken into account. 

0.5 The applicability of the tests to each type of temperature control device 
and the specific requirements for each test will b»' stated in the relevant 
specification for the individual temperature control devices. Should, 
howovcv, any ticviation exist between the provisions of ihis standard and 
those of the relevant individual specificarion, the provision of the latf pr shall 
prevail. 

0.6 This standard requires reference to IS: ."SfiQ-lOGl* so far as the details 
of the climatic and mechanical testing procechnes arc concerned, only the 
role\ant degi-ees of severities and the performance requirements have been 
specified in this standard. 

•B.-«jic climatic and mocKanical dm.i' t'uv i,.«ts l(,r • ' cuonic coniponcnli ( ritistd). 



ISi5575(PartI)-1970 

i.l In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from the 
following documents : 

lEC/TC 49fCentral Office)32 Recommendations for temperature 
control devices for quartz crystals units, Section one: General 
characteristics and standards. International Electrotcchnical 
Commission. 

lEC/TC 49( Central Office )34 Recommendations for temperature 
control devices for quarti crystal units, Section two ■. T<»st coi.JitioTis. 
International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the results of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded oiT value sliould 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the general requirements and methods of test 
forjudging the electrical, mechanical and climatic properties of temperature 
control devices (in which the temperature is kept relatively constant 
by heating alone) with fixed internal (crystal chamber) temperature for 
use with qxuiktz crystal units. It includes the associated electronic/ 
electrical circuits. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 General Temia 

2.1.1 Ttmperatun Cantrol Device for Crystal Units {TCD) — A device for 
containing one or more crystal units which will maintain the temperature of 
crystal unit(s) relatively constant under various mechanical, electrical and 
climatic conditions. 

Nora — Then are three main typei of temperature control devices for quartz cryital 
units at ipedfied bdow : 

Type I Devices by which the temperature i* kept relatively constant by heating 

alone. 
Type 2 Device* by which the temperature is kept relatively coniunt by cooling 

alone. 
Type S A combtnatioB of type I and type 2 above. 



'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( reeittd ). 

3 



ISt 5575 (Part I). 1970 

2.1^ Crystal Chambtr — The cavity of the temperature control device, 
occupied by the crystal unit(s). 

2.1^ Temptrature Stnsor — The temperature tensing element required for 
autontatic temperature regulation of the temperature control device. This 
may control the power input either directly or indirectly. 

Non — The power control of a crytui oven may be eiiiier a twitching device which 
iupplie* power intennittently to the he»ter, or • continuously varying device, which 
luppliet power to the heater enentially proportional (o the deviation of the crystal 
chamber temperature from it* pre-set value. 

2.1.4 Crystal Oven — Temperature rontrol device in which the temperature 
is controlled by means of heating, to com^^ensate for the heat loss from the 
device. 

2.2 Opcrattonsil Cli«ract«4stics 

2.2.1 Crystal Chamber Temperature — The instantaneous temperature exist- 
ing at the location of the crystal vibrator. 

2.2.2 Mean Crystal Chamber Temperature — The average between the 
minimum and maximum crystal chamber temperature when temperature 
control device is operated under constant operating conditions. 

2.2.3 Nominal Crystal Chamber Temperature — The specified mean crystal 
chamber temperature when the device is operated at 2T'C and at the rated 
voltage. 

2.2.4 Calibration Tolerance ( on Temperature ) — The permissible deviation 
of the mean crystal chamber temperature from the nominal crystal chamber 
temperature measured at 27°C and at rated voltage. 

2.2.5 Ageing Tolerances (on Temperature) — The tolerance allowed for a 
change of the mean crystal chamber temperature within a stated period of 
time when measured at 27°C and at rated voltage. 

2.2.6 Temperature Ripple — The difference between maximum and 
minimum crystal chamber temperature when the temperature control device 
is operated at constant voltage and at 27''C after the mean crystal chamber 
temperature has become stable. 

2.2.7 Rate of Change of Crystal Chamber Temperature — The quotient of the 
change of crystal chamber temperature and the time, for very short times, 
when the temperature control device is operated at constant voltage and at 
27''C after the mean crystal chamber temperature has become stable. 

2.2.8 Variation of the Mean Crystal Chamber Temperature Over the Operating 
Temperature Range — The difference between the maximum and minimum 
mean crystal chamber temperature over the operating temperature range 
measured under steady state conditions. 



IStSS75(PM:tI)-1970 

2.2.9 Rtduetion Factor — The ratio of change of ambient temperature to 
the correiponding change of mean crystal chamber temperature for ipecified 
changes of ambient temperature within the operating range. 

Z2.10 OvtrshootfUndtTshoot — That part of the transient change of the 
mean crystal chamber temperatur* which exceeds the limit values of the 
two steady states of the mean crystal chamber temperature before and after 
a comparatively rapid stated change in the operating condition(s) of the 
TCD (m Fig. 1 ). 

-OVERtNOOT 




tIMTS OF THE VAraATKW OP THE MEAN 
CRYSTAl CHAMBCR TEMP OVER THE 
OPERATmO TEMP RANOE. 



h^J^ Aar 



— .^ AMBIENT TE MP 

SUPPLY VOLTAOE 



TIME 

Fio. 1 LnoTS OF THB Variation of thb Mean Crystal 

QiAMBRR TllSPBRATtmi 



2.2.11 Switching Rait — The frequency of the switching cycle measured 
at a specified ambient temperature after the mean crystal chamber 
temperature has become stable (for TCD's with ON/OFF control only). 

2.2.12 Switching Ptriod — The mean time for one switching cycle measured 
at a specified ambient temperature after the mean crystal chamber 
temperature has become sUble (for TCD's with ON/OFF control only). 

2.2.13 Duty Cyclt — The ratio of the heating period to the switching 
period measured at the rated voltage and at specified ambient temperature 
(for TCD's with ON/OFF control only). 

Nora — Both tb« twitching rmt* aod th« duty cycto vary with th« anbiail 
tempatatur*. 

2.2.14 Warm-Up Tim$ — The time elapsed between the moment the 
temperature control device is switched on at the low limit supply voltage 



ISt5575(PartI)-1970 

and the moment the crystal chamber temperature reaches and remains 
within the specified limits for mean crystal chamber temperature, ripple, rate 
of change, etc, when the device is operated at a specified ambient tempera- 
ture within the operating temperature range. 

2.2.15 Maximum Power — The maximum input power that the temperature 
control device consumes at rated voltage and at the minimum operating 
temperature. 

2.2.16 Average Power — The power consiuned by the temperature control 
device when it is operated at rated voltage and at a specified ambient 
temperature within the operating tempei^ture range averaged over a 
sufficiently long time after the warm-up period. 

2.2.17 Ooer Temperaturt — The difTerence between the mean crystal 
chamber temperature and the ambient temperature. 

2.2.18 Heat Loss Per Degree Celsius Over Temperature — The average power 
consumed by the temperature control device divided by the difference of the 
mean crystal chamber temperature and the ambient temperature. 

23 Condiitloiu of Use 

2.3.1 O/xrating Temperature Range — The range of operating temperatures 
over which the temperature control device will function within the specified 
tolerances. 

2.3.2 Storage Temperature Range — The range of ambient temperature over 
which the temperature control device may be stored, handled and transpor- 
ted and thereafter still perform its correct operational function within its 
specified ratings. 

2.4 Type — A type comprises TCD's having similar design feature, manu- 
factured by the same techniques, and falling within the manufacturer's 
usual range of ratings for these devices. 

Note 1 — Mounting »ccc«ori«t are i%nor«d, provided they have no tignificant 
eflect on the teat reiultt. 

NoTB 2 — Ratingi cover the combination of ( a ) operational propertiet, ( b ) electri- 
cal ratings, ( c ) suet, and ( d ) environmenul group, 

2.4.1 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove conformity with the require- 
ments of this standard. These are intended to check the general qualities 
and design of a given type of temperature control device. 

2.5 Acc«ptasicc Tests — Tests carried out on samples selected fix>m a lot 
for the purpose of acceptance of the lot. 



I8t9575(PartI)-t970 

2.5.1 Lot — AIlTCD's of the same type, category and rating manu&ctured 
by the same factory during the same period, using the same process and 
materials. 

2.6 Roatine Tetits — Tests carried out on each temperature Control device 
to check the requirements which are likely to vary during production. 

3. STANDARD VALUES AND TOLERANCES 

3.1 Nominal Crystal Chsunber Tcmpcratorc — The nominal crystal 
chamber temperature shall be one of the following; 

50, 55. 60, 65, 70, 75, 80, and 85*0 

NoTji — When considering additioni or modificAtion* to the above temperatures, 
the (emperaturei listed in IS : 2916-1969* should be considered. 

3.2 Toleraim on the Cry»t«l Chamber Teuperatnrc — The 

preferred tolerances on crystal chamber temperature shall be one of the 
following: 

± 001 , ± 00?, ± 005, ± 0- 1 , ± 0-2, ± 0-5, ± 1 , ± 2 and ± 5 deg celsius. 

The values apply both to the total tolerance and to a partial tolerance 
(for example, calibration tolerance, ripple, ageing). In general the larger 
tolerances apply to the calibration and the smaller to partial tolerances. 

3.3 Opcradag Temperature Range 

3.3.1 Upp*T Limit — The upper limit of the operating temperatuire range 
is limited by the mean crystal chamber temperature. The difference 
between the upper limit of the operating temperature range and the mean 
crystol chamber temperature shall be not less than 5 deg C. 

3.3.2 LowtT Limit — The values for the lower limit of the operating 
temperature range shall be: 

0, -10, -20, -30, -40, and -5.5''C 

3.4 Rated Sapply Voltage — The rated supply voltages shall be: 

5, 6, 6-3, 12,12 6, 20, 24, 28, 30, 48, 60, 100, 115, 125, 220, 23G, 240 V dc 
or ac ( rms ) 

3.4.1 Tolerances on Rated Supply Voltage — The tolerances on rated supply 
voltage shall be: 

± 2, ± 5, ± 10, j; [5 and :!: 20 percent 



■Specification for quarts crystal units used in oicjllaton : Part I Gwieral requiremeots 
and tests. 



ISt5575(P«rtI).1970 

4. MATERIALS, CONSTRUCTION AND WORKMANSHIP 

4.1 Materials — Materials used shall be such as to withstand the high 
temperature attained due to any accidental fiiilure of the sensor element. 
Under these conditions, the materials shall not get permanently damaged, 
cause fire or emit smoke. 

4.2 CoBStnsctioii — Unless otherwise specified, temperature control 
devices for crystal units with metal holders shall have earthing facilities of 
these holders. It shall be so constructed, that it is convenient for the tuer 
to open the oven for replacing or inserting crystal, temperature sensor, etc 

43 W«rkssuuisJilp — The temperature control device shall be manufac- 
tured in a thoroughly workmanlike manner and in accordance with good 
engineering practice. 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Each temperature control device shall have the following information 
clearly marked upon it: 

a) Manufacturer's type number, 

b) Rated voltage in dc or ac (rms), 

c) Diagram of pin coimections, 

d) Nominal crystal chamber temperature in "C, 

e) Serial number, 

f) Maximum power consumption, and 

g) Country of nfianufacture. 

Nora — Thete ihould be space Tor marking the Trequency of the cry«tal(i) fittad 
into tbe teraperature control device. When more than one cryital unit i« fitted into 
the leniperattire control device, the spacet for maiking of the crystal frcquenciea 
thall clearly thow by tome meant which cryttal* are fitted in a given cryital potition. 

5.2 In addition to the above markings, the following particulars may also 
be supplied to obtain a complete definition of the temperature control 
device: 

a) Number and type of quartz crystal units for which the TOD is 
intended, 

b) Warm-up time, and 

c) Type of control. 

8 



IS:5573(PartI).I970 

5.3 The temperature control device may also be marked with the ISI 
Certification Mark. 

Nora — Tbe use of the ISI Certification Mark it governed by the provitioni of 
the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marlu) Act, and the Rule* and 
Regulation* n\ade thereunder. Pretence of this mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control during production. This system, which is devised and super* 
vised by ISI and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the 
products as actually marketed are continuously checked by ISI for conformity to 
the standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the 
ISI Certification Mark inay be granted to inanufacturen or processors, may be obtained 
from the Indian Standards Institution. 

6. TESTS 

6.1 Classification of TMts 

6.1.1 Type Tests — The procedure for type tests shall be in accordance 
with 15:2612-1965*. TTie minimum number of samples for type tests 
shall be 10 units of each type. The sequence of type tests shall be as given 
in Appendix A. 

6.1.2 Acceptance Tests — The acceptance tests shall be carried out on a 
limited numljer of samples selected in accordance with the sampling proce- 
dure given in IS : 2612- 1965* and which have passed the routine tests. 
Two groups of samples, one for non-destructive tests (group A) and the 
other for destructive tests (jtroup B) shall be selected in accordance with 
Appendix B of IS:2612-1965* and the samples in each group shall be 
subjected to the following tests in the order given below: 

Group A {For Non-destructive Tests) Group B ( For Destructive Tests) 

a) General examination (6.4.1) a) Mechanical tests (6.4) 

b) Electrical tests (6.3) b) Climatic tests (6.6) 

c) Operating characteristics (6.5) c) Endurance ( 6.7 ) 

d) Operation under faulty con- 
dition (6.8) 

6.1.3 Routine Tests — The following testa shall constitute routine tests and 
«hall be carried out on each temperature control device crystal. 

a) General examination (6.4.1) 

b) Dimensions ( 6.4.2 ) 



'Recommendation for type approval and sampling procedurei for electronic 
components. 



ISt5575(P»rtI)>1970 

c) Insulation reiistance (6.3.4) 

d) Average power ( 6JJ( ) 

e) Warm-up time ( 6.5.3 ) 

f) Check of switching action: 

1) For OXjOFF typt — After the warm-up has been reached and the 
oven stabilized, there shall be the switching ON and OFF of the 
heater element at regular intervals. This can be checked by 
monitoring heater current or by similar means. 

2) For continuous type — After the warm-up has been reached and the 
oven stabilized, the current drawn by the oven will vary slightly, 
which can be monitored by an ammeter or by similar devices. 
This ensures that the temperature is being regulated. 

6.2 General Conditions for Teats 

6.2.1 Selection of Samples — The samples for testing shall be so selected as 
to be representative of each type, category and rating. 

6.2.2 Atmospheric Conditions for Testing — Unless otherwise specified, all 
tests shall be carried out under standard atmospheric conditions specified in 
IS -589- 196 1*. 

6.2.3 Pre-conditioning — Before measurements are made, the TCD's shall 
be stored at the measuring temperature for a time sufficient to allow the 
entire unit reach that temperature. 

6.2.4 Mounting — Under consideration. 
6.3 Electrical Testa 

6.3.1 Maximum Power — The temperature control device shall be brought 
to the lowest specified operating temperature, and kept at that temperature 
until thermal equilibrium is obtained. Then the rated supply voltage is 
applied. 

For temperature control devices with ON/OFF control, the input 
power is measured during the ON-period. And this shall not exceed the 
maximum power specified. 

6.3.2 Average Power — The temperature control device is brought to the 
specified operating temperature, and kept at that temperature until thermal 
equilibrium has been reached. The rated supply voltage is applied. 



'Basic climatic and mechanical durability i«sM for elrctronic componenti ( rn iW ). 

10 



ISt5575(PartI).1970 

The input powar ihall b« recorded and averaged over a luffidently 
long time ( for ON/OFF controlled temperature control devices over not 
less than 3 complete switching cycles). 

The average power measured above shall not exceed the specified 
value. 

6J.3 Volta^t Proof {High Voltage) 

6.3.3.1 Before this measurement, the temperature control device shall 
be maintained at a specified operating temperature for a period sufficient to 
allow the mean crystal chamber temperature to stabilize. 

At the instant of the test, the supply voltafre should be disconnected. 
The measurement shall be made in each o( the following connections: 

a) Between metal cast or frame and all ungrounded terminals 
connected together, 

b) Between the heater and all related terminals connected together 
and all other terminals connected to the metal case or frame, 
and 

c) Between all ungrounded terminals to each other. 

NoTB 1 — Due care ihall be exerciied in the perForrnAnce of thi* teit a« in certain 
temperature control devices the temperature tensor may be connected to the frame, 
and in other caws one end of the heater \«r)naing may be connected to a >eniiconductor 
device. In cases where one of these connections is present, then only the appropriate 
tettt thould be applied. 

Nora 2 — When these measurements are specified after one or more enviromnental 
tetti, and the results should have to be compared to the retulu obtained before those 
tests, these measurements may be made on the unhealed temperature control device 
both before and after llinie tests. 

6.3.3.2 The test vohage specified below shall be applied for a minimum 
period of one minute between the parts specified in 6J3.1: 

350 V dc for connections (a) and (c) and in the case of low-voltage 
heaters also for connection (b) {see 6.3 J.1). 

2U + 1500 V rms with a minimum of 2000 V rms at power- 
frequency for mains voltage heaters ( i/-» rated mains voltage) for 
connection (b) (x<« 6.3.3.1 ). 

NoTB — Low voltages include voltages up to and including 34 V peak. 

There shall be no breakdown or flashover during the application of 
the test voltages. 

11 



IS>5575(PmrtI)-1970 

63A Insulation Resistanct 

6.3.4.1 The provision of 6.3.3.1 shall apply. 

6.3.4.2 A voltage of 100 ± 15 V is applied for one minute to the 
connections mentioned in (a), (b) and (c) of 6.3.3.1 and the insulation 
resistance is measured. It shall not be less than the value specified in the 
relevant specification. 

This test is applied immediately after the voltage proof test. 

6.3.5 Capacitance — The capacitance shall be measured using bridge or 
any other suitable method between the following: 

a) Each two terminals of the temperature control device used for the 
connection of one crystal vibrator ( or in the case of multi-electrode 
vibrators, each two connections which can be considered as 
belonging to a two-electrode vibrator ); and 

b) Each of these terminals and the remaining terminals connected to 
the metal case, frame or similar. 

There shall be no crystal unit in the temperature control device. 

The measurement is made at a frequency well below the resonance 
frequency of the connections. 

The capacitance values shall comply with the requirements specified 
in the relevant specification. 

6.3.6 Inductance — The two connections to each crystal vibrator (or, in 
the case of multi-electrode vibrators, the two connections which can be 
considered as belonging to a two-electrode vibrator ) are short-circuited at 
the inside of the oven. The inductances between the corresponding 
terminals shall be measured. 

The values shall comply with the requirements specified in the 
relevant specification. 

6.3.7 Resistance — Using the same connections as described in 6.3.6, the 
resistance is measured. 

It shall not exceed the value specified in the relevant specification or 
1 ohm, whichever b the greater. 

6.4 Mechanical Tests 

6.4.1 General Examination — The marking shall be in accordance with 5 
and the finish shall be satisfactory. 

12 



IS 1 5575 (Part I). 1970 

6.4.2 Dimmsion — The dimensions of the temperature control device shall 
be checked and shall comply with those specified in the relevant specifica- 
tion. 

6.4.3 Soldering {When Applieablt) — This test shall be carried out in 
accordance with 7'18 of IS: 589-1961*, to determine the ability of the 
termination! to wet easily and to check that the temperature control device 
is not damaged by the soldering process. 

When this test is required by the relevant specification, it shall specify 
the method of test, that is. Method 1 or Method 2, size of the soldering bit 
in case of Method 2 and period of recovery, if necessary. 

AfVer this test, there shall be no sign of mechanical deterioration, 
loosening of parts, etc. 

6.4.4 Robustness of Termination 

6.4.4.1 Tensile test — This test shall be carried out in accordance with 

7.19.1 of 18:589-1961*. The loading weight shall be as specified in the 
relevant specification. 

6.4.4.2 Bend test — This test shall be carried out in accordance with 

7.19.2 of 15:589-1961*. For tag terminations, two consecutive bends shall 
be applied in accordance with 7.19.2J of 18:589-1961*. 

6.4.4J Torsion test on screw terminals — This test shall be carried out in 
accordance with 7.19.4 of 18:589-1961*. 

When this test (robustness of termination ) is required by the relevant 
specification the following details shall be specified: 

a) Tests to be carried out; 

b) Test conditions, such as values of the torques, etc; and 

c) Deviation from the standard test method, if any. 

After each of these tests, the temperature control device shall be 
visually examined. There shall be no mechanical damage or loosening of 
parts, etc. 

6.4.5 Vibration — This test shall be carried out in accordance with 7.6 of 
18:589-1961* using appropriate degree of severity. The temperature 
control device shall oe mounted as specified in 6.2.4. 

'Basic climatic and mechanical durability test for electronic components {reaiud), 

13 



IS < 5575 (Part I). 1970 

When this test is required by the relevant specification the rollowing 
details shall be specified: 

a) Severity of test; 

b) Final measurements; and 

c) Deviation rrom the standard test method, if any. 

The temperature control device shall then be visually examined. 
There shall be no sign of deterioration. 

6.4.6 Bumping — This test shall be carried out in accordance with 7.5.1 
of IS; 589-1961* with the temperature control device suitably mounted on 
the table of a bump test machine. 

The temperature control device shall then be visually examined. 
There shall be no fracture or loosening of parts or any other mechanical 
failure. 

6.5 Operadug Characteristic* 

6.5.1 Crystal Chamber Temperature 

6,5.1.1 Method A — The temperature sensor used to measure the 
crystal chamber temf>erature shall preferably be a 10 :fe 0*02 MHz calibrated 
AC cut crystal vibrator {see Appendix B). It shall be enclosed in a crys- 
tal holder of the same type that the temperature control device is intended 
to be used with. When the temperature control device is intended for more 
than one quartz crystal unit, one or more temperature sensors shall be placed 
in any of the sockets and dummy units shall be placed in each of the remain- 
ing sockets. In this case, the mean crystal chamber temperature is the 
mean of the readings at each location, and the variation is the difference in 
maximum and minimum crystal chamber temperatures found both in time 
and place. For the other quantities, the maximum or minimum as appli- 
cable, found for any location of the temperature sensor, is chosen. 

Precautions: The following precautions shall be taken when measuring 
crystal chamber temperature by means of a calibrated crytul unit: 

a) The maintaining oscillator network can be housed either inside or 
outside the environmental test chamber. In either case, due care 
should be taken so that the effect of temperature changes on the 
oscillator or changes in the parameters of the connecting leads 
between crystal and the oscillator do not unduly influence the 
measuring accuracy. 



*Bwic climatic and n>echiu)ical dvirabiJiry teiis for electronic compoaenti ( mind). 

14 



I8t5575(FMrtI).1970 

b) The crystal drive level shall be maintained at a low and relatively 
constant value. This value should be stated. 

c) The frequency measuring equipment used shall have a resolution 
consistent with the degree of accuracy required. 

d) Each individual crystal unit shall be calibrated with its associated 
oscillator and connecting leads. The calibration of this combi- 
nation shall be checked at a convenient temperature for every 
different type of temperatiu« control device to be measured. 

e) It shall be understood thatthe calibrated crystal unit, its maintaining 
oscillator and the frequency measuring equipment may all change 
viiih time. Therefore, any measurements to be conducted on 
temperature control device over a period of time should take into 
account the possible effect these changes may have on the results 
obtained. 

f) It should be understood that a number of factors such as the 
diameter of the connecting wires, type of socket used, etc, are 
contributing factors to the overall temperature control device 
performance. Where necessary, these factors should be taken into 
account and specified in the relevant specification, if required. 

6.5.1.2 Method B (altmutm method) — The method consists of intro- 
ducing a pre-calibrated bead thermistor inside the crystal oven at the point 
where the temperature and other parameters are to be measured. This is 
best achieved by mounting the bead thermistor in a 'dummy' crystal unit of 
the same holder type as the type of crystal intended for operation in the 
crystal oven. This is best achieved by mounting the thermistor on a crystal 
similar to the appropriate one shown in Appendix B. 

The thermistor chosen should have a sufficient slope in its resistance/tempera- 
ture characteristic, at least over the measuring temperature range, so that a 
high degree of resolution can be obtained. Most commercially available 
ones meet this requirement. 

The first measurement is to calibrate the thermi&tor over the complete 
operating temperature range of crystal oven. This is done by keeping the 
sensor element inside a test chamber whose temperature can be varied as 
required. The dc resistance of the thermistor is measured, using a precision 
bridge of adequate accuracy, uking care to sec the leads are sufficiently 
thick and short. The measurement shall be done quickly so that the 
resistance of the thermistor is not affected by the current which flows when 
the bridge is connected to it. 

The calibrated thermistor is introduced in the crystal oven. To 
measure the temperatiu^e the dc resistance is measured and the tempcraiure 
read off from the calibration curve. 

Id 



IS > 5575 (Part I). 1970 

6.5.2 Maximum Pouer — Tm 6.3<1. 

6.5.3 Warm-Up Time — The temperature control device Is brought to the 
lowest specified operating temperature and kept at that temperature until 
thermal equilibrium inside the chamber has been reached as indicated by 
constant temjierature inside the chamber. It is then connected to the 
lowest specified supply voltage, and the crystal chamber temperature is 
recorded ( see 6.5.1 ) . 

The time elapsed between the moment that the temperature control 
device is switched on at the low limit supply voltage, and the moment the 
crystal chamber teir.perature reaches and remains within the specified 
limits fcr mean crystal chamber temf)erature, ripple, rate of change, etc, 
shall be within the specified warm-up lime. 

6.5.4 Average Power — See 6.3.2. 

6.5.5 Heat Loss per Degree Celsius Over-Tempet attire — The heat loss per 
degree Celsius over-temperature is calculated from the average power, and 
the diflference between the crystal chamber temperature and the operating 
temperature. 

6.5.6 Switching Period {For TCD's with ONIOFF Control Only )—ACtcT 
the mean crystal chamber temperature has become stable at a specified 
operating temperature, the mean duration of the switching cycle shall be 
measured over at least 3 switching cycles. 

6.5.7 Switching Rate — The reciprocal value of the switching period 
measured in 6.5.6 gives the switching rate. 

6.5.8 Duly Cycle — This measurement may be combined with those of 
switching period {see 6.5.6). After the mean crystal chamber temperature 
has become stable at a specified operating temperature, the duration of 
one switching period and one heating period is measured. 

The ratio of the heating period to the switching period is the duty 
cycle. This value shall be within the limits specified in the relevant 
specification. 

6.5.9 Crystal Chamber Temperature Characteristics at Fixed Operating Tem- 
perature — The operating temperature shall be within the specified limits, 
and the supply voltage shall be kept at the rated value. The following 
measurements shall be made when the mean crystal chamber temperature 
has reached its thermal equilibrium. 

The crystal chamber temperature characteristics shall be measured 
over a sufficiently long time ( for ON/OFF controlled TCD's over not less 
than 3 complete switching cycles). 

The measurements may be repeated for any condition specified in the 
relevant specification. 

16 



ISi5575(PareI)-1970 

6.5.9.1 Mean crystal chamber temperature — Under the conditions specified 
above, the instantaneous crystal chamber temperatures shall be recorded 
{see 6I5.I). From these values, the mean crystal chamber temperature 
shall be calculated which shall be vrithin the specified limits. 

6.5.9.2 Temperature ripple — From the measurements of mean crystal 
chamber temperature, the difference between the tnaTttniim and minimum 
values gives the temperature ripple. This value shall be within the 
specified limits. 

6.5.9.3 Rate of change of crystal chamber temperatun — From the measure- 
ments of mean crystal chamber temperature, the maximum value of the 
quotient of the change of crystal chamber temperature to the elapsed time 
for a time interval consistent with the measurement accuracy required is 
calculated and shall be within the specified limits. 

6.5.10 Variation of Mean Crystal Chamber Temperature Over the Operating 
Temperature Range — The temperature control device is brought to the lowest 
specified operating temperature, and kept at that temf>erature until thermal 
equilibrium has been reached as indicated by constant temperature inside 
the chamber. The supply voltage is kept at the rated value. The 
operating temperature is then raised in steps not greater than IO°C 
ambient and the chamber allowed to attain thermal equilibrium. Mean 
crystal chamber temperature shall be recorded at each step. 

The variation of the mean crystal chamber temperature shall not 
exceed the value specified in the relevant specification. The measurement 
may be repeated for any other supply voltage as specified in the relevant 
specification. 

6.5.11 Reduction Factor — This factor can be derived fi-om the measure- 
ment of 6.5.10. It shall be within the limits specified in the relevant 
specification. 

NoTB — Th« recorded tempermture ctiarscterutici ia not expected to be linear. 
Therefore care shall be taken that tbii factor is related to such a temperature interval 
a* to obtain the minimum value. 

6.5.12 Overshoot I Undershoot — The operating temperature shall be within 
the specified limits and the supply voltage is kept at the rated value. 

Before the measiu-ement starts, the crystal chamber temperature should 
have reached thermal equilibrium. A comparatively rapid stated change 
of an operating condition, such as operating temperatuure or supply voluge, 
may cause a transient change of the mean crystal chamber temperature. 
This shall be recorded ( set 6.5.1 ). It shall be within the limits specified 
in the relevant specification. 

6.5.13 Signalling Devices — During all these measurements, the ^(nailing 
devices, if any, slutll function as specified in the relevant individual speci- 
fication. 

17 



IS 1 5575 (Part I)- 1970 

6.6 Climatic Testa 
6.6.1 Climatic Sequence 

6.6.1.1 Dry heat — This test shall be carried out in accordance with 7.2 
of 15:589-1961* at the upper temperature of the operating/operable 
temperature range of the crystal unit. 

After recovery, the temperature control device shall be visually 
examined. There shall be no visible damage. 

6.6.1.2 Damp heat (accelerated) first cycle — This test shall be carried out 
in accordance with 7,4 of IS: 589-1961* for one cycle. 

After recovery, the temperature control device shall be visually 
examined. There shall be no visible damage. 

After this test, the temperature control device shall be immediately 
subjected to cold test. 

6.6.1.3 Cold — This test shall be carried out in accordance with in 7.1 
of 15:589-1961* at the lower temperature of operating/operable 
temperature range of the crystal unit. 

After recovery, the temperature control device shall be visually 
examined. There shall be no visible damage. 

6.6.1.4 Low air pressure — This test shall be carried out in accordance 
with 7.12 of IS : 589-1961* using appropriate degree of severity as specified 
in the relevant specification. 

6.6.1.5 Damp heat {accelerated) remaining cycles — This test shall be 
carried out in accordance with 7.4 of 15:589-1961* for the remaining 
number of cycles as specified in the relevant specification. 

After recovery, the temperature control device shall be visually 
examined. There shall be no visible damage. 

When this test is specified by the relevant specification, the minimum 
value of the insulation resistance shall also be specified. 

6.6.2 Rapid Change of Temperature — This test shall be carried out in 
accordance with 7.14 of IS: 589-1961* using appropriate degree of severity 
as specified in the relevant specification. 

The temperature contixil device shall then be visually examined. 
There shall be no visible damage. 

6.6.3 Damp Heal ( Long Term Exposure) — Thit test shall be carried out in 
accordance with 7.3 of IS: 589- 196 1* using the appropriate degree of 
severity as specified in the individual specification. 

'Basic climatic and mechanical durability teits for electrook components { raised ), 

18 



IS (5575 (Part I). 1970 

After recovery, thfe temperature control device shall be visually 
examined. There shall be no visible damage. 

When this test is specified in the relevant specification, the minimum 
value of the insulation resbtance shall also be specified. 

6.7 Endvrmnce 

6.7.1 Standard Ambient Test — The temperature control device is subjected 
to intermittent operation for a total period of 1 000 hours under the standard 
atmospheric conditions for testing. 

Each operational cycle consists of one hour rated supply voltage 
connected to the temperature control device and half-an-hour voltage 
disconnected from the temperature control device. 

After 250, 500, 750 hours and at the end of the test, the operational 
characteristics of the temperature control devices are measured according 
to 6.3.3 to 63.7 and 6.5. They shall comply with the requirements 
specified in the relevant specification. 

6.7.2 Cold Storage Test — The temperature control device is maintained at 
the lower storage temp>erature specified in the relevant specification for 
a minimum period of 24 hours. After this period, the temperature control 
device shall be tested as described in 6.5.9 and the mean crystal chamber 
temperature shall be within the limits specified in the relevant speci- 
fication. 

6.7.3 Hot Storage Test — The temperature control device is maintained at 
the upper storage temperature specified in the relevant specification for 
a minimum period of 24 hours. After this period, the temperature control 
device shall be tested as described in 6.5.9, the mean crystal chamber 
temperature shall be within the limits specified in the relevant speci- 
fication. 

6.8 Operation Under Fanft Condition — The control 6e\ice of the 
crystal ov^n is short-circuited, blocked or otherwise impaired so that the 
maximum power is continuously delivered to the heater when the crystal 
oven is connected to the supply voltage. 

The crystal oven is operated at the upper limit of supply voltage, and 
at maximum operating temperature until a safety device, if any, operates or 
until the external surface temperature of the crystal oven has become stable. 

During this test, no fire or smoke shall emanate from the crystal oven. 
The external surface temperatur* shall not exceed the value specified in the 
relevant specification. 

For crystal ovens with restorable safety device, this test may be 
repeated several times. 

NoTR — For crytul ovens with tmhty device, the meximum turfiue cempeniiure 
will occur wnie time after the lafeCy device hw opei«ted 

19 



ISt5S75(PutI).1970 

APPENDIX A 

^Clause 6.1.1} 
SCHEDULE OF TYPE TESTS 

AU Samples 10 

General Examination ( 6.4.1 ) 
Dimension (6.4.2) 
Operating Characteristics (6.5) 
Capacitance f 6.3.5) 
Inductance (6^.6) 
Resisunce (63.7) 
Proof 



Voltage '. 



(High VoIUge) (633) 



Insulation Resistance ( 6.3.4 ) 

Bumping (6.4.6) 

Vibration (6.4.5) 

Robustness of Termination ( 6.4.4 ) 



First Lot 
(4 samples) 


Second Lot 
(3 samples) 

Damp Heat ( Long Term 
Exposure) (6.6.3) 

Insulation Resistance 

(6J.4) 

Operating Charactco-istics 

Operation Under Fault 
Condition (i.t) 


Third Lot 
( 3 samples ) 


SoWering (6,4.3) 

Climatic Sequence 

(6.6.1) 

Rapid Change of 
Temperature (6,6Jt) 

Insulation Resistance 
(6J.4) 

Operating Characteristics 

(<W) 


Endiuance (6.7) 

Operating 
Gharacteristici 

(6J) 





20 



18:5575 (Part I). 1970 

APPENDIX B 

{Clause 6.5,1) 

DETAILS OF CAUBllATED AC CUT MEASURING CRYSTALS 

B.1. CRYSTALS IN TYPE AA HOLDER 

B-l.t The details of AC cut measuring crystals in type AA holder shall be 
as follows: 

30' 30' ± 5' 

12 mm 

Finish with AljOj; approximately 
3 000 mesh lapped to 10200 MHz 
and etched for 1 minute in satu- 
rated ammonium bifluoride. 

7 mm 

Gold 

200 KHz approximately 

see Fig. 2 



a) Angle of cut 

b) Blank diameter 

c) Surface finish 



d) Electrode diameter 

e) Electrode material 

f) Total plate back frequency 

g) Assembly details 

h) Unit to be filled with dry 
nitiogen 



aONOEO WITM 
CONOUCriNC CfMfVX 



SOFT SOLDER 




AU dimeniion* in millitnetrej. 
Note — All cryttal mounting apring* to be 0155 mm dia muiic wire. 

Fro. 2 Tym AA Holder 



21 



ISt5575(r«rtI).1970 

B.2. DETAILS OF CRYSTALS IN TYPE BC AND HC25U ( Style K ) 
HOLDERS 



a) Angle of cut 

b) Blank diameter 

c) Surface finish 



d) Electrode diameter 

e) Electrode material 

f ) Total plate back frequency 

g) Assembly details 

h) Units to be filled with dry 
nitrogen. 



30* 30' ds 5' 

8 mm, bevelled on both sides, 
24 diopter, 0*5 mm wide after 
finish lapping 

Finish with Al,Og; approximately 
3 000 mesh lapped to 1 0* 1 00 MHz 
and etched for 1 minute in 
saturated ammonium bifiuoride. 

4 mm, tabs at 120" 

Gold 

100 kHz 

Sec Fig, 3 and 4 



BONDED WITH 
CONDUCTING CEMENT- 



SOFT SOlDEl 




All diin«ntioM in milliiiMtni. 
Fio. 3 Typs BC Hounit 



22 



IS>S575(PartI).l970 



BONDED WITH 
COMOUCTING CEMENT 



SOFT SOLDER 




All dimeiuioni in inillimctrc*. 

Fio. 4 Type HC25U (Style K) Holder 



23 




IHHtAII ttAHtlARIIS tw^f irilTIOli 



Um9k Uhmmt 1 8ari«duf Shioi Zaiar Mar^y NEW D£tH{ 110002 

< Common to al) of(k:ea ) 

/f§9h09i OfffewM I ' f*hfihom 
•W«»t«m I Manakataya* E9 Mt0C« Maiol, Anc^her) ( East >» 92 d2 d$ 

mmpcf 400091 

tEastam 1 1/1« C. I T. Tehama V» M, V. 1. 1». Road, 3« 24 59 
Maniktola, CALCUTTA 70W84 

Southarn t C* I, T. Camput, MADRAS 800113 41 24 42 

^orihara t Ba» Fhaaa Vll, tndustrtal Focai Point. B 70 26 
S. A. 5. NAGAR 160051 ( Puniab ) 

*Pmhp^ Nil rmaliamac^ Shaikh Marg, Khan(>ur, j 2 63 48 

AHM ADABA0 3SC001 { 2 Oa 48 

'P Etocli Uaft| ,SI|i|{, J^araslmDaraja Squarai 22 4B 0^ 
8AN9ALO|i*«jpC«02 

Gango W ConaiW^ BItadbhad a Road, T* T, Nagar, 6 27 1 6 
BHOPAt ^2f» 

22g Kalpana Ar«i, QHUBANESHWAR 751014 5 3^ 27 

S-a-SSC i, N. 0tipta Mar 0, MYDERA8 A0 500001 22 1 83 

R14 Yudhtstif Mara, C Sohtma, MIPUR 3O20OS e og 32 

1U/41d S Sarvodaya Unqm, KANPUR 208005 4 72 $2 

PatnpyN Indaalffal Estata, PATNA SC^fS e 23 OS 

Hantex Bids C 2ad Flaof ), Riy Station Road, 39 57 
TRIVANORUM 693001 

lfts0ttmhii Oam C with Sal« Point \ I 

Inatttotloa of Eadfiaars ( ladla) BuHdSn^^ 1332 ShbaH Naoar. S 24 35 

PUMI4fiea " ' "^ 



«Sai»i Otilc* iff SomMty l» at Novsitf CiMifnb«n, s^mt RMd 
Bt)m()fty49W 

Rfr6ri.Ctlteitt« 706671 *^ 



8ts&2a 

»7 68 6a 



^ iiii III- »iai.»,.,-^n^, , I'f^^lWl.ii, [■.■)■ ■ ■11,1111,11 



