NAT HA IS 17511 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


teh ATA ch FARO & Ain 
ch fea anata Siem eee — Oita HaT 


Borehole Jack Test for Determination 
of Modulus of Deformation of Rock 
Mass — Code of Practice 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AN YI, 9 SEERNE TH HM, ag faset - 110002 


Ma rent MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 5 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Rock 
Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Erection of civil engineering structures in or on the rock requires the properties of rock and rock mass. The 
characteristics of intact rock differ greatly as compared with the rock mass which contains discontinuities in 
the form of joints, folds, minor/major shear, faults, etc. Discontinuities govern the rock mass properties to a 
great extent. These rock discontinuities adversely affect the stress-deformation behaviour of rock masses. The 
deformation modulus of rock mass is dependent on the number and orientation of joint sets; aperture of joints; 
type and extent of infilling material; presence of shears; water conditions; weathering, etc. Laboratory testing 
on intact rock samples do not take into account the effect of discontinuities, therefore, field tests are required for 
representative and realistic assessment of properties ofrock mass. 


Number of methods exist for the determination of in-situ modulus of deformation with deformation measurement 
on the loading surface and away from the surface. IS 7317 ‘Code of practice for uniaxial jacking test for deformation 
modulus of rock mass’ covers the determination of modulus of deformation of rock mass with surface and 
sub-surface measurements of deformations. Borehole jacks are used for the assessment of deformation modulus 
ofrock in deep drillholes. The test helps in defining the stress-deformation behaviour of sub-surface rock mass in 
the preliminary investigation stages when exploratory drilling is carried out to decipher the geological conditions 
beneath the foundation. Further, the test is also useful in studying the anisotropy in rock mass as it can be used 
in horizontal, vertical or inclined drillholes. Additionally, the jack can be oriented in a specified direction inside 
a drillhole also. The rigidity of the borehole jack depends on the loading platens and number of pistons. This 
standard covers procedure and method of interpretation of modulus of deformation of rock mass in an NX size 
(76 mm diameter) drillholes in rock. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that ofthe specified value in this standard. 


IS 17511 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


BOREHOLE JACK TEST FOR DETERMINATION 
OF MODULUS OF DEFORMATION 
OF ROCK MASS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the determination of modulus 
of deformation of rock mass by borehole jack test at 
different depths and directions in NX size drillhole 
of 76.2 mm diameter. The stress is applied through 
two curved steel platens covering a 90° sector 
over a length of 203 mm. The applied stress and 
resulting deformations of rock mass are used for the 
determination of modulus of deformation of rock 
mass using appropriate elastic theory. The modulus of 
deformation of rock mass depends on the applied stress 
level and thus, it is not a constant parameter which 
means it cannot be characterised by a unique value. The 
modulus of deformation of rock mass is recommended 
based on the stress levels anticipated on account of the 
proposed structure and thus becomes an engineering 
Judgement. 


1.2 Creep characteristics may be studied keeping the 
uniform stress level for a specified period and then 
deformation versus time curve is plotted to analyse 
behaviour of rock mass under sustained loading. 


1.3 Anisotropy can also be determined by application 
of stress level in desired directions in relation to the 
bedding or any other prominent joint or the design 
requirements suiting the proposed structure. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contain provisions which, 
through references in the text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
4464 : 1985 


Title 


Code of practice for presentation 
of drilling information and 
core description in foundation 
investigation 


3 SELECTION OF TEST SITE 


3.1 Before selection of site for testing, geological 
information is needed to be compiled. Geological 
sections of the entire area under the zone of 
consideration should be mapped. Geological map 
indicating the different lithological units and structural 
zones should be prepared. In each of these similar 
zones, at least five tests should be conducted. The 
number of tests may be increased in the event of large 
variation in results and direction of application of stress 
to confirm the findings. 


3.2 The drillhole locations shall be selected so as 
to obtain detailed information about the sub-strata. 
Location and number of drillholes for testing should be 
selected keeping in view the variability in geology and 
type of structure. 


3.3 Drillholes for conducting the tests should be 
selected so as to cover the prominent rock types for 
proper representation of geological formation including 
weak rocks too. The geological logs of all the drillholes 
shall be prepared for rock mass characterisation. 


3.4 Tests in massive and fractured zones should 
be conducted to study the effect of discontinuities. 
However, highly fractured or shear zones can be 
avoided to reduce the risk of damage to the borehole 
jack. Testing in such zones may result in differential 
deformation of loading platens, thus leading to damage 
to the borehole jack. In extreme cases, the jack may get 
struck inside the drillhole, therefore borehole logs and 
drillhole cores should be studied and inspected in detail 
before finalizing the test sections. 


4 DRILLING OF DRILLHOLES 


4.1 The NX size drillhole of 76.2 mm diameter size 
should be drilled using rotary drilling. The quality and 
condition of the drilling bits should be assured so as to 
maintain the appropriate size of the drillhole. All efforts 
should be done to get good core recovery. The test 
section shall have to be decided based on the rock cores 
obtained from the drillhole. The cores obtained from 
drilling can be used in laboratory testing for assessment 
of various properties; therefore, good drilling practices 


IS 17511 : 2020 


should be adopted. In case of jointed or poor rocks, 
triple core barrel can be employed. Vibrations in 
drilling machine is another factor affecting the core 
recovery, hence, drilling machine should be anchored 
firmly before start of the drilling activity. Quality of 
diamond bits and condition of drilling machinery affect 
the core recovery and the size of the drillhole. Quality 
of drilling also depends on the condition of cutting bits 
and the experience of drill operator. The improper size 
and inferior quality of core bits should be avoided. 


4.2 There is possibility of collapsing of the drillhole 
in the overburden material or fractured zones. Hence, 
mild steel casing of appropriate size shall be installed in 
the overburden portion or fractured rock mass. 


4.3 For presentation of drilling information and core 
description, IS 4464 may be referred. The details of 
project, structure, RD, elevation, depth, orientation 
of drillhole, etc, shall be recorded in the register and 
written with paint or permanent marker on the core 
boxes for identifications. Apart from this, the details 
about the drilling rate, length of core run, type of 
cuttings and quantity of water loss in drilling shall also 
be recorded. 


4.4 The records of permeability tests in the drillhole 
shall also be recorded in proper formats. 


4.5 Geological logs of all the drillholes should be 
prepared by the concerned Engineering Geologist in 
standard format. 


4.6 Drillhole shall be properly capped after completion 
of drilling work for protection. 


5 TEST SET-UP 


5.1 Test set-up shall include the following: 


a) Borehole jack unit which includes jack comprising 
two curved stiff stainless steel plates which can 
be pulled apart by hydraulic pressure, LVDTs 
mounted on the jack, end couplings for pressure 
and retraction lines and electrical signal or LVDT 
cable. 


b) Dual acting hydraulic pump of suitable capacity 
and capable of retraction also. 


c) Pair of hydraulic hoses for inflation and deflation 
of borehole jack as per the test depth requirement. 


d) Electrical cable for transmitting rock deformations 
to the readout unit. 


e) Quick connecting couplers. 

f) Pressure gauge. 

g) Deformation measuring read out unit. 

h) Data-logger or Data acquisition system, if any. 


j) Tripod stand with chain pulley arrangement. 
Tripod stand can be avoided in small drifts and 
testing in shallow drillholes. 

k) MS casings of BX size; in the event of non- 
availability of BX casing, any other hollow casing 
with similar diameter can also be used with 
suitable connection between jack and casing. 


m) Drilling tools like pipe wrenches, clamps, etc. 


5.2 Asketch showing the drillhole and equipment setup 
is given in Fig. 1. 


6 TEST PROCEDURE 


6.1 Tests should be conducted after completion of 
drilling work without wastage of time due to the 
following reasons: 


a) Drillhole may collapse at a subsequent time. 


b) Weathering of rock may affect the resultant 
deformations of rock, thus affecting the 
deformation modulus. 


c) Availability of accessories like tripod stand, 
drilling machines, drilling crew, etc is ensured. 

d) Testing can be done at faster pace with the use of 
drilling machine and crew. 

e) Safety of the equipment and manpower can be 
ensured. 


IS 17511 : 2020 


TRIPOD STAND 


READOUT 
UNIT 


HYDRAULIC PUMP 
HYDRAULIC 
PRESSURE 


OVERBURDEN 
MATERIAL 
BX (73 mm Ø CASING ) 


NX (76.2 mmØ DRILL HOLE ) 


BOREHOLE JACK 
SHEAR SEAM 


ROCK JOINTS 


FIG. 1 EQUIPMENT SET-UP AND ACCESSORIES 


IS 17511 : 2020 


6.2 The borehole jack should be test checked before 
installation in the drillhole. 


6.3 Calibration of the borehole jack should be done 
prior to the commencement and after the completion of 
tests. In case of large number of tests being undertaken, 
mid-way calibration can also be done. 


6.4 Washing of drillhole with clean water should be 
done for removal of protruding loose rock pieces, if 
any which may otherwise obstruct the movement of 
borehole jack. Clay or gaugy particles present in the 
joints also get washed away which may otherwise clog 
the borehole jack. 


6.5 Drillhole log shall be studied for variability in rock 
mass before selecting the test locations. Cores should 
always be inspected to select the test locations. Sections 
containing shear and highly fractured zones should be 
avoided as there is risk of borehole jack getting struck 
due to loose infilling material entering the jack or large 
deformations exceeding the prescribed limits of the 
equipment. 


6.6 The rock mass should desirably be uniform in at 
least 400 mm length so as to avoid differential 
deformations which may otherwise damage the 
borehole jack. 


6.7 The distance between two consecutive tests in a 
drillhole should be kept to a minimum of 400 mm and 
preferably 500 mm for undisturbed sections. 


6.8 The jack is connected to the BX casing (73 mm 
diameter) and lowered at the specified depth. 


6.9 The direction of load applications can be adjusted 
by rotating the jack to study the anisotropy in rock. 
For orientation of jack in any specified direction, a 
continuous mark along all the casings is transferred. A 
plumb line is sufficient in vertical drillholes whereas 


for holes in directions other than vertical, orientation 
device as shown in Fig. 2 can be used to transfer the 
mark from one casing to another. Tests can be conducted 
in vertical, horizontal or even inclined drillholes. 


6.10 The diameter of hole should be 76.2 mm. For 
determining the mismatch between the jack and 
the hole, the radius of the drillhole can be measured 
normally by an LVDT at 0.35 MPa or zero stress level. 
Table 1 can be used to calculate the minimum stress 
(Q.min) to maintain full contact as a function of hole 
radius mismatch a with poisson’s ratio (v) as 0.25. 


6.11 Schematic sketch of stress transfer in drillholes is 
shown in Fig. 3. 


B=+45° 


FIG. 3 SCHEMATIC SKETCH OF LOADING IN NX 
BOREHOLE JACK 


FIG. 2 MARKING GUIDE ON BX CASINGS 


IS 17511 : 2020 


Table 1 Minimum Hydraulic Pressure to Ensure Full Contact as a Function of Hole Radius Mismatch a 
with Poisson’s Ratio, v as 0.25, and 2a = Hole Diameter — 76.2 mm 


( Clause 6.10 ) 


SINo. Encoreticar (GPa) Q min’ a (MPa/mm) E gneoretichn (GPa) Q min’ (MPa/mm) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 6.9 55 6.9 80 
ii) 13.8 110 13.8 160 
ili) 20.7 160 20.7 235 
iv) 27.6 205 27.6 315 
v) 34.5 250 34.5 395 
vi) 41.4 290 41.4 475 
vii) 48.3 330 48.3 555 
viii) 55.2 365 55,2 630 
ix) 62.1 400 62.1 710 
x) 69.0 435 69.0 790 
NOTES 


0.20 a 30 x 10° ebria! 
30x 10°(1-v?)+0.91 E 


theoretical 
a E neoreticat 


3.67(1-v?) 


1 For Oversize Holes: O,,,,, = 


2 For Undersize Holes: Qnn = 


6.12 The maximum load at which the test is to be 
conducted shall correspond to 1.2 to 1.5 times the 
anticipated maximum stress liable to be developed 
on account of the of the proposed structure. Test shall 
be conducted in five cycles with peak stress levels 
of 20 percent, 40 percent, 60 percent, 80 percent and 
100 percent of maximum test pressure. Each time, 
the stress is applied up to the maximum stress level 
corresponding to that particular cycle and deformations 
at various incremental stress levels (1/5" to 1/10" of 
ultimate stress level) are recorded. Since, it is a cyclic 
loading test; therefore, the stress shall be brought 
down to the initial level in a manner similar to loading. 
Deformations at corresponding stress levels shall be 
recorded. At peak and initial stress levels, deformation 
shall be recorded after it stabilizes. Generally, 2 min 
time is sufficient enough for deformations to stabilize. 


6.13 Creep characteristics of rock mass can also be 
studied at any particular stress level. The stress level 
is kept constant for the specified period as desired for 
studying the creep characteristics. 


6.14 After the completion of test, stress versus 
deformation curves is plotted. The deformations of rock 
mass at peak stress level during loading and unloading 
are calculated. These deformations are used for the 
determination of modulus of deformation, E, using 
total deformation, Ad during loading for any particular 
cycle and for determination of recovery modulus, E... 
deformations, Ar recovered during unloading in the 
same cycle are used in the computations. For the sake 
of clarity, Fig. 4 can be referred. 


6.15 Since deformations in the first cycle may not 
be true representative of rock mass due to crushing 
of asperities and adjustment of loading plates with 
the borehole walls, therefore, modulus values are 
determined for the successive cycles only. 


6.16 Stress transferred to the rock mass depends on the 
rigidity of the plates and the number of pistons in the 
borehole jack. Therefore, transferred stress to the rock 
mass varies with the type of borehole jack. 


7 INTERPRETATION OF TEST RESULTS 


TA Eoria Cam be estimated by reducing the core 
modulus obtained from laboratory test by a factor of 


2.9. 


7.2 Poisson’s ratio, v can be taken from laboratory test 
values. The equation for apparent modulus of rock 
mass is based on full platen/rock contact in a 76.2 mm 
diameter drillhole. 


7.3 For full contact of the platens/rock, the following 
equation can be used to calculate the apparent modulus: 


E | Ar |r 


cale 


Ad/D 
where 
0.86 = effect of finite test length. 
JE= jack efficiency provided by the 


manufacturer, generally 93 percent for 
jack having twelve pistons (for hard rock) 
and 55 percent for jack having 3 pistons 
(for soft rock). 


IS 17511 : 2020 


STRESS, MPa 


D= 


DEFORMATION, mm 


FIG. 4 TYPICAL CYCLIC STRESS VERSUS DEFORMATION PLOT 


coefficient for full contact which depends 
on Poisson’s ratio ofrock as given in Table 
2. Poisson’s ratio of the rock can be taken 
from the laboratory tests on representative 
rock. If its value has not been determined 
in the laboratory, it may be considered 
between 0.20 and 0.30. Its value for 
different rock types shall be assumed as 
0.20 for excellent rocks such as granite 
etc., 0.25 for gneiss, quartzite, etc, and 
0.30 for mica schist, slates, etc. 


= incremental stress. 


average diametral displacement for an 
incremental stress of AP; use Ar for 
calculation of recovery modulus (E) for 
the unloading as explained in Fig. 4. 


diameter of drillhole. 
Table 2 7* for Full Contact 
( Clause 7.3 ) 


v T* 
(2) 


0.1 
0.2 
0.25 
0.3 
0.33 
0.4 
0.5 


7.4 Eric “an be obtained from E 
Fig. 5. Correction factor is negligible for E... 
7 GPa; hence, E, is equal to E, 


theoretical" 


using 
calc 
less than 


8 REPORT 


8.1 Report should include, 
a) test results of different variants of rock; 


b) geological details of the project as well as the 
drillholes the assumptions; and 


c) details of test equipment and the test procedure 
including the computations. 


8.2 The modulus can be compared with the core 
modulus from laboratory tests. 


8.3 All the test results, stress deformation plots of the 
individual tests and interpretation of test data should 
be integral part of the report as these details define the 
stress-deformation behaviour of rock mass. A brief 
summary of recommended values should be given in 
the “Abstract” section. 


8.4 The reason for omitting any result 
or recommendation of the values for design should be 
clearly spelt out in the report. 


8.5 Since modulus of rock is dependent on the applied 
stress, selection of ultimate stress shall be clearly 
defined and detailed in the report. 


8.6 Apart from tabular form, results can be presented in 
graphical/histograms formats too. The photographs of 
adjacent exposed rock mass help the designers to know 
about the geological details. 


9 APPLICATIONS 
DEFORMATION 


OF MODULUS OF 


9.1 For design of structures in or on the rock mass using 
modulus of deformation of rock mass from borehole 
jack test, the points given in 9.1 to 9.4 are required to 
be taken care of. 


9.2 Within the limit of elasticity, modulus of 
deformation of rock mass is stress dependent which 
means, higher the applied stress, greater will be the 
modulus of deformation. The test report should contain 
all the relevant data including geological details and 
test data so as to enable the designer to choose the 
appropriate value in design. 


IS 17511 : 2020 


9.3 The modulus of deformation of rock mass also 
depends on the loading area. Therefore, spacing of 
joints plays a key role in modulus of deformation. The 
size of loading platen in borehole jack is fixed and may 
cover few joints only. In massive rock, there may be 
no joints within the zone of influence. The accuracy 
of placing the jack at the pre-specified test section 
depends on the core recovery. Therefore, scale effect 
may be considered using the results in the design of 
structure. 


9.4 The borehole jack test provides static modulus of 
deformation of rock mass. 


9.5 The rock being anisotropic in nature, direction of 
applied stress should also be taken into consideration. 


E calc(GPa) 


0 5 10 15 


20 25 


15 100 
A 3 - DFINITE ELEMENTS 
(HEUZE, SALEM) 
EXPERIMENTAL 80 
(MEYER, Mc Vey) 
10 
60 © 
9) 
oO 
2 
7 u 
40 
4 
20 
1 
2.89 3.35 3.86 
0 
0 1 2 3 4 
Ecalc(106 ps) 
FIG. 5 CURVE FOR E VERSUS E 


THEORETICAL 


CALC 


IS 17511 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Engineering AG, India, Gurugram 
Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 
Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, New Delhi 
Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 
Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


National Diasater Management Authority, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


DR N. K. SAMADHIYA (Chairman) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


SHRI G. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
SHRI Hart Dev (Alternate) 


MD RIZWAN ALI 
Dr S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


MEMBER (D&R) 
CHIEF ENGINEER, DESIGN (Alternate) 


Dr SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


Dr R. K. GOEL 
Dr J. K. MOHNOT (Alternate) 


Dr PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRI R. K. PANIGARHI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Lr CoL PARIKSHIT MEHRA 
REPRESENTATIVE (Alternate) 


Dr ALTAF UAMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


Suri M. RAJU 
SHRI PRASANTA MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
DR MAHESH CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI TRIBHUVAN SINGH 
SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH AGARWAL 
SHRI L. PRAKASH (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 17511 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
National Highways & Infrastructure Development REPRESENTATIVE 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, SHRI N. K. MATHUR 
Faridabad SHRI IMRAN SAYEED (Alternate) 


National Institute of Roack Machanics, Bengaluru SHRI A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, SHRIN. K. JAIN 
New Delhi SHRI PRAKASH Rawat (Alternate) 
Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI VIJAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 
RITES Ltd, Gurugram SHRI PALLAB PAL 
Dr B. R. SINGH (Alternate) 
THDC India Limited, Rishikesh SHRI T. S. ROUTELA 


SHRI SMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (C-1004, Park View City-2, Dr MANOJ VERMAN 
Sector-49, Gurugram) 


In personal capacity (4-125, Prodhyogiki Dr RAJBAL SINGH 
Apartment, Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTATING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Dr MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (14808). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.LP. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


