IS : 8506 - 1977 


Indian Standard 


SPECIFICATION FOR LABORATORY 
ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE FURNACES 


Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee, ETDC 43 


Chairman Representing 
Suri B, MAJUMDAR Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries 
( Ministry of Industry and Civil Supplies ), 
New Delhi 
Members 


Suri A. N. Guosn ( Alternate to 
Shri B. Majumdar ) 


Suri S. N. Banwer Directorate General of Technical Development, 
New Delhi 
Suri J. L. CHHABRA Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 


( Inspection Wing ) 
Sunt K. L. Gare ( Alternate ) 
CHIEF ENGINEER ( ELECTRICAL ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Sunr A, L, GUPTA ( Alternate ) 


SHRI S, S, CHITNIS Elpro International Ltd, Pune 
Suri P, S, Buarta ( Alternate ) 
Suri H. M, Desai The Bombay Electric Supply & Transport Under- 


taking, Bombay 
Suri R, V, S, Rao ( Alternate ) 


De R. N. DHAR National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 
Suni B, K. Dosxu1 Messrs Jashwantlal Kantilal, Bombay 
Suri N. J. Dosut( Alternate ) 
Suri RAJAN GUPTA Consumer Council of India, New Delhi 
Lr-Cor A. P. Jain Controllerate of Inspection ( Electronics ) ( Ministry 
of Defence ), Bangalore 
Mas B. C, Haran ( Alternate ) 
Suri P. K. Jain Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana, 


Chandigarh 
Suri O. P. BAHL ( Alternate ) 


Jort Drrecror (ÉrzgoTRTCAL Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
ENGINEERING ) 


Sarı V. 8, KALBAG Tempo Industrial Corporation, Bombay 
SARI Anvinp BOLAR ( Alternate ) 


( Continued on page 2 ) 


(O Copyright 1977 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and 


reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 


IS : 8506 - 1977 


( Continued from page 1) 


Members Representing 
Sun: Ras Kumar Karoor Electrical Appliances Manufacturers’ Association, 
New Delhi 

SHRI VED KAPOOR Racold Appliances Pvt Ltd, Pune 

Sugi J. E, Korwar ( Alternate ) 
Sur BuanoAvi MENON Lady Irwin College, New Delhi 
Suri S, K. MUKHERJEE National Test House, Calcutta 

Suri B. MuKHOPADAYAY ( Alternate ) 
SHRI SAEED MUNSHI National Radio & Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay 

Suri C. K. Baruesa ( Alternate ) 
Suri E, N, NARAYANASWAMY Department of Industries & Commerce, Government 


of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
SARI C. NATARAJAN ( Alternate ) 


Sari V. H. Navk&r Consumer Guidance Society of India, Bombay 
Suri JOGINDER SINGH PALL Ditz Electricals ( India ) Ltd, Delhi 
Suri HARDIT Sixen ( Alternate ) 
Sari H. C. PANDE Directorate of Technical Development & Production 


( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi 
Suri S. R. BHASKARAN ( Alternate ) 


Suri N, RAJAGOPALAN The Standard Electric Appliances, Tuticorin 
Sarı R. Tyvapural ( Alternate ) 
SHRI S, K. SARKAR Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army Headquarters, 
New Delhi 
Mas S. S, CHAHAL ( Alternate ) 
Suri P, K, SEN Bajaj Electricals Ltd, Bombay 
SHRI JAGDISH SHARAN ( Alternate ) 
Suri B, K, Sincu Directorate of Industries, Delhi Administration, 
Delhi 


Suri A. U, Ansari ( Alternate ) 
Suri S. P, SACHDEV, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 
Director ( Elec tech ) 


Secretary 


Sunt M. N, Murtny 
Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 


IS : 8506 - 1977 


Indian Standard 


SPECIFICATION FOR LABORATORY 
ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE FURNACES 


0. FOREWORD 


0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 18 July 1977, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Appliances 


Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 


0.2 Laboratory furnaces are general purpose furnaces not designed to 
heat any specificloads. Since the typeof load and its disposition within the 
furnace may affect the temperature distribution and other characteristics 
to a very large degree and since it is not possible to define a standard 


load the test-conditions specified in this standard require the furnaces to 
be tested empty. 


0.3 In this standard, references with regard to general and safety require- 
ments as well as method of tests have been made to IS : 302-1973*, which 
is a necessary adjunct to this standard. Should, however, any deviation 
exist between the requirements of IS : 302-1973* and those of this 
standard, the provisions of the latter shall apply. 


0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
18:2-1960f. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 


off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard applies to general purpose alternating current 
laboratory electrical resistance furnaces which are not designed for 
heating any specific types of load, which have rating up to 8 kW 
and maximum temperature not exceeding 1 250°C, and which have 
static atmosphere of air. The standard will apply to furnaces of the 
above description having box or tube form, horizontal or vertical, 
and with exposed or concealed elements. 


*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 
( fourth revision ). 


Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 


3 


IS: 8506 - 1977 


1.2 This standard does not apply to special purpose laboratory electric 
furnaces, such as those designed for coal ashing, differential thermal 
analysis, etc, or furnaces designed to work under vacuum or with forced 
air or other gas atmospheres. 


2. TERMINOLOGY 


2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Farnace — A closed heating chamber constructed with refractory 
non-metallic material for the inner lining, where the heat is transferred 
to the load predominantly by radiation from the lining and/or heating 
element. 


2.2 Stated Performance — The maximum temperature and limits of 
temperature variation and differential specified by the manufacturer for 
the particular model and size of the furnace under test. 


2.3 Working Space — The space within the furnace where the stated 
performance is achieved. 


2.4 Furmace Temperature — The temperature at the geometrical 
centre of the working space. 


2.5 Indicated Temperature — The temperature indicated by a suitable 
indicating device fixed on the furnace as standard equipment or recom- 
mended by the manufacturer and fixed in accordance with his 
instructions. 


2.6 Maximum Temperature— The highest furnace temperature at 
which the furnace is designed to operate without unduly shortening its 
life. 


2.7 Steady State Period — The period, when operating under standard 
test conditions, when the mean power consumption is the minimum 
necessary to maintain the given temperature. 


2.8 Average Maximum Temperature — The arithmetical mean of 
successive maximum temperatures occurring in a specified number of 
temperature cycles during a steady state period. 


2.9 Average Minimum Temperature — The arithmetical mean of 
successive minimum temperatures occurring in a specified number of 
temperature cycles during a steady state period. 


2.10 Mean Temperature — The arithmetical mean of maximum and 
minimum temperatures over the same specified number of temperature 
cycles. 


4 


IS : 8506 - 1977 


2.11 Temperature Variation — The difference in the temperature 
recorded at the centre of the working space and at any other point in 
the working space at any instant. 


2.12 Temperature Differential — The cyclic change of temperature 
at any point in the working space as measured by the difference between 
the average maximum and average minimum temperatures at that point. 


2.13 Temperature Drift— The change in the furnace temperature 
over a long time during the steady state period. ` 


2.14 Heating-Up Time — The time required to attain the specified 
maximum temperature after switching on the supply to the furnace. 


2.15 Stabilization Time — The time measured from the end of the 
heating up period to the beginning of the steady state period. 


2.16 Thermal Loss — Rate of loss of heat during a steady state period. 
3. RATING 


3.1 Voltage Rating — The provisions of 3.1 of IS: 302-1973* shall 
apply. 


3.2 Rated Input — The provisions of 3.2 of IS : 302-1973* shall apply. 
4. MATERIALS AND COMPONENTS 
4.1 The materials and components used in the assembly and construction 


oflaboratory electric resistance furnaces shall conform to the relevant 
Indian Standards wherever they exist. 


5. CONSTRUCTION 


5.1 The relevant provisions of 7 of IS : 302-1973* shall apply in addition 
to the requirements stated in 5.2 to 5.7. 


5.2 Cabinet — The cabinet or housing of the furnace shall be construc- 
ted from C.R.C.A. mild steel sheets of a thickness of at least 1'2 mm. 


5.3 Refractory Liners — The refractory liners or muffles used in 
a furnace shall either be monolithic castings or shall be-constructed and 
joined together so that no straight leakage paths from the inner working 
space are likely to be produced by shrinkage of the jointing material. 


*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 
( fourth revision ). 


IS : 8506 - 1977 


5.4 Door or Lid — The door or lid of the furnace shall be so designed 
and constructed that when fully opened, it shall not obstruct the access 
to the working space or pose a hazard owing to its liner being at a very 
high temperature. 


5.5 Heating Elements — The heating elements of a furnace shall be so 
designed and located that the temperature gradient between any part of 
the element and the centre of the working space shall not exceed 200°C 
in the case of concealed or embedded elements and 100°C in the case of 
exposed elements. 


5.5.1 Exposed elements shall be so arranged and connected that they 
are isolated from the supply whenever the furnace door or lid is 
opened. 


5.6 Wiring and Components — The wiring and components used in a 
furnace shall be constructed or fixed in such a manner that they shall be 
able to withstand continuously the temperature to which they are likely 
to be exposed when the furnace is operated at its maximum temperature. 


5.7 Temperature Indicator — A suitable temperature indicator or 
pyrometer capable of reading temperatures with the desired accuracy 
shall be provided on the furnace or alternately arrangement shall be 
provided for fixing such an instrument with its sensitive element well 
within the working space. 


6. GENERAL AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Protection Against Electric Shock — The provisions of B of 
IS : 302-1973* shall apply. 


6.2 Temperature-Rise Limit — The provisions of 10.1 of IS : 302- 
1973* shall apply. 


6.3 Electrical Insulation — The provisions of 11 of IS: 302-1973* 
shall apply. 


6.4 Stability — The provisions of 14.2 of IS : 302-1973* shall apply. 


6.5 Mechanical Strength — The provisions of 15 of IS: 302-1973* 
shall apply. 


*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 
( fourth revision ), 


IS : 8506 - 1977 


6.6 Supply Connections — The provisions of 20 IS : 302-1973* shall 
apply. 


6.7 Terminals — The provisions of 21 of IS : 302-1973* shall apply. 
6.8 Earthing — The provisions of 22 of IS : 302-1973* shall apply. 


6.9 Screws and Connections — The provisions of 23 of IS: 302-1973* 
shall apply. 


6.10 Resistance to Rusting — The provisions of 7.33 of IS: 302-1973* 
shall apply. 


7. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 
7.1 Input — The provisions of 9 of IS : 302-1973* shall apply. 


7.2 Thermal Performance — The furnace shall satisfactorily pass the 
tests specified in 9. 


8. MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 


8.1 Each furnace shall be marked indelibly and clearly with the informa- 
tion prescribed in 25.1 of IS:302-1973* on its outer surface or on 
a name-plate attached thereto. 


8.1.1 Stated Performance — The manufacturer shall include either in the 
information marked on the furnace or in the instructions for use supplied 
with the furnace the following performance details: 


a) Maximum temperature; 


b 


c) The extent and location of the working space; 


— 


The heating-up time; 


d) The temperature variation; 


e) In the case of furnaces fitted with a temperature controller only, 
the temperature differential and drift; 


f) In the case of furnaces fitted with a temperature fuse, the fusion 
temperature; and 


g) In the case of furnaces fitted with a thermal cut-out, the cut-out 
temperature. 


*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 
( fourth revision ). 


IS : 8506 - 1977 


8.1.2 The furnace may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 


Nore — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the.assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer, ISI 
marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard 
as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of 
the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be 
obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 


8.2 Marking of Earth Terminal— The symbol L shall be marked 
prominently on or adjacent to the earth terminal, if provided. 


8.3 Instructions for Use — Each furnace shall be provided with the 
necessary instructions including precautions to be taken for its proper 
and safe use. If the pyrometer requires occasional recalibration in 
normal use the instructions should specify the period after which such 
recalibration may be necessary. 


8.4 The words ‘READ INSTRUCTIONS BEFORE USE’ should appear 
prominently on the furnace. 


9, TESTS 
9.1 Categories of Tests 


9.1.1 Type Tests — The tests specified in Table 1. shall constitute 
type tests and shall be carried out on two samples of furnaces of the same 
type and rating (selected preferably at random froma regular production 
lot ). 


9.1.1.1 Criteria of acceptance -— All samples shall successfully pass all 
the type tests for proving conformity with the requirements of this 
standard. If any sample should fail in any of the type tests, the testing 
authority at its discretion may call for fresh samples not exceeding 
twice the original number and subject them again to all the tests or to 
the tests in which failure occurred. No single failure shall be permitted 
in repeat test(s). 


9.1.2 Acceptance Tests — The following shall constitute the acceptance 
tests: 
a) Visual examination and inspection ( see 9.3.1 ), 
b) Protection against electric shock ( see 40 of IS : 302-1973* ), 


*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 
( fourth revision ). 


8 


IS : 302-1973*), 


IS:8506 - 1977 


Insulation resistance and leakage current (hot) (see 42 of 


d) Earthing connection ( see 38 of IS : 302-1973* ), 


e) Input ( see 45 of IS : 302-1973* 5, 


f) Temperature-rise limit ( see 41 of IS : 302-1973* ), 


g) Temperature variation ( see 9.3.2), 


h) Temperature differential ( applicable to furnaces provided with a 
temperature controller ( see 9.3.2 ), and 


j) Temperature fuse or cut-out ( applicable to furnaces not provided 
with a temperature controller ( see 9.3.4 or 9.3.5 ). 


The method of sampling shall be as agreed to between the manufac- 
turer and the user. 


xi) 


TABLE 1 SCHEDULE OF TYPE TESTS 


( Clause 9.1.1) 


TEST 


(2) 
Visual examination and inspection 
Fire resisting property 
Mechanical strength 
Protection against electrical shock 


Insulation resistance and leakage current 


(hot) 
Farthing connection 
Input 
Temperature-rise limit 
Temperature variation and differential 
Operation of temperature fuse or cut-out 


Heating-up time 


CLAUSE REFERENCE 


(3) 
9.3.1 
29 of IS : 302-1973* 
( Under consideration ) 
40 of IS : 302-1973* 
42 of IS : 302-1973* 


38 of IS : 302-1973* 
45 of IS : 302-1973* 
41 of IS : 302-1973* 
9.3.2 
9.3.4 or 9.3.5 
9.3.6 


*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 
( fourth revision ). 


SSS IAiAihrüittàotbiláiii: emLonLGLMA a MAMMA 


*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 


( fou 


rth revision ), 


9 


IS : 8506 - 1977 


9.1.3 Routine Tests — The following shall constitute routine tests: 
a) Visual examination and inspection ( see 9.3.1), 
b) Protection against electric shock ( see 40 of IS : 302-1973* ), 


c) Insulation resistance and leakage current (hot) ( see 42 oi 


IS : 302-1973*), 
d) Earthing connection ( see 38 of IS : 302-1973* ), and 
e) Input ( see 45 of IS : 302-1973*). 


9.2 General Conditions for Tests 


9.2.1 Test Voltage — The provisions of 26.3 of IS: 302-1973* shall 
apply. 
9.2.2 Ambient Temperature — The ambient temperature during the 


performance test may be kept at any value between 15 to 40"C and 
during the test the temperature shall not vary by more than £5°C. 


9.2.3 Test Temperatures — The temperature variation and differential 
test shall be performed at 500 + 20? C and at a higher temperature which 
is within 50°C of the maximum temperature. The temperature limit test 
shall be performed at the maximum temperature 10°C. 


9.2.4 Measurement of Temperatures — The measurement of temperatures 
for the purpose of temperature variation and differential tests shall 
commence when the steady state period is reached. 


9.2.4.1 The temperature measurements shall be made with Pt/13 
percent Rh-Pt thermocouples made from 0°5 mm thick wire with the 
junctions enclosed in a protective sheath of mullite with wall thickness 
not more than 1[5 mm. The thermocouple junctions will be located at 
different points specified in the stated performance as quoted on the 
equipment marking, instructions for use or specification literature supplied 
by the manufacturer. The thermocouples will be connected to a 
suitable multi-channel recorder or to suitable direct reading pyrometer 
with channel selection switch. 


9.2.5 Arrangement of the Furnace — The furnace shall be tested on a table 
or stand 1 m above floor level and located so as to be protected from direct 
heat source or droughts. When carrying out performance tests, it should 
be empty but with the hearth plate, if any, supplied with the furnace 
kept in position, and all vent holes or peep holes adjusted as per 
the manufacturers instructions. 


*General and safety requirements for household and similar electrical appliances 
( fourth revision ). 


10 


IS : 8506 - 1977 
9.3 Schedule of Tests 


9.3.1 Visual Examination and Inspection — Each furnace shall be examined 
and inspected for general construction and marking requirements speci- 
fied in this standard. The necessary operating instructions and specifica- 
tion of stated performance shall also be checked. 


9.3.2 Temperature Variation and Differential Test — With the measuring 
thermocouples located as required to check the stated performance and 
connected to a measuring or recording instrument the temperatures 
shall be noted or recorded at least once in three minutes at each location 
of a thermocouple junction over a span of two hours during the steady 
state period. The maximum difference of temperature observed at any 
two locations during the test shall constitute the temperature variation of 
the furnace at the test temperature, and the maximum difference of 
temperature during the test observed at any one location shall constitute 
the temperature differential of the furnace at the test temperature. 


9.3.2.1 The temperature variation of the furnace measured as 
in 9.3.2 shall not exceed the limits specified in the stated performance. 


In the case of furnaces fitted with an automatic temperature 
controller the temperature differential of the furnace measured as in 9.3.2 
shall not exceed the limits specified in the stated performance. 


9.3.3 Temperature Drift — A furnace fitted with a temperature controller 
shall be operated continuously for 24 hours in the steady state after 
conclusion of the test as in 9.3.2 and the furnace temperature shall 
be recorded or noted at intervals not exceeding 60 minutes during 
the whole period and at its conclusion. The difference between the 
minimum and maximum temperature obtained shall constitute the 
temperature drift, and it shall not exceed the value specified as stated 
performance. 


9.3.4 Test for Operation of Temperature Fuse — With the furnace arranged 
to operate with the rated input the temperature of the furnace shall be 
allowed to rise without any constraints until the temperature fuse 
interrupts the supply by its fusion. The furnace shall be allowed to cool 
down to below 100°C and the fuse replaced with another of identical 
characteristics. The furnace shall then be switched on again at rated 
input until interruption by the temperature fuse. The cycle will be 
performed six times in all noting the maximum temperature reached. 
This shall not differ at any time by more than 10°C from the nominal 
fusion temperature of the fuse stated by the manufacturer and the 


furnace shall not be found to have been damaged in any way after 
conclusion of the test. 


ll 


IS : 8506 - 1977 


9.3.5 Test for Operation of Thermal Cut-Out — With the furnace arranged 
to operate with the rated input the temperature of the furnace shall be 
allowed to rise without any constraints until the cut-out interrupts 
the supply. The minimum temperature reached shall be noted and the 
furnace allowed to cool below 100°C. The cut-out shall be reset 
as directed by the manufacturer and the cycle repeated. After six such 
operations of the cut-out, the furnace shall not be found to have been 
damaged in any way. 


9.3.6 Heating-Up Time — At the end of the test as in 9.3.5 the furnace 
shall be cooled down to the test ambient temperature and the furnace 
switched on with the related input or maximum setting in case of 
thermostatically controlled furnaces without any constraints on the 
temperature-rise. The time required to attain the maximum temperature 
shall not exceed the heating-up time stated by the manufacturer. 


12 


