IS:3su(Partv)-1968

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR BC SYSTEMS
PART V DISTANCE PROTECTION RELAYS

( Fifth

Reprint OCTOBER 1993 )

UDC 621.316.925.4s

@ Copyright 1969

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARD S MANAKBIUVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC
NEW DELHI 110002 Gt 9 December 1969

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR ac SYSTEMS
PART V DISTANCE PROTECTION RELAYS

Relays

Sectiollal

C:ommittec,

BTDC 35

Shri K. M. Chinnappa ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Lid, Bomba> SHRXV. BALASUUR~M~NIAN SHRI S. V. DIXIT ( Alternate ) Hailway Board ( 1Iinistry of linilxxys CHIEF ELXCTRICALL ENOIS~~R (CENTRAL RAILWAY ) CHIEF ELE~TRICAI, E~~INEER ( RAILWAY ELECTRIFIOATION) ( A/lenU?le)

SHRI G. K. THAKUR

(Afternate

to

)

Jyoti Limited, Barode SHRI A. DATTA SEBI B. L. SINHVAL ( Afrernafe ) DirectorateGeneral of Posts C Telegraphs &RI 5. L. DESAI ( Ministry of Transport & Communications) Mysore State Electricity Board, Bangaloro SH~I M. S. KRIS~NASWAMY The Bombay Electric Supply and Transport SH~I B. H. MEAT&~ Undertaking, Bombay SH~I A. D. LIMAYE ( Alternare) National Test House, Calcutta 8~arB.K. MUXHERJEE ASEA Electric India Pvt Ltd. Bontbuy Saar S. MUTHURAMAN SHBI 5. T. PATEL ( Affernore ) The Sata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur Saar ft. PAD~ANAB~AN SHRI B. R. KAXATH ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SRRI S. 0. PARANOE ( Inspection Wing) ( Ministry of Supply, Materials Technical Development & Planning ) SHBI M. 9. RAJAOOPALAN The English Electric Co of India Ltd. Madras SEBI N. NATE ( Affernore ) OHRI A. RAJARAO Heevy Eleotricals ( India ) Ltd. Bhopel P~OF H. N. RAHACHANDRA RAO Indian Institute of Science, Bangelore ( Conrinued on page 2

)

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARC3

BHAVAN,

NEW

110002

IS : 3842 ( Part
( Cotrfirrrreci

V ) - 1968
I ) Representing

from puge
R_~~DAK

Memhs SIIHI S. 1`.

Jnternational General Electric CO of India Private Ltd, Bombay QHRI P. LLI~NOASWAMP Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala SJIRI P. K. SEN Sum M. 11. SHET~INA Siemens India Ltd, Bombay Smtr M. C. AOAXWALA ( Alteruate ) Central Water & Power Commission (Power SlIRI c. s. SRI~ENIVASAN Wing ) Sriax 1,. C. JAIN ( Alternate ) SHRI Y. Y. VEXI<.~TUW~~AN, Director General BIS, `( Ex-officio Member ) Director ( Elec 113-h ) Secretary
SHRI R.

C. BAJPAI

Deputy

JXrertor

( Elec tech ), BIS Relays,

l'allel for Applicatioll
Convener PIIOF H. N. RAXACHANDRA RAO Members SHRI SHRI SARI SRRI SHRI N. V. P. M. C. NATIL RADHAKRISRNAN K. SEN M. SHETRNA S. SREENIVABAN

Guide for Electrical ETDC 35 : P2

Indian

Institute

of Science,

Bangalore

SERI G. K. THAKUR

The English Eleotric Co of Indie Ltd, Madras Heavy Electricals ( Indis ) Ltd;Bhopel Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiale Siemens India Ltd, Bombay Centrel Water & Power Commission ( Poiver Wing ) Tats Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, Bombqy

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 CONTENTS
PAGE

............... 0. FOREWORD
1.

4

SCOPE

............... . .. . .. . .. ...

6 6 6
10
11

2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Il. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.

TERMIIWLO~Y

CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO POLAR CHARACTERISTICS ... POLARIZING SUPPLIES. . . . .. . .. . ..

CLAWPICATION ACCORDING TO TYPE OF COMPARATOR . . . PERFORMANCE OF DISTANCE RELAYS DISTANCE SCHEMES ... . .. ... ... .. . . ..
.. .

13 16
16

STARTER RELAYS FOR DISTANCE PROTECTION IMPEDANCES SEENBY DISTANCE RELAYS APPLICATION OF DISTANCE RELAYS
RELAYING .. ... , . .. .. .

...... ......
. .. ... ... . ..

20 21
23 31

MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS ASSOCXATED WITH DISTANCE
EFFECT OF FUSE FAILWRB

DISTANCE RELAY& IN CONJUNCTION WITH AUTO-RECLOS.. . ... . .. INOAND CARRIER. CHANNEL 33

APPLICATION OF DISTANCE RELAYSTO TEED LINES

.. .

35 36 37

APPLICATION OF DISTANCE RELAYSFOR SINOLE-POLB AND ... THREE-POLE AUTO-RECLOSINO . . . ... INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMER CONNEOTION~ . . . A TYPICALEXAMPLE OFDISTANOE RELAY APPLmATION . ..
...

37

IS : 3842 ( Part V) - 1968

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR ac SYSTEMS
PART V DISTANCE PROTECTION RELAYS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part V ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 10 December 1968, after the draft finalized by the Relays Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Modern power systems are designed to provide uninterrupted electrical supply, yet the possibility of failure cannot be ruled out. The protective relays stand watch and in the event of failures, short circuits help de-energize the unhealthy or abnormal operating conditions section of the power system and restrain interference with the remainder of it and thus limit damage to equipment and ensure safety of They are also used to indicate the type and location personnel. >ffailure so as to assess the effectiveness of the protective schemes. 0.3 The features which the protective relays should possess are: even after long operations under part of the operatof

4 Reliability,

that is, to ensure correct action periods of inactivity and also to offer repeated severe conditions; Selectivity, that is, to ensure that system is disconnected; that is, detection ing conditions; Speed to prevent or minimize rotating plant; and

b)

only the unhealthy

C>Sensitivity, 4 e)

of short-circuit damage

or abnormal

and risk of instability

Stability, that is, the ability to-operate only under those conditions that call for its operation and to remain either passive or biased against operation under all other conditions.

0.4 A distance relay compares the local current with the local voltage as an economical substitute to an ideal protection scheme comparing local current with the remote current. As the operation of such a relay 4

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968
is made dependent on the ratio U/I = 2 ( 2 being the line impedance or a trigonometric function of it ), it is also a measure of the line length. Hence the name ` distance ' relay. 0.5 Besides being used for protection of feeders and transmission lines, the distance relays are sometimes also used for other applications, such However, this guide confines itself to only as back-up for generators. feeders and transmission lines. 0.6 This guide covers distance protection schemes comprising of electroDistance protection schemes can be made of mechanical relays only. static and semi-static relays which have not been covered in this guide. 0.7 In the preparation of this guide considerable, derived from several published books and from Assistance has also been rendered literature. Boards in collecting actual examples. assistance has been manufacturers' trade by State Electricity

0.8 It is emphasized that this guide has been prepared to assist in the application rather than to specify the relay to be used. This guide deals only with the principles of application of distance relays and does The not deal with the selection of any particular protective scheme. actual circuit conditions in all probability may be different from those The examples, even though drawn from actual field given here. applications, should be regarded as mere illustration of one or the other point. 0.9 This guide is one of the series of Indian Standard application guides for electrical relays for ac systems. The other guides in this series are: IS : 3638-1966 Application guide for gas-operated relays

IS : 3842 ( Part I )-1967 ac systems ; Part transformers IS : 3842 ( Part ac systems motors

Application guide for electrical relays for I Overcurrent relays for feeders and guide for electrical relays for relays for generators and \ relays for negative relays for

II )-1966 Application : Part II Overcurrent

IS : 3842 ( Part III )-1966 Application guide for electrical ac systems : Part III Phase unbalance relays including phase sequence relays IS : 3842 ( Part IV )-1966 Application guide ac systems : Part IV Thermal relays for electrical

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 1. SCOPE 1.1 ~Phis guide ( Part V ) deals with the application of distance relays It applies only to feeders for ac systems, covered by IS : 3231-1965". and transmission lines.
- Distance protection schen~es NOTE relays are not covered in this guide. comprising of @atic and semi-static

1.2 This guide does system protection. 2. TER.MINOLOGY

not

cover

the

principles

of system

design

and

2.1 For the purpose of this guide the definitions given ( Part 1X)-1966? and IS : 1885 ( Part X )-1968$ shall apply. 3. CLASSIFICATION CHARACTERISTICS ACCORDING TO POLAR

in IS : 1885

relays are classified by their polar characteris3.1 General -Distance tics, number of inputs, and the manner in which the comparison The common types compare two input quantities in either is made. magnitude or phase to obtain characteristics which are either straight lines or circles when plotted on an R--X diagram. The polar characteristics normally obtainable are: a) Plain impedance; b) Ohm: 1) Blinder, and 2) Reactance; c) Mho; d) Offset mho; and e) Modified impedance. 3.1.1 Relay movements and circuits in which two independent quantities are compared are either inherent.ly amplitude or phase comparators. Any type of characteristic obtainable with one comparator is also obtainable with the other, although the combinations of quantities compared in each case argdifferent. shown 3.2 Plain Impedance Relay - The plain impedance characteristic in Fig. 1 is the sitnplest in use and consists of a circle with centre at the origin. Operation occurs in the shaded area inside the circle. The -. I_-*YpeciGcation f0or elect&n1 relays for power syetem protection.
+Electrotechnical ~Eiectrotschnical vocabulary: vocabulary: Part Part IS Eleatrical relays. S Electrical power system protection.

6

IS:3842(PartV)-1968
signiticance of this is that the relay operates below a certain impedance leirel which is independent of the phase angle between voltage and current. The relay h,as a current-operating coil producing a torque equal to K,Z and a voltage-restraining coil producing a torque equal to . &U. Relay operati& occurs when K,I > K,U or -+=Z)< 2. x

FIG. 1 CHARACTERISTICOF IMPEDANCE RELAY 3.3 Ohm Relay 3.3.1 Blinder Relay - This relay has a straight line characteristic, _~ parallel to the locus of the feeder impedance as shown in Fig. 2, and is relays from tripping on very used as a `blinder ' to prevent distance severe power swings and loads on long lines. The relay, which is sometimes referred to as an ` angle-impedance ' relay can also be used for purposeful tripping of the tie lines at preselected locations, when the generators have gone out of synchronism. For this application, two which divide the impedance diagram. j:nto such relays are required, three zones, that is A, B and C ( see Fig. 3 ). As no other condition except a power swing can cause the impedance vector to move succcsis entirely immune to sively through the three zones, the scheme operation on any other type of system disturbance, for example, fault conditions. 3.3.1.1 Another protection of power prevent operation of load conditions and coriditions. application of the `blinder' relay is in the lines for railway traction, where it is used to the distance measuring relays under maximum shall ensure operation under minimum fault

3.3.2 Reatance Re!ay - This relay is a special case of the, ` ohm' relay and has a polar characteristic which is a straight line parallel to the resistance axis as shown in Fig. 4; The concept of a relay measuring X was developed as such a relay 7 would be independent of

IS:3842(PartV)-1968
atmospheric effects, terrain or tower footing resistance and fault or arc resistance. While this is true for a radial line, it may not be equally applicable for meshed circuits.
X t FEEDER

LOCUSOF

IMPEDANCE BLINDER RELAY

LOCUS OF POWER \

Fro.

2 CHARACTERISTIC

OF OHM

RELAY USXD As `BLINDER'

LINE

IMPEDANCE

POWER

SWING

LOCUS

Fro. 3

CHARACTERISTICOF OHM RELAY FOR OUT-OF-STEP TRIPPING relays may have a reactive VA magnet ipstead of magnet of an impedance relay, and operate when *I;;$X)uK

. 3.3.2.1 Reactance the voltage-restraining

3.3.2.2 High speed aluminium cup ._type of relays with four poles are more sensitive than the above type and are used nowadays. Two opposite poles have current polarizing windings and the other two have one each of current-opergting and voltage-restraining windings which The torque is thus made proportional to oppose each other. U Sin + < K that is, KP - WI Sin # and the relay opeiates when ---I X ( K, the ohmic reactance setting 8 of the relay

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968

FIG. 4 CHARACTERISTIC OF REACTANCE RELAY

3.3.2.3 It, therefore, follows that the characteristic of a reactance relay is a straight line parallel to the R axis on the R - X diagram and its reach in the third and fourth quadrant is infinite, that is, it is Therefore, in practice, a directional relay inherently non-directional. can be used either to keep the polarizing coils shorted or a separate directional relay is employed with the reactance relay.
relays have a circular characteristic with the 3.4 Mho Relay -These circumference passing through the origin, as shown in Fig. 5. The term c mho ' was originally derived from the fact that the characteristic when plotted on an admittance instead of impedance diagram, gives a The mho relay is inherently directional and is suitable straight line. for use on long lines. The majority, of present day electromagnetic mho relays have a four pole cup type of movement, having voltage coils on two opposite poles and opposed current andvoltage windings on the other two poles, giving a torque equation at balance as U [ yZ Cos ( 0 - #) - U 1. = 0 is the phase angle between U and I, orZ=KCos(O-_),where# while 13is the value ,of 4 for maximum torque. This is the equation of a circle with diameter K.

l

FIG. 5

CHARACTERISTIC OF MHO RELAY 9

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 case where the circular 3.5 Offset Mho Relay - The more general characteristic of the plain impedance relay is offset by val ying amounts is known as the ` ofl&t-rnho ' characteristic. Typical o&t mho chal acteristic is shown in Fig. 6. The offset mho retay has four pl-incipa\ applications: a) Bus-bar b) Carrier d) Starters zone starting on very back-up ( or power protection, blocking and schemes, swivg ) blocking,

in carrier-distance long lines.

c) Out-of-step

FK.

6 CHAWKXI:KISTIC OE..OFFSETMlro

RELAY

impedance relay is a special case 3.6 Modified Impedance -Modified of the offset mho relay where the plain impedance relay is offset along the R or R and X axis to take care of arc compensation. 4. POLARIZING SUPPLIES

4.1 Of ,the three input quantities to impedance measuring relays, namely, operating current, restraint voltage, and polarizing input, the first two determine the complex impedance (2) measured by the relay and are derived from the voltage and current associated with the fault. The third quantity is essentially a reference for determining the phase sense of the operating current and may be deiived from a variety of The magnitude of the polarizing input is unimportant so quantities. long as it is not zero, for example, for terminal faults, when the restraint voltage is zero, the polarizing input should exist to avoid dead zone in the forward direction and to prevent maloperation for reverse faults. 4.2 The different methods given in 4:2,1 to 4.2.4. in use for polarizing `distance relays are

4.2.1 Faulty Phase Voltage - If the same voltage is used for polarizing as is used foe the restraint voltage and the comparator input is derived through similar impedance, the polarizing signal disappears

IS : 3842 ( Part when the fault impedance is low and thus this method is not ofpractical USC. It is worth noting, however, that relation is always satisfied.

V ) - 1968

of polarization the phase angle

4.2.2 t;uulty Phase Voltage with Memory - If, instead of applying the faulty phase voltage through an impedance similar to the restraint impedance to provide a polarizing input, an alternative impedance consisting of a tuned circuit is used, it is possible to maintain a polarizing signal for a short time'after a fault occurs. Thus in the case of a terminal fault the polarizing input will be maintained sufficiently long for operation of the relay to occur. One of the drawbacks of this arrangement is that it is not effective when a line is being energized. The relay' being initially de-energized, ` memory ' is ineffctive under this condition. This disadvantage may be overcome by using busbar However, voltage transformers instead of line voltage transformers. when line voltage transformers are used, additional relays may be required in case of mho relays to ensure proper operation in case of solid three-phase faults. The polarizing current does not maintain a constant phase relation When a fault occurs, the phase angle of to the faulty phase v'oltage. the faulty phase voltage alters whereas the memory circuit maintains a current at the original phase angle. This phase angle shift is not A further and more seriouscause of excessive and may be tolerated. phase angle shifts is due to variations in the supply frequency. The resonant circuit always resonates at a fixed frequency whereas the supply To avoid trouble it is frequency may vary between certain limits. essential that ` memory' is restricted to about three cycles at the most. This implies that the relay shall be very fast. voltage may also be ob4.2.3 Healthy Phase Voltage - A polarizing tained from one of the healthy phases or,between two phases. The main disadvantage ofthis method is that in the event of a three-phase terminal fault the polarizing voltage disappears. In a number of cases it has been possible to use high-set overcurrent relays which may protect against three-phase terminal fault. 4.2.4 Ft~lry Phase Voltage with a Small Percentage from the Healthy Phases - This condition is similar to that given in 4.2.1, but has an additional 3 to 5 percent of the voltage from one of the leading phases This voltage is phase shifted to bring in the voltage polarizing circuit. This increases the accuracy it in phase with the faulted phase voltage. of distance measurement under low fault-voltage conditions. However, the method has similar limitations as those given in 4.2.3 under threephase faults. 5. CLASSIFICATION 5.0 As mentioned ACCORDING earlier, comparators 11 TO TYPE are OF COMPARATOR into two groups

divided

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968
according to whether a comparison is made of the amplitude input quantities or of the phase angle between them. 5.1 Amplitude movements: a) Balanced b) Induction comparators beam, disc. and generally employ the of the'two relay

following

5.1.1 Balanced Beam RelayAlthough quite outmoded, the balanced beam unit is used nowadays as an inexpensive starting In the relay, element with limited range and accuracy requirements. two magnitude circuits are arranged to act at the opposite ends of a beam, as shown in Fig. 7. Assuming that the turns are equal on the two coil systems and that the magnetic circuits are similar, operation is obtained when I 10 I Q where I, = operating I, = restraining current, current,.and I I, I 2 + K.

K r: constant: The advantages of this unit are simplicity and speed. The disadvantages are high-reset impedance, over-reach due to offset current waves or currents of high X/R ratio, elliptical impedance characteristics In modern in undesirable direction, and a tendency to chatter. practical relays, solutions to some of these problems have been found, for example, the dc offset component was extracted from the current wave by a filter to reduce she over-reach.

RESTRAINT u

OPERATE

Fxo. 7

BALANCED BEAM AMPLITUDE COMPARATOR

5.1.2 Induction Disc ( Amplitude Comparator ) Relay - By proviJiug two entirely separate driving mechanisms on an induction disc as slrowu This unit sulfer~ I'I~IUII in Fig. 8, amplitude comparator is obtained, 12

I!3:3842(PartV)-l!k% mm of the disadvantages of the beam relay and is much less efficient as it is slow in operation. As such it is not used in any modern distance protection scheme, and is of theoretidal interest only. .

RESTRAINT U

FIG. 8 INDUCTION DISC AMPLITUDE.COMPARATOR 5.2 Phase angle comparators a) Induction b) Induction disc, and cup. generally employ the following movements:

5.2.1 Induction Disc ( Phase Angle Comparator ) Relay.- A torque is obtained by the interaction of the fluxes from the two magnetic circuits which act in close proximity on the disc. The unit has a very low sensitivity and suffers from interaction between the two magnetic It is also difficult to balance and there is a tendency for circuits. spurious torques where only one input is applied. It is currently used in directional elements where high performance is not required. cup comparator is 5.2.2 Induction Cup Relay - The induction illustrated in Fig. 9. It is an improved version of the induction disc ( phase angle ) comparator and produces nearly perfect impedance characteristics, has almost equal operate and reset values and is not much affected by offset waves. The comparator may work over a larger range of input quantities and has very little interaction. The forces are proportional to the product of the input quantities. Its construction is compact and robust and it is the most popular high speed electromagnetic unit. 6. PERFORMANCE OF DISTANCE RELAYS

6.1 The ideal polar characteristics so far described are independent of the actual values of current and voltage applied to a distance measuring Practical relay and depend only on the ratio of the input quantities. distance relays depart from the ideal and have characteristics which depend on the actual values of voltage and current. An approximation to the, ideal is obtained only over a limited range of input quantities. 13

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968
Inside this range the relay will have errors which are acceptable and outside this range it will have excessive errors and may not operate. The operating time of the relay will be variable depending on the individual magnitudes of the input quantities, being, for example, long for small inputs near the cut-off impedance and short for large inputs well within the cut-off impedance. The reach accuracy of the relay also depends upon the proportionality between the respective torques and input quantities being maintained. However, depending upon the design of the relay, below a certain value of input voltage, this is no longer true and the relay may not be guaranteed to measure within the The complete representation of a practical relay specified accuracy. has thus to include information on these aspects in addition to the ideal polar characteristics.

A
Fro. 9

INPUT

I

A

INDUCTION CUP PHASE COMPARATOR

6.2 Any c .lt condition

in a power system may be represented by a single line a:iagram as shown in Fig. 10. This simple impedance loop has a voltage U applied to it, which may be either the star or delta open circuit voltage of the power system, depending on the type of fault considered. R is identified as the relay location and Ix and un are the current and voltage applied to the relay respectively. The impedances 2,s and ZL are the source and line impedances by virtue of their position with respect to the relay location. Source impedance 2s is a measure of fault MVA at the relaying point and for faults involving earth, is also dependent on the method of system earthing behind the relaying point. Line impedance 2~ is a measure of the impedance of the protected section. The voltage [JR applied to the relay is thus IRZI, for a fault at the reach point, and this may be 14

a

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 to line impedance ratio,

alternatively expressed ZS /ZL , as follows: UR = IRzL where

in terms

of source

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..." . . . . . . . . . . . (2)

IR=
Thus

u
ZL

2s j-

=

u

(
SOURCE

1-t

*

1

.....

,...............................

(3)

LINE

IMPEDANCE

FIG. 6.3

10

PERFORMANCE OF A DISTANCE RELAY

It may be seen from equation 3 of 6.2 that the fault voltage ` seen ' depends on the source-to-line impedance ratio of a transmission system. Relay performance is usually expressed in terms of the minimum ` fault voltage ' that should be seen by the relay, for example, 8 V ( secondary ) across the relay terminals to maintain the accuracy of calibration within & 10 percent. Therefore, the lower the value of the fault voltage across the relay to maintain the accuracy of calibration, the higher will be the 2s /Zh ratio that may be entertained, or in other words, the shorter the length of the line that may be protected. The ` minimum fault voltage ' for a fault at the reach point to which the relay will remain accurate varies with the type of relay, that is, impedance, mho or reactance and also with the type of comparator rmployed.

by the relay

15

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 6.4 Apart
from the magnitudes of the impedances 2~ and Z,, it is necessary to consider their phase angle. This determines the time constant of the primary transients which will occur in the voltage and current waveforms when a sudden fault is applied. With high speed relays this factor is bf great importance as the relay is required to measure correctly during the transient period. 7. DISTANCE SCHEMES

7.1 Discriminating zones of protection may be obtained using distance relays provided that fault distance is a simple f'unction of impedance. While in principle this is'true for transmission circuits, the impedance actually measured depends on the actual magnitude of current and voltage, the relay connections, type of fault and impedances in the fault in addition to the line impedance. It is impossible to successfully eliminate these additional features in distance measurement for all possible operating conditions. However, a considerable measure of success is achieved using composite schemes employing several relays and different relay characteristics. 7.2 A distance scheme comprises starting relays, impedance measuring unit, zone timers and tripping relays. To cater for the economic and technical requirements of any particular network, a range of schemes is necessary from which a choice may be made. The schemes generally employed to meet the protection requirements of low, medium and high voltage networks, may be classified into three main groups: a) b) Schemes designed for protection against phase fault< only; Schemes designed for protection against all types of faults phase and earth -using separate units for each type of fault ( also referred to as non-switched schemes ); and Schemes designed for protection against various type using one set of units only but incorporating switching (also referred to as switched schemes ). falling under the three categories given of faults features in 7.2, are

c)

7.3 Typical schemes, given in Table 1. 8. STARTER RELAYS

FOR

DISTANCE

PROTECTION

function of the starter relays, sometimes also referred to as fault detectors, is to switch measuring relays to the correct input quantitie? of the measuring &lays where the relays are not directionally connected ( switched schemes ) and to control the timing relays for extending the reach of the measuring relay to the second and third zone. Starter relays when used with distance relays of the impedance and reactance type, which do not possess any inherent directional property or additional direction measuring clement, should incorporate directional feature in them. 16

8.1 The primary

IS:3842(Part.V)-1968 8.2 The following types of ` starter ' relays, for distance protection are used: a.) Overcurrent starters, b) Undervoltage starters, c) Impedance starters which may be of current dependent or current and angle dependent, and d) Mho or offset mho starters.
TABLE 1 TYPICAL

SCREZ~E

DISTANCE PROTECTION SCHEMES (`Clause 7.3 ) BASIC UNITS r
8)

E. I
[

measurement ii) Three mho units for starting fault measurement

i)Three mho units for pheee fault

b) [ 1) Three-sons
phase fault protection ( Non-switched ) 1 f

9 Th ree reactance units for phase ii) Three mho units for starting
i) Ok mho unit for 3-phase fault measurement ii) One rnho unit for nhose-to-chase fault measuremen't A Three offset mho or elliptical alnrting units One negative sequence starter Three mho units for phase faulL measurement Three mho units for earth fault measurement Three mhck lmits for starting Three rsnotnnce urlitn for pll:lse fault mensuroment Three rertctnnce trnitri for ~art.11 fnult measnremeut Three mho units fov atartiilg Three mho units for phwe fault meaeurement Three reectnnce units for earth fn.ult measurement Throo mho units for stnrling

I

2) Three-zone pkyxse nnrl earth fault protection ( Ron-switched )

i) Three mho unit.s for enrl h fault and j-phase fault mens~~rement~ d) ( ii) One mho unit for phase-1 o-phase fault measurement I ; iii) Three offset mho or elliptical starting elements _ 1

r

I

( Continued )

17

IS : 3842 ( Part V )-1968
TABLE 1 TYi'ICAL DISTANCE PROTECTION SCHEMES-Confd

SCEEXE I!E.
B)

BAEIO UNIW

4

r4
1

9 One mho unit for fault measurement . . Two instantaneous overpurrent

i

startera NOTE -The mho unit is awltched to the faulted phase by the overcurrent starters.

One reaotance unit for phase and earth fault measurement One mho unit for directionalieing reactance unit b) -+ 1 iii) Three impedance starters NOTE-The mho and reactance units are switched to the faulted phase(s) by the starters. t

:1 ii) i,

`) 3) Three-zone phase and earth fault protection (switched )

i) Three impedance units for phase and earth faults j ii) Three directional units for phase and earth fnults 4 iii) Three imnedance starters NOTE -The _ impedance and direcI tional units are switched to measure either phase faults or earth faults by the starters. t r

f
d) (

1 I I [

and earth faults ii) Three impedance starters starters for earth iii) Overcurrent faults Nora -The mho unit is switched to the faulted phase by the starters.

i) One mho unit for phase

i) One mho unit for earth fault and
3-phase fault measurement fault measurement ~~a~t;roffset mho or elliptical starter

] ii) One mho unit for phase-to-phase
0) 3

i iii) L iv) One negative
r

sequence

f)

i) Three impedance units for phase and earth faults measurement ii) Three directional units for phase and earth faults i' 1 iii) Three impedance starters (_ iv) Pour overcurrent starters

8;;3edFollowing

combinations

of distance

and starter as

re1aJ.s are commonly starters for uie with

a) Directional impedance

and overcurrent relays type of distance relay; 18

IS:32342(PutV)-1968 b) Overcurrent units only for use with mho type of distance relay (sometime und,er-voltage relays are also used specially on resistance earthed systems ); c) Mho starters for any type of distance relay; d) Impedance starters for reactance or impedance type of distance relay directionalized by a separate mho relay or a directional relay; e) Current dependent under-impedance star ten for distance relays when heavy loads on medium lines are expected. On heavy loads the reach of the starting relay reduces and at low currents the reach increases; and f) Current and angle dependent under-impedance starters for distance relays where on heavy loads and long lines the reach, even at high current, is to be maintained in the fault area. 8.4 Choice of the type of starter deserves careful thought and depending upou the system conditions any of the starters mentioned above could be used. The mho type of starters should have, a very wide range because they should be capable of detecting faults well beyond the zone3 reach of the measuring relays. Where such a unit is used as a common starter for both phase and earth faults, residual compensation is necessary for the correct detection of earth faults. 8.S For switched schemes, that is, employing one common measuring element to be switched to the appropriate phase(s) by the starter relays or th,eir auxiliaries, the choice may be made between any one of the starters mentioned in 8.2. 8.6 When overcurrent starters are used, care shall be taken to ensure that their setting is such that they would pick up for phase-to-phase and phase-to-earth hults, at the end of the zone-3 reach of distance relays, with minimum generation, yet they should not pick up for the heaviest overloads under `maximum generation. These two conditions may not always be satisfied simultaneously. In such an instance, overcurrent starters should not be used. Furthermore, overcurrent starters should have a high pick up to drop out ratio, otherwise indiscGminate tripping may occur when there are tee-offs in the zone;2 and zone-3 sections, as this would prevent overcurrent starters from resetting after a zone-2 or zone-3 fault has been cleared by the relay of the faulty section. 8.6.1 Overcurrent starters have to be supplemented with ` undcrvoltage' type of starters to initiate the ,switching sequences on such earth faults which would prevent the overcurrent starters from'picking up but would produce an undervoltage condition, This requirement calls for undervoltage starters to be set aroc*?d 80 to 85 percent of the rated voltage. It should, therefore, be ensured that whenever under19

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 voltage type of starters are employed, the system voltage under heavily loaded, but !lealthy conditions, is not so low as to affect the undervoltage starters. 8.7 An (impedance ' type of starter is, however, free from the drawbacks pointed out above for overcurrent and undervoltage types of starters. Care should be exercised to ensure that such starters have an ability to ` see ' faults up to the end of zone-3 and to prevent incorrect switching. The starters on healthy phases should not pick up under an earthfault due to the extra ` sound phase ' currents that would be flowFor this purpose, a knowledge of ing on multipl'e earthed systems. along with the the system's ' sound phase ' currents is nercssary, maximum load current. 9. IMPEDANCES SEEN BY DISTANCE RELAYS 9.1 To enable a distance relay to measure the same impedance, and hence the distance, under all types of f'ault conditions such as phase-tophase, phase-to-earth and three-phase faults, appropriate voltages and currents should be available at the relay terminals. The actual rmpedante seen by a distance relay is: Voltage available at the relay tcl.minals = -~-----.------_--_.---_. Current flowing through the relay Voltage Current Voltage = transformer transformer tran;F;;Ter secondary voltage secondary currcnc primary ratio
X

Currelit

transformer ratio

Voltage

transformer
x

= Primary = Secondary

impedance impedance

Currc:nt transformer primary current Current transformer ratio -.-Voltage transformer rat%7

9.2 A distance relay required to measure correctly for phase-to-phase faults should be supplied with (a) phase-to-phase voltage and the difference of two phase currents as shown in Fig. I lA, or (b) be arranged in the three-phase single system scheme whereby the relay will measure all combinations of phase-to-phase faults. 9.2.1 The relay would measure : under the fault
URP - 1'

condition
= 21

as shown

in Fig.

1lA

IR

thst is, the positive phase sequence impedance of the single line conductor between the relay location and the fault position both under three-phase and phase-to-phase faults. 20

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 9.2.2 Similarly, for phase-to-earth faults as shown in Fig. llB, if the relays were to measure positive phase sequence impedance Zr, additional current, which is a function of the current transformer residual current ( Ia, ), should be fed into them. Thereforc, the relay measures

hase sequence current ) for a phase-toSince I& = 31, ( I0 = zero earth fault, it may be shown x at the factor ( K' known as a earth fault residual compensation ' should be: 20 - 21 32, where Z,, is the zero phase sequence impedance. With the above amount of compensation, it may be shown that in a multiple earthed system where value of lo is unknown and may change with switching conditions, automatic adjustment of the amount of competisation IB, by circuits. may using still be -achieved by adding transformer Z" - z, IRrr tQ & 1 connected in the residual i

a compensating [R

Y

Y fB
UBN IRES -2

B

IO
,_; FAULl

I IA

Phase-to-`Phase Fault

I I B Phase-to-Earth Fault

Fro.

11

CIRCUIT DIAGRAM FOR THE OPERATION OP DISTANCE RELAYS UNDER DIFFERENT FAULT CONDITIONS

10. APPLICATION

OF DISTANCE

RELAYS

10.1 Of the various applications possible for a distance measuring relay, its application to transmission line protection is the most common. Instead of the inverse time-distance characteristic used earlier, ` stepped ' time-distance characteristics are now in use. The characteristibs may either be ` single-stepped ' or ` three-stepped ' as shown in Fig. 12 and 13 respectively. A distance measuring relay of conventional 21

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968
design has an inherent instantaneous time-distance characteristic, operating time ,becoming infinite at the relay reach point. . the

,PROTECTED

SECTION -

-I

DiSTANCE

Fm. 12

TYPICAL SINGLE-STEPTIME-DISTANCE CHARACTERISTIC OF DISTANCERELAYS

ZONE

3

t ZONE
2 * ZONE

2

1 PROTECTEDSECTION DISTANCE -

-

Fm. 13

TYPICAL THREE-STEP TIME-DISTANCECHARACTERISTIC OF DISTANCE RELAYS

10.2 Owing to the limitations of time overcurrent protection on short feeders and on systems with wide variations in the generating capacity as given in IS : 3842 ( Part I )-1967*, distance relays are used in preference, to overcurrent relays. Single-step distance relays can be used on feeders where high-set instantaneous overcurrent units cannot be used. *Application guide for electri&l relays for ACsystems: Part I Overcurrent relays for feeders and transformera. 22

IS : 3842 ( Part V) - 1968
protection 10.3 Another typical instance where ` single-step ' distance In such a case, it would be may be employed is a transformer-feeder. possible to set the distance relay to cover 100 percent transformerfeeder length instantaneously because even on considering the ' overreach ' constituting factors such as ` offset wave ' accuracy of the relay calibration, current transformer and voltage transformer errors and errors in line constants, it is often found that the relay will not ` look ' or in other words, operate for transformer through the transformer, secondary side faults. 10.4 On transmission lines having an c adjacent ' line section as shown in Fig. 13, ` three-step ' distance relays are used. The first step is usually set to cover up to 80 to 90 percent of the protected line section, Setting the first step reach to about and is instantaneous in operation. 80 to 90 percent of the protected section ensures that the relay will not over-reach and maloperate on faults close to the bus-bar of the adjacent This is necessary to allow for the inaccuracies, of the instrusection. ment transformers, errors in line constants, relay inaccuracies, and overThe setting of reach effect due to dc transients in the fault current. the first step should, therefore, take into account the above mentioned points. 10.4.1 The second step is set to extend between 20 to 50 percent of t,he next section. This ensures that the remote end faults of the protected section will be cleared in zone-2 time. 10.4.2 The third step is set to cover the entire adjacent section. I.. may, therefore, be surmised that the second and third steps of a threestep scheme serve as back-up to zone-l protection of the adjacent section. Extention of the measuring relay reach into zone-2 and zone-3 is obtained by changing the taps of the auxiliary voltage transformers or by switching in resistance in the relay restraint circuit at pre-set time intervals by means of a timer relay, which is initiated by the starter relays on the inception of a fault. Alternatively, separate measuring relays may be used for zone-2 and zone-3. This latter arrangement, however, adds to the cost of the protection.

11. MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS DISTANCE RELAYING 11.1 Under-Reaching of Distance Relays

ASSOCIATED

WITH

11.1.1 Any phenomenon producing difference in the values of currents flowing past the relaying point and that flowing into the actual fault will result into an erroneous measurement leading to under-reaching, that is, the relay not being able to see a fault in its distance setting.
23

IS:3842(PutV)-1968
This may happen under the following circumstances: a) When there is an infeed at the next bus-bar; b) When there is fault impedance, usually present in the form of an arc; and c) Earth faults on the secondary side of delta/star transformers being reflected as phase-to-phase fault on the primary side.

11.1.2 As shown in Fig. 14 the infeed Zp at the next bus-bar, which would be present if section A& itself was double circuit, would reduce the reach of relays at A as the additional current in section BC will not be seen by relays at A, although the additional voltage drop will be seen. Hence the impedance actually seen by the relay at A will be:
zF =

(ZdB x Id) +$BD(zd

+ IF)

=zABfzBD(zy)

But as the relay can actnally measure only ZAB + ZBD for operation in zone-5 it would now be able to ` see ' up to only ZB& in addition to ZAB, such that
z,E( "2 ") = ZBD . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .i . .. . . (1)

. ... . ... . . . .. . .. . .. ... . .. . .. .. . . .. . . (2) From equation (2) above, it may be seen that however large may be the infeed Zp at the next bus-bar, the next bus-bar faults will always be covered in zone-2 of relays at A, which is their main function. 11.1.3 It has been said above that zone-3 shall cover the entire adjacent section. In Fig. 14, the worst case will be when section BC is singlecircuit and section AB is double-circuit which would make Zp = IA. Therefore, to cover entire section BC in zone-3, zone-3 should be set to z,,( ""lf; ") = 2x&c ,

care should, of course, be exercised the load impedance.

to see that 2~n + 2 ZBC is less than

Fro. 14 UNDER-REACHINGOF DISTANCE RELAYS DUB TO
SEPARATE INPEED

24

IS : 3842 ( Part V) - 1968 11.1.4 Under-Reach Due to Arcing 11.1.4.1 Where mho or directional impedance relays are used for fault measurement, they also ` see ' the fault-arc resistance which is quite appreciable at times and would cause under-reaching as shown in the vector diagram of Fig. 15. Th e under-reach due to arcing should thus he limited to such a value that all remote and bus-bar faults are cleared in zone-2 time. In other words, if the zone-2 setting is 50 percent of zone-l setting, that is, extending 20 percent into the next section, the under-reach due to arcing should not exceed 20 percent ( assuming both sections of equal length ). . *

FIG. 15

VECTCR DIAGRAM FOR UNDER-REACH OF DISTANCE RELAYS

11.1.4.2

It

has been

emperically

found

that

arc

resistance

28 650 Ohms Ra = F In general, if arc resistance per metre length of the arc in still air. exceeds one-third of the protected section impedance, the reach of a relay set to cover 85 percent of the section may shrink to It follows, therefore, that only faults in the 60 percent of the section. middle 20 percent, may be cleared instantaneously from both the ends. It should, howeve`, be noted that for a phase-to-phase fault, the relay would ` see ' &Ra. Further, as we are considering the effect of arc on zone-2, the time delay is sufficient to enable the arc to treble its initial Wind stieches and value, given by the above formula, due to wind. deionises the arc and both these factors have a direct bearing on the arc 25

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 resistance. Therefore, while calculating R, by the formula

be greater (1' being the length of the arc in -metre ( ` 1' s11011ld than the conductor spacing of a line ), mho relays tolerance to arcing may be increased by choosing the relay m;lximum torque angle to be less ( lagging) than the line angle. Modified impedance relays can be set to take care of arc compensntion without any under-reaching measurement :LS shown in l:i;<. 16.

FIG. 16 MODIFIED I~~PEDANCE RELAY CHARACTERISTICS WITH AND WITHOUT ARC COMPENSATION 11.1.4.3 Another method of increasing the tolerance of mho relays to arcing is to polarize them with voltage from another phase(s), that is, This alters the reach of the mho relay under from unfaulted phases. Thus the relay allows for different fault conditions along the R axis. more arc resistance. 11.2 Power Swings -Distance protection, not being a true unit protection, is affected by power swings on the system and may operate under The locus ofa power swing on the polar diagram is these conditions. shown in Fig. 17. It will be noted that the locus of the power swing is at right angles to the general direction of the line impedances. In general, distance relays having mho characteristics are less susceptible to operation on power swings because of their narrower characteristics. If the system goes out of step, however, these relays will also operate. Because of this, special measures are taken to block operation during a power swing either by using an ohm-blinder relay as shown in Fig. 2 or by using an out-of-step blockin g relay. The latter arraugement is shown 26

IS : 3842 (Part V) - 1968
in Fig. 18. The locus of the impedance vector ` seen ' during a swing condition cuts the characteristics of both the blocking unit and the measuring unit. If the measuring unit operates within a certain time after the operation of the blocking relay, then tripping is allowed. If, on the other hand, after a predetermined time the measuring unit has not operated then an auxiliary relay opens a contact in the tripping circuit so that if the measuring relay does eventually operate tripping will not take place. Thus under fault conditions when the out-of-step blocking relay and the measuring relay operate practically simultaneously, tripping is allowed, but underpower swing conditions when the measuring relay picks up after the out-of-step blocking relay, tripping is prevented. Thus the danger of cascade tripping of feeder sections is removed. Another applicatron of out-of-step blocking relay is shown in Fig. 19. Two offset-mho relays are used to detect the presence of a power swing, .and determination of whether the system is stable OI unstable is made according to the time interval between the operation of these two relays.

SOURCE

IMPEDANCE

0 / G,/

/ SWING

FIG. 17 Locus

OF POWER SWING

.3 Double-Circuit Lines --Where two circuits are supported on the same towers or are otherwise in close proximity over the whole or part of their length, there is zero sequence mutual coupling between the circuits. Thus, during earthfault conditions, the voltage applied to a relay in one circuit includes an induced voltage proportional to the other. As the current distribution in the two circuits is unaffected by the presence of mutual coupling, no similar variation in the current applied to the relay takes place and consequently, the relay measures incorrectly. Whether the relay over-reaches or under-reaches will depend The amount upon the direction of current flow in the healthy circuit. of over-reach or under-reach is dependent on the line parameters, It should be source and line impedances and the position of the fault. noted, however, that the maximum amount of over-reach is restricted to

27

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 the total length of the line and the cut-off point can never extend outside the line length. This is independent of the line parameters and compensation is, therefore, unnecessary in this respect. When the prospective under-reach from this and other causei is excessive, however, it may be prudent to employ carrier aided distance schemes or some other form of unit protection where high speed relay operation and simultaneous fault clearance by circuit breakers or both is considered necessary for all faults within the protected section. This would apply particularly where the parallel line section was followed by a short line. In this case faults near the end of the parallel line section may be cleared in zone-3 time if plain distance schemes are used.
X r-LINE IMPEDANCE OUT-OF-STEP BLOCKING RELAY

MHO

STARTE

R

OA = First line section AB = Adjacent line section
FIG. 18 CHARACTERISTICS OF OUT-OF-STEP BLOCKINGRELAY

effect of transients on distance relays is to cause, 11.4 Transients -The over-reaching or to introduce a delay in the relay operation. The former is due to the difference between the current and voltage tran-. sients applied to the relay, whilst the latter is generally the result of transient saturation of the protective transformers. The current and voltage transients at a relaying point due to a fault have the same time constants but their ratio of amplitudes depends on the source impedance which is widely variable. The system X/R ratio determines the duration of both transients while the instant of fault inception together with the system X/R ratio controls the initial amplitude of the current transient. 28

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968
The amplitude of the voltage transient is inversely proportional to the source to line impedance ratio but also. increases as the difference in the source and line angles increases. In a homogeneous system there is no transient voltage as the source and line angles L-e identical.
X MHO STARTER OF DISTANCE PROTECTION

FIG. 19 OUT-OF-STEP BLOCKING SCHEME USING Two OFFSETMHO ELEMENTS (A AND B) The effect pf these transients is to increase the peak and rms values of current and voltage applied to the relay during the first few cycles of a fault. The current transient tends to increase the operating force and so causes over-reach, whilst the voltage transient increases the restraint force and causes under-reach. Since the voltage transient is always lower in magnitude, the net result is towards over-reach. Where transient instability of a relay is merely due to mismatch between the transients in the current and voltage inputs, it may be corrected by either matching the transients by the use of secondary replica impedances or alternatively, by eliminating the transients altogether using filters; in the latter case at the cost of time delay. Unfortunately, transients may cause saturation in current transformers due-to the increased flux swing and this results in a possible delay in relay operation of several cycles. This condition is quite intolerable in situations where system instability may result from delay in fault clearance. Current transformer should be designed to withstand this flux swing without saturation when ' 1 cycle ' distance relays are used. 29

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 11.5 Operating Time Characteristics - III practical relays, as the relationship between the operating current and restraint voltage direcfl! affects the relay operating time, it varies with fault position and inplli current, being short for large inputs near the relaying point and lo:g for small inputs near the reach point. Tl.pe of comparator used determines h,ow sensitive a particular relay is and how far its operating time is affected by fault position and input current.
It is customary to present inforrnation on operating time by contour curves, similar to those shown in Fig. 20. From this figure, operating time may be determined for various fault positions and for various values of system source to line impedance ratios ZS/ZJ,. This mct?loci of representing operating time is now verv common.
-RELAY BOUNDARY CHARACTERISTiC :t; IAIm Ez zid =KK OIA 5: 25 4o 20 100 8G 60

v ccc $tti lJ.Y)

1

10

100

a,

SOURCE

TO LINE

IMPEDANCE

RATIO+(

)

FIG. 20 TYPICAL OPERATING TIME CHARACTERISTICS

11.6 Application of Distance Relays to Electric Traction - Use of distance relays on single phase 25 kV railway overhead feeders has become A typical application is shown in Fig. 21. Two distance common. relays are normally used, one for phase-to-earth faults and second to guard against wrong phase coupling in case neutral section is accidentally ` bridged `. These relays have single instantaneous zone as no grading is involved.
Phase-to-earth fault relay is similar to the distance relays for threephase lines. However, wrong phase coupling relay is normally provided with a maximum torque angle of 125" to 145". It is preferable to provide a forward ` offset' for this relay to prevent it from operating on phase-to-earth faults. 30

!S : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968

2lA R---y

Relay

Characteristics

`I/

Jn

+n

TRANSFORMER

(c: 6

A _

B O NEUTRAL A V SECTION

-

A A
V

0

B

2IB

25 kV Track

Showing

Relay

Locations

Fro.

31

DISTAIWE RELAYS FOR ELECTRIC TRACTION, 25 kV, SINGLE PHASE FEEDERS

12. EFFECT OF FUSE FAILURE
of all distance measuring relays as shown above the comparison of the restraining torque produced by the voltage and It follows, therefore, that operating torque produced by the current. with the current flowing in the operating direction, if thevoltage at the relay were to vanish suddenly, as would be the condition on voltage the distance relay will dperate. transformer secondary fuse failure, To prevent this form of virtual maloperation, fuse failure relays are used. A fuse failure relay is a simple device and is-connected as shown

12.1 The basic principle

is

31

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968
in Fig. 22. On one or more main voltage transformer fuse blowing, the fuse failure relay will be energized. Fuse failure relavs have normally closed contact which may be wired in srries with -the distance relay trip circuit to block the undesirable tripping impulse. The fuse failure relay should be provided with another pair of electl.icall~ separate contacts so that an alarm may be sounded.

TRIP

CIRCUIT

dz!z
FIG. 22

ALARM

CIRCUIT

A = Fuse failure relay B = Distance relay voltage

coils

CONNECTIONS FOR FUSE FAILURE RELAY

12.2 It should, however, be ensured that the operating time of voltage transformer fuse failure relay is shorter than the distance relay zone-l operating time otherwise the fuse failure relays will get `beaten ' by the distance protection relays, which it ii supposed to prevent from maloperation. 12.3 When fuse failure relay or miniature circuit-breakers are used, it should be ensured that the operating time of the same is shorter than the protection operating time and further more the starters do not maloperate under high resistance voltage transformer faults. 32

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 13. DISTANCE-RELAYS IN CONJUNCTION WITH AUTORECLOSING AND CARRIER CHANNEL 13.1 Distance relays are often required to operate in donjunction with circuit-breaker autorreclosing schemes to avoid unnecessary interruption of supply on transient faults which are by far the most predominant faults on overhead transmission systems. The requiremmts ofsuccessful auto-reclosing schemes are:
a) Simultaneous and ` instantaneous line section from both the ends; b) Allow a certain and minimum fault arc deionise; and c) Close

' de-energisation
amount

of the faulted

of ` dead ' time to let the

both ends of the line simultaneously.

13.1.1 For an auto-reclose to be successful, that is, the two systems pulling into step again after the momentary disruption it follows that the tripping and closing operations at the two ends should be ` simultaneous ' and the time delay under 13.1(b) should be as low as practicablr. by liuk13.1.2 The requirements of 13.1( a ) and 13,1(c) are achieved ing the protection at the two ends of a line by means of a ' carrier' channel. The carrier channel principle is used in the following forms; a) Carrier-intertripping, and b) Carrier-blocking, c) Carrier-acceleration. principle is shown ir. 13.2 Carrier-Intertripping - Carrier-intertripping Fig. 23. The distance relays at the two ends A and B cover about 80 percent of the line length in their instantaneous zone-l. Therefore, faults occurring in the middle 60 percent of the lin; section are ` seen ' by both the ends in zone-l and their tripping is simultaneous. However, for faults occurring in the end 20 percent sections, the relay nearest the fault locates it in its zone-l while the remoter relay locates the same in its zone-2. The nearer tripping relay is therefore made to send a carrier signal to the remoter nontripping relay to bring about simultaneous Once the two ends trip simultatripping of the whole line section. neously, the auto-reclose relays take over. 13.3 Carrier-Blocking -One of the carrier-blocking principle is shown in Fig. 24. Here the carrier signal is utilized slightly differently. The distance relays at A and B are normally made to ` sit ' in zone-2, that is, they are made able to I see ' up to 140 percent of the line length instantaneously. Therefore, for a fault anywhere along the line section, the relays at two ~nd3 trip simultaneously and the auto-reclosing sequences are initiated. However, for faults in the ad,jacent section, say at F,, 33

S4842

(Part V ) - 1968

which may still be seen by relays at A in their instantaneous zones, relays at A are prevented from tripping by way of a carrier ( blocking' signal transmitted from the end B. The blocking signal is transmitted by reverse looking ` carrier-start ' relays at B having their reverse reach somewhat greater than the zone-2 reach of the relays at A into the next section. On receipt of the carrier blocking signal, the relays at the receiving end step back to their usual zone-l reach at 80 percent of the protected line section and thus allow relays at C to clear the fault in their zone-l. Relays at ,4 offer back-up protection by their zone-2 and zone-3 reach and time-delay.

Anr\

nfi

~Mlcxu~6~~B~~-Bj

FIG. 23

CARRIER INTERTRIPPING

r--$---,A--w ____. s-J

+--B F13 I CARRIER BLOCKING

C--c

+ F2

FIG. 24

13.3.1 It should be appreciated that the final tripping relays of a car&r blocking type of distance scheme should have a slight time delay on operation to wait for the carrier signal to be received from the other end in case the fault is external. If no carrier signal is received, Otherwise, on receipt of a Carrie1 the tripping is allowed to proceed. signal the instantaneous zone-l reach is promptly reduced as mentioned By using a fast carrier channel and carrier start relays, this above. time delay may be cut down. It is possible to achieve comparable times with modern blocking schemes with intertripping schemes. -This 13.4 Carrier-Acceleration tripping except that the signal on receipt of a carrier intertrip principle is similar to carrier-interreceiving end relays do not trip directly signal. Instead, on receipt of the signal, 34

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1948
reach of the relays is instantly extended to cover protected section and tripping takes place after the relays at receiving end have actually measured a fault. This principle a slight time delay for remote end tripping as compared with tripping principle where tripping takes place as soon as the received.
the zone-l

the entire the signal introduces the intercarrier is

13.5 From signalling point of view, the carrier-blocking principle is Superior. The signal is transmitted over a healthy line and the only potential noise problem is during `internal fault; at any other time,noise merely causes a harmless blocking signal. The intertrip and acceleration schemes on the other hand, always signal through a short circuited transmission line. Carrier-intertripping schemes are still sometimes favoured because they are cheaper than carrier-blocking schemes as the latter have to have additional reverse looking ` carrier start ' relays However, for extra high apart from the usual set of measuring relays. voltage lines ( 220 kV and above ) carrier-blocking schemes are generally preferred.
14. APPLICATION

OF DISTANCE RELAYS TO TEED LINES

14.1 Application of distance relays to teed lines deserves careful thought and co-ordination. In the example given in Fig. 25, a fault at F may be Ideally seen by all the three relays, at A, B and C, in their zone-l. ' speaking, line AB should not trip. This is where ` carrier-blocking principle is most usefully employed. The relays at C may have a carrierblocking transmitter whereas relays at A and B may be the conventional carrier-blocking schemes with reverse looking ` carrier start ' relays to take care of faults on the adjacent sections. With such an arrangement for faults down the line CD which fall within the instantaneous reach of all the three relays, station C will transmit a blocking signal to stations A and B and clear the fault first. Line CD may then have its own auto-reclosing scheme.
A
nr.
-

11
D

C

-

B
An

FIG.

25

APPLICATIONOF DISTANCERELAYSTO TEED LINES principle may also be employed here of high speed auto-reclosing at C. 35 but it For a

bt

14.2 Carrier-intertripping
would necessitate foregoing

IS : 3842 (Part V ) - 1968 A and B should auto-reclose fault at F, all the three stations will trip. as quickly as possible whereas C may either not reclose automatically at all, or have delayed anto-reclosing.
14.3 While choosing settings for such a multi-terminal line, it should be borne in mind that if the tee-off has a transformer right at thejunction, i Len the ` instantaneous ' reach of the relays at A and B should not normally extend beyond the transformers(s) at C. The lower the transformer impedance, for example, more units in parallel at a tee-off, the lower will be the instantaneous coverage possible for the main line relays at A and B. 14.4 It has been assumed in above discussion that there is no source of each teed feeder requires special connected at end D. Protection consideration and depends on various factors, for example, whether teed feeder is connected to a source, w.hether there is a transformer at ` tee-off `, etc.

15. APPLICATION OF DISTANCE RELAYS FOR SINGLE-POLE AND THREE-POLE AUTO-RECLOSING 15.1 In applications where it is felt that single-pole auto-reclosing is desirable from system stability point of view, distance protection may be In case of ` switched ' schemes the designed to meet this requirement. ` pole ' selection is done by the starter relays auxiliaries, whereas in case of a non-switched scheme, it is provided by the respective phase measurIt is, however, ensured that for ing relays or their auxiliary trip relays. faults involving more than one phase, all the three phases are tripped as shown in Fig. 26, The function of contacts R,, Yz and B, may also be performed by a ` 1 phase - 3 phase selector switch' which may be located either on the relay panel or at the circuit-breaker itself.

TRIP

R

TRIP

Y

.--x+-cc

TRIP

B

FIG. 26

APPLICATIONOF DISTANCERELAYS FOR SINGLE- AND THREE-PHASEAUTO-RECLOSING

36

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 16. INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMER CONNECTIONS

16.1 Impedances presented to the relay under different fault conditions depend upon the current transformer and voltage transformer connections and whether zero sequence compensation is used or not. These facts should be taken into consideration while setting the relays.
17. A TYPICAL EXAMPLE

OF DISTANCE RELAY APPLICATION

17.0 General -Fig. 27 shows a typical 66133111 kV network. The calculation necessary ior application of distance relays are carried out step by step. The requirements of the two lines, A and B, are identical.
As stated previously, it is useful for a manufacturer to declare the minimum voltage across the relay coils at which the relay will maintain the accuracy of its calibration within specified limits. In the system shown in Fig. 27, minimum voltage will occur when with minimum generation on the 66 kV side, given by the minimum fault level, only one 66133 kV transformer is feeding the 33 kV bus-bar. 17.1 Step Jbe protected relays: 80 percent Check whether 80 percent of the proposed line length to falls within the setting range available on the measuring of line impedance seen by = 0.8 x 5.6 = 4.48 Ohms = 4.48 x Current transformer Voltage transformer ratio ratio

Therefore, impedance the relay, 2s or 2s = 4'48 x

598 Ohms

This value should fail within the setting range of the relay. 17.2 Step II - Check the minimum voltage zone-l reach point for three-phase fault. at the relay for a fault at

4

( 33 )2 = jz.18 Ohms = 500 66133 kV transformer dance at 33 kV bus-bar
impe= (33)) 30 x 7 = j3.64 Ohms

b)

4

Line impedance for a fault 80 percent point

at

=

( 2.5 + j5.0 ) [ i:i

t

::z ,'

= ( l-2 + j2.4 ) Ohms 37

IS : 3842 (Part V) - 1968
66 kV MINIMUM SYSTEM

FAULT LEVEL 500 MVA

PERCENlAGE

REACT-

SUB-SfAl

33 kV

BUS-BAR

I

400/l CURRENT TRANSFORMER 33 kV/llb V VOLTAGE TRANSFORMER

33 kV

BUS-BAR

RADIAL

FEEDERS

10 WA 33/llkV PERCENTAGE

TRANSFORMER REACTANCE : 19

cl1

kV

BUS-BAR

FIG.

27

CIRCUIT DIAGRAM OF THE EXAMPLE ON APPLICATION 01: DIWANCE RELAYS 38

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 d) Total
impedance up to the fault = (j2.18 + j3.64 + l-2 -I- j2'4 ' = ( 1.2 +j8*22 ) Ohms = 33 000

Therefore, Therefore,

total voltage

fault

current

IF

d/3( 1.2 + j8.22 )

=.2290

A

across the relay,

U, = QT x IF x line impedance = &I x 2290 x (1.2 + j2.4) = 47 x 6 160 volts ( in terms primary ) we get ( in terms the

of

Converting

this voltage

in terms x 1/3

of secondary, = 35.5 dary volts ) than at relay

u, = 6160

110 x 33000 -

of second-

This voltage should be equal to or higher tage ' figuse quoted by the manufacturer. 17.3 Step III.faults at zone-l We have For static Therefore, Check minimum reach point: (zI+zs+ 3 Zr = 2s point will be 20) voltage

`minimum

for phase-to-earth

Z, =

equipment

2, up to the fault

2 (j2*18+j3*64+1*2+j2*4)+3x36+ = = = ( 110'4 $- .jl6.44 114.0 + ,j26*29 -__3 3 ) + ( 3.60 + j9.85 ) 3

( 0.8 X 1.2) ( 7.5 _+_j20.5) (@8+ 1.2)

= ( 38 + j8.76 ) Ohms Therefore, IFE = 33000 2/y-( 38 f j8.76 2, of the lines for a fault = Q O-8 .--I_ x I~0.8 + 1.2 1.2 ) = 489 A

at 80 percent

r 2 x ( 2.5 + j5.0 ) + ( 7.5 i39

j'rO-5 )

>

IS : 3842 ( Part V ) - 1968 = 4 ( 2.4 + j4.8 = 4 ( 6.0 + j14.65 = (2.0 + j4-88)
= 5-3 Ohms Therefore U, = 489

+ 3.6 + j9.85 )
Ohms

)

x 5.3 x 3s0

=

8.6 volts secondary

( in )

terms

of

This value U, should he equal to or greater than the one specified by the manufacturer.

17.4 Step IV -Determination that all relays are calibrated 17.4.1 To set zone-l Primary impedance

of Relay Settings -It should be noted in positive sequence impedance. line:

to cover 80 percent of the protected Z1 = 2'5 $- j5.0

Primary impedance in terms of secondary ( 80 percent of the protected line ) = 0.8 x ( 2.5-t j5.0 ) x `F = 2.67 + j5.34 = 5'98 /$20 Ohms Therefore, reactance relays should be set at 5.34 Ohms.

x $$&-

Since.the line angle is 63*5", mho relays with 60" maximum torque angle will'be most suitable and they should be set at: 5.98

cos

( 63.5

-

6(-j"

) =

"' Ohms
line plus 50 percent of the

17.4.2 To set zone-2 to cover the protected next line section: Primary impedance

Zs = ( 2'5 + j5.0 ) $- 3 ( 3.5 + j7.0 ) = 4.25 + j8.5 110 x 33000

Primary impedance in terms of secondary = (4.25

+ ,j8*5 ) x F

= ( 5.66 -t_ ,jl1*33 ) Ohms = 12.7 /Ej" Therefore, reactance Ohms relays zone-2 reach should bc set to Il.33 Ohnls. 40

Is:3842(Part
The mho relays, = Gas = t with 60" mriximum 127 ( 63.5 60 ) torque angle should

V)-1968
be set to:

12.8 Ohms 13.0 Ohms

17.4.3 To set zone-3 to cover the protected line plus 125 percent of the next line section: 2s (in terms of ( 25+jS*O)+1'25 ( 3'5+j7*0) secondary ) = $X -!!?33000 = 9.18 + ji8.35 Ohms = 20.5 /E Ohms Therefore, reactance relays should be set at about, The mho relays should be set at: 20.5 Cos ( 63.5 60 ) = 21 Ohms. of starters for faults at or

say, 20 Ohms.

check for positive 17.5 Step V -To just beyond zone-3 reach point:

operation

Z1 = j2.18 + j3.64 + 3 ( 2.5 + jS.0 ) + 1.25 ( 3.5 -C j7.0 ) = ( 5.62 + ,j17*07 ) Ohms Therefore, line current = Line volts ------Loop Impedance = 33 000 2 (5*62+j17*07) 33 000 __ = 915 A = 36.0

Therefore,

current

915 in one line = 2 = 458 A 458 = 4oo A ( in terms = 1.14 A ( in terms of secondary) of secondary)

Should this setting be considered too low in relation to.the feed at substation ` B `, then ` mho ' or impedance type starters should be used, wit;1 the same setting or ju$t greater than zone-3 setting that is, 21 Ohms. - If the zone-2 or 17.6 Step VI - Zone-2 and Zone-3 Discrimination zone-.3 reaches of the distance ielays look beyond the 33/l 1 kV transformers, then the time delay of zone-2 and zone-3 should grade with In this instance: the 11 kV protection. Parallel impedance of transformers = so
x -20

(33Y

= j5.45 Ohms. 41

IS:3842(Part

V)-I%8 = ( 2.5 + j5.0 ) + j5'45 = ( 2.5 + j10.45 ) Ohms ( primary ) this impedance is: = (2.5 + j10.45) `F x -!-!& 33 000 Ohms. from

Therefore, impedance the relaying point In terms of secondary,

Reactance

= ( 3.33 + j13.9 ) Ohms relays zone-2 reach is worked out to be Il.53

Therefore, zone-2 will not look into 11 kV faults. Zone-3 reactance relays reach is worked out to be 20 Ohms. As the fault reactance is only 13.9 Ohms, zone-3 relays will see 11 kV side faults; hence zone-3 time Mho relays will be should be graded with the 11 kV protection. similarly,affected. 17.7 Step VII - To Check Uoder-Reach of Zone-2 and Zone-3 - Becausr zone-2 and zone-3 fault currents will be shared by the two parallel lines equally, for zone-2 faults, the relays will actually see: ( 2.5 + j5.0 ) + 0.5 ( 3.5 + j7.0 ) x ) = ( 3.375 + j6'75 ) Ohms ( in terms of primary ) = ( 4.0 + j9.0 ) Ohms ( in terms of secondary ) But Zone-2 reactance relays are actually set at 11.33 Ohms Therefore, Similarly, percentage the measured under-reach itipedance = 11.33 - 9'0 = 20.6 percent Il.33

for zone-3 will be

( 2'5 + j5.0 ) + 1.25 ( 3.5 + j7.0 ) x 4 = (4.69 + j9.38 ) Ohms ( in terms of primary ) = ( 6.25 + j12*5 ) Ohms ( in terms of secondary ) But zone-3 reactance Therefore, under-reach relays are actually set at 20 Ohms. * 20-12.5 for zone-3 = 2. = 37.5 percent.

Therefore, as already pointed out earlier, if load impedance permits, zone-3 reach should be set to cover 125 percent of the adjacent line section taking into consideration the division of fault current along the parallel lines. That is, the zone-3 should be set at: ( 2.5 + jS*O ) + 2 x 1.25 ( 3.5 + j7'0 ) = 15-O f j30.0 Ohms ( in terms of secondary A similar check can be carried out for mho relays. )

42

BUREAU
Heedquerters

OF :

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central
l

Telegrams

: Manaksanstha

(Common to all Offiis) Telephone 331 01 31 ! "3": is3 z 21843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

: Manak Bhavan, 9, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg.
NEW DELHI 110002 - l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. ' `4.' D. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 : SC3 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C.I.T. Camous, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Mane!c~!&a, ES MIDC Marol, Andheri (East), &cl 111 >,.., I ~OCO93 380001

Eastern

Northern Southern t `W&tern

`Pushpak', Nclrnlohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur. AHMADABAD t Peertya Incci.:, s%.sa, 1 st Stage. Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALOHt obcO58 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 462003

2 63 48 39 49 55 55 40 n 53627 2 67 05 B-71 19 96 33177 23 10 83 6 34 71 21 68 76 5 55 07 6 23 05

Plot No. 82/83, Lewrs Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 Kaiai Kathir Ruiidina. 6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Quality Marking CeGire; N.H. IV, N,I.T., FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex. 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 5315 Waro 31~1 29, T;.G Barua Road. 5th By-lane, GUWAhA I i it;1003 5.8-5tic; I ;.! Gupta Marg, ( Nornp:: .y station 9oad ) HYDER,A!-`AD 500001 :fiarg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302Oe, R14 Yudti :
1171418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR'208005 Plot No. A-S, House No. 561/63 Slndnu Nagar, Kanpur Roao. LUCKNOW 226005 Patliputra Illdustrlal Estate, PATNA 8X013
Dtstrict Industries Centre

Complex,

Bagh-e-Ali

Maidan. 621 04

SRINAGAFL 190011 T. C. No. 14/1421', University P. 0.. Palayam. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 /nspection Offices (With Sale Point)

:
62 51 71 5 24 35

---

Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411005

----

`Sales Office Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA t Sales Offlce is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY Narasimharaja Square, i Sales Office is at Unity Building, BANGALORE

27 68 00 89 65 28 22 39 71

I.e9rography Unit, Bi5

New Delhi, India

