NAT 1% IS 7872 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Trev veran {ӘТ 


( ЧЧ TA) 


Deep Freezers — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 27.200; 97.130.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda HIS SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH MT, ay ect 110002 


Мыз МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 9 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1975 and subsequently revised in 2018. 


This revision has been contemplated in order rectify and/or modify some of the definitions, test procedure, test 
conditions and figures etc. based on the feedback and inputs received from various stakeholders. 


This standard specifies safety, constructional and performance requirements of deep freezers. This standard 18 
limited to the freezers working on the vapour compression refrigeration system using natural or forced draught 
air-cooled condenser. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7872 : 2020 


Indian Standard 
DEEP FREEZERS — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the safety, constructional 
and performance requirements including methods of 
determining performance of deep freezers based on 
vapour compression working principle. This standard 
covers deep freezers of top access type, having a 
storage volume up to and including 1 000 litre, with 
both hard top, glass top (sliding, hinged and curved) 
and their rated voltage not exceeding 240 V a.c. 50 Hz 
for single phase and 415 V a.c. 50 Hz for three phase 
a.c. including units with fixed speed and variable speed 
compressors. 


1.2 The following types of deep freezers are not 
within the scope of this standard: 


a) Vertical freezer; 
b) Combo freezers (freezer+ cooler); and 
c) PCM/Eutectic based freezers/ Blast freezers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. АП the standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Food Freezer — А thermally insulated cabinet 
which is intended for storing of frozen food for storage 
application when the food is brought in at same or 
lower average temperature than -18?C. 


3.2 Ambient Temperature — The measured 
temperature in the space surrounding the deep freezer 
under test. It is the arithmetical average value of 
temperatures measured at three points, located at 
350 mm from the vertical centreline of the two 
opposite side walls and front side of the deep freezer 
(see Annex B). 


3.3 Balanced Pressure — It is the pressure in the ‘off’ 
cycle at any point in the refrigeration system after the 
high and low sides have attained a condition of thermal 
equilibrium at design ambient condition. 


3.4 The Average Freezer Air Temperature — The 
average inside air temperature taken by means of 
thermocouples or thermometers located at places in the 
freezer cabinet (see Fig. 9 and 10 of Annex C) 


3.5 Cycles per 24 Hours — A cycle in the operation 
of a freezer is the period during which a compressor 
goes through the steps of starting, running, stopping 
and starting again. Cycles per day can be determined by 
dividing the number of complete cycles by the elapsed 
time in hours and multiplying the result by 24. 


3.6 Percentage Running Time — The percentage 
running time, under required conditions of ambient 
temperature and of average internal temperature, is the 
ratio of duration of compressor operation during a full 
number of cycles to the total duration of full number of 
cycles as represented by the following equation: 


R-d/Dx100 


where 


а- duration of compressor operation during a full 
number of cycles, and 


D = total duration of full number of cycles 


NOTE — See Fig. 9 for thermocouple position under no load 
conditions 


3.7 Overall Dimensions (Door or Lids Closed) — 
Measurement of the outside rectangular dimensions 
over the horizontal base within which the freezer 
inscribed to include the complete appliance shall also 
include the protrusion of the handle. The dimensions 
of all external accessories other than handle provided/ 
recommended by manufacturers shall be specified 
separately. 


3.8 Overall Space Required for Use (Doors or Lids 
Open) — Overall dimensions including the handle, 
space necessary for free circulation of the cooling 
air when the appliance is in service, plus the space 
necessary to allow door opening up to minimum angle 
permitting removal of all removable parts such as 
containers and shelves, etc. 


IS 7872 : 2020 


3.9 Gross Volume — Total volume contained within 
interior walls of the freezer without internal fittings 
namely, baskets, partition self and similar fittings with 
the door closed as determined by the method described 
in 8.2. 


3.10 Rated Gross Volume — Gross volume declared 
by the manufacturer as determined by the method 
described in 8.2. 


3.11 Storage Volume — The total volume contained 
within interior walls of the freezer for storage of 
food, which remains after deduction of the volume of 
components and spaces recognized as unusable for the 
storage of food (considering maximum storage limit 
line). 


3.12 Rated Storage Volume — Storage volume 
declared by the manufacturer. 


3.13 Maximum Storage Limits Line — The line 
which defines maximum line up to which the storage 
can be done as per manufacturer instruction. 


3.14 Front Access Type — Appliance in which the 
storage compartment(s) is (are) accessible from the 
front as shown in Fig. 1. 


3.15 Top Access Type — Appliance in which the 
storage compartment(s) is (are) accessible from the top 
as shown in Fig. 2. 


3.16 Storage Basket — A basket is any combination of 
vertical and/or horizontal surface (shelves, partitions, 
etc.) in which food can be placed. It may be formed by 
one component or by components fitted side-by-side, 
which may be fixed or removable. 


DEPTH WITH 
THE 
DOOR, OPEN 


Fic. 1 For FRoNT LOADING 


3.17 Storage Partitions — A partition is any 
combination of vertical and/or horizontal surface 
(shelves etc.) by which food can be separated from 
each other. It may be formed by wire self-partition or 
by components fitted side-by-side, which may be fixed 
or removable. 


3.18 Pull-Down — It is the capability of deep freezers 
to achieve the average freezers air temperatures up to 
-18°C from an ambient temperature of 43°C at no load. 


3.19 Pressure (Refrigeration System Components 
Except Compressor) 


3.19.1 Design Pressure — Pressure chosen for the 
strength calculation of each refrigerant containing 
component. 

NOTE — It is used for determining the necessary materials, 


thickness, and construction for components with regard to their 
ability to withstand pressure. 


3.19.2 Tightness Test Pressure — Pressure that is 
applied to test a system or any part of it for tightness 
under pressure 


3.19.3 Maximum Allowable Pressure (PS) — Maximum 
pressure which system or component is designed, 
as specified by the manufacturer [see also IS 16678 
(Part 2)/ISO 5149 - 2]. 


3.19.4 Refrigerating Strength Pressure — Pressure that 
is applied to test the strength of a refrigerating system 
or any part of it. 


3.20 Ambient Class — Manufacturer should mention 
the climate class of the product as per Table 1. In case 
of class other than mentioned below, manufacturer 


/ 
; MAXIMUM Ё 
[E DOOR OPENING | | SSS 
HEIGHT 


Fic. 2 For Top LOADING 


NOTE — The definition and the figure for front access type is given only to distinguish between the two types of opening. 


must take adequate measure to communicate the 
effective temperature class to the customer through 
declaration in the user manuals/stickers or any other 
suitable means. 


Table 1 Climate Classes 
( Clause 3.20) 


SI Description Class Ambient Temperature 
No. Range (°С) 

a) 2 (3) (4) 

i) Extended temperate SN +10 to +32 

ii) Temperate N +16 to +32 

ш) Subtropical ST +18 to +38 

iv) Tropical T +18 to +43 


3.21 Stable Operating Conditions — It is a condition 
when the refrigerating appliance has been left running 
for a minimum time according to the manufacturer’s 
instruction without any adjustment of temperature 
control setting(s) during this time, and when the average 
M packages (with load conditions) temperatures or 
average air temperature (no load condition) shows 
changes within + 0.5°C. 


3.22 Operating Cycle — For refrigerating appliance 
systems designed to operate continuously, the operating 
cycle is defined as a period of 24 h under stable 
operating conditions. 


For other refrigerating appliances the operating cycle 
is the period between two successive stops of the 
refrigerating system, or a part of a system, under stable 
operating conditions. 


Ifa single operating cycle is longer than 48 h the values 
of storage temperatures and energy consumption from 
the first 24 h are to be compared. 


3.23 Energy Consumption — Energy used by the 
deep freezer over a specified period of time or for a 
specified operation as determined in accordance with 
this standard stated, in kWh (kilowatt hour). 


4 CONSTRUCTION 


4.1 General Design 


The freezers shall have adequate mechanical strength 
and be constructed to withstand handling and 
transportation that may be expected in normal use. 
Where an internal light is fitted, the lamp shall be 
suitably protected from mechanical damage but shall be 
accessible easily without any undue force or pressure. 
There shall be no sharp edges or corners liable to cause 
injury to the user in the normal conditions of use. 


4.2 Materials 


Materials used in the construction of the outer body 
shall comply with relevant Indian Standards wherever 


IS 7872 : 2020 


applicable, except where such requirements are 
modified by this standard. They shall be free from 
defects which are liable to cause undue deterioration or 
failure. Under normal conditions of use, the materials 
used shall not shrink, warp or cause odour and shall 
be resistant to attack by local vermin’s and destructive 
pests. 


Where liable to be exposed to moisture, chemically 
active substances and food or food products, they 
shall be suitably resistant and shall not contaminate 
stored products placed in contact with them. Sealing 
materials used shall not loose in service, any of their 
essential properties, such as adhesiveness, plasticity 
and moisture resistance, due to ageing, temperature and 
humidity variations. 


4.3 Finish 


The interior and exterior finish shall be durable and 
capable of being cleaned effectively and hygienically 
without undue deterioration. All metal parts used inside 
or outside the freezer which are exposed to moisture 
or ambient conditions shall be corrosion resistant 
or adequately protected against corrosion. It shall be 
tested for 72 h as per IS 9000 (Part 11). 


4.4 Thermal Insulation 


The quality, thickness and application of the insulating 
material shall be such that insulation of the cabinet 
is effective and efficient to maintain the required 
temperature inside the cabinet. There shall be proper 
seals against moisture penetration by diffusion 
or condensation. Detachable plates and covers in 
the cabinet shall be provided with suitable seals 
to prevent ingress of moisture into the insulation. 
Highly conductive external or internal surfaces shall 
be separated by insulating breaker strips or their 
equivalent. As far as possible, no member of the frame 
shall penetrate the full thickness of the insulation. 
NOTE — Insulation material used should comply with Indian 
regulatory norm listed by Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change for Ozone depleting substance. 


4.5 Fittings 


Linings and facing shall have sufficient mechanical 
strength to resist distortion and give reasonable 
protection to the insulation. When the doors of the 
refrigerated space are closed, there shall be no leakage 
of external air into the cabinet either past the door 
gaskets or by any other means (see 11.4). 


4.6 Hardware 


Door fasteners and hinges shall be smooth and positive 
in action and designed to maintain their proper function 
without undue wear under normal conditions of service. 
Screws and all other hardware shall be adequately 
protected from corrosion so that they can be easily 
serviceable. 


IS 7872 : 2020 


4.7 Interior Fittings 


The rails, shelves and baskets shall be sufficiently strong 
for the duty specified in 11.5. The shelves shall be of 
welded metallic construction galvanized, chromium 
plated or of non-corrosive finished casting, plastic or 
any other protective coating not reacting with food in 
any way. The shelf supports shall be strong enough to 
take the load. The interior lining shall be of suitable 
metallic sheets or polystyrene materials and shall 
be non-corrosive. The surfaces which are coming in 
contact food stuff shall be made of food grade material 
so that during storage it shall not impact/ deteriorate the 
food quality. 


4.8 Doors and Fittings 


Hinges and handles shall be strong and resistant to 
corrosion. They shall be able to withstand the normal 
usage without adversely affecting the air tightness of 
the freezer. The opening of the door shall be sufficient 
to enable removable shelves or baskets to be easily 
withdrawn. In case of horizontal freezers, the door 
hinges shall be spring loaded for easy closing and 
opening and for self-opening when the door latch is 
released. 


Door/lid shall withstand 100 000 opening and closing 
without deterioration for hard top and curved glass 
door/lid and 50 000 opening and closing for each of 
the sliding doors, which in particular, may adversely 
affect air tightness of the freezer, when subjected to the 
durability test of 4.8.1. 


4.8.1 External Doors 


a) Procedure — The ambient temperature during 
the test shall be at normal ambient and the 
appliance shall be switched off. The door 
opening and closing sequence is shown in Fig. 3. 


b) Opening sequence — The movement of the 
door shall be controlled from an angle of 0? 
to an opening angle of 60? followed by free 
movement of the door. 


с) Closing sequence — The movement of the door 
shall be controlled from the angle of opening of 
60? to an angle between 60? and 50^, followed 
by the free movement ofthe door and its closing 
as in normal use. The number of cycles per 
minute shall be 10 to 15 as shown in Fig. 3. 
NOTE — Safety standards mandate that appliances with 
any space large enough for a child to get into must be able 
to be opened from the inside provided door is in unlocked 
conditions. 
In addition to it there should be no finger pinching 
during door opening. 


4.9 Disposal of Defrost / Condensate Water 


A means shall be provided for draining the defrost/ 
condensate water or while cleaning with an external 
receptacle. Any drainage system shall be designed to 


ensure its proper function. It shall be easily accessible 
for the clearing of any blockage, and shall be designed 
so as to prevent any undue ingress of air into the food 
storage compartment(s). 


60* 


Fic. 3 Door OPENING SEQUENCE FOR HARD ТОР 
AND HINGE GLAss Top 


5 REFRIGERATION SYSTEM 


5.1 Construction 


The pipes and connections to moving or resiliently 
mounted parts shall be arranged so as not to foul 
or transmit vibration to other parts. The pipes and 
connections shall be securely fixed and should be of 
sufficient length to minimize the risk of failure due to 
vibration. The evaporator may be of suitably copper 
coated or plated steel, copper, brass or aluminium. 
Stainless steel may also be used for this purpose. 


5.2 Control of Operation 


Refrigerant flow and compressor motor shall be 
controlled with the help of thermostat to maintain the 
cabinet temperature within the limits of application. 
Suitable capacity strainer or dehydrator shall be 
provided in the refrigeration circuit for smooth 
functioning of refrigeration cycle in presence of 
contaminations. 


5.3 Location of Components 


The evaporator, screens and shelves shall not obstruct 
access to the stored products. All control devices and 
service valves shall be readily accessible. 


5.4 Strength-Pressure Test for Components 


5.4.1 General 


Components of refrigerating systems shall be designed 
with a sufficient mechanical strength. Compliance 
is checked by carrying out the tests specified in 5.4.2 
to 5.4.4. 


5.4.2 Individual Strength-Pressure Test 


Each component shall be strength-pressure-tested 
individually at minimum 1.43 x PS for a period of 


minimum 1 min. The individual strength-pressure 
test shall be carried out as a hydrostatic pressure test 
by means of water or some other liquid, except where 
a component cannot be pressure-tested with liquid 
for technical reasons. In that case, it shall be tested 
by means of air or some other non-hazardous gas. 
Adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent danger 
to people and to minimize risk to property. 


5.4.3 Type-Approved Strength-Pressure Test 


Аз ап alternative, the components can be type-approved 
by testing at 3 x PS or by testing according to the fatigue 
test as described below. If the maximum continuous 
operating temperature exceeds 125?C for copper or 
aluminium, or 200?C for steel, then the type-approved 
strength test pressure shall be increased according to 
the ratio of allowable stress at the test temperature and 
that at the maximum continuous operating temperature 
based on a known pressure vessel code or a published 
national or international standard. For example, if 
the material of the component has an allowable stress 
of 35 N/mm? at test temperature and 27 N/mm? at 
maximum continuous operating pressure, then the 
type-approved test shall be conducted at 3 times 
(3 x 35/27) of maximum allowable pressure. 


5.4.4 Fatigue Test 


As an alternative to the pressure test as mentioned 
above, the components shall be subjected to a strength- 
pressure test at 2 x PS provided they comply with the 
fatigue test as described below. 


Three test samples shall be filled with fluid and shall 

be connected to a pressure-driving source. The pressure 

shall be raised and lowered between the upper and lower 

cyclic values at a rate specified by the manufacturer for 

a total number of 250 000 cycles. The entire specified 

pressure excursion shall occur during each cycle. 
NOTES — For safety purposes, it is suggested to use a non- 
compressible fluid. The following test pressures shall be 
applied. For the first cycle, the maximum PS for the low- 
pressure side components or the maximum PS for the high- 
pressure side components shall be applied: 


a) For the test cycles, the upper-pressure value shall not be 
less than 0.7 x PS and the lower-pressure value shall not 
be greater than 0.2 x PS. The pressure shall be 0.9 x PS 
for water heat exchangers in the heat pump. 


b) For the final test cycle, the test pressure shall be increased 
to 1.4 x PS (two times of 0.7 x PS). The pressure shall 
be 1.8 x PS (two times of 0.9 x PS) for water heat 
exchangers in the heat pump. 


5.4.5 Acceptance Criteria 


In the case of individual strength test at minimum 
1.43 x PS, permanent deformation shall not result from 
these tests. In the case of type approval, it is deemed that 
the components are designed to withstand a pressure 
not less than three times the component’s maximum 
allowable pressure without rupture (or not less than two 


IS 7872 : 2020 


times the component’s maximum allowable pressure 
without rupture after the fatigue test) and confirmation 
shall be provided by testing. In the case of the fatigue 
test, the component shall not rupture, burst, or leak 
after completion of this test. The strength-pressure 
test at 2 x PS is to be performed on three samples, 
other than the samples used for the fatigue test. If the 
maximum continuous operating temperature exceeds 
125°C for copper or aluminium, or 200°C for steel, the 
fatigue test shall be conducted at least 10°C above the 
maximum operating temperature. 


PS is the maximum allowable pressure, for each 
component shall not be less than the maximum 
allowable pressure of the system or part of the system. 


6 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 General 


The deep freezers shall comply with the safety 
requirements given in clause 8 to 32 of IS/IEC 60335- 
2-89. The equipment shall be capable of working 
within + 10 percent of rated voltage specified in 1.1. 


6.2 Hermetically Sealed Compressor 


The compressor shall comply with the requirements 
of IS 10617 and shall be so constructed that the 
constant pressure of oil and refrigerant under working 
pressure and temperature has no adverse action of the 
compressor motor’s insulation material and windings. 


6.3 Protective Guards 


All moving parts shall be protected by suitable guards, 
shields or screens of adequate strength and durability 
to avoid the possibility of making inadvertent contact 
therewith during normal service conditions. 


6.4 Electrical Accessories 


All internal electrical fittings, such as lamps, and 
switches, shall be provided with suitable guards for 
protection against mechanical damage and shall be 
suitable for operation at the lowest air temperature 
likely to occur. 


6.5 Flammable Refrigerant 


For flammable refrigerant the units should comply with 
IS/IEC 60335-2-89. 


7 SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL 


The refrigerating system shall not have sound pressure 
level more than 65 dBA for commercial places (Ambient 
Air Quality Standards in respect of noise as per Noise 
Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 issued 
by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change) the normal running operation at no load at 
prevailing room temperature and should not transmit 
vibration to adjoining portions of the surroundings. 


IS 7872 : 2020 


A random machine should be picked Шот 
manufacturing line for conducting the sound test. 
Freezer should be placed centrally in the test chamber 
with background noise less than 45 dBA. 


With the help of calibrated sound meter/analyser or 
recorder, noise level of freezer is to be measured at a 
distance of 1.1 m from each side (except back side) of 
freezer and 1.2 m above the floor. 


8 MEASUREMENT OF FREEZER STORAGE 
CAPACITY 


8.1 Inside Dimensions of the Cabinet 


Place cross-section area with maximum storage 
limit line and mark L x W x H (see Annex C and E). 
Maximum load limit line should be marked clearly. 


8.1.1 Top Access Type 
8.1.1.1 Inside depth 


This shall be the mean horizontal distance between the 
front and rear inner surfaces of the front and back walls 
of the enclosed space of the cabinet. 


8.1.1.2 Inside width 


This shall be the mean horizontal distance between the 
inner surfaces of the side walls of the enclosed space. 


8.1.1.3 Inside height 


This shall be the mean vertical distance between the 
inner surface of the floor and the lid or door. 


8.2 Gross Volume 


The gross volume of the freezer shall be the product of 
inside depth, inside width and inside height as defined 
in 8.1.1. 


In case of intricate shapes of the liners, the total volume 
shall be divided into convenient units of volume of 
geometric shape. Volume of all such units shall be 
calculated from their mean inside dimensions and added 
to yield gross volume. Shapes formed in the wall of the 
food compartment and in the door (bulges, hollows, etc) 
are taken into account in calculating the gross volume. 
When the freezer is divided into compartments by fixed 
insulated partition, each compartment shall be regarded 
as a separate freezer for the purpose of computing 
volume and the sum of each of such volume shall be 
gross volume. 


8.3 Storage Volume (Net Volume) 


The storage volume shall be the gross volume or sum of 
the gross volumes of individual compartments less the 
volumes of internal fittings fixed in the cabinet and the 
volumes of the shelves, partitions and baskets essential 
which are assembled with tools for the proper operation 
of the cabinet. This volume will be obtained after 


deducting from the gross and also deducting the volume 
of any other space which is identified as unusable for 
storage of food, provided that its individual volume is 
greater than 0.25 litre or its thickness or width is greater 
than 13 mm: 


a) Volume occupied by parts necessary for proper 
functioning of the freezer, such as evaporator 
material, evaporator doors, cooling coils, 
evaporator ribs and suction header; 


b) Volume between the deductible 
projections and adjacent liner walls; 


door 


c) Volume occupied by fixed partitions or 
projections, such as control knobs, shelf 
hangers, shelf and tray rails or basket supports 
which individually occupy a volume of more 
than 0.25 litre and have a width or thickness of 
more than 13 mm; and 


The load line (Н) as shown in Fig. 12 and for 
volume measurement Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 of, 
shall be specified by the manufacturer. 


8.4 Volume of Shelves 
Fittings 

The volume of a shelf, partition or internal fitting 
(excluding baskets) shall be the product of its area 
and thickness. The area of a shelf shall be the product 
of its width and depth. Where part of the shelf is cut 
away, the area of the cut-out shelf shall be deducted. 
Where the edge of the shelf is not more than 25 mm 
from the cabinet lining, the shelf shall be considered as 
extending to the lining for the purpose of calculating 
shelf area. Where there is an access door in a wall 
of the cabinet, the inner surface of the door shall be 
considered as being the inner surface of the lining. 


d 


м7 


Partitions and Internal 


The thickness of the shelves and partitions shall be 
the distance between the outer surface excluding the 
edges, where those are reinforced (see Fig. 4). Where 
surfaces are corrugated or fitted with pipe grids, the 
plane through the apices of the corrugations or pipes 
shall be used for calculating volumes except that where 
the clear distance between adjacent corrugations or 
pipes is greater than 100 mm, the surface itself shall 
be used and a volume shall be deducted for each 
corrugation or pipe equal to the product of the width, 
the distance from the surface to the outside of the 
corrugation or pipe and the length of the corrugation 
of pipe. 


Fic. 4 THICKNESS OF SHELVES 


8.5 Volume of Baskets 


The volume of baskets to be deducted from the gross 
internal volume in the determination of storage 
volume shall include the space not available for 
storage at each side and end of the basket and the 
volume of the bottom of the basket (see Fig. 5). 
If basket is plug and play type means it does not 
require specified tool to assemble in product, then its 
volume should not be deducted for storage volume 
calculation. 


/ 
1 


Ж 


Fic. 5 DEDUCTION OF VOLUME FOR BASKET 


8.6 Full Partition 


The volume of a full partition is the product of its 
thickness, depth and width or height. This depth, 
width and height are those dimensions of the cabinet 
applicable in the plane of partition. 


8.7 Fractional Partitions 


The volume of a permanently fixed fractional 
partitions is the product of its thickness, depth and 
width or height, whichever of these two is applicable. 
The depth, width or heights are the distances normal 
to the lining from adjacent surfaces to the further 
edges of the partitions or to the evaporator in case the 
fractional partition touches it. A horizontal partition 
the edges of which are more than 70 mm from the 
lining of the cabinet is regarded as fractional partition. 
A vertical partition, the edges of which are more than 
100 mm from the lining of the cabinet, is regarded as 
a fractional partition. 


8.8 Suspended Containers 


The area of the bottom of a suspended container and 
the area of the shelf beneath shall not both be counted 
unless the vertical clearance between this shelf and the 
bottom is at least 100 mm. If the mean depth vertically 
of a suspended container as measured between its 
bottom and the cover or shelf immediately above is less 
than 40 mm the bottom area of the container shall not 
be considered 


8.9 Rated Gross Volume 


This shall be the gross volume as declared by the 
manufacturer, in litres. The measured gross volume as 


IS 7872 : 2020 


described in 8.2 shall not be less than the rated gross 
volume by more than 3 percent. 


8.10 Rated Storage Volume 


This shall be the storage volume as declared by the 
manufacturer, in litres. The measured storage (net) 
volume as described in 8.3 shall not be less than the 
rated storage volume by more than 3 percent. 


9 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 


9.1 Freezer Installation 


Unless otherwise specified, the test shall be made on the 
freezer installed as for normal use with shelves, baskets 
and other fittings, if any, in their normal positions in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, with 
all containers being empty. 


9.2 Electrical Power Supply 


For the test during which the freezer will be in operation, 
electric power supply shall not vary by more than 
+1 percent of the rated voltage and frequency. 


9.3 Rated voltage for single phase and three phase shall 
be as specified in 1.1. 


9.4 Test Room Ambient 


The test room shall be capable of being maintained up 
to maximum of temperature class declared with + 1?C. 


For temperature class of 16?C to 43?C, the chamber 
should be able to maintain 43 + 1°C. The vertical 
ambient temperature gradient from the platform as 
specified to a height of 2.1 m shall be within 1?C for 
each | m of vertical distance. 


9.5 The freezer shall be placed on a solid top platform 
the way it should be installed under normal use. The 
freezer shall be so placed or shielded as to prevent 
direct radiation from the test room heating equipment. 
Circulation of air around the appliance shall be 
restricted by surrounding the appliance by three vertical 
partitions, fixed or adjustable, made of wood 16 to 
30 mm thick, arranged as follows: 


One of the partitions shall be placed parallel to the 
rear of the appliance, against the stops/ hinges or 
100 mm or at the distance specified by the manufacturer 
in connection with the required overall space. 


The two other partitions shall be parallel to the sides of 
the cabinet and shall be fixed on the platform 350 mm 
from the sides of the cabinet. 


The appliance shall be so placed or shielded as to 
prevent direct radiation to or from the space cooling or 
heating equipment in the test room, and shall be placed 
far enough away from all other objects in the test room 
to eliminate any possibility of any point in the space in 
which it is situated being at a temperature other than 
ambient. Air circulation in the test room shall-be such 


IS 7872 : 2020 


that the specified ambient temperatures are obtained 
within the limits of the specified tolerances. 


The appliance under test shall be shielded from any air 
currents of velocity above 0.25 m/s. The air circulation 
in the test room shall not interfere with the normal air 
circulation created by the appliance. 


9.6 General Operating Conditions 


Priorto the start offirsttests, the unit should be defrosted 
and the interior of the cabinet dried. Units should be 
switched on after all the internal parts have achieved 
the ambient temperature of the test after a minimum 
soaking period of 4 h. The freezer shall then be allowed 
to operate at the ambient temperature of the test for at 
least 4 h to establish the thermal equilibrium. Stable 
operating conditions are deemed to be reached when 
during a time of 2 h the mean temperatures measured 
at the same position of the control cycle do not vary by 
more than 0.5°С from the final regulated figure. 


9.7 Humidity 
Unless otherwise specified, relative humidity of the test 
room shall be kept between 45 percent and 75 percent. 


10 MEASUREMENT 


10.1 Measuring Instruments 


10.1.1 Watt-hour meters shall be capable of being read 
to 0.001 kWh and be accurate to within + 1 percent of 
the total energy consumption measured during the test 
period, which is 1 percent of the reading. 


10.1.2 The temperatures shall be measured with 
thermocouples, or other temperature measuring probes, 
which are inserted in the centre of a copper mass 
weighing 25 g and of minimum external area (diameter 
and height = about 15.2 mm). 


10.1.3 Relative humidity shall be measured either 
by means of ventilated psychrometers having 
thermometers of an accuracy of + 3 percent or with 
recording apparatus of equivalent accuracy When 
psychrometers are used, it shall be necessary to carry 
out measurement at regular intervals. 


10.2 Temperature Measurement Conditions 


10.2.1 Ambient Temperature 


Ambient temperature shall be maintained within + 1?C 
of the specified value and shall be measured at 300 mm 
from the sides and front of the cabinet and at the height 
of the geometric centre of the front and sides. This 
condition shall be maintained during both stabilization 
and test period. 


The ambient temperature shall be recorded at one of the 
above positions preferably with a recording instrument. 
If an indicating instrument is used, reading shall be 
taken at intervals not greater than 30 min. 


Temperatures may be read or preferably recorded. 
The temperature sensitive element of the temperature 
measuring instrument shall be separated from any heat 
conducting surface by at least 13 mm of air space. 
Connections from the measuring instruments shall be 
arranged in such a manner as not to interfere with the 
air-seal of the storage compartment. 


АП instruments used for measuring shall be calibrated 
against master instruments of certified accuracy. 


Temperature measuring instruments shall have an 
accuracy up to 0.5?C. 


11 TESTS 


11.1 No Load Pull Down Test 


The freezer shall be operated under no load, at 43°С 
ambient as per climate class T. The time required 
to pull down the average freezer air temperature 
from maximum temperature of 43?C to an average 
temperature of -18°C and maximum temperature shall 
not be warmer than -15?C and pull down time shall be 
not more than 200 min. The position ofthe thermocouple 
shall be as given in Fig. 9. The temperature shall be 
stabilized before the test within 43 + 19С. 


11.2 Energy Consumption Test 


The freezer shall be operated at no load in an ambient 
temperature of 38?C for at least for 4 h prior to 
commencement of the testing. 


After stable operating conditions (no load) have been 
attained the test period shall start. It shall be operated 
for 6 hrs and calculated for 24 h duration. During this 
period the average temperature should be below -18°C. 


The energy consumption shall be determined either by 
one test at the target temperatures or by interpolation 
from the results of two tests when target temperature 
is not achieved by one test. When interpolation is 
used, the temperature obtained from one of the two 
tests shall be warmer than the target temperature, and 
the temperature obtained from the other of the two 
tests shall be colder than the target temperature. The 
difference between the two temperatures used for the 
interpolating test shall not exceed 4?C. 


The calculated energy consumption rate E, is given by 
the equation (see IS 15750): 


m=z (e-a 


where 
E = calculated energy consumption rate of the 
appliance at the target temperature t, 
Е = measured energy consumption rate of the 


appliance for point 1, 


measured energy consumption rate of the 


appliance for point 2, 
measured compartment for 


point 1 (warm point), 


temperature 


measured compartment for 


point 2 (cold point), and 
-18°C 


temperature 


The value measured in the energy consumption test 
on the first appliance tested shall not be greater than 
the energy consumption by more than 10 percent 
of the rated energy consumption. If the result of 
the test carried out on the first appliance is greater 
than the declared value (on marking label) plus 
10 percent, the test shall be carried out on a further 
three appliances. Average energy consumption 
of three units recorded shall not be more than 
10 percent of the value declared by the manufacturer 
on marking label. 


11.3 Temperature Rise Test 


The purpose of this test is to check the time for the 
temperature rise of test packages, after the operation of 
refrigeration system is interrupted. 


The refrigerating appliance shall be prepared in 
ambient temperature as per climate class mentioned 
by manufacturer and shall be stabilized and loaded as 
per 12. 


The setting of temperature control device or other 
control shall be set to maintain to achieve warmest 
package temperature of -18°C. 


The power supply to the refrigerating appliance shall 
be cut off immediately after the end of a refrigeration 
cycle. 


For automatic defrosting refrigerating appliances, 
the power supply shall be cut off after the power 
disconnection point to be a ‘compressor off’ during 
the stable part of the refrigeration cycle. If there are 
temperature variations, the test shall be commenced at 
a low temperature point. 


The period of time shall be noted from the moment 
when the temperature of the warmest ‘M-package’ 
reaches —18°C to the moment when апу опе of the 
‘M-packages’ in any of these compartments (or 
cabinets) first reaches -99С. 


11.4 Door Seal Test 


The purpose of this test is to ensure that the gasket 
of the door of the deep freezer adequately prevents 
any ingress of the surrounding air. With the freezer 
at rest, a strip of paper 50 mm wide 0.08 mm thick 
and of suitable length shall be inserted at any point of 
the seal and the door closed normally on it shall not 
slide freely. 


IS 7872 : 2020 


11.5 Mechanical Strength of the Shelves and Similar 
Components 


The purpose of this test shall be to check the mechanical 
strength of the components used for storing food, means 
shelves, containers, baskets, etc., with the freezer at 
rest and the door open. The test shall be conducted as 
follows: 


a) Place the shelves in the proper location parallel to 
a flat surface; 

b) Use a height measure, caliper, or ruler to measure 
the existing deflection (if any) of the shelf at its 
maximum point on the underside of the shelf; 


с 


— 


For shelves uniformly load shelf with load of 
195.3kg/m?. Load can be either dead weight or 
actual products which are uniformly disturbed 
across the shelf area; 


d 


— 


After 72 h have elapsed, use the same measuring 
device used in b) to measure the total deflection of 
the shelf at its maximum point on the underside 
of the shelf; 


Subtract the second measurement from the first 
measurement to get the total deflection. Divide 
the total deflection measurement obtained by the 
width of the shelf to obtain the deflection in cm/m; 
and 


е 


NA 


f) Remove the load and measure the total deflection 
of the empty shelf. 


Deflection has to be 1.04 cm/m when loaded with 
195.3 kg/m?. There should be no permanent shelf 
deformation/deflection which impacts the functionality 
of component. 


However, in the case of baskets, maximum loading 
shall be checked based on the declaration of instruction 
manual/product provided by manufacturers. 


11.6 — Thermal 
Condensation Test) 


Insulation Test (External 


The purpose of this test is to determine the 
effectiveness of the insulation, on the external surface 
of the freezer. The test shall be carried at no load 
condition. 


The freezer shall be held with an average internal 
temperature of -18°C in а surrounding ambient 
temperature between 31°C and 33°C and relative 
humidity between 70 and 75 percent. It shall be 
considered satisfactory, if condensed moisture is not 
visible on the outer surface, and no running droplets 
are visible on the external surface of the freezer during 
a period of time lasting for 12 h after the test conditions 
have become stable. 


11.7 Pressure Test 


All parts of the refrigerating system subject to internal 
pressure shall be tested. No part of the assembly 
under test shall show signs of leakage or permanent 


IS 7872 : 2020 


deterioration after subjecting to the appropriate pressure 
given in 5.4. 


12 TEST PACKAGES 


12.1 Dimension and Mass 


When tests are carried out, test packages in the form of 
right parallelepipeds shall be used. The size and mass 
of the test packages, including their packaging, shall be 
as specified in Table 2. The location of test packages 
and M-packages in frozen compartment shall be as 
shown in Fig. 11 of Annex D. 


The tolerances for new test packages shall be as follows: 
a) +2 mm for linear dimensions 25 mm to 50 mm; 


b) +4 mm for linear dimensions 100 mm to 200 mm; 
and 


с) +2 percent for mass. 


Table 2 Dimensions and Mass of Test Packages 
( Clause 12.1) 


SI No. Dimensions Mass 
mm в 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) 50 x 100 x 100 500 
ii) 50 x 100 x 200 1 000 


The following packages may be used as fillers to complete the 
cabinet loading: 


iii) 25 x 100 x 200 
iv) 37.5 x 100 x 200 


500 
750 


Due to the frequency of use and to the loading pressure, 
the package could change in dimensions and weight. 
Test packages shall be checked annually for conformity 
with the following life-time tolerances. When a test 
package is found to exceed one of the tolerances, it 
shall be replaced. 


-5 percent 
No visible hole. 


a) Loss of mass 
b) On the wrapper 
c) Change in linear dimensions 


1) + 4 mm for dimensions 25 mm and 50 mm; 
and 


2) +8 mm for dimensions 100 mm and 200 mm. 
Each test package shall consist of filling material and 
a wrapper. 

Filling material per 1 000 g shall contain: 

1) 230 g of oxyethyl methyl cellulose; 

2) 764.2 g of water; 

3) 5.0 g of sodium chloride; and 

4) 0.8 g of para-chloromethane-cresol. 

The freezing point of this material is -1 °C. The enthalpy 
value of 285 kJ/kg shall correspond to the temperature 
of (-1 + 0.5) °C (see Fig. 6, Table 3 and Table 4 ). 
About 4 percent of water should be added in order to 


compensate for evaporation during the preparation of 
the filling material. 


12.2 Wrapper 


A sheet of plastic or any other suitable material 
of such nature that exchange of moisture with the 


Аб = (1%0.5)С 


к=(3.7+0.4)кЈ(ко.К) -1 


35247 


KEY 
X Temperature °C 
Y Specific enthalpy. kJ/kg 


Fic. 6 THERMAL CHARACTERISTICS OF TEST PACKAGES 


10 


ambient medium is negligible: the surface emissivity 
shall be equal to 0.9 + 0.05 at 25 °С. A laminated 
sheet should be used, consisting of a layer of high- 
pressure polyethylene, easily sealed, 120 pm thick, 
together with an external sheet of polyterephthalate 
approximately 12.5 um thick, the two layers being 
bonded together. After filling, this sheet shall be 
sealed. The correspondence of the packages material 
composition with the above mentioned characteristics 
should be certified by the supplier or by an independent 
laboratory. 


Table 3 Temperature and Specific Enthalpy 
of Test Packages 


( Clause 12.1) 


SI No. Temperature Specific Enthalpy 
°С; kJ/kg 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) -40 0 
ii) -30 19 
iii) -25 28 
іу) -20 39 
у) -18 43 
уі) -16 49 
vii) -]4 55 
viii) -12 63 
ix) -10 73 
x) -9 79 
xi) -8 85 
xii) -7 93 
xiii) -6 102 
xiv) -5 114 
xv) -4 129 
xvi) -3 152 
xvii) -2 194 
хуш) -1 285 
xix) 0 297 
xx) +10 334 
хх1) +20 371 


Table 4 Temperature and Increase in Specific 
Enthalpy of Test Packages 


( Clause 12.1) 


SI Temperature Range Increase in Specific Enthalpy 
Мо: °С kJkg 

(1) (2) (3) 

1) -30 to -20 20+ 2 

ii) +10 to +20 37-4 

iii) -30 to +20 35247 


IS 7872 : 2020 


12.3 M-Packages Life-Time 


Some of the 500 g packages (50 mm x 100 mmx 100 
mm) shall be equipped for temperature measurement, 
being fitted with temperature sensors inserted in the 
geometrical center of the packages in direct contact 
with the filling material. All precautions shall be taken 
to minimize extraneous conduction of heat and to avoid 
any possibility of entrance of the air from the hole in 
the wrapper for the passage of the temperature sensor 
that could create oxidation and loss of weight in the 
filling material. These packages are called M-packages 
(see Fig.7). Due to frequency of use and loading 
pressure the package could change in dimensions and 
weight. All M-packages shall be checked annually 
for conformity with the life time tolerances specified 
in 12.1. The checking results shall be recorded for each 
lot of M-packages. When a M-package is found to 
exceed one of the tolerances, it shall be replaced. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 7 M-PACKAGE 


13 MARKING AND INSTRUCTION 


13.1 Marking on Freezer 


Each deep freezer shall have the following information 
marked in a permanent and legible manner on one or 
several locations where it is readily accessible. 


a) Manufacturer’s name and the trade-mark; 


b) Model (or commercial designation) of freezer and 
SI No.; 


c) Rated gross volume, in litres; 

d) Rated storage volume; 

e) Name of the refrigerant used in system and its 
quantity; 

f) Full load current or rated current or rated power 
input; 

g) Type of freezer; 

h) Rated voltage or voltage range; 

j) Rated frequency of supply; and 

k) Country of manufacture. 


13.1.1 Each freezer shall be accompanied on delivery 
by instructions for its use and maintenance printed 


IS 7872 : 2020 


on strong paper, cardboard or similar material. These 
instructions shall at least provide following information 
relating to: 

a) Installation requirements; 

b) Conditions of operation (starting, stopping); 

c) Use of various control devices (thermostat, 

defrosting, etc); and 
d) Maintenance and cleaning the freezer. 


13.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product conforming to the requirements of this 
standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed there under, and the product may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


12 


IS 7872 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2.) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
9000 (Part 11) : 1983 Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 11 Salt 
mist test 
10617 : 2018 Hermetic compressors — Specification 
15750 : 2006 Household frost-free refrigerating appliances — Refrigerators cooled by internal 


forced air circulation — Characteristics and test methods 


16678 (Part 2): 2018/ Refrigerating systems and heat pumps — Safety and environmental requirements: 
ISO 5149-2 : 2014 Part 2 Design, Construction , Testing, Marking and Documentation 


IS/IEC 60335-2-89 : Safety of household and similar electrical appliances: Part 2 Particular requirements 
2010 Section 89 Particular requirements, for commercial refrigerating appliances and 
ice-makers with an incorporated or remote refrigerant unit or motor-compressor 


13 


IS 7872 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 3.2) 


AMBIENT TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 


100 x 10 


TO MEASURE FROM REARMOST 
PROJECTION OF APPLIANCE 
(HINGE / SPACER) TO THE 
SIMULATED WALL ( PARTITION ) 


WOODEN PARTITIO 
16 - 30 mm THK. 


SOLID TOP PLATFOR 
FOR FREE AIR 
CIRCULATION 


NOTE 1: 
T1,T2,T3 AMBIENT MEASURMENT 


SENSOR'S LOCATION 
UNSPECIFIED TOLERANCE ON 


DIMENSIONS ARE +/- 50 mm 


ao” HEIGHT CAN 
BE ADJUSTED AS PER AIR 


FLOW REQUIREMENT 


FRONT VIEW 


NOTE 2: 

AMBIENT SENSOR SHALL BE SHIELDED FROM 
ANY SOURCE OR SINK OF RADIANT HEAT 
WHICH INFLUENCE MEASUREMENT AIR 
TEMPERATURE, INCLUDING CONDITIONING 
EQUIPMENT, EXTERNAL DOORS, OR APPLIANCE 


UNDER TEST 


All dimensions are in millimetres 


Fic. 8 MEASUREMENT OF AMBIENT TEMPERATURE 


14 


IS 7872 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 3.4, 8.1, 8.3 and 11.1 ) 


THERMOCOUPLE LOCATION FOR TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 


THERMOCOUPLE LOCATION FOR TEMPERATURE MEASURMENT 
-ICELAND HARD TOP/GLASS TOP FREEZERS 


W= 900mm AND LESS 0 
KL LL LL, 
T6 


2 
И 
/ 
@ 
@ 
Й 
И 


ГГА 
TOP VIEW 


MAX PERMISSIBLE 
LOADING LIMIT 


KOKAIN 


aa a ah 


W- 
(W= 900mm AND LESS) 
FRONT VIEW 
T1,T2,T6 & T7 NOT APPLICABLE IF W < 500mm 


(a) 


W= 900mm AND LESS 


УУУУ УУ УУУ УУУУ УУУУ УУ УУ УУУУ 


D 


ed 
= 
©, 


„чыч ы ee чыч 
9- 
со 
УМ 


[A 
> ЖФИО 2 
ТОР VIEW 


AX PERMISSIBLE 
LOADING LIMIT 


i 


OCH сее 


E 


Т1,Т2,Т9 & T10 NOT APPLICABLE IF W < 500mm 
(W= 900mm AND LESS) 


FRONT VIEW 
(c) 


N 


50 


W- 900mm AND ABOVE 


W/2- 


TOP VIEW 
MAX PERMISSIBLE 
LOADING LIMIT 


NSS SY 


N 
Шемен 


4 TA 
a a a a a a a a ЖЖЖ 


MACHINE 
ROOM AREA 


ҚҰ 


W- 
(W= 901mm AND ABOVE) 
FRONT VIEW 


(b) 


W= 901mm AND ABOVE 


TOP VIEW 


AX PERMISSIBLE: 
LOADING LIMIT 


SSSSSSSSSSSSEY 


NNNNNNN UNNNNWAZ 


[——— Rx 


4 


ае” 2 aaa aa aa 4 


МАСНІМЕ 
КООМ АКЕА 


2 


(W= 901mm AND ABOVE) 
FRONT VIEW 
(d) 


Fic. 9 LOCATION FOR THERMOCOUPLES FOR TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 


15 


IS 7872 : 2020 


ANNEX C ( Concluded ) 
( Clauses 3.4 апа 8.3) 


THERMOCOUPLE LOCATION FOR TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 
HARD TOP/FLAT GLASS TOP/CURVED GLASS TOP FREEZERS 


W= 900mm AND LESS W= 901mm AND ABOVE en 
Ee... Wk 
eT: © 


TOP VIEW 50 TOP VIEW 50 


MAX. PERMISSIBLE SH/2 MAX. PERMISSIBLE 


SH? LOADING LIMIT 50 LOADING LIMIT 


ҚАСЫ ық ыз; 


NS 
u 
S 


Ww 
W 
W= 900mm AND LESS 901mm AND ABOVE 


T4,T5,T6 & T10 NOT 
APPLICABLE IF W<500mm 


FRONT VIEW (b) 


FRONT VIEW 


TOP VIEW 


MAX. PERMISSIBLE 
m 50 LOADING LIMIT 


Notes : 

1. H= Max load line limit specified by manufacturer. 

2. In case of permanent partition in side cabinet then 
thermocouple should be installed in geometrical vertical 
center line of each compartment. 

3. All dimensions are in mm with tolerance of + 5. 


T4,T5,T12 & t13 NOT 
APPLICABLE IF W«500mm 


FRONT VIEW 
(c) 


Fic. 10 THERMOCOUPLE LOCATIONS FOR TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 


16 


IS 7872 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 12.1 ) 


LOCATION OF TEST PACKAGES AND M-PACKAGES IN FROZEN COMPARTMENT 


Р М 


MMP A ZZ LEA 


— — 


Mmm 


NASH 
=ч 
аш 


= 
Ж 


7272227 


THEZGEEGHE 
| ишш 


[e] 


(225 ИЯ, | 2 2 
b) CHEST FREEZER (STEPPED LINER) 


CHEST FREEZERS AND OTHER TOP OPENING COMPARTMENTS 


TMP, = TOP LEFT FRONT M-PACKAGE 
TMP,, = TOP LEFT BACK M-PACKAGE 
TMP}; = TOP RIGHT FRONT M-PACKAGE 
TMP;; = TOP RIGHT BACK M-PACKAGE 
TMP, = CENTRE TOP 


TMP,, = CENTRE BOTTOM 
TMP = ABOVE THE COMPRESSOR OR BOTTOM CORNER OR AND 


LIKELY TO BE WARMEST 


Fic. 11 Location or TEST PACKAGES AND M-PACKAGES ON FROZEN COMPARTMENT 


TOP BREAKER FRAME 


IS 7872 : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 8.3) 


MAXIMUM STORAGE LIMIT LINE 


LLI LLI 
mb at 
n= a= 
$5 25 
50 zo 
rz rz 
e e 
SE 55 
ž 3 222 
> > 


TOP BREAKER FRAME 


TOP BREAKER FRONT 


HARD TOP FREEZER GLASS TOP FREEZER CURVED GLASS FREEZER 


LOAD LIMIT LINE SPECIFICATION 


+50 
1000 


MÀ 

a 

FIG. A CONTINUOUS LOAD LIMIT LINE 
1300 


FIG. B LOAD LIMIT LINE REPEATED AT INTERVALS 


5.5 < d1< 15 
60° 60° 


ib) [— —N 


a) This denotes the load limit, 25 5 


АІ dimensions in millimeters 


FIG. C DIMENSIONS OF LOAD LIMIT LINE 


The load limit line shall be continuous (see figure A), or repeated at intervals (figure B), to ensure that it can not be overlooked. Individual 
markings shall be at least 50mm long and shall contain at least one equilater triangle with side dimension, d, , included with in 5.5mm and 


15mm(see figure С) 


Fic. 12 MAXIMUM STORAGE Limit LINE 


18 


TOP BREAKER REAR| 


IS 7872 : 2020 


ANNEX F 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 

Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 

Blue Star Ltd, Mumbai 

BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 

Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurugram 

Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 

Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 

Consumer Education and Research Centre, 
Ahmedabad 

Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Electrical Research and Development Association, 


Vadodara 
Emerson Climate Technologies (India) Pvt Ltd, 


Karad 
Godrej & Boyce Mfg Co Ltd, Mumbai 
Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers , Kolkata 
Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 
Ingersoll Rand, Bengaluru 
International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Pror (Dr) Ravi Kumar (Chairman) 


SHRI G. К. PRASAD 
Suri J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAYA KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
ӛнкі ANAND BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


ӛнкі BIMAL TANDON 
SHRI D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


Suri А. К. Ravi KUMAR 
SHRI СОЈЈАГА B.BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


Ms SwETA MAHAJAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
Suri К. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI D. P. DEsPANDE (Alternate) 


ӛнкі Burzin J. WADIA 
Suri Авнілт А. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
Dn Nitin Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dr Supr К. Das (Alternate) 


Dr JvoriRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA 


SHRI MITTAKOLA VENKANNA 
SHRUEYAPRAKASH GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
Suri C. M. Ратнак (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
SHRI RAJAT SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


19 


IS 7872 : 2020 


Organization 
National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 
Refrigeration & Airconditioning Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Sierra Aircon Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Spirotech Heat Exchanger Pvt Ltd, Bhiwadi 
The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 
UL IndiaPvt Ltd, Bengaluru 

Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 

Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 


Voice, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (H. No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


In personal capacity, F-88, Abdul Fazal Enclave, 
Jamia Nagar, New Delhi -110025 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI D. К. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. К. Јна (Alternate) 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Suri К. K. Menta (Alternate) 


SuRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVESH MUDGAL 


SHRI SUNIL BHARDWAJ 
SHRI DWIJESH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SuRI VIKAS MEHTA 
Suri NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI P. S. CHIDAMBARAM 
SHRI GIRISH SETHI (Alternate) 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SRINIVASU MOTURI 
Suri A. D. Комвнак (Alternate) 


Suri Н. WADHWA 
Suri В. К. MuknorApHva (Alternate) 


Suni P. К. MUKHERJEE 


SHRI J. К. AGRAWAL 


Sunis T. H. FARIDI 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “E? AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DiRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms Кновнво JYOTSNA KINDO 
Scientist “С, (MED), BIS 


20 


IS 7872 : 2020 


Panel on Specification of Deep Freezers 


Organization 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur Vihar, 
Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Blue Star Ltd., Mumbai 


Frigoglass India Pvt Ltd., Gurugram 
Godrej & Boyce Mfg. Со Ltd, Mumbai 


Panasonic India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Refrigeration & Airconditioning Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 


UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Western Refrigeration Private Limited, Mumbai 


Member Secretary 


Representative(s) 


Suri Р. К. MUKHERJEE (Convener) 


SHRI SRINIVASU Moruni (Co-Convener) 


SMT DEEPSHIKHA WADHWA 
SHRI КізновЕ Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL JAIN 
SHRI SHAILESH Monon (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH KUMAR 


SHRI ABHIJIT A. ACHAREKAR 
SHRI KRISHNA T. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SUNDARAMOORTHY 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 
SHRI PUNEET RANDEO (A/ternate) 


SHRI PARESH PATEL 


Ms Кновнво JYOTSNA KINDO 
Scientist “С? (MED), BIS 


21 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (14991). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


