NAT HA IS 3050 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


FTSE Tedent ECTS 
cht watera Rira & few 
ALITA AT AIS 
( FEAT JAGAT ) 


Code of Practice for Reinforced 
Binding of Library Books 
and Periodicals 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 37.100.01 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 3 


Publication and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee, MSD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the ‘Publication and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee’ had been approved by the ‘Management and 
Systems Division Council’. 


Library binding is a way to increase the life of books and periodicals used in libraries. This is done by sewing 
the pages in place and by reinforcing the spine for each volume. The goal of library binding is long-term 
preservation. This also benefits library patrons by ensuring that the volume in hand is complete, opened with 
ease, and easy to photocopy. In addition, many libraries re-bind damaged books in library bindings regardless of 
whether they were originally paperback or hardcover. 


Book binding is done by sewing together loose leaves of paper to form a book block. Threads pass through small 
holes that have been punched in the signature’s gutter margin (nearest the spine), forming over lock stitches that 
attach it to previously attached sections. A back lining (piece of linen/paper) is then glued to the book block spine 
for further support. The book’s spine may be rounded and backed to keep it from caving in, but if the book block 
is too thick, the spine is sometimes left flat. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1965. In this revised standard, the scope has been expanded for binding 
of books and periodicals to include reinforced binding also. The various provisions as applicable to both binding 
and reinforced binding have been included in this revised version. The standard has been updated to cover latest 
techniques of binding. Additional terms and pre requisites of book block has also been added in this revised 
standard. Detailed procedure for binding has been explained. 


IS 3050 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR REINFORCED 
BINDING OF LIBRARY 
BOOKS AND PERIODICALS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies styles, operations and materials 
required for binding of books and periodicals including 
reinforced binding of library books and periodicals. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated were valid. The standard is subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard is 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
15306 (Part 4) : 2016/ Graphic technology — 
ISO 12637-4 : 2008 Vocabulary: Part 4 Post 
press terms 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in IS 
15306 (Part 4)/ISO 12637-4 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Adhesive Binding — Type of hard cover or soft 
cover binding in which signatures are milled and the 
sheets glued together by means of an adhesive. 


3.2 Binder’s Board — Rigid, solid board, made from 
straw and paper pulp, having grammage of 225 g/m? 
or more. 


3.3 Finishing — Comprises lettering, tooling and 
polishing. 
NOTE — It could also include colouring, gilding, marbling, etc. 


3.4 Folding Endurance — Logarithm (to the base of 
10) of the number of double folds required to cause 
rupture in a strip of paper 15mm wide, tested under 
applied standard stress conditions. 


3.5 Forwarding — Steps in binding that take place 
after sewing and prior to a book being cased in. 
NOTE — It usually includes rounding, backing and lining the 
spine and it may include tipping-in the endpapers. 


3.6 Fore-edge — The front edge of the book opposite 
to the spine. 


3.7 French Joint — The space provided between the 
board and the spine. 
NOTE — French joint enables the board to swing back more 
freely than if they were fixed closely to the spine. This gives 


a greater area of the covering material to stand the strain of 
closing and opening the book. 


3.8 Flat Back — The book having no rounding or 
backing at the spine. 


3.9 Full Binding — The binding in which cover is 
made from one single piece covering material. 


3.10 Guard — A thin strip of cloth or paper used at the 
spine of the signatures for reinforcing. 


3.11 Half Binding — Covering the back and a part of 
the sides and the corners with material stronger than the 
one used for the rest of the sides. 


3.12 Head — The top of a book. 


3.13 Headbands — Strips of thread worked at the head 
and tail of the back. 


3.14 Inlay — A strong and thick flexible strip of paper 
used to stiffen the spine of a case by centrally placing 
between two cover boards. 


3.15 Kettle Stitch — The stitch which locks the sewing 
thread after each complete pass of the thread along the 
spine, at the head and tail of the signatures. 


3.16 Library Binding — Rebinding of books which 
otherwise would be worn out by constant use. 


3.17 Mitring — A joint at 45° in the covering material 
on the inside of the boards. 


3.18 Nipping — The process of reducing the swell 
in the spine of thread sewn book block or gathered/ 
collated signatures. 


3.19 Over-casting — Over-sewing the back edges of 
single leaves or weak sections. 


3.20 Page — One side of the sheet. 


3.21 Permanent Paper — Paper which during long- 
term storage will undergo little or no changes in 
properties that affect its use. 


IS 3050 : 2018 


3.22 Rounding and Backing — The process of shaping 
of a book block to a convex spine by a special machine 
(or by hand) after gluing and trimming. 


NOTE — Rounding results in the characteristic convex spine 
and concave fore-edge of a hard cover book. 


3.23 Sheet — The full size of paper, printed or 
unprinted, forming a section when folded. 


3.24 Section — A folded sheet of paper. 


3.25 Size — The size of a book is determined by the 
measurement of the book block. 


3.26 Slips — The ends of the tapes or cords on which 
the book is sewned, that are attached to the board. 


3.27 Smashing and Nipping — The process of 
compressing and removing the air from the folds, 
enabling flattening of the overall area of the book block. 


3.28 Soft Cover Book — Book bound in flexible 
material, usually paper or light board, that can be made 
either from sewn leaves or as an adhesive binding from 
sheets glued together. 


3.29 Spine —The thickness of the back edge of 
the book. 


3.30 Spine Inlay — Strip of paper or board used to 
stiffen the spine of the case of a binding. 


3.31 Spine Gluing — Process of applying adhesive to 
the spine of the book block after sewing. 


3.32 Split Board — The board used in reinforced 
library binding, made by two mill-boards one thick 


and the other thin-being glued together, except in the 
portion to be kept split. The depth of the split portion 
shall be not less than one-sixth of the width of the board. 


3.33 Squares — The portion of the boards projecting 
beyond the edges of the bookat head, tail and fore-edge. 


3.34 Tail — The bottom of a book. 


3.35 Tipping — Fixing of loose sheets or endpapers, 
to the signatures, applied with a thin line of adhesive 
along the binding edge. 


3.26 Turn In — The part of the covering material 
which is turned over the outer edges of hard/soft cover. 


4 STYLES 

The various styles of book binding are as follows: 
4.1 General Binding 

4.2 Reinforced Binding for Library 


5 BOOK BLOCK 


5.1 Pre-requisites of Book Block 
5.1.1 Size of Book Block 


For convenience of use and to avoid undue strain on the 
binding structure, the thickness of the book block shall 
not exceed 50 mm. 


5.1.2 Paper 


Difference in grammage and flexibility between all 
papers used for the book block, including flyleaves, 


Table 1 Styles of General Binding 


SI No. Style Recommended Use 
a) 2) (3) 
i) Wire stitched (centre or side) predominantly with soft Periodicals, magazines, reports, journals and booklets 
cover in constant use 
ii) Thread sewn (centre, side or section) with Text books, reference books and books of permanent 
a) Soft cover, or value 
b) Hard cover 
Table 2 Styles of Library Binding 
SI No. Style Recommended Use 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Full leather Rare books and books of permanent value 
ii) Half leather with linen or art canvas Periodicals and books in constant use 
iii) Full linen or art canvas Periodicals and books not in constant use 
iv) Half linen or art canvas or calico and marble Pamphlets and books with weak paper 


endpapers, spine inlays and paper for inserts, shall be 
as homogeneous as possible. The machine direction of 
all paper used for the book block, including paper for 
inserts, shall run parallel to the binding edge. 


5.1.3 Margins 


The text shall be imposed so that the inner margin 
measures at least 14 mm on both sides of the fold of 
the signature. For paper sizes wider than 144 mm, each 
inner margin shall measure at least 1/9 of the page 
width. 


5.1.4 Endpapers 


5.1.4.1 Endpapers shall be formed from single sheets 
of paper folded in half. Endpapers shall be attached 
to the front and back signatures either by sewing or 
by tipping-in. If tipping-in is used, the fold of each 
endpaper shall line up with the fold of the signature, 
with a tolerance of + 0.5 mm. The adhesive line shall 
then be straight and between 3 to 5 mm in width. 
It should be made of good, thick, strong paper of 
120 g/m? to 160 g/m? with high folding strength and it 
should be acid-free. 


5.1.4.2 Cambric material may be used as a reinforced 
material for folded endpapers, with tensile strength 
not less than 10.36 kg/cm for warp and 8.04 kg/cm for 
Fill and the tear resistance of 480 gms for warp and 
464 gms for Fill. 


5.1.4.3 Drill material may be used as a reinforced 
material for endpapers for side sewn books, with tensile 
strength not less than 16.43 kg/cm for Warp & 9.82 kg/ 
cm for Fill and the tear resistance of 680 gms for warp 
and 780 gms for Fill. 


5.2 Preparation of Book Block 
5.2.1 Folding 


The book block shall be gathered from one or more 
signatures (folded sheets), all of which shall retain 
their folding edge. A signature shall not exceed 
2.5 mm in thickness and shall be well pressed. If the 
imposition plan results in an odd sized signature, that 
is, a signature with a number of pages different from 
the others, this signature shall be placed between full- 
sized signatures. 


5.2.2 Collating 


All sections of the book shall be examined in respect 
of their sound condition, and collated and secured in 
proper sequence. 


5.2.2.1 Inserts 


Inserts of 4 leaves (8 pages) or more shall be sewn in 
as signatures. 


IS 3050 : 2018 


5.2.2.2 Fold-outs 


Fold-outs, for example, maps, larger than four times the 
size of the book format shall be contained in a book 
pocket. The extra sheets upto 2 pages shall be tipped 
with the relevant section before gathering. 


5.2.3 Sewing 


5.2.3.1 The book block shall be made by sewing through 
the folds of the signatures. Signatures shall have as 
many stitches as the machine can employ, except 
for a kettle stitch distance of 10 mm from the head 
and 13 mm from the tail, which shall be left without 
stitches. The distance between stitches (discernible by 
measuring the spacing along the innermost fold of a 
signature) shall not be more than 25 mm. The thread 
used shall be strong and durable and shall be of the 
linen or unbleached cotton and soft enough not to injure 
the paper at any time. 


5.2.3.2 Whether the book will withstand rebinding 
should be determined before the order for the rebinding 
is given. 


5.2.3.3 The first and the last sections of all books shall 
be enclosed at the back in linen or muslin strips. 


5.2.3.4 All sections broken at the back shall be lined 
inside and outside at the fold with strips of rag, tissue 
paper, or with unsized muslin or linen strips, preferably 
serrated. 


5.2.3.5 All torn pages shall be repaired with Acid free 
transparent tissue paper or Similar, material without 
compromising the readability. 


5.2.3.6 When the paper of the volume is deteriorated 
and brittle, it shall be reinforced with transparent tissue 
paper or other similar material without compromising 
the readability. 


5.2.3.7 If have no sufficient margin in the spine side, 
repaired sheet will be guarded with good quality 
of Acid free handmade paper along with margin 
2”- 2.5”, depending on the size of book and thickness 
of spine. 


5.2.3.8 All folded plates, maps, plans and other 
extended sheets not forming part of a normal section 
shall be mounted on guards of linen or muslin or tough 
paper. Pasting of leaves larger than the format of the 
book shall not be permitted. All extended sheets shall 
be reinforced at the folds. 


5.2.3.9 All folded plates, maps, plans and other extended 
sheets shall be reinforced and, where necessary, be 
mounted on jaconet or thin linen or muslin of good 
quality. 


IS 3050 : 2018 


5.2.3.10 The reinforced binding will be done on tapes, 
the number of which will depend upon the depth of the 
book, as shown below: 


Depth in cm No. of Tapes 
Not more than 15 2 
Between 15 and 25 3 
Between 25 and 35 4 


For books of greater height, the number of tapes shall 
be increased suitably. The tapes, in excess of two, shall 
be equally spaced between the tapes near the head and 
the tail of the books. Tapes and cords should be of 
unbleached linen or good quality cotton, unsized and 
free from loose threads and mechanical defects. 


5.2.4 In the case of a periodical or a book published in 
instalments, all the issues of a volume and the sections 
making up the title, contents pages and indexes shall 
also be collated and assembled in the proper sequence. 


5.2.5 Covers and advertisement sheets in periodicals 
shall not be bound in unless: 


(a) they are included in the pagination of the text, and 
(b) they are required to be retained for other reasons. 


5.2.6 As far as practicable, assembling into volumes 
more than 45 mm in thickness should be avoided. 


5.2.7 Books printed on paper of good quality and for 
reinforced binding shall be sewn all along one section 
on, with thread of suitable thickness over linen or 
cotton tapes. 


5.2.7.1 Each of the end-papers for reinforced binding 
shall be sewn on as a section. 


5.2.7.2 Unbleached linen or cotton tapes shall be used. 
The width of the tape shall be 2 cm. There shall be 
one tape within 2.5 cm of the head and another within 
2.5 cm from the tail. 


5.2.7.3 Straight line machine stitching shall not be used. 


5.2.7.4 Section sewing shall be so done that when the 
hook is opened, the pages of its two halves lie flat on a 
flat surface. 


5.2.8 Nipping/Smashing and Nipping 


The book block is compressed to remove the trapped air 
from the signatures, enabling flattening of the overall 
area of the book block. It is then nipped to eliminate the 
excess swell at the spine. 


5.2.9 Spine Gluing 


The spine of the book block shall receive a coating 
of adhesive or glue, prior to rounding and backing. 
The adhesive shall thoroughly coat the spine and 
penetrate no further through the sewing holes than to 
the innermost leaf. The adhesive shall be applied at the 


proper consistency so that it does not seep unevenly 
between signatures. At no point shall the adhesive 
penetrate between the signatures to a depth of more 
than 1.0 mm. 


5.2.10 Trimming 


The trimming shall be done as squarely and minimal as 
possible. In cases, where the book block is meant to be 
untrimmed, an overhang of 2 mm to 3 mm is allowed. 
The trimming of books (flat back) with soft cover shall 
be done after the cover is drawn over. 


5.2.11 Rounding and Backing 


Book blocks shall be evenly rounded and backed to form 
a smooth convex spine and a concave fore-edge. These 
shall be backed to form shoulders that are symmetrical, 
uniform from head to tail, and nearly equal in size to 
the specified board thickness. Rounding and backing 
is not required for book blocks less than 13 mm thick. 


5.2.12 Back Lining 


The lining shall be carried out either during the spine- 
gluing operation or during the casing-in operation. The 
lining material shall be evenly and securely attached to 
the spine. The lining material shall be mull or any other 
suitable cloth. Paper may only be used as a second 
lining on the mull. The application of cloth or mull shall 
extend at least 15 mm onto the endpaper. The machine 
direction of the paper shall run parallel to the spine. 


5.3 Book Case 
5.3.1 Pre-requisites of Case Preparation 


5.3.1.1 All cover materials shall have a sufficiently 
smooth surface to avoid dust retention. The covering 
material can be leather, rexine, linen, calico, art canvas 
or printed laminated/UV coated sheets. All cloth 
material employed shall perform adequately with 
respect to their strength, flexibility and other properties 
such as lay-flat, shrinkage, tensile strength, etc. 


a) Paper — The cover material shall have a pH-value 
in between 6 to 10. With cover material of a pH- 
value less than 7.0, acid migration from the cover 
to the book block shall be prevented by alkaline 
buffered endpapers of a grammage between 
120 g/m? to160 g/m?. 

b) Cover material  (woven)-linen/calico  — 
Unbleached book cloth, fabric base should be in- 
sized, cotton evenly woven, free from pin holes 
and other mechanical defects. Finished cloth shall 
be soft, pliable and should not show cracking 
surface when bent sharply. It should not show any 
sticking when folded upon itself. It should allow 
satisfactory finishing and tooling by hand or with 
embossing machine. 


Coated and non-woven materials — Alternative 
cover materials may be used, provided that their 


c 


wa 


pH value is in between 6 to 10. Protective coating 
may be a polyester lamination, using polyvinyl 
acetate (PVAc) to bond to the paper cover. 

d 


— 


Leather — Only leather from mature animals 
shall be used. It should be vegetable tanned 
and not acid tanned. It should not be artificially 
grained or dyed. Goatskin, also called morocco, is 
recommended. 


5.3.1.2 Boards 


The boards shall be cut with their machine direction 
running parallel to the spine of the book. The boards 
shall form squares having a head and tail overhang of 
between 1.5 mm and 2.0 mm for book blocks up to 
38 mm thick, and a maximum of 2.5 mm for book block 
more than 38 mm thick. 


5.3.1.3 Spine inlay 


A spine inlay shall be used to reinforce the spine of the 
case. The inlay shall be cut squarely and the machine 
direction of the paper or board used shall run parallel 
to the spine of the book. The width of the inlay shall 
be equal to the width of the spine + 5 percent and its 
height shall be equal to the height of the cover boards. 
The inlay shall be made from a flexible paper or board 
with a minimum thickness of 0.3 mm. 


5.3.1.4 Adhesives 


Adhesives or glue used for all processes shall be capable 
of forming a permanent bond between the surfaces to 
be joined. The adhesive force shall be such that bonded 
materials cannot be separated without damage. 


The adhesives used for making the case shall be a 
poly-vinyl acetate emulsion adhesive (PVA) with good 
long term ageing characteristics. It should be best 
quality flexible hide glue, clean translucent and amber 
colour, liquid glue prepared for binding should not be 
heated over 70 °C. Paste made from best quality starch 
(or maida) and mixed with a suitable insecticide and 
fungicide, not harmful to man, could also be used as 
adhesive. 


5.3.2 Case Preparation 


5.3.2.1 Cover material 


The cover material shall be cut squarely, approximately 
38 mm larger than the finished case so as to allow 19 
mm overhang on all four sides of the unfinished case 
and resulting in a turn-in of approximately 15 mm to 
20 mm. 


The corners of the cover material shall be left uncut 
so that library edition corners can be made or corners 
shall be straight-cut or cut concave at 45° angle so that 
traditional corners can be made. The cover material 
shall be turned-in snugly and uniformly, approximately 
15 mm on all sides and shall adhere neatly and tightly 
to the edges of the board. The overhang of the cover 


IS 3050 : 2018 


material shall be cut away (mitred) at a 45° angle at 
each corner of the case, approximately 3 mm beyond 
the corner of the cover boards. The small protruding 
tip of the corner shall be nicked or tucked-in prior to 
the turning-in of the overhangs at the fore and back 
edge ofthe case to avoid visibility of the board at the 
corners. 


5.3.2.2 The boards shall be correctly positioned on the 
cover material to ensure the correct spine and joint 
width for the case. The joint width shall be twice the 
thickness of the board together with three times the 
thickness of the cover material. 


5.3.3 Casing-in 


The spine of the book block shall be positioned firmly 
in the spine of the case and the joints shall be tightly 
adhered. The amount of adhesive applied to the joints 
should ensure that the joints are tightly secured and 
cannot be separated without damaging the bonded 
surfaces. Endpapers shall adhere to all surfaces 
smoothly and shall be free of wrinkles and bubbles 
(air-pockets). 


5.3.3.1 Absence of warping 


The components of the case (cover material, boards, 
paper liner, casing-in adhesive, and adhered endpapers) 
shall form a completed book-cover structure that is free 
of warping. The component materials shall be applied 
with their machine direction or warp-thread direction 
running parallel to the spine of the book block. 


5.3.3.2 Joint forming 


Cased-in books shall be pressed between pressing 
boards until thoroughly dried in a pressing machine. 


Joint forming device using sufficient hydraulic or 
pneumatic pressure, dwell and heat to ensure good 
adhesion of the endpapers to the boards and turn-ins 
of the covering material to the spine lining as well as 
endpapers in the joint area of the book binding. 


5.4 Dust Jacket 


Ifa dust jacket is to be used, its fold around both boards 
and covers shall not be less than 1/3 of the width of 
the cover. 


5.5 Book Pocket 


If a book pocket is to be used for holding maps, charts 
and other similar materials, it shall be firmly attached 
to the inner side of the back board, and comply with 
all the relevant material requirements to maintain the 
overall shape of the volume. 


5.6 Labels 


If labels are required, they shall be firmly and securely 
fixed to the cover material or endpaper, using a suitable 
adhesive. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 06 (0540). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


