(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS : 11315( Part 10 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE QUANTlTATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF DISCONTINUITIES 1N ROCK MASSES
PART
Rock
Chairman
DR BHAWANI

IO

BLOCK

SIZE
BDC 73

Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

Representing University of Roorkee, Roorkee

S~r;an

Members ASSISTANT R~SARCR OFFICER ( IRI ) DIRECTOR ( CW & PRS )

Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune SHRI S. L. MOEHASHI ( Alternate ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTOR New Delhi Engineering Research Karnataka Station, DIRECTOR ( CHIEB ENQI~EER ) Krishnarajasagara Snnr R. NABA SIMHA IYBNOA~ ( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dn A. K. DUNE Dhanbad ( Bihar ) and Power Department, Amritsar Irrigation SHRI P. S. GOSAL ( Punjab ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Dn UDAY V. KUI+ARNI Central Building Research Institute ( CSlR ), Dn G. S. MEHROTRA Roorkee SHRI A. GHOSH ( Alternate ) Associated Instrument Manufarturrrs ( India ) SHRI M. D. NAII~ Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Paor T. S. NAC+.\RAJ( Alternate ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI P. L NAI~ULA Central Road Research Institute SHI~I T. K. NATRAJAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi PROF T. RAMAM~IURTHI DR G. V. RAO ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

#ZJ Copyright 1987
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11315( Part 10 ) - 1987 ( Continuedfrom paga 1)
Members
DRY. V. RAMANA ) DR G. V. RAO RESEARCH OFFICER ( MERI SECRETARY DIRECTOR (C) ( Alternate ) SHRI C. D. THATTE SHRI G. RAYAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Represenling National Geophysical Research Institute (CSIR), Hyderabad Indian Geotechnical Society, Delhi Government of Department, Irrigation Maharashtra, Nasik 82 Power, of Irrigation Board Central New Delhi Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat Director General, BIS ( Ex-oficio Member )

Secretary
SHRI K. M. MATHUR Joint Director (Civ Engg ), BIS

Rock Slope Engineering, Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee, BDC 73 : 4
Convener
PROW L. S. SRIVASTAVA DR R. K. BHANDARI SHRI A. G~OSH ( Alternate ) SARI B. D. BALWA University of Roorkee, Roorkee Institute Institute ( CSIR ( CSIR ), ),

Members

Centfiabor~t~lding CentrDfanyirdng

Research Research

Cemindia Company Limited, Bombay SHR~ A. P. BANERJE~ SHRI D. J. KETKAR ( Alternate ) Jaiprakash Associates Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO (Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR T. RAMAZWJRTHY DR K. G. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur DR YUDHBIR

),

2

IS : 11315( Part 10 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATlVE DESCRIPTIONS OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES
PART IO BLOCK SIZE

0.

FOREWORD

0 .l This Indian Standard ( Part 10 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 January 1987, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In view of the advancement in the Field of Rock Mechanics, a number of methods for assessing the strength characteristics of the rocks and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Slope Engineering and Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee ot' Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee. The majority of rock masses, in particular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is therefore essential that the structure of rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified description of rock masses and discontinuities, and it may be possible to design engineering structures in rock with a minimum of expensive in situ testing. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 0.3 Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistocity planes, weak zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistance, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number of sets, and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 3

IS : 11315 ( Part 10 ) - 1987 0.4 It is essential
that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard covering various parameters to describe discontinuities in rock masses is being formulated in various parts, each part covering one parameter. This part covers size. The other parts covering other parameters are also being formulated. 0.5 Block size describes rock block dimensions resulting from the mutual orientation of intersecting discontinuity sets, and resulting from the spacinn of the individual sets. Individual discontinuities may , further influence thi block size and shape. with 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance this standard, tf the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 10 ) covers the method for the quantitative description of size and shape of block resulting from the intersecting discontinuity sets in rock mass.
2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 11358-1986t shall apply.
3. GENERAL

the

definitions

of

terms

given

in

3.1 Block size is an extremely

important indicator of rock mass behaviour. Block dimensions are determined by discontinuity spacing, number of sets, and persistance of the discontinuities delineating potential blocks.

3.2 The number of sets and the orientation determine the shape of the resulting blocks, which can take the approximate form of cubes, rhomobohedrons, tetrahedrons, sheets, etc. However, regular geometric shapes are the exception rather than the rule since the joints in any one set are seldom consistently parallel. Jointing in sedimentary rocks usually produces the most regular block shapes.

*Rules for rounding off numerical
iGlossary of terms and symbols

vaIues ( revised ). relating to rock mechanics.

4

IS : 11315( Part 10 ) - 1987 3.3 The combined
properties of block size and interblocks shear strength determine the mechanical behavionr of the rock mass under given stress conditions. Rock masses composed of large blocks tend to be less deformable, and in the case of underground construction, develop favourable arching and interlocking. In the case of slopes, a small block size may cause the potential mode of failure to resemble that of soil ( that is circular/ rotational ) instead of the translational or toppling modes of failure usually associated with discontinuous rock masses. In exceptional cases `block' size may be so small that flow occurs, as with a `sugar-cube' shear zone in quartzite. 3.4 tion of a soils Rock quarrying and blasting efficiency are likely to be largely a funcof the natural in silu block size. It may be helpful to think in terms block size distribution for the rock mass, in much the same way that are categorized by a distribution of particle size.

3.5 Block size can be described either by means of the average dimension of typical blocks ( block size index It, ) or by the total number of joints intersecting a unit volume of the rock mass ( volumetric joint count 3v ). 3.6 Block size describes the shape and dimensions of rock block resulting from mutual orientation of intersecting sets of discontinui ties (joints, cleavage, bedding, etc ). The size is measured by a tape of at least 3 m length, calibrated in mm divisions. 4. PROCEDURE 4.1 Block Site Index ( Ib ) is estimated by selecting by eye several typical block sizes and taking their average dimensions. Since the index may range from millimetres to several metres, a measuring accuracy of 10% should be sufficient.
NOTE 1 --The purpose of the block size index is to represent the average dimensions of typical rock blocks. The average value of individual modal spacings ( S,, S,, etc, ) may not give a realistic value of In if there are more than three sets, since the fourth set, if widely spaced will artificially increase Ib, but may have little influence on actual block sizes as observed in the field. the case of sedimentary rocks, two mutually perpendicular sets of NOTE 2 -In cross joints plus bedding constitute an extremely common cubic or prismatic block shape. In such cases, Zb is correctly described by: Zb = St + sz + ss 3

4.1.1 Each domain should with the range, that is, typical

be characterized by a modal It, together largest and smallest block size indices. in parallel with Ib attempt to convert

4.1.2 The number of sets should always be recorded since if there are only one or two sets, any subsequent Ib to typical block volumes may be unrealistic, 5

IS : 11315 ( Part 10 ) - 1987 4.2 Volumetric joint count ( Jv ) is defined as the sum of the number of joints per metre for each joint set present. Random discontinuities can be included, but will generally have little effect on the results.
NOTE 1 - Field mapping can be performed very rapidly as a measuring tape can be dispensed with when individual joint spacings are not of interest. 5 or 10 m can be paced out or estimated with_reasonable accuracy by most observers ( that is, to within +lO% of the correct length ). The observer should face in the direction of strike for each joint set that is to be counted and count perpendicular to the strike. thereby removing the angular correction factor. It should be noted that to ++ + + .._& not modal spacbe log-normally

Jv is not equal
NOTE 2 ing. Generally distributed.

The calculation of& is based on the mean spacings, but spacing tends to the results will be similar,

NOTE 3 - The occasional random discontinuities will not noticeably elfect the value ofJv unless the spacing of the systematic joints is wide or very wide ( that is 1 - 10 m I. In such cases they should be included with appropriately wide spacing, for example, 10 m.

4.2.1 The number of joints of each set should be counted along the relevant joint set perpendicular. A sampling length of 5 or 10 m is suggested. Each joint count will then be divided by 5 or 10 to express the results as number of joints per mctre.
4.2.2 counted below: A typical result for three joint along 5 to 10 m perpendicular Jv = 6/10 + 24110 + 5/5 + sets and a random discontinuity sampling lines might appear as l/IO blocks )

3; =
4.3 The following ing block size:

0.6 + 2.4 + descriptive

1.0 + O-1 = 4-l /ms ( medium-size terms give an impression

of the correspond-

Description Very large blocks Large blocks blocks Medium-sized Small blocks Very small blocks represent Values of Jv > 60 would crushed zone.

Jv (joints/x-d ) < 1-3 3-10 IO-30 > 30 crushed rock, typical of a clay-free 1.0

6

fS : 1131.5 ( Part 4.4 Rock masses can be described
impression of block size and shape = = = = = = i) massive ii) blocky iii) tabular iv) columnar by the following ( see Fig. 1 ): adjectives,

io ) to give

1987
an

few joints

or very wide spacing equidimensional considerably considerably smaller larger than than the the

approximately one dimension other two one dimension other two wide variations heavily jointed

v) irregular vi) crushed

of block size and shape to `sugar cube'

4.5 Orientation data provide additional descriptive data for a clearer expression of the form of an anisotropic block structure if present, that is, `steeply dipping sheets, slabs, beds', etc, or `vertical columnar blocks', etc. When block dimensions a.re reasonably isotropic only the block shape need be described, that is, cubic, rhombohedral, prismatic, terahedral, irregular, etc, as appropriate. 5. REPRESENTATION 5.1 Record the modal block size index ( I,, ), and 1, values typical for the largest and smallest block sizes for the domain or domains of interest. ( Also record the number of sets and describe the persistancc. ) 5.2 Record and volumetric joint count ( 3,. ) f or the domain or domains ( Also record the number of sets and describe the PerJistunce. ) interest. 5.3 Describe the rock massive, blocky, tabular, mass and its `blockiness' in general columnar, crushed or as appropriate. terms of as:

5.4 Where possible, block by means of photographs ( Fig. 1 ).

size and shape should also be communicated and/or field sketches of typical exposures

l!!i : 11315 ( Part

16 ) - 1987

1A

BLOCKY

16

IRREGULAR

1C

TABULAR
FIG. 1

1D

COLUMNAR

BLOCK

SKETCHES OF ROCK MASSES

8

