( Reaffirmed 2000 )

I[!3: 10386 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 6 CONSTRUCTION

Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, BDC 67
Chairman SHRI J. C. MALHOTRA House No. 472, Sector 6 Panchkula ( Haryana ) Members SHRI L. S. BASSI Representing

Roads Wing ( Ministry of Shipping and Transport ), New Delhi SHRI S. P. CHAKRAVARTY ( Alternate ) Irrigation Project, Public Works Department, SHRI D. T. BUCH Government of Gujarat, Ahmadabad Beas Project, Talwara CHIEF DFSIGN ENGINEER
CHIEF ENGINEER Salal

Hydro Electric Project, Gevernment of' Jammu & Kashmir, Jyotipuram Public Works Department, Government of Tamil CHIEFENGINEER( IRRIGATION) Nadu, Madras SR DY CHIEF ENGINEER ( IRRIGATION ) ( Alternate ) Irrigation & Power Department, Govt of Andhra CHIEF ENGINEER ( CD0 ) Pradesh, Hyderabad SUPERINDENDING ENGINEER ( CD0 ) CHIEF ENGINEER ( TDC ) SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( CONST TDC ) ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENGINEER ( PROJECTS )

( Alternate )

Irrigation Works, Shahpur Kandi

Government

of

Punjab,

Water & Power Trivandrum DY CHIEF ENGINEER ( IRRIGATION ) ( Alternate )

Department,

Govt

of Kerala,

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1983 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1s : 10386 ( Part 6 ) - i983*
( Continued from page 1 ) *
Members
CHIEF ENGINEER ( WRDO

)

Representing and Electricity Department, Public Works Government of Karnataka, Bangalore Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal Continental Construction Pvt Ltd, New Delhi

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( CAUVARY PLANNING ) ( Alternate > Irrigation CHIEE TECHNICAL EXAMINER SHRI S P. &uG DIRECTOR ( CC ) DIRECTOR ( HTD I > DY DIRECTOR ( HTD-I DIRECTOR ( R & C ) MEMBER( IRRIGATION)

) ( Alternate ) Central Water Commission,

Central Water Commission, New Delhi Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi New .Delhi

( Alternate ) SHRIV. R. NATARAJAN

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( BD ) SHRI G. M. ABDUL RAHAMAN

Bhakra Beas Township

Management

Board,

Nangal

Tamil Nadu Electricity Nati~;$`rojects

Board,

Madras Corporation, New

( Alternate ) SHRI S. RAMACHANDRAN SHRI D. M. SAVUR

Construction

SVRI T. S. MURTHY ( Alternate ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SECRE VARY DEPUTY SECRETARY( Alternate ) Farraka Barrage Control Board ( Ministry of SBCRBl-ARY Jaiprakash Associates Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Karnataka Power Corporation, Bangalore

Agriculture

& Irrigation

), New Delhi

SHRI D. C. SHARMA (Alternate )

SHRI G. H. SHIVASHANKAR PROJECT ENGINEER ( DESIGNS )

Irrigation & Power Department, SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER Maharashtra, Bombay ( BHATSE ,PROJECT CIRCLE ) Irrigation Department, Government SUPERINTENDINGENGINEER Pradesh, Lucknow ( TONE'S C I v I L CONSTRUCTION

Govt

of

of Uttar

Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI R. S. VERMA D R S. GANGOPADHYAY ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI G. RAMA?,

' Div II)

I

Director

( CIV Engg ) Secretary
SHRI HAMANT KUMAR Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

2

AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 2010 TO IS 10386 (PART 6) : 1983 SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 6 CONSTRUCTION (Page 5, clause 4.3)  Add the following sentence at the end of the clause: `Preferably a non-skid (anti-skid) material should be fitted at the bottom of the ladder.' (Page 7, clause 8.10)  Add the following sentence at the end of the clause: `Rigid supports should be provided particularly where the volume of concrete is huge.' (Page 8, clause 9.4)  Add the following new clause: `9.5 Properly trained personnel should be engaged.' (Page 10, clause 13.3)  Add the following new clause: `14 GENERAL Unauthorized persons should be kept away from the work area for all works.'

(WRD 21)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

IS : 10386 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

Indian Standard SAFEI-Y CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RlVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 6 CONSTRUCTION

O.FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 6 ) was adopted by the Indian Institution on 18 April 1983, after the draft finalized by the Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Standards Safety in Sectional Council.

0.2 With large scale increase in construction activity on river valley projects involving hazardous construction jobs, there has been an increase in the number of accidents, both major and minor ones. Further, increased construction activity in the underground jobs has created health hazards for the persons working under such conditions. In order to minimize such accidents and health hazards, it shall be the overall responsibility of the project authorities and contractors to provide necessary measures for the safety and health protection of all employees working on the projects. 0.3 It shall be the responsibility of the employer, that is government or contractor, to initiate and maintain such programmes in respect of their employees working on a project scheme. 0.4 Each employer/department, contractor and employee shall comply with the different safety regulations in force on a project and shall be alert at all times to eliminate hazards to himself/herself and/or to others. 0.5 This standard requires reference to the following standards: IS : 1989 ( Part I)-1978 Leather safety boots and shoes: Part 1 For miners ( third revision ) IS : 2750-1964 IS : 2925-1975 IS : 3696 (Part 2)-1966 IS': 4041-1967 Steel scaffoldings Industrial safety helmets (first revision ) Safety code for scaffolds and ladders: Part 2 Ladders Glossary of &~B-I$ relating materials 3.. to refractory

IS : $03616( Part 6 ) - 1983 IS : 4770-1968 IS : 6994 (Part l)-1973 1s : 8519-1977 IS : 8520-1977 IS : 8521 (Part l)-1977 3 fS : 8523-1977 IS : 8807-1978 Rubber gloves for electrical purposes Industrial safety gloves: Part cotton gloves 1 Leather and

Guide for selection of industrial safety equipment for body protection Guide for selection of industrial safety equipment for eye, face and ear protection Industrial safety face shields: Part plastics visor 1 With
'

Respirators, canister type ( gas masks ) Guide for selection of industrial safety equipment for protection of arms and hands

1.. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 6 ) lays down the safety requirements regarding scaffolds, platforms, gangways and runs, ladders, ramps, openings, dangerous corners, forms for concrete, grouting and guniting, structural steel erection, welding, riveting and cutting, painting storage of materials like-cement, pipes, poles, steel, sand, gravel, crushed stone, paints, etc.

2, FALSE WORK,&CAFFOLDS
2.1 Suitable

scaffolds shall be provided for workmen for all jobs that cannot safely be done from ground, from part of permanent structure, from a ladder or any other available means of access. 2.2 Scaffoldings or stagings, which are more than 3.25 metres above the ground or floor, swung or suspended from an overhead support or erected with stationary support, shall have a guard rail, properly bolted, braced or otherwise secured at least 1 metre above the floor or platform of such scaffoldings or stagings and shall extend along the entire length of the outside and end thereof with only such openings as may be necessary for the delivery of materials. 2.3 The scaffoldings or stagings shall be so fastened as to prevent it from swaying away from the structure. Alternatively, the scaffolds shall be so designed as to be self supporting under all live loads, 4

IS : 10386 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 3. PLATFORMS, 3.1 Working GANGWAYS AND RUNS

platforms, gangways and runs shall be so constructed that they do not sag unduly or unequally. If the heights of platform gangways and runs are more than 3'25 metres above the ground level or floor level, they shall be closely boarded and shall have adequate width as specified in IS : 3696 ( Part 1 )-1966* and be suitably fenced as described in 2.2 and 2.3. 3.2 The slopes of platforms, gangways and runs shall ccnfcrm to IS : 3696 (Part I)-1 966*. 4. LADDERS
4.1 The ladder may be made of either steel complying with IS : 1977-19751_

Rope for ladder shall or wood complying with relevant Indian Standards. conform to the requirements for Grades I ropes as laid down in IS : 1%41969$ or IS : 1410-1973s. 4.2 Suitable hand holds of good quality wood or steel shall be provided, and the ladder shall be given an inclination not steeper than a horizontal to 1 vertical. The steps shall be rigidly fastened at the ends with the supporting steel or timber. 4.3 To prevent slipping, ladder shall be secured at the bottom end. If this cannot be done, a person shall be stationed at the base, whenever it is in use. 4.4 If the ladder is used for carrying provided on it. materials, suitable footholds shall be

4.5 Width between side rails in a rung ladder shall in no case be less than 30 cm for ladders up to and including 3 metres in length. For longer ladders this width shall be increased by at least 6 mm for such additional 30 cm of length. 4.6 Uniform step spacing shall not exceed 30 cm. 4.7 Ladders shall extend atleast one metre above the top of the floor or platform, to provide hand hold when stepping on or off the ladder.
*Safety code for scaffolds and ladders : Part 1 Scaffolds. j-specification for structural steel ( ordinary quality ) ( second JSpecitication for manila ropes ( second revision ). $Specificatios fw Coir rope ( j?rst revision ).

revision

).

5

IS : 10386 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 5. RAMPS 5.1 Ramps shall be of adequate strength and shall be evenly supported. They shall have railing on the open side(s), and adequate strength to protect workmen, and shall either have a sufficiently flat slope or shall have cleats fixed to the surface to obviate slipping of workmen. 5.2 Rumps shall be materials and also labourers. 5.3 Ramps meant sufficient width and 6. OPENINGS 6.1 Every opening in the floor of a structure or in working platform shall be provided with suitable means like fencing or railing whose minimum height shall be 1 metre to prevent the fall of persons or materials. 6.2 Wherever there are open excavations in ground, they shall be fenced off by suitable railing, if necessary, with toe boards. 6.3 Danger signals shall be installed at night so as to prevent the fall of persons or to prevent persons slipping into the open excavation. 7. DANGEROUS CORNERS kept free from grease, mud, snow or other slippery other obstructions leading to accidental fall of the for transporting materials shall have even surface, be provided with skirt boards on open sides.

7.1 At all approaches and exits, and dangerous corners, danger and warning signals shall be placed to ensure safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 7.2 In case of platforms, gangways, runs and ramps, dangerous corners shall be protected with fencing or railing whose minimum height shall be 1 metre; if necessary, they may be protected with toe boards. 7.3 All dangerous corners shall be well lighted for night work. 8. FORMS FOR CONCRETE 8.1 Formwork shall be designed after taking into consideration spans, setting temperature of concrete, dead load and working loads to be supported and adequate safety factor for the materials used for formwork. 8.2 All timber formwork shall be carefully unacceptable material shall be discarded. inspected before use and all

8.3 As timber centering usually takes an initial set when vertical load is applied, the design of such centering shall make allowance for this factor.
6

8.4 The vertical supports shall be adequately braced or otherwise secured in position so that these do not fail when the load gets released or when the `sdpports are accidentally hit. 8.5 In case of timber posts, vertical joints shall be properly designed. The `connections shall normally be with bolts and nuts. Use of rusted or spoilt `threaded bolts and nuts shall be avoided. 8.6 Tubular steel centering shall be used in accordance with the When tubular, steel and timber centering is inanufacturer's instructions. to be used in combination, necessary precautions shall be taken to avoid any unequal settlement under load. 8.7 A thorough inspection of tubular steel centering is necessary before its erection and members showing evidence of excessive rusting, kinks, dents or damaged welds shall be discarded. Buckled or broken members shall be replaced. Care shall also be taken to see that the locking devices are in good working order and that the coupling pins are effectively aligned to frames. 8.8 Sills under the supports shall be set .on firm soil or other suitable material in a pattern which assures adequate stability for all props. Care shall be taken not to disturb the soil under the support. Adequate drainage shall be provided to drain away water coming due to rain, washing of forms or during the curing of the concrete, to avoid softening of the supporting soil strata. 8.9 All centerings shall be regularly inspected to ensure that footings of sills under every post of centering are sound, the centering panels are plumb in both directions and all cross braces are securely in place. 8.10 Daring pourmg of concrete, the centering shall be constantly inspected and strengthened if required, and wedges below the vertical supports shall be tightened. Adequate protection of centering shall be ensured from moving vehicles or swinging loads. 8.11 Forms shall not be removed earlier than the limit laid down in the specifications and not until it is certain that the concrete has developed sufficient strength to support itself and all loads that will be imposed on it, Only workmen actually engaged in removing the formwork shall be allowed in the area during these operations. Those engaged in removing the formwork shall wear helmets, gloves and heavy soled shoes, and approved safety belt if adequate footing is not provided above 2 m level. While cutting any wires in tension, care shall be taken to prevent back lash which might hit the body. 8.12 Dismantling of supports shall be done under the supervision of a competent engineer and the order of dismantliug of individual supports laid down in the instruction sheets shall be closely followed. 7
.

IS ! lb386 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 9. GROUTING AND GUNITING

9.1 Pressure used in grouting must be carefully regulated and shall conform

to IS : 6066-1971* at all times during the process of injection. 9.2 Record gauges for measuring pressure shall always be fixed at the top of the grout hole. They shall be checked frequently against standard water gauge. 9.3 Grouting equipments shall be in accordance with IS : 6066-1971* and also shall be free from patent defects and kept in good repair condition and working order. 9.4 Workers engaged in grouting and guniting shall be provided with protective clothing, hand gloves, sleeves, boots, safety hats and safety glasses conforming to the relevant Indian Standards.
10. STRUCTURAL STEEL ERECTION

10.1 During erection, the steel work shall be securely bolted or otherwise fastened and when necessary, temporarily braced to provide for all loads to be carried by the structure during erection including those due to erection equipment and its operation ( see IS : 720519731_ ).

10.2 No riveting, permanent bolting or welding shall be done until proper alignment has been obtained. 10.3 Use of hoisting machines, cranes, winches and tackle including their attachments, anchorages, supports and foundations shall conform to the conditions specified in 10.3.1 to 10.3.7. 10.3.1 These shall be of good mechanical construction, sound material, of adequate strength, free from defects and shall be kept in good repair condition and working order._ 10.3.2 Every rope used for hoisting or lowering materials or as means of suspension shall be of durable quality, of adequate strength and free from patent defects. 10.3.3 Every crane driver or hoisting appliance operator shall be qualified for the. job and no person under the age of 18 years shall be in charge of any hoisting machine, crane, winch, signalling equipment, etc. 10.3.4 In case of every hoisting machine
ring, hook, shackle, the of suspension,

and

crane, and every chain

shovel and. pulley block used in hoisting or as means safe working load shall be marked. No part of any

*Recommendationsfor pressure grouting of rock foundations in river valley projects. TSafetycode for erection on structural steelwork. 8

IS : 10386 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

machine or any gear shall be loaded beyond the safe working for the purpose of testing.

load except

10.3,5 Motors, gears, transmissions, electric wirings and other dangerous parts of hoisting appliances shall be provided with efficient safeguards, hoisting appliances shall be provided with such means as will reduce the risk of any part of suspended load becoming accidentally displaced, to the minimum. 10.3.6 All workers, engineers and suppervisors employed in erection work shall wear safety helmets conforming to relevant Indian Standards and shall be provided with necessary apparels, such as safety clothing, hand gloves, sleeves, boots. 10.3.7 Unauthorised persons shall be kept away from the work area during erection operations. Red flags, or warning signs shall be strategically posted to assist in cautioning and instructing others. Authorised visitors shall be equipped with safety hats and be accompanied by a guide competent to keep the visitors out of dangerous situations. 11. WELDING, RIVETING AND CUTTING

11.1 Welding and cutting operations shall be done by workmen thoroughly trained for the job or by trainees who are under competent supervision. Workers engaged in welding, riveting and cutting shall be provided with protective clothing, hand gloves, sleeves and boots as per relevant Indian Standards. Workers engaged in welding and cutting shall be provided with protective goggles conforming to I$ : 1.179-l 967*. 12. PAINTING 12.1 Paints containing lead or lead products shall not be used.

12.2 The face masks in accordance with relevant Indian Standards shall be supplied to workers when paint is applied in the form of spray or when a surface having lead paint is dry rubbed and scrapped. 12.3 Most paint materials are highly combustible. and every .precaution shall be taken to eliminate danger from fire. Packages containrng palms, varnishes, lacquers or other volatile painting materials, shall be kept tightly closed when not in actual use and shall be placed where they shall not be exposed to excessive heat, spark, flame or direct rays of the sun. *Specification for equipment for eye and face protectjoq during welding (first
revision ).

9

IS : 10386 ( Par,t 6 ) - 1983 13. STORING
OF MATERIALS LIKE CEMENT, PIPES, POLES, STEEL, SAND, GRAVEL, CRUSHED STONE, PA.[NTS, ETC

13.1 No materials on any of the work sites shall be so stacked

or placed

as to cause danger or inconvenience

to any persons.

13.2 Material shall be stored and stacked in such a way that it shall not slide down and cause hazards or danger to persons ( see IS : 7969-1975: and IS : 8989-1978t ). 13.3 Materials dumped against walls or partitions shall not be stored to a height that will endanger the stability or exceed the resisting strength of such walls and partitions.

*Safety code for handling and storage of building materials, $Safety code for erection of concrete framed structures.

10

