**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 5204 (1969): Research Microscope [PGD 22: Educational 
Instruments and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT V 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 5204- 1949 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
RESEARCH MICROSCOPE 



UDC 535 822 




© Copyright 1969 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



October 1969 



AMENDMENT NO. 3 MAY 1983 
TO 
IS:5204-1969 SPECIFICATION FOR RESEARCH MICROSCOPE 

Alterations 

(Page 10, alauee 6.2.4): 

a) heading - Substitute the following for the 
existing heading: 

'Field of View Number {Field Number) of 
Eyepiece' . 

b) Last sentence - Substitute the following 
matter for the existing: 

'An alternative method for the measurement 
of field of viev number shall be as given 
below: 

A microscope fitted with an objective with 
magnification UOX or k$X and the eyepiece 
under test shall be focused on a stage micro- 
meter. The exact magnification of the 
objective shall be determined according to 
the method given in Appendix J of IS:2T5 1 *-196l*. 
A stage micrometer normally has 1 mm divided 
into 100 divisions, thereby making each 
graduation equal to 0.01 am. The maximum 
number of graduations on the stage micro- 
meter which cure seen with the eyepiece under 
test are noted. Ibis number expressed in mm 
gives the diameter of the visual field of the 
microscope. The field of view number of the 
eyepiece is given by the formula: 

Diameter of the visual 
Field of view * field in mm X magnification 
number of the objective.' 

(EDO 36) 

Reprography Unit, ISI, New Delhi » India 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 SEPTEMBER 1980 

TO 

IS : 5204-1969 SPECIFICATION FOR 
RESEARCH MICROSCOPE 

Alterations 

[ Page 6, clause 4.8.1(a) to (d)] — Substitute the following for the 
existing matter: 

<a) 32mm( 5 X NAO'125), 

b) 16mm ( 10 X NA 025 ), 

c) 4 mm ( 40 x NA 65 ) or ( 45 x NA 0'65 ), and 

d) 2 mm ( 90 X NA 1 25 ) or ( 100 X NA T25 ) oil immersion.' 

( Page 9, clause 6.1.3 ) — Substitute the following for the existing 
clause: 

'6.1.3 In changing from lower magnification to next higher magnifica- 
tion or re-introducing the same objective by rotation of the nosepiece, 
the object at the centre of the field shall be well within the field of 
view.' 

( Page 10, clause 6.2.6 ) — Substitute the following for the existing 
caluse: 

'6.2.6 When observed under white light illumination, the image 
shall appear clear and well defined. The image shall be totally free from 
colour defects up to half the field of view and shall be reasonably fiee 
from colour up to two-thirds field of view.' 

Addenda 

( Page 6, clause 4.8.2 ) — Add the following new note after 4.8.2: 

'Note — The mechanical tube length of 160 mm is applicable only in case of 
monocular microscope while for"5T-nocular microscope the tube length may be up 
to 200 mm.' 

( Page 9, clause 6.1.1 ) — Add the following new note after 6.1.1: 

'Note — The mechanical tube length of 160 mm is applicable only in caie of 
monocular microscope while for bi-nocular microscope the tuble length may be up 
to 200 mm.' 



(EDC36) 



Printed it Printogr«ph, Now Delhi. India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 1979 

TO 
IS: 5204-1969 SPECIFICATION FOR RESEARCH MICROSCOPE 

Alterations^ 

(Page S, clause 4.4) - Substitute the following 
for the existing clause: 

f U.6 Light Source - The microscope shall be equipped 
vith a high intensity compact light source enclosed in 
a suitable housing complete vith condensing lens, iris 
diaphragm and filters including ground glass for 
critical and K5hler illumination of the specimen, 9 

(Page 7, clause 4. 9. 2.1, line 2) - Substitute 
'0.01 mm* for '0.001 mm' . 



(EDC 36) 



Reprography Unit, ISI, New Delhi 



IS -.5204 -1969 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
RESEARCH MICROSCOPE 

Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee, 

EDC36 

Chairman Representing 

Dr C. S. Rao The Andhra Scientific Co Ltd, Masuhpatam 

Members 

Shri P. V. Subba Rao ( Alternate to 
Dr C. S. Rao ) 
Shri P. L. Bhardwaj Quality Marked Goods Manufacturers 1 Co-opetaiivc 

Association Ltd, Roorkec 
ShriJai Prakash (Alternate) 
Shri R. R. Chakraborty The National Instruments Limited, Jadavpur 

Shri J. Sanyal ( Alternate) 
Chief Hydrographer ( Navy ) Indian Navy 

Deputy Director, Standards Research, Designs & Standards Organisation, 
( Track ) Ministry of Railways 

Assistant Director, Standards 
( Track ) ( Alternate ) 
Director, Instruments Research Ministry of Defence (R&D) 
& Development Establishment 
Shri S, S. Dharmayya {Alternate) 
Maj S. Ganguli Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Mat P. S. Brahmacharee (Alternate) 
Shri A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. D. Khosla Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Col K. L. Khosla Survey of India, Dehra Dun 

Shri V. Krishnamoorthy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri D. Majumdar Office of the Development Commissioner* Small 

Scale Industries, Ministry of Industrial Develop- 
ment, Internal Trade and Company Ajffairs 
Shri G. B. Jakhktia ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. R. Mankhand The Koh-i-Noor ( India ) Private Limited, 

Varan asi 
Dr J. Prasad Central Scientific Instruments Organisation ( CSIR ), 

Chandigarh 
Shri Ram Sinoh ( Alternate ) 
Shri Prem Prakash National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri P.C.Jain (Alternate) 

Shri E. B. Rajderkar Raj-Der-Kar & Co, Bombay 

Shri Subhash Rajderkar ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



ISi 5204- 1969 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Dr I. Ramakrishna Rao 

Representative 

Surveyor op Works II Under 

Superintending Surveyor of 

Works I 
Shri H. C. Verma 

Shri J. A. Unvala ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Patankar, 
Dirt ctor ( M< ch Engg ) 



Representing 

In personal capacity ( 16-3-5 Official Colony, 

Vtsakiiapatnam 2 ) 
Madras Institute of Technology, Madras 
Central Public Works Department 

Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) 
Puvate Limbed, New Delhi 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojjuio Member) 



Secretary 

Shri S, M. Razvi 

Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI 

Optical Instruments Subcommittee, EDC 36 : 2 



Convener 
Shri A. N. Bhattacharyya 

Members 

Shri G. L. Batra 
Shri R. G.Jain 



Ministry of Defence (R&D) 



Shri S. N. Das Gupta ( AlUrnaU ) 



Towa Optics ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Delhi 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 



Shri V. Krishnamoorthy 
Shri S. K. Maheswari 
Shri P. C. Mioha 



Shri D. R. Goyal ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mukherjee 
DrM.V. R. K.Murthy 
Dr J. Prasad 

Shri J. L. Mathur ( Alternate) 
Shri Ram Prashad 

Shri S. V. Gupta {Alternate) 
Shri D. G. Roy 
Shri P. V. Subba Rao 



Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Government Precision Instruments Factory, 

Luc knew 
Small Industries Service Institute, Ministry of 

Industrial D^vek pment, Internal Tiade and 

Company Affairs 

Instrument Re earch Laboratory Ltd, Calcutta 
Department ef Atom.c Energy, Bombay 
Central Sc.ent.nc Instruments Organisation ( CSIR ), 
Chandigarh 

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

The National Instruments Limited, Jadavpur 
The Andhra Scientific Co Lid, Masulipatam 



IS: 5204 -1969 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
RESEARCH MICROSCOPE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 8 July 1969, after the draft finalized by the Optical and Mathematical 
Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Research microscope is a more precise, convenient and a perfect form 
of general purpose microscope capable of being used for critical microscopic 
observations over prolonged periods. It is provided with arrangements for 
bright and dark field illuminations suitable for direct observation, photo- 
micrography and projection of transparent specimens. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the general and functional requirements of the 
research microscope. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 1399-1959| 
and the following shall apply. 

2.1 Critical Illumination — Illumination of the specimen, directly by 
light source focused on the plane of the object. 

2.2 Kohler Illumination — Illumination of the specimen, by the surface 
of an auxiliary lens used as a light source instead of the direct light source 
focusing on the plane of the object to illuminate the specimen with 
uniform, extended and an intense controlled illumination. 

•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 
fGlossary of terms used in optica) technology. 



IS: 5204 -1969 

2.3 Bright Field Illumination — Illumination in which the specimen is 
illuminated with intense light which directly passes into the objective and 
the image is formed from direct, diffracted, reflected and refracted light 
by the specimen. 

2.4 Dark Field Illumination — Illumination in which no direct light is 
permitted to enter the objective and the image is formed entirely from 
diffracted, reflected and refracted light by the specimen. 

3. DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The dimensions of the research microscope shall conform to IS : 3081- 
1965*. 

4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.0 The research microscope shall conform to the requirements laid down 
in IS: 988-1 959 j and to the general requirements laid down in 3 of 

IS: 2754-1964}. 

4.1 Base — The base shall be of heavy construction for stability and 
freedom from tremor. 

4.2 Limb — The microscope shall be provided with a non-hinged or 
hinged type limb preferably in the form of an arc to allow large sized 
objects to be placed on the stage and also to facilitate carrying the 
microscope from place to place. 

4.3 Stage — The microscope shall be furnished with either a rectangular 
stage or a rotating centring object stage with device for crosswise displace- 
ment of the object. 

4.3.1 Circular Stage — The circular stage shall preferably be 125 mm in 
diameter to accommodate the standard slides of maximum dimension 
50 mm x 76 mm as specified in IS : 3099-1965§. 

4.3.2 Rectangular Stage — The rectangular stage shall preferably be of 
dimension 120 mmx 125 mm to accommodate standard slides of maximum 
dimension 50 mmx 76 mm. 

4.4 Body Tube Attachments 

4.4.1 The microscope shall be suitably designed to accommodate the 
following attachments: 

a) Inclined binocular eyepiece tube for ease of observation and to 
provide stereoscopic relief, 

* Dimensions and marking of general purposes microscopes. 
•[■General requirements for optical components. 
^General requirements for optical instruments. 
^Specification for slides and cover slips for microscopes. 



15:5204-1969 

b) Straight monocular eyepiece tube for direct vision and for photo- 
micrographic and projection purposes, and 

c) A combined straight and inclined tube to deviate a small 
percentage of image forming light into the inclined tube to facili- 
tate observation of the image whilst the specimen is being 
photographed. 

4.4.2 The straight tube shall be provided with a draw tube for the 
adjustment of the photomicrographic and projection attachments. The 
draw tube may be graduated. 

4.5 Illumination 

4.5.1 The microscope shall be provided with facilities for critical as well 
as Kohler illumination. 

4.5.2 Facilities shall also be provided for carrying out microscopical 
investigations under bright and dark fields with the help of suitable light 
sources and sub-stage condensers ( see 4.6 and 4.7.3 ). 

4.5.3 A variable central opaque light stop shall be used to achieve dark 
field illumination. The stop shall be capable of completely preventing the 
light rays from passing directly into the objective. 

4.6 Light Sources — The microscope shall be equipped with the following 
sources of illumination: 

a) An extended uniformly illuminated surface, such as an opal bulb 
or frosted glass for low or even medium powers, enclosed in a 
suitable housing, complete with iris diaphragm and filter for 
visual microscopy of transparent specimen, and 

b) A high intensity compact light source used in conjunction with 
lamp condensing lens for high powers and more exacting work. 

4*7 Condensing System 

4.7.1 Lamp Condenser — The--«ondenser lens shall be well-corrected so 
that it forms an image of uniform intensity of the source in the plane of an 
iris diaphragm mounted in the illuminating train. 

4.7.2 Mirror — A suitable substage plane and concave mirror shall be 
provided with the microscope. The concave mirror shall be able to 
concentrate a beam upon a small area of the object when the condenser is 
not in use. 

4.7.3 Substage Condensers 

4.7.3.1 For bright field examination, the microscope shall be equipped 
with a suitable achromatic oil immersion condenser provided with a 



IS: 5204 -1969 

detachable top lens which may be easily removed to increase the working 
distance as required in low power works. 

4.7.3-2 For dark field examination, the microscope shall be furnished 
with a refracting or reflecting aspheric condenser capable of illuminating 
the object by a large aperture of rays not directly injected into the objective. 

4.7.3.3 The numerical aperture of the condensers shall not be less 
than that of the highest power objective. 

4.7.3.4 The condensers shall be complete with iris diaphragms and 
filter holders which may be swung out of the system when desired. 

4.7.3.5 Rack and pinion arrangement shall be provided for up and 
down movement of the condenser. Suitable arrangement shall be made to 
restrict the upward movement up to a predetermined position so that the 
front lens of the condenser may not strike the stage-surface. 

4.8 Objectives 

4.8.1 The microscope shall be provided with four achromatic, semi- 
apochromatic or apochromatic objectives. The equivalent focal length, 
preferred magnification and numerical aperture shall be as under: 

a) 16 mm ( 10xNA0-25), 

b) 8 mm (20xNAO50), 

c) 4 mm (40xNA0-65) or ( 45xNA 0'65 ), and 

d) 2 mm ( 90xNA 1-25 ) or ( 100 xNA 1-25 ) oil immersion. 

Note — The values of numerical aperture specified arc the minimum. 

4.8.1.1 When required by the purchaser, the objective having focal 
length, preferred magnification and numerical aperture of 32 mm 
( 5xNA 0*125 ) may also be supplied. 

4.8.1.2 A groove filled with red paint shall be provided on the oil 
immersion objective for quick identification. 

4.8.2 The objectives shall be corrected for the mechanical tube length 
of 160 mm and cover slip thickness of 0*17 mm with tolerances of ± 1 mm 
and ± 0'015 mm respectively. 

4.8.3 There shall be provision for the coarse and fine focusing movement 
of the objective relative to the stage and it shall be so restricted by a 
suitable slide protecting device that it may not, at any time damage the 
microslide placed on the stage. 

4.8.4 Suitable containers shall be provided for keeping objectives. 



IS: 5204- 1969 

4.9 Eyepieces 

4.9.1 The microscope shall be provided with the eyepieces of following 
types and magnifications as required by the customer: 

a) Huygenian: 5x, 10x and I5x; 

b) Ramsden: 5x and 15x; and 

c) Compensating: 10 x. 

4.9.1.1 If required^ by the purchaser, an eyepiece with graticule and 
micrometer arrangement with measuring facility upto O001 mm may be 
provided. 

4.9.2 For binocular vision, paired eyepieces of above types and magni- 
fications shall be supplied. 

4.10 Case — The case carrying the microscope shall be made of well- 
seasoned wood. Teak ply or board may also be used. It shall be suitably 
padded from inside to eliminate the risk of shock during transportation. It 
shall be complete with lock and key arrangement, and a suitable locking 
screw for securing the microscope and a cross-piece to retain it in position 
during transit. The case shall be of a suitable design with a carrying 
handle at the top and suitable internal receptacles for holding the 
objectives, eyepieces and accessories. It shall contain a bag of activated 
silica gel to keep the interior moisture-free, and also a cleaning brush. 

5. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Circular Stage 

5.1.1 The hole in the stage shall be located centrally with respect to the 
microscope axis. 

5.1.2 The circumference of the stage shall be graduated in degrees and 
fitted with a vernier having well-defined and distinct graduations. The 
vernier shall be so graduated that the amount of circular movement of the 
stage may be read up to at least six minutes of an arc. 

5.1.3 The transverse and front to back movement of the stage shall be 
70 mm. and 30 mm respectively so that the entire area of maximum 
50 mm x 76 mm slide may be examined. 

5.1.4 Scales and verniers, with well-defined and distinct graduations, shall 
be provided to read the amount of crosswise movement. The verniers 
shall be so graduated that the amount of movement in either direction may 
be read to an accuracy of at least 0* 1 mm. 

5.1.5 The circular and crosswise movements of the stage shall be easy 
and smooth. 



IS: 5204- 1969 

5.2 Rectangular Stage 

5.2.1 The hole in the stage shall be located centrally with respect to the 
microscope axis. 

5.2.2 The transverse and front to back movement of the stage shall be 
70 mm and 30 mm respectively so that the entire area of the maximum 
50 mm x 76 mm slide may be examined. 

5.2.3 Scales and verniers, with well-defined and distinct graduations, 
shall be provided to read the amount of crosswise movement. The verniers 
shall be so graduated that the amount of movement in either direction 
may be read to an accuracy of at least 0*1 mm. The tolerance between 
any two graduations shall be 0*01 mm. 

5-2.4 The movement of the stage in two perpendicular directions shall 
be easy and smooth. 

5.3 Condensers 

5.3.1 The iris diaphragms of lamp condenser and substage condenser 
shall open and close centrally and smoothly. 

5.3.2 The circular and the up and down movement of the substage 
condenser shall be easy and smooth and shall remain unaffected by the load 
of accessories likely to be used. 

5.4 Objectives and Eyepieces 

5.4.1 The coarse and fine focusing movement of the objective relative to 
the stage shall be smooth and even and shall remain unaffected by the load 
of accessories likely to be used. 

5.4.2 The fine motion shall be 0*1 mm per revolution of the corres- 
ponding knob over a range of 1 to 2 mm. 

5.4.3 The nosepiece shall be smooth in movement without any shake 
and shall not be displaced by any jerk. 

5.4.4 The objectives and eyepieces shall be parfocal to within one 
quarter of a turn of the fine motion knob. It is essential that these parfocal 
distances be maintained at the values given in IS : 3081-1965*. 

5.4.5 The edge of the eyepiece stop shall appear in focus and shall be 
dull black. 

5.5 Optical Axis — The optical axis of the microscope shall coincide with 
the mechanical axis. 



•Dimensions and marking of general purposes microscopes. 

8 



IS: 5204- 1969 

5.6 Image — The image shall be well-defined with good contrast rendition 
and practically free from spurious colour effects, curvature of field over 
three-fourths of the field of view, and distortion. 



6. TESTS 

6*1 Mechanical 

6.1.1 The mechanical tube length shall be within ±1 mm of the 
standard nominal value of 160 mm. 

6.1.2 The stage shall be checked for its squareness to the axis of the 
microscope maintaining the objective parfocal distance. The deviation 
from squareness shall not exceed five minutes of arc. 

6.1.3 In changing from one objective to another or reintroducing the 
same objective by rotation of the nosepiece, the object at the centre of the 
field shall not appear displaced by more than 0'02 mm in the object plane 
in any direction. 

6.1.4 Operation of the fine motion through its full range shall not appear 
to displace an object by more than 0*01 mm. 

6.1.5 The centring of the condenser shall be checked by rotating it in its 
holder. The rotation of the image of a distant object formed by the 
condenser shall be within ± 1 mm. 

6.1.6 Parfocality of the objectives and the eyepieces shall be within one 
quarter of a turn of the fine motion knob. 

6.2 Optical 

6.2.1 Magnification and Numerical Aperture of Objectives — ■ The magnification 
and numerical aperture of objectives shall be measured by the methods 
specified in 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 respectively of IS : 2754-1964*. The measured 
values shall not differ from the specified values by more than five percent. 

6.2.2 Resolving Power and Definition 

6.2.2.1 Depending upon the numerical aperture of the objective, an 
appropriate test slide ( diatom ), illuminated by a beam of nearly the same 
numerical aperture, shall be observed with the microscope. The fine 
structure shall appear resolved and well-defined. ( The emphasis on a 
well-defined image is for protection against misleading results due to 
spurious resolution. ) The object shall be carefully and judiciously chosen 



•General requirements for optical instruments. 

9 



IS 2 5204 -1969 

in the test diatom slide. The recommended diatoms are as follows: 
Magnificatio n j NA Recommended Diatoms 

For 10 x /025 Navicula lyra 

For 20 x /0*50 Navicula lyra 

For 40 x /065 or 45 x /0-65 Pleurosigma angulatum 

For 90x/ 1*25 or lOOx/1'25 Amplipieura pellucida 

6*2.2.2 Alternatively, the resolving power of the objective shall be 
measured by the method given in Appendix K of IS : 2754-1964*. The 
measured value shall not be less than the theoretical value by more than 
five percent. 

6.2*3 Eyepiece Magnification - - The equivalent focal length of eyepieces 
shall be measured by any of the methods given in Appendix C of 
IS: 98B-1959f, and then the measurement of magnification shall conform 
to 4,2.5 of IS: 2754-1964*. 

6.2.4 Field Number of Eyepiece — The eyepiece shall be icmoved from the 
microscope and the diaphragm shall be illuminated by diffused light from 
the eye-lens side. The diameter of the image of the diaphragm formed by 
the field lens shall be measured in millimetres with a measuring ( travelling ) 
microscope placed towards the field lens of the eyepiece. The value shall 
be in conformity with that calculated by the formula given in 
IS: 2754-1964*. 

6.2.5 Star Test for_ Definition — The objective shall be tested separately 
for aberrations over three-fourths of the field of view by the examination 
of the intra-focal and extra-focal images of a ' Star ' object; the latter being 
artificially produced by suitably illuminating the smallest mercury globbles 
on a piece of glass painted black, placed on the stage of the microscope 
under test. For observing the diffraction patterns thus formed on cither 
side of the focus of the objective under test, an auxiliary testing microscope 
may be used in place of the eyepiece to provide a magnification higher 
than 15 X in doubtful cases; otherwise normally a 15 x eyepiece may be 
used. 

6.2.6 Colour — The image of a black or white test object shall appear 
free from colour when observed by illumination with white light over three- 
fourths of the field of view. 

6.2.7 Curvature of Field — The image shall be ircc from curvature oV 
field to the extent of nearly three-fourths of the total field. A microslide 
having 2 mm divided into 200 parts or 1 mm divided into 100 parts shall 
be focused under the objective and nearly three-fourths of total number of 

•General requirements for optical instruments. 
tGencral requirements for optical components. 

10 



18:5204-1969 

graduations visible in the field of view shall appear well-defined and be 
symmetrically located in the field of view. 

6,2.8 Distortion — A counting chamber slide or a cross-line grating shall 
be focused in order to judge visually whether the image is free from 
distortion. 

6.2*9 Clarity of the Field of View — It shall be observed that no shadow 
V>nes along the periphery of the field of view are present ( These may arise 
due to improper location of stray-light baffles ). 

6.2*10 Condition of Optics — The optics shall be checked for conformity to 
the requirements as laid down in IS : 988-1959*. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 Each microscope shall be marked at a suitable place with the manu- 
facturer's name or trade-mark and the serial number. If required by the 
purchaser, the microscope may also be marked with the year of 
manufacture. 

7.2 The marking of the objectives and eyepieces shall be according to 
IS:308U1965f. 

7.2.1 The microscope may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by 
the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are 
continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under 
which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufac- 
turers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

8. PACKING AND PACKAGING 

8.1 The microscope shall be free from all traces of foreign material and 
shall be delivered in a thoroughly clean and dry condition. 

8.2 All the objectives shall be placed in cylindrical containers which, 
in turn, shall be held in a wooden receptacle fixed or sliding inside 
the wooden case of the microscope. The eyepieces shall be put in their 
respective positions in the same receptacle. Other accessories shall be 
placed in their respective places. During transit, the objectives, eyepieces 
and other accessories shall be well secured in position. 



'Geneial requirements for optical components. 

f Dimensions and marking of general purposes microscopes. 

11 



IS: 5204- 1969 

8.3 The straight tube fitted in the microscope shall be brought to its lowest 
position by means of the coarse focusing knob before being put into the 
case. The binocular eyepiece tube and the combined straight and inclined 
tube shall be suitably secured in their respective positions. 

8.4 The filters, if provided, and the mirror shall be wrapped in a clean, 
dry and acid-free tissue paper and shall be suitably retained in position. 

8.5 The condenser unit shall also be wrapped in a clean, dry and acid-free 
tissue paper and suitably secured in its position. 

8.6 The bulbs shall be placed in a suitable container which shall be well 
secured in the case. 

8.7 The microscope shall then be placed in the case and held in position 
securely by suitable arrangement. 

8.8 A bag containing 300 g of activated silica gel shall be suitably placed 
inside the case. 

8.9 The empty spaces, if any, shall be filled with suitable size bags or 
pillows or both stuffed with suitable packing material. 

8.10 The case along with its contents, shall be locked during transit and 
the keys attached to the handle. 

8.11 The case shall then be packed in a packing box lined with waterproof 
paper, using suitable cushioning material. The lid shall be screwed down. 

8.12 The package shall be marked with the description, the number of 
contents, the standard symbol for indicating fragile contents and the symbol 
for 'THIS WAY UP ' according to IS : 1286-1967*, together with the 
legend < INSTRUMENT, HANDLE WITH CARE * in red. 



♦Pictorial markings for handling of goods in general {first revision) 

12 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 5 000 Indian Standards, broadly classified under the following 
main heads, have been issued so far: 

Agriculture & Food Electrotcchnical 

Chemical Mechanical Engineering 

Civil Engineering Structural* Metals 

Consumer Products Textile 

Of these, the standards belonging to the Mechanical Engineering 
Group fall under the following categories: 

Basic Engineering Standards Marine Engineering and Ship- 
Abrasives building 

Bearings Material Handling, Lifting Gear 
Bicycle Components Mining 

Chemical Engineering Pumps 

Engineering Metrology Refrigeration and Air-Condition- 
Gas Cylinders and Fittings ing 

Gaskets and Packings Sewing Machines 

Gears Steam Tables 

Hand Tools Threaded Fasteners and Rivets 

IC Engines and Automotive Transmission Devices, Pulleys 

Vehicles and Belts 

Instruments (Drawing, Optical Weights and Measures 

and Surveying) Wire Ropes and Wire Products 

Machine Tools and Small Tools Unclassified 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

Rs 

ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month) 

Single Copy ... ... ... ... ... 3*00 

Annual Subscription ... ... ... 25'00 

Annual Reports ( from 1948-49 Onwards ) ... ... 2-Op to 3*00 each 

Handbook of ISI Publications, 1969 (Pages vi -f 546, Price Rs 1000) 
incorporating annotations on all Indian Standards, and also listing ISO 
Recommendations and Publications of IEC 



Available from 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Headquarters 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I 
Telephone! 27 36 1 1-20 Telegrams Manaktanttha 

27 50 31-40 

Branch Offices 

Telegram! Manaksanitha 

S34 Sardar Vallabhbhal Patel Road Bombay 7 

5 Chowrlnghee Approach Calcutta 13 

5-9-201/2 Chlrag All Lane Hyderabad I 

I 17/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar Kanpur 5 

54 General Patters Road Madras 2 

Pnnird at Drlhi Pnnicri, Drlbi 6. Indm 



Telephone 


35 69 44 


■ » 


23-18 23 


•» 


3 23 35 


M 


82 72 


• • 


8 72 78 



