**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8252-1 (1976) : Environmental Tests for Aircraft 
Equipment, Part I: General [TED 14: Aircraft and Space 
Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629'i3-05: 620-193 IS : 8252 ( Part I )- 1976 




Indian Standard 
ENVIRONMENTAL TESTS FOR ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 
AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT 

PART I GENERAL 



1. Scope — Lays down the general requirements and standard environmental test conditions 
as generally applicable to the series of Indian Standards on environmental tests for aircraft 
equipment. 

Note — It is proposed to issue different parts of this series as sliown in Appendix A. 

2. Definitions 

2.1 Relevant Equipment Specification ~ A specification prepared by an International standards 
organization, a national standards organization, manufacturer or purchaser for a particular item of 
aircraft equipment. 

Other definitions shall be as stated in the relevant parts comprising this series of standards as 
appropriate to their subject matter. 

3. General 

3.1 The relevant equipment specification shall invoke any of the relevant environmental tests 
selected from this series of Indian Standards, and shall state the tests required to comprise 
a complete type test, including the severity grade, class, etc, to which the equipment shaH be 
designed and tested. The relevant equipment specification shall also state the order in which these 
tests are to be carried out, and the parameters of the functioning tests required by these Indian 
Standards, 

3.2 The relevant equipment specification shall also specify routine production tests and periodic 
quality control tests, the latter being based on selected type tests described in this series of Indian 
Standards. 

3.3 When the relevant equipment specification and this series of Indian Standards for aircraft 
equipment allow alternatives, and when individual purchaser's specifications are based on these 
standards, it rs the responsibility of the purchaser of the equipment to specify the appropriate 
severity grade, class, etc, selected from this series of Indian Standards and any special conditions 
for which the equipment shall be designed and tested, 

3.4 The appropriate grades, classes or categories of equipment stated in this series of Indian 
Standards shall be used for the purpose of declarations of design and performance of aircraft equip- 
ment based on the form given in 15:7855-1975 'Form of declaration of performance of aircraft 
electrical equipment'. 

3.5 Consideration shall be given when drafting the relevant equipment specification, individual 
instances, to the need for applying concurrently two or more tests selected from these Indian 
Standards. If this is a requirement, the individual standard or specification shall state tire possible 
interactions between these environments. 

3.6 The relevant equipment specification for * special-to-type' equipment may introduce variations 
of the test parameters given in this series of Indian Standards based upon the environment that the 
equipment will experience in that particular aircraft. 

4. Standard Conditions — Unless otherwise stated, the following standard conditions shall apply 
to all tests slated in the subsequent parts comprising this series of Indian Standards. 

4.1 Standard Laboratory Atmospheric Conditions — For the purpose of this series of Indian Standards 
the follovvlng standard laboratory conditions shall apply: 

a) Temperature 15 to 35°C 

b) Relative humidity 45 to 75 percent 

c) Air pressure 86 to 106 kPa ( or kN/m^ ) 

( 860 to 1 060 mbar ) 



Adopted 27 October 1976 



February 1977. ISI 






T 






INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAR6 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 8252 (Part I)- 1976 

Any deviation from these conditions shall be noted and the actual condition recorded in the 
test report. 

4.2 Standard Referee Atmospheric Conditions— \NhBf\ the performance of the equipment is sensitive 
to temperature, pressure and/or humidity and measurements are required for referee purposes, at 
intervals throughout a test programme, the following reference standard atmospheric conditions 
shall be applied: 

a) Temperature 27 ± IX 

b) Relative humidity 65 rb 2 percent 

c) Air pressure 96 ± 10 kPa 

4.3 Tolerances on Environmental Test Conditions — Unless otherwise stated in the relevant equip- 
ment specification, the tolerances to be applied to the atmospheric parameters in the environmental 
tests shall be as follows: 

a) Temperature: 

< 100X ± 3X 
^100°C±5X 

b) Relative humidity : See individual tests 

c) Air pressure ( not altitude ) ± 5 percent 

5. Supplies — Supplies and services ( electrical power, air supplies, hydraulics, etc) shall, where 
relevant, be derived from or simulated by sources representative of those provided in operational 
use. The relevant equipment specification shall provide details of the necessary supplies and 
services. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 1 ) 

PARTS OF INDIAN STANDARD ON ENVIRONMENTAL TESTS FOR 

AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT 

Part I General 

Part II Temperature, pressure and humidity 

Part III Humidity 

Part IV Ice formation 

Part V Ice accumulation 

Part VI Water-proofness 

Part VII Sand and dust 

Part VIII Change of temperature 

Part IX Mould growth 

PartX Salt mist 

Part XI Differential pressure 

Part XII Effects of ozone 

P^rt XIII Solar radiation 

Part XIV Vibration 

Part XV Constant acceleration 

Part XVI Bump and shock 

Part XVII Accoustic vibration 

Part XVIll Magnetic influence 

Part XIX Radio interference 

Part XX High voltage and insulation resistance 

Part XXI Explosion proofness 

Part XXII Fluid contamination 

Part XXIII Fire-resistance 



IS: 8252 (Part I)- 1976 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This Indian Standard is the first of a series specifying simulated environmental tests to which 
aircraft equipment is to be subjected to demonstrate that it would function satisfactorily under 
normal akcraft operating conditions. The relevant equipment specification will define the appro- 
priate test severities and the criteria for correct functioning. 

This Indian Standard is based on ISO 2650-1974 ' Environmental tests for aircraft equipment- 
Part I Scope and applicability ' issued by International Organization for Standardization. 



Printed at Ne«ft«nal Prlntart, Delhi, Intfla 



