IS 9401 (Part 6): 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IAA HAF (Reaffirmed 2022) 
qå ort iame A art aa at gft 
(aa ak aag FEAT ) 
am в ARA 9 чеч эйс a чча =Й 
(Ve FRAT) 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF 
WORKS IN RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
( DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES ) 


PART 6 VENTILATION PIPES AND OTHER EMBEDDED MATERIALS 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 1 


Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works for River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 6) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works for River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Water Resource Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1984. In the course of usage of this standard by various construction agencies 
in the country, several suggestions for modifications were received which have prompted the revision of this 
standard. This revision also duly reflects the subsequent publication of other standards in this series. The provisions 
contained in this standard shall have precedence over the provisions in IS 1200 (Part 2) : 1974 ‘Method of 
measurement of building and civil engineering works: Part 2 Concrete works (third revision)’, for river valley 
projects. However, the provisions of both the standards may be considered complimentary and supplementary to 
each other. 


This standard (Part 6) is a part of the series of Indian Standards formulated on the method of measurement of 
works in river valley projects (dams and appurtenant structures). The other parts in this series are: 


Part 1 Excavation for foundation 
Part 2 Dewatering 

Part 3 Grouting 

Part 4 Concrete work 

Part 5 Masonry 

Part 7 Joints 

Part 8 Instrumentation 

Part 9 Lining 

Part 10 Formwork 


Part 11 Diaphragm walls 
Part 12 Topographical surveys 
Part 13 Earth and fill dams 


Part 14 Canal works 

Part 15 Investigation works — Drilling of bore holes and exploratory drifting and logging 
Part 16 Tunnelling 

Part 17 Hydromechanical and related metal works 

Part 18 Sheet piling 

Part 19 Electro-mechanical works 

Part 20 Protection works 


In measurement of quantities, in construction of river valley projects a large diversity of methods exists at present 
according to local practices. This lack of uniformity creates complication regarding measurements and payments. 
This standard is intended to provide a uniform basis for measurement of ventilation pipes and other embedded 
materials in the construction of river valley projects. 


In reporting the result of measurements made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)’. 


IS 9401 (Part 6) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF 
WORKS IN RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
( DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES ) 


PART 6 VENTILATION PIPES AND OTHER EMBEDDED MATERIALS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 6) covers the method of 
measurement of ventilation pipes and other embedded 
material in river valley projects, such as, dams, 
hydraulic structures, canals and power houses. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 
9401 (Part 2): | Method of measurement of works in 
2003 river valley projects (dams and 
appurtenant structures): Part 2 
Dewatering (first revision) 
3 GENERAL 


3.1 The purpose of measurement of proposed work is 
preparation of bill of quantities for estimating and 
tendering. The purpose of measurement of executed 
work is assessment of value of work for payment. In 
either case the method of measurement should be such 
that it is fairly quick, reasonably accurate and amenable 
to check at any time. 


3.2 In case of measurement of proposed work, the 
dimensions are scaled or read from drawings and then 
processed, that is, reduced to length, area, volume, or 
weight in recognized units of measurements for the 
particular item. In case of assessment of executed work, 
the dimensions are measured in the field. Calculations 
of length, area, volume, weight, etc, are made on the 
basis of these dimensions and payments are made 
accordingly. Where measurement of a number of units 
are the same it is the usual practice to take 
measurements of one unit and multiply the calculated 
length, area, volume, or mass by the number of units. 


3.3 Measurements shall be taken to nearest centimetre 
including that for the levels. Fractions less than half 
shall be disregarded and fractions half and above are 
to be regarded as unity. Areas shall be worked out to 
nearest 0.01 m? and cubic contents shall be worked 
out to nearest 0.01 m*. However, in measurements of 
repetitive nature, this practice shall be applied to the 
total of the item and not to individual unit. It is 
essential that measurements shall be as accurate as 
possible. 


3.4 Measurements are closely linked with detailed 
drawings, description of items and specifications of 
the work. These should, therefore, be very clear and 
properly worded and the order of precedence shall be 
sanctioned drawings, approved specifications and 
specified description of items. 


3.5 Clubbing of Items 


Items may be clubbed together provided the break-up 
for such items is agreed to be on the basis of the detailed 
description of items stated in this standard. 


3.6 Bill of Quantities/Items of Work 


Item of work shall provide short description of item 
(nomenclature) with unit, quantity and rate as per the 
technical specifications. 


3.7 Detailed Description of Items 


The description of items shall be as given in technical 
specifications. 


3.8 Booking of Dimensions 


In booking dimensions, order shall be consistent and 
generally in sequence of length, width and height or 
depth or thickness. 


3.9 Measurements 


All work shall be measured net in the decimal system, 
as fixed in place, unless otherwise stated herein, as 
follows: 


IS 9401 (Part 6) : 2013 


a) Linear dimensions shall be measured to the 
nearest 0.01 m. 


b) Mass shall be worked out to the nearest 


0.01 kg. 

c) Areas shall be worked out to the nearest 
0.01 m°. 

d) Cubic contents shall be worked out to nearest 
0.01 m°. 


e) Any work done extra over the specified 
dimensions shall be ignored. 


3.10 Works to be Measured Separately 


Works executed in following conditions shall be 
measured separately: 


a) Work in or under water, 

b) Work in liquid mud, 

c) Work in or under foul positions, 
d) Work under tides, and 

e) Work in snow. 


3.11 Wherever, springs or special situations are 
encountered and dewatering is resorted to, it shall be 
measured in accordance with IS 9401 (Part 2). 


4 MEASUREMENT OF PIPES AND EMBEDDED 
MATERIALS 


4.1 Items included in this standard are as follows: 


a) Ventilation pipes; 

b) Grout pipes; 

c) Foundation, drainage/uplift pressure pipes; 

d) Internal drainage pipes in dams; 

e) Sewer pipe drains; 

f) Metal pipes embedded for post-cooling of 
concrete; 

g) Steel liners for air-vents, plumb bob wells, 
etc; 

h) Embedded parts for trashracks, control gates, 
etc, steel ladders, metal hand rails, manhole 
frames, covers and other miscellaneous metal 
work; 

j) Electrical metal conduits; and 

k) Anchor rods, anchor bolts. 


4.2 Ventilation/Grout/Foundation/Drainage/ 
Uplift Pressure Pipes 


The pipes shall be classified according to their nominal 
diameter, the quality of pipe, kind of material and the 
method of jointing and shall be measured in running 
metre, inclusive of all joints. The measurement shall 
be taken along the centre line of the pipes and fittings 
or specials. All fittings or specials shall be enumerated 
separately as extra over the pipes. Cutting and jointing 


the pipes to such fittings or specials shall be deemed 
to be included with the item of fittings or specials. 


4.3 Internal Drainage Pipes in Dams 


Measurement for porous concrete pipes shall be on 
the basis of the length of pipe in metre laid in the body 
of dam. The nominal diameter and type of the pipe 
shall be specified. 


4.4 Sewer Pipe Drains 


Measurement for sewer pipe and constructing drains 
shall be made in metre along the centre lines of the 
pipe, from end-to-end of the pipe in place and no 
allowance shall be made for laps at joints. The nominal 
diameter and type of the pipe shall be specified. 


4.5 Metal Pipes Embedded for Post-Cooling of 
Mass Concrete 


The pipes shall be classified according to their nominal 
diameter, the quality of pipe, kind of material and the 
method of jointing and shall be measured in running 
metre, inclusive of all joints. The measurement shall 
be taken along the centre line of the pipes and fittings 
or specials. All fittings or specials shall be enumerated 
separately as extra over the pipes. Cutting and jointing 
the pipes to such fittings or specials shall be deemed 
to be included with the item of fittings or specials. 


4.6 Steel Liners for Air- Vents, Plumb Вор Wells, etc 


Measurement for the lining plates and other structural 
steel shall be on the basis of mass (in kilograms) of 
plates and structural steel actually embedded in the 
structure. 


4.7 Embedded Parts for Trash-Racks, Control 
Gates, etc, Steel Ladders, Metal Hand Rails, 
Manhole Frames, Covers and Other Miscellaneous 
Metal Work 


Measurement for these items shall be on the basis of 
mass in kilograms of metal work actually installed and 
left in place. 


4.8 Electrical Metal Conduits 


Measurement for various types and sizes of electrical 
metal conduit shall be on the basis of length in running 
metre of conduits, actually embedded in the structure. 


4.9 Anchor Rods, Anchor Bolts 


Measurement for anchor rods and anchor bolts shall 
be made on the basis of mass in kilograms of anchor 
bolts or anchor rods actually embedded. In case of 
anchor bolts the weight shall include the weight of bolt, 
nut, washers, wedges and bearing plates. Drilling and 
grouting, if any, shall be paid separately. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 23 (0482). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


