IS 15475 (Part 5) :2004 $m9wm%-

mmwt TRJNtfalma'T 41`l&llwa-q@
9TPT5?FnFF@kT!3?mmiRRzif

Indian Standard

CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES SAFETY
PART 5 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES

ICS 97.200.40

0 BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

IN DIAN

STANDARDS
MARC

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group

4

Continuous Committee,

Bulk "Conveying, ME 06

Elevating,

Hoisting,

Aerial Ropeways

and Related

Equipment

Sectional

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. Amusement parks in India are becoming quite common and people visit these parks quite often. In order to ensure lheir safet y in amusement parks or while enjoying the rides, an attempt has been made to stipulate safety in the form of a National Code. It is hoped that organizers of amusement parks, manufacturers of rides would make use of these codes to ensure overall safety of human beings and equipment at such places. The code of recommended practice for amusement rides safety is being brought out in six parts. This standard covers the operation and maintenance procedures for amusement rides. The other parts in this series are as follows: (Part 1) (Part 2) (Part 3) (Part 4) (Pan 6) General information Safety requirements Design, manufacture and erection

Selection training and supervision of operators Performance tests rides

In preparation of this standard, assistance has been taken from ASTM standards available on amusement or devices. Considerable assistance has also been derived from the following Indian Standards: IS 7155 (Part 1) :1986 (Part 2): 1986 (Part 6) :1990 (Part 7): 1990 Code of recommended General information Safety requirements Selection, training and supervision Inspection and maintenance of operators practice on conveyor safety:

IS 15475 (Part 5): 2004

Indian Standard

CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES SAFETY
PART 5 OPERATION 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 5) covers procedures for operation and maintenance of amusement rides or devices keeping in view general and specific safety requirements. 1.2 This standard does not cover aIl the safety concerns associated with the use of ride or device to carry passengers for amusement purposes. It is the responsibility of the manufacturer/designer and owner/user to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine applicability prior to use of the ride or devise. 1.3 Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene the provision of any of the existing Government regulation. It is the responsibility of the user of this code to establish appropriate safety and health practices and comply with regulatory and statutory requirements prior to use of the ride or device for carrying passengers for their amusement. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 15475 AND MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES shall include the following The instructions information.

4.1.1 Description of the ride or device operation including the functions and operation of its major devices/components. 4.1.1.1 Description of the motion(s) device during operation. of the ride or passenger including

4.1.2 Description of the recommended loading procedures during operations, recommended seating, where applicable.

4.1.3 Recommended safety procedures and instructions including information about safety equipment/devices pertaining to patrons, operators/ attendants of ride or devices. 4.1.4 Capacity of carrier unit of ride by ~aximum total weight of passengers and maximum number of adult passengers. 4.1.5 Description of the passenger restraint system, its recommended use and operation. 4.1.6 Operational safety checks, visual and other inspections to be performed by supervisor, operator and attendants of ride or device prior to and during operation of each ride or device. 4.1.7 Safety Instruction for Users restrictions 4.1.8 Operational environmental conditions such temperature. relating to as wind, rain or

Title
Code of recommended practice amusement rides safety: for

(Part 1) :2004 General information (Part 4) :2004 Operation and maintenanceproctxlures 3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, definitions IS 15475 (Part 1) shall apply. 4 OPERATION PROCEDURE given in

4.1.9 Operating procedures including location or position of operators and attendants of each ride or device. 4.1.10 Pre-opening inspections to be performed by the owner or his authorized representative before granting permission for use of ride for carrying passengers. 4.1.11 Functions of operator and attendant at prime locations which controls the starting and stopping mechanism of ride or device. 4.1.12 Recommended emergency evacuation procedures. procedures for

4.1 Each owner/operator of an amusement ride or device shall advice the manufacturer/supplier, to supply documented, recommended operating instructions with the delivery of each ride or device. 1

4.1.13 Recommended each ride or device.

IS 15475 (Part 5) :2004 4.1.14 Recommended use of emergency power equipment if any provided with the ride or device. 4.1.15 Series of steps to be taken to restarl the ride or device after interruption of power supply. 5 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER/OPERATOR 5.8.1 The signs or notices shall be bold in design, with wording short, simple and to the point in English and Hindi. 5.8.1.1 In addition to English and Hindi, other national/regional languages should also be used for the benefit of patron who does not understand English or Hindi. To the extent possible some geometrical/ conventional signs should be used for the benefit of patrord user who are illiterate and do not understand any language. 5.8.2 Warning for entry of unauthorized persons shall be posted outside the machinery room or other restricted areas. 6 RIDER RESPONSIBILITY

5.1 Each owner of ride or device and operator shall read and become familiar with the contents of documents relating to operating procedures supplied by the manufacturer/supplier as mentioned in 4.1. 5.2 Each operator of ride or device shall prepare an operation manual to be made available with the operators and attendants, of each ride or device. 5.2.1 The operation manual prepared by the operator shall include at least the following information. a) Specific ride or device operation policies and procedures on the basis of manufacturers instructions. Description of the ride or device operation. Specific duties at assigned position/location. General safety procedures. Specific emergency procedures to be followed in the event of an abnormal condition or an interruption of service. Additional information such as regulatory or statutory requirements relating to ride or device.

6.1 Rider(s) willing to enjoy shall be made aware about the inherent risks involve by participation. 6.2 Rider(s) have a duty to exercise good judgement and act in a responsible manner while using the amusement ride.or device. 6.3 Rider(s) shall obey all oral or written warnings or advices prior to or during participation. 6.4 Rider(s) have a duty not to participate in or on any amusement ride or device or attraction when they are under the influence of drug or alcohol. 6.5 Rider(s) have a duty to properly equipment provided for participation. 7 MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES use all safely

b) c) d) e)

f)

5.3 The owner or operator shall arrange to provide training to operators and attendants of each ride or device. 1S 15475 (Part 4) may be referred. 5.4 The owner/ride operator shall verify whether operators or supervisors had conducted the pre-opening inspections required prior to carry riders for amusement purposes. 5.4.1 The operator shall verify daily test of all communication equipment or system necessary for the operation of ride or device. 5.5 The operator shall witness minimum one complete operating cycle before granting permission to use the ride or device. 5.6 The operator shall deny entry to the ride or device of persons which may cause injury to other passengers or jeopardize the safety system or feel discomfort during permitted exposure time on a ride or device. 5.7 The operator shall ensure special considerations applicable to physically disabled and mentally irepaired patrons related to their particular ride or device. 5.8 The operator shall ensure fixing or placing of signs or notice boards at prominent places containing instructions and necessary information for the public.
L

7.1 The manufacturer of the ride or device shall provide documented maintenance manual which shall contain at least the following information: Description of recommended procedures for installation, set up, disassembly of ride or device. b) Description of daily and pre-opening inspections required for identification of special care areas. c) Schedule of recommended maintenance inspections and testing.. d) Recommended wear limits or tolerances where deemed necessary by the manufacturer/ designer. e) Recommended specifications for the replacement of fasteners or components, etc. torque requiremen~ for o Recommended fasteners. !3) Schematic diagrams of electrical power, lighting, controls and other systems including trouble shooting guide where applicable. h) Name of the component manufacturer and identification code or specification of electrical and mechanical component used in ride or device as applicable. a)

IS 15475 (Part 5) :2004

j) Schematic

k)

m) n) P)

q)

r)

s) t) u)

diagrams of hydraulic and pneumatic systems, including recommended pressures, location of components, line specification, fitting specification, type of fluid, location chart and trouble shooting guide. Recommended maintenance procedures for hydraulic and pneumatic systems and components. List of critical spare parts used in the assembly of ride or device. Recommended maintenance procedures for electrical components. Series of steps to be taken in the extended period of non-operation or storage of amusement ride or device. Recommended restrictions and special procedures, lubricants materials or equipment that may be necessary relating to environmental conditions. .Description of recommended assembly and disassembly techniques and procedures pertaining to specific components. Recommended lubrication procedures, recommended types and specifications of lubricants. Schematic lubrication drawing, chart showing location of lubrication points. Special method of lubrication and safety instructions.

7.5 The ownerloperator shall arrange and provide necessary tools, accessories, testing apparatus and safety apparatus, etc. 7.6 Prior to carrying riders, the owner/operator or his authorized representative shall verify the pre-opening inspections and obtain a documented inspection report and check list for each ride or device. 7.7 The owner/operator shall permit the use of ride or device for the purpose intended only after ensuring that the subject ride or device is in safe working condition. 8 REPLACEMENT OF PARTS

8.1 Parts/components/fasteners, etc, required for replacement of defective or worn out items shall be procured from the original manufacturer and supplier of amusement ride or device, using the appropriate manufacturer/suppliers specification/identifying nomenclature. 8.2 In case of non-availability of parts/component with the manufacturer or supplier, they shall be procured or produced using appropriate original manufacturing drawing or specification or both. 8.3 The manufactured/fabricated replacement part shall conform to original design parameters or Indian Standard where available. 8.4 Sufficient stock of spare parts shall be kept so that defective or worn out parts can be replaced as and when required during preventive or corrective maintenance services. 9 -SPECIFIC SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

7.2 The owner/park operator shall provide training for each personltechnician engagedlemployed for performing the regularly scheduled maintenance on the ride or device, pertaining to their assigned duties. The training of maintenance staff shall include but not be limited to the following: a) b) c) d) Instructions on inspection and preventive maintenance procedure. Instructions on the specific duties of the assigned position. Instructions on general safety procedure-s. Demonstration of the physical performance of their assigned regularly scheduled duties and inspections. Supervised observation of the maintenance technician/persons physical performance (practical examination). Use of specific tools and safety devices necessary for providing maintenance services.

9.1 Besides statutory and other requirements relating to inspection and maintenance of amusement/joy ride system, specific safety requirements relating to these aspects shall be observed particularly at utilization stage. 9.2 Inspection and Maintenance Programme

e)

An inspection and maintenance programme shall be planned, organized and implemented to keep the entire amusement ride system and devices in safe operating condhion. 9.2.1 The preventive maintenance programme, time schedule and the responsibility of personnel at various levels to implement the programme shall be fixed. 9.3 Regular Checks Those responsible for inspection shall be thoroughly familiar with tions made by the amusement manufacturer and the inspection programme. and maintenance the recommendaride and device and maintenance

f)

7.3 The owner/operator shall deploy/depute only trained and qualified persons for maintenance/ servicing of each ride or device. 7.4 The owner/operator shall provide documented maintenance manual based on the instructions and information provided bythemanufacturer.

3

IS 15475 .(Part 5): 2004 9.3.1 In addition to other checks all take up devices provided for the purpose of adjusting for stretch in the belt, chain or cable shall be checked for proper functioning periodically as per the time schedule decided in the inspection and maintenance programme. 9.3.2 All other pins, fasteners and couplings shall be checked periodically and carefully in accordance with the inspection and maintenance programme. 9.3.3 Regular and periodic inspection shall be made and details recorded for assessing the status of equipment, parts/components and future reference. 9.4 Spare Parts Depending upon the wear, tear and other characteristics adequate consumable spare parts shall be maintained for ready replacement. 9.5 Tools and Plants Depending u_pon the necessity and maintenance requirement proper tools and plants shall be used and maintained carefully. Safety belts and harness assemblies shall also be made available. 9.6 Lubrication Inadequate and improper lubrications may lead to frequent break down of the system/subsystem components thus causing safety hazard. Particular attention shall be paid to lubrication schedules recommended by the manufacturer of ride or devices and to the replacement of worn parts before they fail. The lubricant shall be of the type, grade, etc, as recommended by the machine manufacturers. 9.7 Removal of Guards 9.7.1 It is recommended that a `DANGER, `OUTOF-CONTROL, `SYSTEM UNDER REPAIR, CLOSED FOR SAFETY CHECK tag system shall be evolved and implemented. 9.7.1.1 Under normal circumstance when an authorized person has tagged or locked out a control then it shall be the responsibility of that person to remove the tag and to reset the control after the purpose, for which these were used, was accomplished. 9.8 Safety of Personnel Where inspection and maintenance personnel are required to work at places where there is risk of falling, priority shall be given to use of safety belts and harness assemblies. 10 SUPPLEMENTAL BULLETINS NOTIFICATION

10.1 The manufacturer shall provide all the necessary information related with newly recommended inspections or testing or both which shall be consistent with the following criteria in order to carry the effect of recommended practice. 10.1.1 Modifications, procedures, testing and inspections shall `be as per recommended practice. 10.1.2 Modifications, procedures, testing and inspections shall be reasonable, ethical and consistent with the general manufacturing practices. 10.1.3 Supplemental notification bulletin when delivered to the owner/operator shall be titled as follows: a) SAFETY ALERT for notifications that recommend immediate actions and shall be printed in RED (see Annex A). SERVICE BULLETIN for notifications that do not recommend immediate actions but do recommend future action and shall be printed in BLUE (see Annex B.). NOTIFICATION for notifications that do not necessarily recommend future but are primarily forpromulgation.of-information and shall be printed in GREEN (see Annex C).

Prior to removal of safety guards for inspection and maintenance purposes, electrical supply shall be disconnected and the control shall be locked in the `OFF' position. An appropriate `warning sign' shall also be +xovided during inspection and maintenance. It shall be ensured that -safety guards and covers are refixed on the completion of inspection and maintenance work. The alertlwarning bell/audio visual system between the operators of the machine and control cabin of major rides should be provided which should have a two way flow (communication).

b)

c)

IS 15475 (Part 5) :2004

ANNEX

A

[Clause 10. 1.3(a)]
PROFORMA

OWNEWOPERATOR: M/s ADDRESS : SAFETY ALERT RIDE MANUFACTURER: RIDE NAME MODEL/TYPE SERIAL NUMBER DATE OF INSPECTION
M/S

REASON(S) OF RELEASE: Inspection team/Operator/Maintenance -Person/ Technician had reported that the above mentioned amusement ride or amusement device is out of order and immediate actions are required to be taken.

ACTIONS 1. 2. 3.

TO BE TAKEN

(Reference of schematic drawing/maintenance

manual/operation

manual)

PLEASE NOTE -- All operators/maintenance person(s) and rider(s) are advised not to operate, repair and use the subject ride or device without the written permission of the undersigned. OWNEIUOPERATOR (OPERATION/MAINTENANCE)

5

IS 15475 (Part 5) :2004

ANNEX

B

[Clause 10.1.3(b)]
PROFORMA

Mh OWNER/OPERATOR: ADDRESS:

SERVICE

BULLETIN M/s

RIDE MANUFACTURER: RIDE NAME MODEL/TYPE SERIAL NUMBER DATE OF SERVICE/TEST

:

REASON(S) OF RELEASE: Inspection team/Inspecting authority/ supervisor had reported that the above ~entioned amusement ride or amusement device is in good working condition. However actions required to be taken in future are below.

ACT-IONS TO BE TAKEN IN FUTURE 1. 2. 3.

(Reference of schematic drawing/maintenance

manual) OWNEWOPERATOR (OPERATION/MAINTENANCE)

6

IS 15475 (Part 5) :2004

ANNEX

C

[Clause 10. 1.3(c)]
PROFORMA

OWNER/ OPERATOR: M/s ADDRESS: NOTIFICATION RIDE MANUFACTURER: DATE OF MANUFACTURE RIDE NAME SERIAL NUMBER DATE OF INSPECTION /TEST :
M/S :

:

REASON(S)

OF RELEASE:

FOR INFORMATION

AND RECORD Necessary actions related

The above mentioned amusement ride or device is in good working condition. with inspection, operation and maintenance have been taken.

OWNEWOPERATOR (OPERATION/MAINTENANCE)

Bureau

of-lndian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications),.BIS. Review of Indidn Standards of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed: if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed

from Doc : No. MED 06 (067 1).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 ~2832 X2832 9295,28327858 7891,28327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131, 23233375,23239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I,T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: CJ.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBAINESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. R.AJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Pmted at Prabhat Offset Press, New Dethi-2

