( Reaffirmed 1998 )

Indian Standard

FARM DRAINAGE-INTERCEPTOR DRAINS FOR STEEP HTLL SLOPES UNDER PLANTATION CROPS - GUIDELINES FOR LAYING

UDC 626.861 : 631.62

Q BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG
.

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

February 1994

Price Group 4

Farm Drainage Equipment

and System Sectional Committee,

FADC 28

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Farm Drainage Equipment and System Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Influence of high rainfall, steep slopes and complex nature of the underlying rocks present at shallow depth, result3 in drainage problem of special nature in soils with plantation crop in areas like Darjeeling, some parts of Dooars, Terai of North Bengal, Cachhar of Assam and Tea areas of South India. High rainfall on hne textured soils results in soils of low permeability which becomes suscepetible to and are aggravated by compaction, surface capping and natural, and chemical cultivation pans. These soils often develop structureless layers at depth which makes natural drainage of subsoil excess water very difficult. The soil strata of different permeability give rise to springs along their outcrops some of which are merely seasonal whilst others Bow throughout the year. A spring or spring lme often adversely affects a considerable area of land under plantation crop in different parts of the country. The seepage flow at shallow depths in the rootzone causes serious water logging that decays tea roots and restricts the uptake of essential nutrients required for optimum growth of test The subsurface seepage flow under excessive hydrostatic pressure causes land slide problem at places. Well designed interceptor drainage system have been found useful in reducing the problem of water logging and land slide by releasing the hydrostatic pressure of the soil. The true interception occurs when the hydraulic gradient of the undisturbed water table is 1 percent or greater. In view of the importance of such drains, a need was felt to prepare this standard for providing guidelines for designing and laying of interceptor drains In preparation of this standard, Research Association Jorhat. assistance has been derived from Tocklai Experimental Station, Tea

IS 13939 t 1994

Indian Standard

FARMDRAINAGE-INTERCEPTOR DRAINSFORSTEEPHILLSLOPESUNDER PLANTATIONCROPS-GUIDELINES FORLAYING
1 SCOPE This standard provides guidelines for designing and laying interceptor drains in hill sloping lands, with plantation crops. 2 REFERENCE The following Indian Standard adjunct to this standard: IS Jvo. IS 9979 : 1981 is a necessary Title Code for design and laying of mineral filters for tile drain system 5.2 Nature ( phreatics or artesian ) and direction of groundwater Row shall be determined. 5.3 Lateral extension, thickness, slope, hydraulic conductivity and drainable porosity of the water bearing strata shall be determined. 5.4 Water table and hydraulic head shall be measured. The observation wells for water table measurements and piezometers for the pressure head should be installed in phreatic and semiconfined or confined aquifers. Spacings of 50 metres are suggested. Hydraulic head may be obtained by adding appropriately gravitational head and pressure head. The readings should be used to draw water table contour maps as well as hydraulic head difference maps. 5.5 The depth of impe rvious layers shall be obtained. Physical ( auger hole/soil profile exposition ) or geophysical ( geoelectric or seismic ) method shall be applied to determine the depth of impervious layer. 6 INTERCEPTOR 6.1 Type of System DRAINAGE SYSTEM

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, definition shall apply. 3.1 Interceptor Drain ground water flow enters the following

The drain in which all from the upslope side.

NOTE - True interception occurs when the hydraulic gradient of the undisturbed water table is 1 percent or more.

4 SOURCES

OF EXCESS

WATER water may be as

4.1 The major source of follows:

excess

a) Seepage from Up-land - Foreign ground water inflowing from adjacent land or from a river or from an irrigation canal whose water level is higher than the water table in the area under plantation. b) High rainfall plantation. received in the area under

Interceptor drain should be installed to collect lateral or horizontal flow coming from known upland areas, thus preventing it from reaching the area to be protected. In many instances, a single interceptor line proves to be an adequate remedial measure. The interceptor usually should be placed at the upper boundary of the wet area. Interceptor drain should be planned as single random drain or as a series of parallel drains. They are required where soils are relatively permeable and table where the gradient of the water table is relatively steep 6.2 Location of Drain as they are areas with

4.2 It is important to estimate the amount of excessive seepage from upland and identify the locations. 5 FIELD INVESTIGATION

The location of an interceptor drain, observed quite commonly in the plantation crops, are given below. 6.2.1 Abrupt Change in Topography

5.0 Before starting the designing and laying of the interceptor drains, the following investigations shall be made. 5.1 Delimitation of the waterlogged area by field if inspection and the use of aerial photographs, available, shall be made.

This is a situation of large valleys where the land is subject to seepage from upland. An abrupt change in land is subject to seepage from upland. An abrupt change in land slope from steep to flat causes a rise in water table at the base of the slope

IS 13939: 1994 or a terrace. In such cases, the water table surface is found close to a straight line or flat curve extending from the water surface in the stream to some distant point beneath the terrace. The corrective measure is to lower the water table in this area by'an interceptor drain installed at the base of the hill land or at the base of a higher terrace ( see Fig 1 ).

G.L

\

111
DRAIN

.WT AFTER DRAINAGE e_ll--------

INTERCEPTER

FIG. 1 LOCATION OF INTERCEPTOR DRAIN WHERE SLOPE CHANGES ABRUPTLY FEOM STEEP TO FLAT 6.2.2 Impervious Layer Close to Ground at the foot of the slope. An interceptor drain shall be provided at the foot of the slope to control the water table in the lower reaches ( see Fig. 3 ). 6.2.4 More Permeable Poor& Pervious Layers Layer Sandwitched Between

At points, the impervious layer rises close to the ground surface under natural conditions. It causes the hydrualic grade line or water table surface to rise to near the ground surface. This situation is often found in alluvial flood plains where ancient channel changes have built up barriers of fine gained sediments. The corrective measure may be an interceptor drain just upslope from the barrier ( see Fig. 2 ). 6.2.3 Seepage at the Foot of a Slope

A commonly observed situation in hills is a sudden drop in ground elevation. The land slope may or may not remain the same. It causes water tables to rise close to ground surface in the lower reaches 2

In some situations the permeable layer outcrops and causes a seep affecting a considerable area below. This occurs when soil is highly stratified with exposed outcrop. Such permeable layers carry a considerable groundwater with hydraulic grade line that intercept the ground surface at scP.ne point in the outcrop area causing a natural seep. An interceptor drain should be located at the base of the permeable material to collect the flow from the aquifer and prevent seepage at the ground surface ( see Fig. 4 ).

IS 13939 : 1994

G.L

wIIz2--cTERcEpTER DRA1N
--Q*_=-__

`?AFTER

--

-~~~~~~~~ -.

----

Fm. 2 LOCATIONOF INTERCEPTOR DRAIN WHERE IMPERVIOUS LAYER COMESCLOSE TO GROUND SURFACE 6.2.5 Seepage from
Water Channel almost equal. On steeper slopes there is a bridging over effect produced by the flow of foreign water in the capillary fringe above the phreatic water surface. This bridging effect may not occur in an open drain. The escape of lateral flow over the top of the pipe drain line may range from 5 to 20 percent depending on the nature of soil and slope. 6.4 Drain Depth

A considerably high amount of seepage flow occurs into the lower areas from water channels and causes waterlogging. An interceptor drain constructed some distance below the water channel can take care of waterlogging and control water table below the rootzone ( see Fig. 5 ). 6.3 Drain Type

The choice between an open drain and a pipe drain depends on soil profile characteristics and slope of land, The soil profile characteristics should be given more weightage in making the decision. Underlying soil having loose formation should not be cut open and requires only close systems. Open system should be used if a minimum depth of stable soil is available after 60 cm

below the designed depth of the drain. In land with slope upto 3 percent or so, the efficiency is
3

An interceptor drain should be placed as deep as it is practical to install, preferably along the top of the impervious layer so as to intercept the maximum amount of seepage flow. In case of pipe drains, the trench of the drain shall not be cut into the impervious layer otherwise a significant percentage of lateral flow will bridge over the drain line and continue on down slope. The pipe drains shall be installed with suitable envelopes

IS 33939 : 1994

G.L

HIGH WT. AREA

INTERCEPTER

DRAIN

FIG. 3 LOCATIONOF INTBRCEPTORDRAIN AT resting on the impervious layer so amount of water is intercepted. 6.5 Filter filters may be that maximum

THE FOOT OF A SLOPE

installed progressively accomplished by digging the first drain to protect the higher portion of the wet area and lower drains can be dug after evaluating the effect of the first drain. 6.7 Amount of Flow Intercepted

Organic, mineral and synthetic used ( see IS 9979 : 1981 ). 6.6 Drain Spacing

drain is very Proper location of interceptor important. In many instances, a single interceptor line may prove to be adequate. They can be effective for a considerable distance downslope from the drain but the upslope effect is usually very small and can be ignored. The spacing of interceptor drains ranges between 60 and 150 m based on practical experience. The spacing, however, shall depend upon land slope(s), soil hydraulic conductivity(k), thickness of soil layer being intercepted for seepage flow, relative position of interceptor drain with respect to impervious layer and amount of seepage flow.The system shall be 4

The quantity of lateral flow intercepted by a drain is dependent on the position of the drain. About 50 percent of the flow is intercepted if the drain is placed at the mid point between the water table and impervious layer. If the drain is placed three fourths of the way down about 75 percent of the flow will be intercepted. If it is possible to install drain at impervious layer, nearly 100 percent of the foreign groundwater can be intercepted. It is desirable to estimate the amount of water flowing past the point of interception. By positioning the drain device in the profile, the probable quantity of water to be drained can be measured. Roughly, the quantity varies directly with the depth of flow intercepted.

IS 13939 : 1994

WT RECEPTOR DRAIN

I'ERVIOUSLAYER

---

--_

--.

POORLY PERVI@US LAYER
FIG. 4 LOCATIONOF INTERCEPTOR DRAIN WHERE PERVIOUS LAYER IS SANDWICHED BETWEENPOORLYPERVIOUS LAYERS 7 DRAWDOWN tangency level, with the original water table

7.1 Under the situation when all the flow originates from various sources upland and the soil is homogeneous, slope is uniform, Dupuit-Forchhenmer ( D-F ) assumptions are valid, the impervious layer exists at certain depth below the drain, the impervious layer and the initial water table have a slope `s' with horizontal base line existing under this situation the drawn down shall be calculated in accordance with the following procedure.
7.1.1 Drawn Down Upslofie Glover's formula, given below, in simplified form can be used under such conditions to calculate the drawdown ( seti Fig. 6 ): X where x= distance in metre upslopc drawdown curve approaches where the significant = 4 -*3s H

H=
5 -

thickness of horizontal being intercepted, and

flow of soil water of original

the slope in metres per metre water table surface. Downslope

7.1.2

Drawdown

This is approximately equal to the height of the water in the drain provided the radial resistance equal to D, is negligible i.e., h is approximately ( see Fig. 6 ). 7.1.3 The discharge of the interceptor unit length shall be expressed by the formula ( see Fig. 6 ): drain per following

Q==q41
where f2discharge of the interceptor unit length ( ms/day ), drain per

H-h

5

`IS 13939 : 1994
H= thickness of horizontal upslope being intercepted flow

(m) ,

of

water

below the rootzone of ten. the system are as follows: Drain Shape Depth Top width Bottom width Bed gradient Location
type

The

design details

of

h

= water

table height above layer down side of the drain flow rate per unit upslope ( ms/day ).

41 =

impervious (m), and from length

Open ditch Half trapezium 150 cm 120 to 150 cm 30 to 45 cm 2 percent Along the upper boundary of the wet area as observed during rainy season. 60 to 150 m depending condiupon specific tions of the area and piezometric data.

NOTE-The shape of the drawdown curve upslope is independent of hydraulic conductivity of the soil and quantity of flow becomes a function OI the slope.

7.2

Water

Table Control Spacing

In areas where water table was recorded to be fluctuating between 30 and 45 cm depth below ground level throughout the year before drainage a systematically designed interceptor drainage system was installed to control the water table
WATER CHANNEL

IGH WT AREA

WATER CHANNEL

HIGH WT AREA

INTFRCEPTER

DRAIN

FIG. 5 LOCATION OF INTERCEPTOR DRAIN WHERE SEEPAGE FROM WATER CHANNELS OCCUR
INTO FLOW LANDS

6

FIG. 6 DRAINAGE OF STEEP LAND-WITH ALL FLOW ORIGINATINQ FROM FOREIGN SOURCE UPSLOPE

G.L

INTEBCEPTER

i-

X

_/---

FICJ 7

DRAWDOWN

EFFECT OF INTERCEPTOR DRAIN WHEN SOURCE IS LOCAL RAINFALL

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standarth Act, I986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade of implementing the standard, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments 1s reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or and `Standards Monthly Additions'. edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No. FAD 28 ( 2628 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331.13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 { 37 84 99, 37 85 61 1 37 86 26, 37 86 62 53 38 43, { 53 23 84 53 16 40

235 02 16, 235 04 42
I 235 15 19, 235 23 15

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) B 3MBAY 400093

632 92 95, 632 78 58 632 78 91, 632 78 92

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at NOWIndia Printing Prera, Khurja, India

