\ IS 13672 ISOjlEC : 1993 9545 : 1989

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

vwits+R ?e;rr
0

lndian

Standard

APPLICATION LAYER STRUCTURE IN OPEN SYSTEMS INTERCONNECTION FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

U DC

681'327'8'01

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group ~AFAR MARG r 7

March

1993

Computer

Systems and Interconnection

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 36

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989 `Information technology Open systems interconnection - Application layer structure', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Computer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee ( LTD 36 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. In this Indian Standard, the respective place the following:
International Standard

not identical standard, to. they

to those should

Standard'

appear, referring standards

to. this

following

international

are referred
Indian

Read in their

Standard

IS0 7498 : 1984 Information processing systems - Open systems interconn,ection - Basic reference model IS0 7498-3 : 1989 Information processing systems systems - Open interconnection - Basic reference model - Part 3 : Naming and addressing IS0 8649 : 1988 Information processing systems - Open systems interconnection - Service definition for the association control service element IS0 8822 : 1988 Information processing systems - Open systems interconoriented nection - Connection presentation service definition technical ccmmittee responsible for provisions of the following IS0 Standard conjunction with this standard:
The

IS

12373 ( Part 1 ) : 1987 Basic reference model of open systems interconnection for information processing systems : Part 1 ( Identical )

IS 12373 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 Basic reference model of open systems interconnection for information processing systems : Part 3 Naming and addressing ( Identical ) IS 13615 : 1993 Service defintion for the association control service element in open systems interconnection for information processing systems ( Identical ) Dot LTD 36 ( 1636 ) Connection oriented service definition presentation in open systems interconnection for information processing systems ( under preparation )
( Identical )

the preparation of this standard has reviewed the and has decided that it is acceptable for use in Concepts has and terminologies while for the adopting

ISO/TR 9007 : 1987 Information processing systems conceptual scheme and the information base Only the English language it in this standard. text in the International Standard

been retained

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

Indian

Standard

APPLICATION LAYER STRUCTURE IN OPEN SYSTEMS INTERCONNECTION FOR INFOkMATlON TECHNOLOGY

1 Scope
This International Standard refines the Basic for for

2 Normative

references

Reference

Model for 0% to provide the development

a framework

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this international the editions on this Standard. At the time of publication, All standards are encouraged Members are to of based indicated were valid. Standard

co-ordinating

of existing and future

Application Layer standards. It is provided reference by Application Layer standards. In oanicular this international Standard:

subject to revision, International investigate editions

and parties to agreements of applying registers

the possibility

the most recent valid

of the standards

listed below.

defines the nature of standards 4 Application Layer and the relationships them;

in the among

IEC and IS0 maintain International Standards.

of currently

b) defines the architectural framework in which individual 0% Application Layer protocols shall be developed.

IS0 7498 : 1984, Information processing Open Systems Interconnection - Basic Model. IS0 7498-3: 1989, Information processing

systems Reference

systems -

c)

defines the categories are necessary of protocols;

of identifiable

objects and

Open Systems Interconnection Addressing. IS0 8649: 1988, Information

- Part 3: Naming and

which

for the specification

operation d)

processing

systems

for

relates

distributed

information in the

processing Application

Open Systems Interconnection the Association IS0 8822:

- Service Definition

activities Layer.

to the

standards

Control Service Element. processing systems

1988, Information

This International Standard does not specify services and protocols for OSI. It is neither an implementation specification the addresses for systems, of nor a basis for appraising Further, it for, nor the form conformance implementations.

Open Systems Interconnection - Connection oriented presentation service definition. ISO/TR 9007: 1987, Information Concepts and terminologies schema and the information

-

neither the requirements

processing systems for the conceptual

of, documentation

of such services and protocols.

base.

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

3 Definitions 3.1 For the purposes
the following of this International Standard,

3.5 For the purposes the following definitions

of this International apply. association:

Standard,

terms as defined in IS0 7498 apply:

3.5.1 application-association,

A co-

a) application-process; b) application-entity; c) (N)-function; d) (N)-layer; e) (N)-protocol;

operative relationship between two application-entityinvocations for the purpose of communication of information and co-ordination of their joint operation. This relationship is formed by the exchange of the application-protocol-control-information using Presentation Service. A set of rules shared in in operation
is a shared

3.5.2 application-context: common by two

application-entity-invocations

order to enable their co-operative
NOTE 1 An application-context of discourse

(see 5.7).
concepkal

9 (N)-protocol-control-information;
g) (N)-protocol-data-unit;

scnerna for the universe

for communication.

3.5.3 application-context-definition: h) real open system; and i) transfer syntax. 3.2 For the purposes of this International Standard, the following terms as defined in IS0 7498-3 apply: a) (N)-association; b) (N)-directory-function; c) (N)-protocol-addressing-information; d) (N)-service-access-point-address. 3.3 For the purposes the following of this International Standard, and of an application-context. 3.5.4 application context identifies

The description

unambiguously definition. 3.5.5

name: A name that an application-context-

application-entity-invocation: of part or all of the capabilities

A specific of a given

utilization

application-entity in support of the communications requirements of an application-process-invocatton. 3.5.6 application-entity-type: A description of a

class of application-entities in terms of a set of capabilities defined for the Application Layer. 3.5.7 application-process-invocation: A specific

terms as defined in lSO/TR 9007 apply: Schema; Base; and

utilization of part or all of the capabilities of a given application-process in support of a specific occasion of information $5.8 processing. A description in terms of a

a) Conceptual b) Information

application-process-type:

c) Universe of Discourse. 3.4 For the purposes the following of this international Standard,

class of application-processes interworking capabilities.

of a set of

terms as defined in IS0 8822 apply:

3.5.9 application-service-element: application-functions that provides intetworking of specific purpose.
NOTE 2 -This definition refines the

A a capability

set for

of a

for the

application-entity-invocations

a) abstract syntax; and b) presentation context.

original

definition

of

applicaticn-service-elements

in IS0 7498.

2

3

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

3.5.10 association

control

application-service-element

service element: that provides and terminating

An the all

5.1.2 The Application

Layer is supported

by the lower

exclusive means for establishing application-associations.
NOTE 3 element The functionality in IS0 8649.

layers in OSI. In particular, the Presentation Layer facilities for representing information contains exchanged between application-entities (AEs), and the Session Layer contains mechanisms that may be used for controlling interactions between AEs. 5.1.3 The Application Layer differs from the other layers of OSI in several important respects. Entities in the Application Layer are made up of a collection of application-service-elements (ASEs), each of which is defined various by a set of service and protocol standards. These ASEs are combined in various ways to form Layer, as the connections

of this application-service-

is defined

3.5.11 multiple association control function: A component of the application-entity-invocation that co-ordinates the interactions among multiple associations within an application-entity-invo.cation order to provide a co-ordinated service. 3.5.12 single association control function: component of a single association object represents in

types of AEs. The Application Layer.

The that

highest layer of OSI, does not provide within the Application

As a result, relationships

the use of those rules in the application-

context concerning interactions among applicationservice-elements within a single association object. 3.5.13 single association object: The collection of

formed by the transfer of information between AEinvocations in the Application Layer have particular significance. 5.2 Fundamental

concepts
operation of real

things in an application-entity-invocation single application-association.

related to a 5.2.1 In IS0 7498, the co-operative open systems is modelled in terms of the interactions between application-processes (APs) in these representation of systems. An AP is an abstract

4 Abbreviations
ACSE AE AP APDU APCI ASE MACF OSI SACF SAO Application Element application-entity application-process application-protocol-data-unit application-protocol-controlinformation application-service-element multiple association function Open Systems Interconnection single association single association control function object control Control Service

those elements information Depending may only intermittently; distributed with time. 5.2.2

of a real open system which perform for a particular application.

processing

upon the nature of an application, an AP with other APs need to communicate moreover, the set of APs involved for an application in processing may change

Co-operative

operation

between

APs requires

that they share sufficient information to interact and carry out processing activities in a compatible manner.
NOTE -This shared in of information is referred to as a universe 9007. The

5 Application 5.1 Introduction

Layer

Concepts

of

discourse

the terminology of

of ISOfiR

description schema.

a universe

discourse

is a conceptual

51.1 international Standards for OSI are intended to support ?he communication requirements of applications (i.e., information processing tasks) requiring co-ordinated processing activities in two or more real open systems. In particular, standards for the 0% Application Layer define procedures for the support of distributed information processing.

5.2.3 The information interactions

determining

the nature of the is of three kinds:

between AP-invocations

a)

Information describing the set of objects (using this term in its most general sense) which

3

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/lEC 9545 : 1989

are

the

subject activities.

of

distributed

information

ordination Standard.

is outside

the scope

ot this International

processing

b) Information describing the procedures to be used to effect communication between the APinvocations distributed for the control and co-ordination information processing. representing interactions of

5.4 Application-Entities 5.4.1 The aspects of an AP which need to be taken into account for the purpose of OSI are represented by one or more AEs. An AE represents a set of OSI communication capabilities of a particular AP.

c) Information state) of past invocations.
NOTE -This

the net effect (i.e., between the AP-

5.4.2 An AE represents OSI environment. by AEs of the same

one, and only one, AP in the be represented An AP may be AE-type.

Different APs may

is a portion of the shared information base in

the terminology of ISO/lR 9007.

represented

by a set of AEs: each AE in this set is of a

different AE-type. The purpose of OSI Application Layer standards is to provide definitions of procedures for interworking which are related to these three kinds of information. 5.2.4 The structuring of the Application Layer into components described in this International Standard does not prescribe whether the information contained in any, one of these components is, or is not, accessible to any other component that may be 5.4.4 An AE-invocation functions information including information 5.4.5 number consecutively An AE-invocation of may be a partner application-associations or concurrently. The number in a either through models the communication together with the associated state for particular communication activities of Such activities between are progressed communication AE-invocations present in the AE-invocation 5.3 Application-Processes 5.3.1 An AP represents processing may resources, be used a set of resources, a particular of which it is a part. 5.4.3 An AE-invocation the capabilities communication an AP-invocation represents a specific use of It represents specific of an AE. activities of an AP-invocation and is The aspects of that need to be taken into account

an integral part of that AP-invocation.

for the purposes of open systems interconnection are represented by one or more AE-invocations.

an AP-invocation. within a real open system that

related by application-associations.

to perform

processing activity (the AP concept is defined in IS0 7498). An AP may organise its interactions with other APs in whatever way is necessary to achieve a particular information processing goal: no constraints are imposed the form relationships
NOTE-For with other

of these

by this International interactions

Standard

either on

of these

or on the possible

application-associations may change with time. In particular, there may be periods of time when an is not a party to any applicationAE-invocation associations. determined associations 5.4.6 The The lifetime of an AE-invocation by the duration of the in which it is a participant. state information modelled by an AEeffect of its the net other AE-invocations. The is not application-

that may exist between them.
instance, an AP could schedule its interactions APs to take place either sequentially or

concurrently.

5.3.2 The activity of a given AP is represented by one or more AP-invocations. Co-operation between APs takes place via relationships established among APinvocations. At a particular time, an AP may be represented by none, one or more AP-invocations. An AP-invocation is responsible for co-ordinating its interactions with other AP-invocations. Such co-

reflects invocation communications with modelling concurrent

existence of this state information

provides a basis for consecutive or the co-ordinated use of multiple application-associations. It

also provides a basis for modelling a relationship, between a pair of AE-invocations, whose duration is not bound to the lifetime of a particular association. For example, this provides applicationone possible

4

\

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1969

method following

for modelling

the continuation

of an activity

governing

the mutual

communication

behaviour

of

the loss of an application-association.

the particular pair of AE-invocations.
NOTE _ The pair of AE-invocations in an applicationthey similar

54.7 The lifetime of an AE-invocation is controlled by the AP-invocation which it represents in the OSI environment. lifetime than AP-invocation An AP-invocation may have a longer any or all of its AE-invocations. There representing an at any particular time.

association may

may have different complementary behaviours.

roles; as a consequence rather than

exhibit

communication

may be zero or more AE-invocations

5.6.2 When communication

is required

between

two

5.5 Application-Service-Elements 5.5.1 An ASE is a set of functions communication AE-invocations
NOTE ASE or

that provides

OSI of

AEs to meet the needs of an application, one or more established between application-associations are AE-invocations of the two AEs. An AE-invoca!ion may support a number of application-associations simultaneously, sequentially more other AE-invocations. 5.6.3 An or both, with one or

capabilities

for the interworking

for a specific purpose.
can be grouped ASEs. into one single to avoid

Different functions split into

application-association-identifier with an application-association. is unique the

may

be This

several

In order

associated scope of the provides the

unnecessary

proliferation

of different

ASEs,

the following

application-association-identifier pair of associated means to identify

within the It state

should be considered:

AE-invocations. related

a) grouping

of functions and

into an the

ASE

must contain

at

information

in each AE-invocation.

least all the functions which are required

corresponding machine

APDUs which is

for a protocol

5.7 Application-Context 5.7.1 A pair of AE-invocations must have shared knowledge, and follow a common set of rules that governs their communication. Such a set of rules is called an application-context.
NOTE schema An application-context is a shared conceptual

logically complete

and consistent

in itself;

b) the grouping occur in such independently

of functions

into different

ASEs

has to

a way that the ASEs can be of each other.

specified

5.52

The

capabilities

of an ASE shall be defined by the procedures governing their the application-protocol between

the specification

of a set of application-protocol-data-

for the universe

of discourse

for communication.

units (APDU) and use. This constitutes

5.7.2

An

application-association

has

only

one of

two ASEs of the same kind. 5.5.3 An AE may be composed of one or more ASEs of different kinds in order to realize a specific composite purpose. 5.6 Application-Associations 5.6.1 An application-association relationship between is a co-operative for the communication capability for a particular

application-context. application-context that set of rules. together alternatives, the APs.
NOTE within The an

The set of rules that make up the may contain rules for alteration The set of rules may with rules for selecting contain among of

these alternatives

according

to the requirements

use of a rule to select among application-context does not

alternative constitute the use

rules an of a

alteration selection maintained

of the application-context. rule by does change

However, the with state

two AE-invocations

information to an

purpose of communication of information and coordination of their joint operation. This relationship is formed by the exchange of application-protocolcontrol-information Service. The characterised (APCI) using of this the Presentation are properties relationship

AE-invocations

respect

application-association,

5.7.3 An application-context AE-invocations, relationships

includes among

the rules that by both things, those

describe a set of things that must be known

by a set of rules and state information

5

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

actions

which

may

be

performed

on them,

and

i) rules concerning deletion of rules. 5.7.5 The sequencing

the addition,

modification

and

permitted states of affairs concerning of things which must be known invocations association, capabilities of communications with respect

them. The set by both AE-

includes those which may be the subject to an applicationincluding those for exchanging things which provide information (such as

rules for the use of the services

ASEs) and information to be exchanged between AEinvocations (categories of APCI to be exchanged).
NOTE An application-context-definition of the co-operative processing does not specify out

of the ASEs in combination s.pecify a composite service. The resulting operation of the ASEs in combination generates the composite protocol that supports that service. 5.7.6 An application-context may contain rules describing mechanisms that enable AE-invocations to transfer information for multiple association coordination purposes. It may also contain shared rules mechanisms co-ordination. for the governing the use of such purpose of multiple association 5.7.7 The definition Such a definition

the nature

tasks carried

by the partners

of an application-association.

5.7.4 The set of rules in an application-context will always include a specification of a set of ASEs (by reference to the ASE specification standards), and may also include (but is not limited to):

of an application-context is called

may be

written in a natural language, structure of definition. directly may

or in a formal language. an application-context-

4

specifications

of the

logical

information

to be exchanged

or referenced;

An application-context-definition may define some application-context rules and others that have been defined

reference

b), specification of invocation dependencies between the ASEs, beyond those dependencies contained within the ASE specifications; the selection and use of

elsewhere (e.g. in other application-context-definitions or in ASE standards). 5.7.6 The application-context that applies to application-association is determined during establishment in either of the following identifying or an actual description of the a pre-existing ways: applicationan its

cl 4
and

rules concerning

optional features of the ASEs;

any
in

additional

rules,

beyond

those

a)

by

contained

in the ASE specifications, of use of the service the consequence

governing primitives, of the

context-definition; b) by transferring application-context,

the sequence

sequence

APDUs, of each ASE; e) rules for the co-ordinated (such as rules for the operation of ASEs of service

In particular,

a name may be used to identify a pre-

interleaving

existing application-context-definition,
NOTES

requests and APDUs from different ASEs); rules concerning the mapping of the APCI from ASEs on to the services of either the Presentation Layer and/or of other ASEs; of application-functions, directory their use; information that has a lifetime functions, and such as rules
2 The allocation of names will be in to pre-existing the subject of applicationregistration context-definitions procedures

9

1 The contexts

predominant is expected

method to be

of by

determining reference to

applicationpre-existing

application-context-definitions.

g) designation application governing

as described

clause

9 of this International

h) rules concerning association; and

Standard.

that is greater than the lifetime of an application5.7.9 The communications over an behaviour of an AEis invocation application-association

6

IS13672

:1993

ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

constrained to be compatible with a generic behaviour defined by the application-context in use. 5.7.10An application-context Presentation manner. 5.7.11 When an AE-invocation supports a number of and ACSE shall be defined in such services in a compatible

5.10 Multiple

Association

Co-ordination
activities on several

5.10.1 Co-ordination application-associations a manner as to endure that the ASEs it references use

of related

may require: of activities on different

4 sequencing associations;

concurrent application-associations, there is no architectural requirement that each of these application-associations use the same applicationcontext. 5.8 Single Association 5.8.1 A single

consistency relationships b) maintenance of between activities on different associations; and c) any other rules necessary multiple associations. for the utilization of

Object
object (SAO) is the

5.10.2Co-ordination of related activities responsibility of a single AE-invocation shared by a group of co-operating two or more open systems. 510.3 A set of application-functions

may be the or may be in

association

AE-invocations

component of an AE-invocation that models the functions and state information related to the operation of an individual application-association. The lifetime of an SAO is identical to the lifetime of the association it supports. It does not model the existence of st,ate information or application-functions co-ordination related to multiple association functions. An SAO contains one or more ASEs (one of which is always the Association Control Service Element - ACSE) and a Single Association Function. application-context for an 5.8.2 The application-association contains rules Control

that co-ordinates associations is related activities on several represented in the structure of an AE-invocation by a multiple association control function (MACF). A MACF together with the objects that are under its control provide a composite
NOTE -

sewice.
activities in multiple AE-

The

co-ordination

invocations representing

one AP-invocation

may operate

together to provide an integrated co-ordination capability.

individual for the 5.10.4 A MACF may provide following forms of co-ordination: a) localized co-ordination, operation of either or both of the

composition and operation of the SAO supporting that application-association within the AE-invocation. 5.8.3 contain At a particular none, one time an AE-invocation SAOs. When may an AE-

resulting an

from

the

autonomous

AE-invocation,

or more

which does not require explicit communications; b) distributed co-ordination, resulting from the

invocation contains more than one SAO, the combinations of ASEs within them may be different.

5.9 Single Association

Control Function

co-operative operation different open systems, explicit communications.

of AE-invocations in which does require

The Single Association Control Function (SACF) is the component of the SAO that models the coordination of the interactions among the ASEs contained ordination in the SAO and also models the coService. of their use of the Presentation these interactions the of

NOTE

- The distribution of co-ordination functions among a

group of AE-invocations requires agreement on

in two or more open systems the co-ordination functions

performed by each of the AE-invocations.

The rules concerning

by the application-context association.

are defined application-

5.10.5When il is necessary for two AE-invocations to have a shared understanding of the rules for coordination of multiple associations, those shared rules will be contained within the application-context-

7

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

definition. Localized co-ordination rules are not part of the application-context-definition. 5.10.6 The communications requirements of a MACF are supported by the generation of protocol on individual associations. 5.10.7 Those rules of an application-context providing support for multiple association co-ordination may be contained in specifications of ASEs, specifications of abstract syntaxes, or be part of the rules for the combined operation of ASEs. 5.10.8 Within an AE-invocation, a MACF may coordinate the activity on all or only a subset of the application-associations. 5.10.9 A MACF specification comprises:

5.11.2 Information on these mappings may be held for access by available locally and made or lt may be held application-directory-fucctions, remotely. It is a local responsibility to retrieve the information and make it available to an applicationdirectory-function. If this information is stored remotely, OSI protocols may be used to access that information.
NOTE -It is not required that every AE contain an ASE that provides the service to retrieve this remote information; local system management may obtain this service from another AE. even another AE in another AP.

5.11.3 The procedures which constitute the application-directory-functions are modelled within the AE independent of any particular ASE.
NOTE - Application-directory-functions are an example of within the AE

a) a definition of the set of services made available by the combined operations over the associations;
NOTE Services within the scope of such a co-

application-functions

that

are

modelled

independent of any particular ASEs. Other such applicationfunctions may support aspects of security activities,

management activities, etc.

ordination may or may not be made visible by the MACF specification.

b) a specification of the use of services provided by objects under its control; this may include: 1) temporal ordering rules for the services; 2) the interrelationships between the use of services; of information which 3) the specification must be exchanged between AE-invocations for the purpose of co-ordination. 5.11 Names and Directory Functions

5.11.4 In IS0 7498-3, several kinds of name are defined in order to enable the identification of certain objects in the Application Layer. These kinds of name are: a) application-process-title; b) application-entity-title; c) application-process-invocation-identifier; d) application-entity-invocation-identifier; e) application-association-identifier; fj application-process-type-title; g) application-entity-type-title; and

5.11.1 As specified in IS0 7498-3, applicationdirectory-functions process presentation-addresses, AE-titles, application-protocol-addressingand information to provide mappings among these categories of information. Conceptually, these functions are performed by the AE-invocation to derive the addressing information required.

h) system-title. The ways in which they may be used in the operation application-directory-functions and the of identification of specific Application Layer objects are described in IS0 7498-3.

1

IS 13672 : 1993 tSO/IEC 9545 : 1989

Operation 6 Invocations
6.1 Use of Application 6.1.1

of

Application-Entity-

transfer these APDUs between AE-invocations using the Presentation Service it is necessary to establish one or more presentation-contexts for each abstract syntax. During an association, occurrences of these APDUs are linked to presentation-contexts. Each presentation-context specifies a pairing of a particular abstract syntax with a transfer syntax. 6.2.4 An application-association is bound to a single

Associations

for the establishment and Capabilities termination of application-associations are contained in a specific ASE: the ACSE. This ASE is a necessary part of AEs. 6.1.2 In establishing an application-association, an

presentation-connection. It does not span concurrent or consecutive presentation-connections.
NOTE

AE-invocation specifies to the Presentation Service the location of a peer AE by its presentation-address. Additionally, it may use one or more of the following identifiers for the selection of a peer AE-invocation: a) AP-invocation-identifier; b) AE-invocation-identifier. An AE-invocation may in also use an applicationthe the

In this

way it is a

restricted use of the (N)(N)-association concept

association concept. The general allows such spanning.

6.3 Co-ordlnation

of ASE Activities

Communication within an application63.1 association makes use of one or more ASEs in each of its AE-invocations. There are two aspects to the coordination of ASEs: of ASEs within an SAO; of peer ASE activities in related

association-identifier application-association related AE-invocations.

order and the

to identify SAOs within

a) co-ordination

6.1.3 In addition,
AP-title and establishment

related AE-invocations may transfer AE-title information during the of an application-association. This

b) co-ordination SAOs. Both of these association.

information identifies the peer AEs in a way that is independent of their presentation-addresses.

aspects

are governed

by means

of

rules in the application-context

of the application-

6.1.4 The termination
AE-invocations

of an application-association resufts from the action of the related AE-invocations. may take such action in response to a visible in the Presentation failure in communications Service. 6.2 Use

6.3.2 The operation organised particular in association,

of ASEs way as dbfined

in an SAO may be is necessary for a by the application-

whatever

context that applies to the association. In some cases the operation of ASEs may be organised so as

of the Presentation

Service

to enable the shared use of particular presentationservices by means of the concatenation of APDUs from different ASEs. NOTES
1 The specification of an ASE should take into account any particular requirements for its operation in combination with other ASEs in an SAO. Such requirements may concern the c&operative use of ASE services and presentation-services. In particular, assumptions regarding the way in which the

6.2.1 An AE is attached to one or more presentationservice-access-points in order to make it addressable in the OSI environment. 6.2.2 The communicating Presentation Service to each other. The method AE-invocations use the transfer APDUs between of use of the Presentation

Service is prescribed by the rules of the applicationcontext of an application-association. 6.2.3 The structure of the APDUs of an ASE is

establishment and termination of associations is achieved can seriously affect the feasibility of the combined operation

specified

by at least one named abstract syntax. To

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

of ASEs. For instance, an ASE may require access to ACSE services; alternatively, or perhaps optionally, it may be

to more remain 0% of

general conceptual, their real

models. carrying

Their

descriptions No

must within

the appearance

capable of using a preexisting association. 2 The relationship between the initialization phase of an application-protocol initialization phase and procedures for applicationmay be association establishment needs to be clearly defined. The of an application-protocol related to such procedures in one or both of the following ways: a) it may be establishment; invoked at the time of association

operation.

implementation

conformance models.

requirements

can be derived from such

7.3 A service definition conveys the understanding of the function carried out by the ASE. It is the first step that leads to the specification of the corresponding protocol. By analogy with the service definitions at the OSI layer boundaries, the service definitions for ASEs are conceptual and do not imply conformance. 7.4 A protocol specification defines the structure for between peer ASEs. may make and/or In use the

b) it may be invoked at points during the lifetime of an association.

the exchange of other

of information Layer

so doing, the protocol Application Service. Presentation

specification

services

6.4 Co-ordination of the Activities of an AEInvocation
An AE-invocation or to may to control its activities them in within

8 Abstract Syntax Definition
several application-associations independence necessary requirement. satisfy a either to ensure their ways communication

8.1 An abstract syntax is made
which are independent represent the data.

up of those aspects of data to techniques

co-ordinate specific

of the rules used in the formal specification of the encoding

6.5 Error Recovery within an ApplicationAssociation , 6.5.1 The action to be taken in the event of errors that
are visible within an application-association is prescribed by rules in the application-context of the application-association. application-association mutually acceptable Following such errors, the may be terminated or, in may be resumed from a point. be as

8.2 For a given ASE the structure of the APDUs is specified by a set of one or more abstract syntaxes. The structure of any user information conveyed by within these APDUs on an association is specified another set of one or more abstract syntaxes. 8.3 A name may be assigned to the definition

of an

some cases, communication

abstract syntax. Such a name may be used in the specification of requirements for the establishment of a presentation context by the Presentation Service.

6.5.2 An application-association-identifier may used to denote a particular application-association part of the error recovery application-context. procedures specified

9 Registration 9.1 The
Standards procedures use of

Requirements
Application Layer of of names International registration (which are for

in an

requires the establishment for the assignment throughout objects:

7 Description of Application-ServiceElement Standards 7.1 An ASE is defined in terms of a service definition
and a protocol specification. 7.2 An important description part of an ASE definition may be the explaining the requirements of

unambiguous the following

the OSI environment)

a) The Application

Layer related objects from the

list in 13.1 of IS0 7498-3; b) The following additional objects:

of a model

the service user. Such a model may include reference

1) abstract syntaxes;

10

\

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1969

international 2) application-contexts; 3) application-entities. definition

or

national

standard,

a

published

developed

by a community

of interest, or a

private agreement. 9.3 The registration 9.2 An abstract syntax definition or an applicationcontext-definition that is registered may be an procedures used in each of these

situations should be compatible with an internationally recognized framework for registration procedures.

11

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

Annex A
(informative)

Examples of the structure of AE-Invocations
This annex provides tutorial material which is intended to aid in understanding the relationships between some of the Application Layer structuring concepts described in this International Standard. In particular, figures are provided to illustrate the internal structure of an AE-invocation viewed at a particular instant in time. as it might be

A.1 A simple AE-invocation
-

A-E-invocation SAO S ASE A C F ACSE a I
n

key: ACSE = ASE = SACF = SAO = n =

Association Control Service Element Example Application Service Element Single Association ,Control Function Single Association Object application-association
Figure A.1 Simple AE-invocation The SAO contains two ASEs (ACSE and a simple

Figure A.1 illustrates Invocation association SAO. is engaged

a simple

case, where

an AEone

in exactly

one applicationcontains

at the time, and therefore

"user" ASE in this example) and a SACF, which models the use of the rules in the application-context that concern interactions between the two ASEs. s

12

.

Printed at Dee Kay printers,

New Delhi, India

IS 13672 : 1993 ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989

A.2 A complex AE-invocation

APPLICATION-ENTITY-INVOCATION

key: ACSE = ASE = SACF = = SAO = n
n

Association Control Service Element Example Application Service Element Single Association Control Function Single Association Object Application-Association

Figure

A.2

-

Complex

AE-invocation

Figure A.2 illustrates a more complex case in which the AE-invocation is simultaneously engaged in three application-associations, and therefore it contains three SAOs. The first of these associations is used in a manner that is independent of the activities taking place in the other associations. The second and third associations are used in a manner that requires coordination present MACF of their activities, in this AE-invocation in the correspondent therefore the MACF is these two with the the to control

support the communications MACF, as necessary;

requirements

of the

b) some or all of the SAOs supporting the multiple associations for a single AE-invocation may be under the control of the MACF as necessary; c) the associations single AE-invocation sequentially controlled may by the MACF in a exist and be used

SAOs. In order for the MACF to communicate

AE-invocation,

and/or simultaneously;

second and the third SAOs may contain one or more ASEs that have functions to provide communication in support of capabilities on this individual the MACF. The following association d) in order to support its own communications requirements, the MACF may utilize one or more ASEs in one or more SAOs; e) in some cases, the MACF may have no communications requirements of its own.

should be noted:

a)SAO 2
one,

and SAO 3 might both contain none, or more ASEs that provide functions to

13

1 Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Stundurds Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. Details of conditions under BlS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
/ -__-_.-___ ._._~_.___

I

I

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. Enquiries relating ( Publications ), RlS.
Revision of Indian Standards

BIS has the copyright

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also revit Ned periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook. and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. L-l-D 36 ( 1570 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Ainend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

tsUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:
Telephones

STANL)ARDS 110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

-C

Manak Bhavnn, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

to all

05ces

)

Regional Central

Ofices :
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

Telephone Shah Zafar Marg 37 84 99, 37 86 26,
53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 235 04 42 235 23 15

NEW DELHI

110002

331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62
53 16 40

Eastern : l/l4 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western
: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

632 92 95, 632 78 91,

632 78 58 632 78 92

BANGALORE. BJ!lOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. GHAZl ABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers. Aligarh. India

