UDC

539.12074 : 614,876

IS : 11868 - 1937 IEC Pub 405 ( 1972)
( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard CONS'TRUWONAL REQUIREMENTS OF NUCLEAR INSTRUMENTS TO AFFORD PERSONAL PROTECTION AGAINST IONIZING RADIATION Requirements ( IEC Title : Nuclear Instruments : Constructional Afford Personal Protection Against Ionizing Radiation )
National Foreword This Indian Standard, which is identical with IEC Pub 405 (1972) c Nuclear instruments: Constructional requirements to afford personal protection against ionizing radiation ' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ([EC) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Nuclear Instrumentation Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Tele_communication Division Council. Wherever the words <International Standard' appear, as `Indian Standard'. Cross References In this Indian Standard, the following International tive place the following:
International Standard

to

referring

to this standard,

they shall be read

Standards are referred to.

Read in their respec-

Corresponding Indian Standard

IEC Pub 348 ( 1978 ) Safety requirements for electronic measuring apparatus

IS : 9858-1981 Safety requirements electronic measuring apparatus

for

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the following IAEA Publication and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard.

pryisions of the

IAEA Pub (1967) Basic safety standards for radiation protection. Only the English language text of the International this Indian Standard. Standard has been retained while adopting it in

Adopted 28 January 1987

I

@ August

1987, BIS

I

Gr 5

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI

110002

Is : 11868- 1987

IEC.Pnb 405 ( 1972)

1. 1.1

The recommendations apply to electrical measuring instruments incorporating a radioactive sealed or non-dispersible unsealed source for self-calibration or for measurement, but excepting instruments used for the control of nuclear reactors or for medical diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. Recommendations concerning false indications (Clause 8) and ease of decontamination (Clause 9) apply specifically to health physics instruments irrespective of whether the instruments incorporate a radioactive source. The recommendations do not apply to: - instruments in which the generation of ionizing radiation by the acceleration of electrons is essential to the measurement function of the instrument, for example X-ray sets;
-

1.2

1.3

radioactive sources used for measurement

but not incorporated

in the instruments.

1.4

The recommendations concern only personal protection against ionizing radiations, excepting precautions against the hazards of luminising compounds. Recommendations for protection against electric shock, the effects of excessive temperature, explosion and the spread of fire, are given in IEC Publication 348, Safety Requirements for Electronic Measuring Apparatus. Attention is directed to the existence in most countries of legal requirements and/or codes of good practice governing the possession, use, storage and transport of radioactive sources. Such requirements and/or codes may be more stringent than these recommendations.

1.5

No/e. -

The USC$U/beum

of some instruments

incorporating

a radioactive

source is hazardous.

Protection

additional

to this recommendation

may then be necessary and will depend on the design of the installation.

2.

Object To specify intrinsic constructional requirements for those electrical measuring instruments used in connection with ionizing radiation specified in Clause 1 so as to provide reasonable personal protection against ionizing radiation in the use of such instruments, and to specify tests for showing compliance with these requirements.

3 _.

Ddioitions Sealed source: a source of radioactive materials designed to be used in such a way that the radioactive substance does not enter into immediate contact with the source surroundings. The radioactive materials are either firmly incorporated in solid and inactive materials, or sealed in a capsule of strength sufficient to prevent, under normal conditions of use, any dispersion of radioactive substances and any possibility of contamination including that from the capsule itself. Non-dispersible unsealed source: a source of radioactive

materials which :

is not a sealed source; has determinate boundaries:

2

1s : 11868 - 1987 IEC Pub 405 ( 1972) is designed so that under normal conditions disperse outside its designed boundaries. of use the radioactive materials cannot

ClsejUl beum: that through the apertpre, Protective Leukuge housing. Occupationally work.
No/r. -

part of the radiation which comes diaphragm, cone or other collimating a housing of a source except an adult intended the useful exposed

out of the source device.

and

its housing

housing: rudiution:

to reduce

the Ieukuge rudiution. from within a protective of his

all radiation person:

heum coming

exposed

to ionizing

radiation

in the course

Most countries comply with the recommendations

of the ICRP

concerning

such persons.

Accessible: capable of being touched by either the jointed standard test finger (see Figure la. page 18) or the rigid test finger (see Figure 1b. page 18). The finger is applied in every possible position. In case of doubt, the rigid test finger is applied 30 newtons. The force shall be exerted by the tip of the test finger lever action. Accessibility shall be construed accordingly. with a maximum force of so as to avoid wedge and

4. 4.1. 4.2

General requirements Incorporated sources shall not be dispersible unsealed sources. to ensure, under normal conditions of

Instruments incorporating sources shall be constructed use. personal protection with respect to: external ingestion accidental radiations hazards; detachment of incorporated sources; emanating from the instruments;

the user not being aware of such sources. to ensure. under normal conditions of

4.3

Health physics instruments shall also be constructed use, personal protection with respect to: false indications (see Clause 8); 9).

ease of decontamination

(see Clause

5.

Protection requirement categories For instruments incorporating a source, it is not always possible to obtain radiological protection by constructional means. Four categories of such instruments are therefore recognized according to the restrictive conditions which may be necessary in use.

5.1

Cutegory

0 - No limitation

on use

Instruments containing a radioactive source the activity of which shall not exceed that specified in column 7 of Table IIA of the International Atomic Energy Agency publication, Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection, 1967, and around which dose rates shall not exceed : one millirem one-tenth per hour at the exterior per hour surface of the instrument; the exterior surface of the instrument.

of one millirem

at IO cm from

No/r. -

In some countries.

these instruments

may he cxcmpt from notification,

registration

or licensing.

( IEC

page 9 )

3

IS : 11868 - 1987 IEC Pub 405 ( 1972) 5.2 Category A - For scienttjic, commercial or industrial use without restrictive conditions

Instruments containing a radioactive source the activity of which shall not exceed 1000 times that specified in column 7 of Table IIA of the International Atomic Energy Agency publication. Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection, 1967, or 10 millicuries, whichever is the smaller, and .around which dose rates shall not exceed :
-

0.75 millirem per hour at a distance of 5 cm from the exterior surface of the instrument.
B - For use by occupationally exposed persons without restrictive conditions

5.3

Category

Instruments containing a radioactive source the activity of which shall not exceed 10000 times that specified in column 7 of Table IIA of the International Atomic Energy Agency publication, Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection, 1967. or 100 millicuries, whichever is the smaller, and around which dose rates shall not exceed: - 2.5 millirems per hour at a distance of 5 cm from the exterior surface of the instrument. The source shall not be accessible,
-

except :

when the instrument is in the operative condition,
accessibility

and if: 5.4 is essential to the functioning of the instrument.
or locally for a particular Cutegory Z - For use under restrictive conditions imposed nationally instrument or installation or class of instrument or installation

Instruments containing a radioactive source, which shall not be accessible, except:
-

when the instrument is in the operative condition, is essential to the functioning of the instrument.

and if: - accessibility 5.4.1

Category Z is divided into sub-categories Za, Zb, Za/b and Zc.
Za

Instruments without shutters but such that the dose rate shall not exceed: 5.4.2
Zb

20 millirems per hour at a distance of 5 cm from the exterior surface of the instrument, 2 millirems per hour at a distance of 1 metre from the incorporated source.

Instruments supplied with a shutter which interrupts the shutter is closed the dose rate shall not exceed: 5.4.3
Zajb

the usclfirl beam, so made that when

2.5 millirems per hour at a distance of 5 cm from the exterior surface of the instrument.

Instruments supplied with a shutter and which shall comply with the dose rate requirements of sub-category Za. 5.4.4 zc Instruments of category Z which do not fall into one of the categories Za, Zb or Za/b.

6.

Mechanical security of incorporated sources

Instruments shall be constructed so as to guard against the accidental an incorporated source or part of the source under normal conditions of use. 6. I

detachment

of

Sources shall be sealed unless functional requirements make this impraticable. If the source is unsealed, it shall be non-dispersible and the instructions shall call attention to it. Dispersible unsealed sources are not permitted.

4

1s : 11868- 1987

IEC Pub 405 ( 1972) Compliance required. 6.2 is checked by inspection, and a certificate from the source manufacturer is

An incorporated

source shall not be removable except by the use of tools.

Compliance is checked by inspection and a manual test of the fastenings. A force of 30 newtons shall be applied in all possible directions using the rigid standard test finger]) without causing loosening of the source. 6.3 If practicable the source shall be protected shall not abrade the source. Compliance is checked by inspection. against mechanical damage. A shutter, if any,

7. 7.1 7.1.1 7.1.2

Markiag To guard against persons not being aware of an incorporated marked as follows: Category 0 instruments need not be marked. Category with the chemical marking A, B and Z instruments which incorporate a source shall be marked on the front face International Radiation Symbolz) not less than one cm in diameter, together with the symbol and mass number of the source nuclide. Below the symbol, there shall also be as follows: 0.75 mrem/h 2.5 &em/h 20 mrem/h (the value in mrem/h of the maximum dose rate at a distance of 5 cm from the exterior surface when the shutter is open)/25 mrem/h 2012.5 mrem/h (the value in mrem/h of the maximum dose rate at a distance of 5 cm from the exterior surface when the shutter, if any, is open) mrem/h. source, instruments shall be

For Category A: For Category B: For Category Za: For Category Zb: For Category Za/b: For Category Zc:

7.1.3

The protective housing or surrounding of an incorporated source shall be painted Safety Yellow-`) so as to be conspicuous when the instrument is serviced. A label, dimensioned as shown in Figure 2, page 21, shall be affixed close to the source. The label shall display the International Radiation Symbol, the word "Radioactive", the chemical symbol, the mass number and the activity.
Accessibility of the source shall be indicated by the words "Accessible Radioactive

7.2 7.3

Source" in

the label specified in Sub-clause 7.1.3 above (see Figure 2b, page 21). If an instrument is fitted with a device to interrupt the useful beam, the control of the device shall indicate its operating state. Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement of the beam leakage. 7.4 In the case of class Z instruments, if practicable, outlined in Safety RedJ). Compliance is checked by inspection. the aperture defining the useful beam shall be

1) See Figure

1b.

page

IS.

by IS0 Recommendation R 361-1963. 3) Colour defined by IS0 Recommendation R 408-1964.

2) Defined

(EC page13)

Is : 11868 - 1987 IEC Pub 405 ( 1972)

8. 8.1

False indications by health physics instruments
Overload conditions

Instruments for measuring : . - X and gamma exposure; X and gamma exposure rate; neutron fluence; neutron fluence rate,

whilst presented to radiation greater than the nominal full scale valuel) shall so indicate by remaining out of scale at the higher end. Additionally, X and gamma exposure meters and neutron fluence measuring instruments shall remain out of scale on removal from the radiation. For instruments with switchable scale ranges*), the requirement Compliance is checked : 8.1.1 For exposure meters whose nominal full scale value is less than 800 R, by irradiation for 10 minutes by gamma or X radiation having an exposure rate such that the exposure in this period is not less than 100 times the nominal full scale value, or an exposure rate of 104 R/h, whichever is the lesser. For exposure meters whose nominal full scale value is. not less than 800 R, by irradiation to twice the nominal full scale value at a rate not less than 104 R/hJ). . There shall be an evident indication of overload within a period of twice the time for the full scale exposure to be received and this indication must persist for at least one hour after cessation of the irradiation. 8.1.2 For exposure rate meters, by irradiation for a period of 2 minutes at an exposure rate of not less than 100 times the nominal full scale value or 104 R/h, whichever is the lesser. There shall be an evident indication within 5 seconds that the instrument is reading out of scale at the higher end and this indication must persist until the irradiation ceases.
Note. Instrument circuitry may, due to a scale-of-two dividing effect, sometimes cause a spurious fall-back indication not detected by the foregoing tests. Compliance should therefore be checked by presentingthe instrument to a steadily increasing field rising to at least 10 times the nominal full scale value at a rate not exceeding the factor ccc))(2.718, the base of natural logarithms) in a period equal to the time constantof the instrument.

shall apply on each range.

8.1.3

For neutron fluence measuring instruments, by irradiation for a period of 10 minutes by a fluence of neutron energy within the stated response range of the instrument and of such rate that the fluence in this period is not less than 100 times the nominal full scale value. There shall be an evident indication of overload within a period of twice the time for the full scale fluence to be received and this indication must persist for at least one hour after cessation of the irradiation.

8.1.4

For neutron fluence rate measuring instruments, by irradiation for a period of 2 minutes to a fluence of neutron energy within the stated response range of the instrument and of a fluence rate between two and three times the nominal full scale value.

1) If such instruments, especially high-sensitivity instruments, cannot sustain overload without damage, they shall be markedby the manufacturer with the limiting value of exposure, exposure rate, neutron fluence or neutron fluence rate up to which they are immune (see ICRU - Report 20, 1971). 2) Alternatively, these instruments may be provided with automatic upwards range switching operable 5y overload, with evident indication. 3) The exposure rate and duration to be agreed upon by manufacturer and user.

an

(

IEC page IS) 6

1s : 11858 - 1987

IEC PUS 405 ( 1972) There shall be an evident indication within one minute that the meter is reading scale at the higher end and this indication must persist until the irradiation ceases.
NOW. For inslruments recommendations indicating in rems, the equivalent fluence should be in accordance of the International Commission on Radiological Protection*. with the

out of
current

8.2

Pulsed fields

In pulsed fields of ionizing or radio frequency radiation, for example from linear accelerators. certain instruments may be sensitive to the periodicity of the pulses. It is sometimes impracticable to construct an instrument to be entirely immune. Users must therefore make operational checks, such as switching the pulsed field on and off and observing the behaviour of the instrument over its whole sensitivity range when brought into the field from a distance. Any known characteristics the user's handbook. of an instrument with respect to pulsed fields should be stated in

9.

Ease of decontamination

of health physics instruments

Portable instruments for the measurement of exposure and exposure rate, alpha and beta radiations, neutron fluence or neutron dose, and radioactive contamination shall be constructed so as to facilitate decontamination. These instruments shall comply with one or more of the following three sub-clauses. 9.1
Deconiaminable exterior surface The instruments smooth non-porous

shall have an easily decontaminable surfacemfree from crevices.

exterior

surface,

for example, as follows:

a

Compliance is checked, unless otherwise specified in special recommendations,

On a typical spot of the surface of the instrument, put a drop of a solution of a radioactive isotope of short half-life and of energy not less than 500 keV, for example, sodium 24 or lanthanum 140; the activity to be 0.5 microcurie on drying. After decontamination without abrasives, the background noise of the instrument must remain unchanged and a smear give not more than 100 disintegrations/minute. 9.2
Easily replaceable windows

The instruments shall have easily replaceable windows. Compliance is checked by inspection. It is permissible for an instrument to have an easily replaceable window covering a display or control panel in combination with a smooth non-porous surface elsewhere. 9.3 Use in protective
cover The instruments shall be usable when placed inside a thin flexible disposable or easily decontaminable cover fitted with transparencies to permit reading of the instrument scales. For instruments fitted with a probe and its connecting cable, it shall be permissible to put only the probe into a protective cover, provided the instrument itself is easily decontaminable.

Compliance is checked by practical demonstration.

*ICRP-Publication

4, 1962, revised

1963. To be published:

Supplement

to Publication

15. 1969.

( XEC

page 17)

7

IS : 11868- 1987 IEC Pub 405 ( 1972)

I

60 t-

1_

io

J \
Cylindrical

Insulating

material

Spherical

Tolerances : on angles: * 5' on linear dimensions less than 25 mm: -0.05 over 25 mm: * 0.2

Fro. 1 a L N

Jointed standard test finger. Ref.: Clause 3.

80 L 1 20

c c

5: 19

z Q 1

FIG. 1 b

Rigid test finger. Ref. : Clause 3 and Sub-clause 6.2.

(

IEC

pd&2 18)

8

IS : 11868-1987 IEC Pub 405 ( 1972)

0 10

f

Co- 60 100~ Ci A

1

Radioactive

FIG. 2~) - Example of label to indicate an incorporated radioactive source. Ref. : Sub-clause 7.1.3. Minimum dimensions as shown, larger sizes to be proportionate.

Co-60 100~ Ci

Accessible Radioactive Source

FIG. 26) - Example of label to indicate an incorporated Ref. : Sub-clause 7.2.

accessible radioactive source.

Dimensions in mm

9

Reprography

Unit,

BIS, New Delhi,

fndla

