eT d TT Ah IS 18284 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


erator eiera mds cht ea e fer — 
AGIRIEI 


Repair of Distribution 
Transformers — Code of Practice 


ICS 29.180 


© BIS 2023 


RAA HAR em 
Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
es S18, 9 FETT Me HHL AM, Ag fee - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 12 


Transformers Sectional Committee, ETD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Transformers Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


Distribution transformers (DTs) are the backbone of electrical distribution network. Though they are some of the 
most reliable component of the electrical grid they are also prone to failure due to many factors both internal as 
well as external. Failure of distribution transformers results into interruption of power supply to consumers. This 
disruption affects the economy of nation in the form of loss of revenue, materials, repairing charges etc. 


Presently, India incurs approximately INR 3 000 Crore per annum for repair of failed distribution transformers 
alone. Though better maintenance practices have helped in the reduction of failure rate, still most of the utilities, 
considering their economic conditions, are very much dependent on the repair of failed distribution transformers. 
This has made it of very much concern that root cause analysis of the failure should be done and properly recorded 
and the failed DTs are repaired in a standardized manner so as to minimize subsequent failures. 


Also, under Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 12 ‘Responsible Consumption and Production’, it is the 
responsibility of all to reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, reuse and recycling. This standard 
supports SDG 12 by ensuring that failed distribution transformers are repaired in a standardized manner which 
would minimize subsequent failures and will ensure efficient and reliable functioning when these repaired 
transformers are put back into the distribution network. 


This standard specifies the guidelines to be followed by the repairers for repair of liquid immersed (both mineral 
oil and ester liquid) as well as dry type distribution transformers covered under the scope of IS 1180 series. 


The tolerance values specified on the losses have been kept on the higher side considering the practical difficulties 
of the Indian repair industry and feedback received from various stakeholders as well as current practices being 
followed by the utilities for repair of failed distribution transformers. The specified tolerance values may be 
reviewed in future when sufficient repair data will be available. 


IS 1180 series is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


The composition of the panel, ETD 16 : POI and the Sectional Committee, ETD 16 responsible for the 
formulation of this standard in listed Annex H. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


REPAIR OF DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMERS — CODE OF 
PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This code gives the guidelines along with tests 
including failure analysis and record keeping for the 
repair of liquid-immersed, dry-type, outdoor/indoor 
type, stacked core/wound core with CRGO or 
amorphous core material, double wound distribution 
transformers with nominal system voltages up to and 
including 33 kV and of the following types and 
ratings: 


a) Liquid-immersed: Oil/Natural Ester/Synthetic- 
Organic Ester: 


1) Three-phase ratings: up to and 
including 2 500 kVA (both sealed and 
non-sealed); and 

2) Single phase ratings: up to and 
including 100 kVA (sealed type). 


b) Dry-Type: 


1) Three-phase ratings: up to and 
including 3 150 kVA; and 

2) Single phase ratings: up to and 
including 100 kVA. 


1.2 This standard does not apply to transformers 
which are excluded from the scope of IS 1180 series 
(see NOTE 1, Clause 1 of IS 1180 series standards). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1180 Outdoor/Indoor type,  oil- 
immersed distribution 
transformers up to and 
including 2 500 kVA, 33 kV: 


(Part 1): 2014 Mineral oil immersed 


(Part 3): 2021 Natural/Synthetic organic ester 
immersed 


IS No. Title 


IS 12444 : 2020 Copper wire rods for electrical 
applications — Specification 


(first revision) 


IS 1885 (Part 38): Electro technical vocabulary: 


1993 Part 38 Power transformers and 
reactors 

IS 1866 : 2017 Mineral insulating oils in 
electrical equipment 


supervision and maintenance 
guidance (first revision) 


IS 2026 (Part 1) : Power transformer: Part 1 
2011 General requirements 


IS 5484 : 1997 EC grade aluminium rod 
produced by | continuous 
casting and rolling — 


Specification (second revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 1180 (Part 1), IS 1180 (Part 3), IS 1180 
(Part 4), IS 1885 (Part 38) and IS 2026 (Part 1) shall 


apply. 
4 CLASSIFICATION OF REPAIR ACTIVITIES 


4.1 The extent of repair for any transformer depends 
upon the failure analysis comprising certain tests, 
such as visual inspection of active-part assembly (and 
if need be, disassembly of coils and inspection 
thereof), history of transformer including loading 
pattern, condition of tank and radiators/fins, number 
of times repair undergone in past, life of transformer, 
load tests, winding tests, core condition etc. 


4.2 Repair activities may broadly be classified as: 


a) Minor repair work which involves 
replacement/repair (whichever is applicable) 
of failed parts which are external to windings, 
for example, arcing/flashover from leads to 
earth or change of failed/damaged bushings, 
metal parts, OLTC/OCTC parts or other 
fittings/accessories, tank leakage, gasket 
replacement, PRV etc; 


b 


— 


Major repair work which involves change of 
coils that have failed electrically or due to 
mechanical forces and change of a few 


IS 18284 : 2023 


laminations or complete core, change of tank 
etc; 

Enhancement of overloading capacity by 
increasing cooling by adding radiators is also 
considered as a major repair activity. 


Sometimes repair of damaged/deformed tank 
and its paintwork would be necessary. This is 
also considered as a major repair activity. 


c) Another type of important repair activity is 
overhauling/ rehabilitation of transformer 
which involves change of gaskets; change of 
insulating liquid if parameters do not meet 
the relevant standards; internal cleaning; 
tightening of core-coil assembly; repainting 
and re-servicing of fittings and accessories or 
replacement of accessories; 


d) Augmentation of core or winding for 
enhancing the loading capacity, reliability 
and energy performance, increasing number 
of turns while rewinding etc. can also be 
considered as a repair activity; and 


e) Retro-filling with ester liquid is another kind 
of minor repair activity which helps to 
increase the life of the transformer, its 
overloading capability and makes it eco- 
friendly and fire-safe. 


This code defines general guidelines for all kinds 
of repair works indicated above. 


5 GENERAL 
5.1 Identification 


Whenever a transformer is received for repair, the 
following four important aspects should be 
identified first: 


a) Information regarding failure site of the 
transformer as stated by the customer (site 
report) including accident if any for example 
fire; 


b) Information which is crucial and to be kept 
by the service centre for records; 


c) Information that is to be attached to the 
transformer part being repaired; and 


d) Information that can be assessed and retained 
by the customer post repair work. 


5.1.1 Recordkeeping 


Record keeping is an important step not only for the 
service centre but also for the customers who can 
quantify the pre- and post-condition of the 
transformer. Different utilities repair service centres 
may have different systems like log book or 
electronic data processing for record keeping. 


Every time a transformer is received for repair, a 
unique record document or service order should be 
established. This document should briefly describe: 


a) the root cause of failure as described by the 
customer; 

b) items identified requiring repair by the 
repairer; and 


c) alist of damaged or missing components. 


In addition, photographs or digital images may be 
attached to this record document to confirm the state 
of the failed transformer upon receipt and to prepare 
further documentation for the repair process. If the 
transformer is liquid-filled type, the poly chlorinated 
bi-phenyl (PCB) concentration should also be 
clearly shown on the service order with supporting 
documentation from the customer or test laboratory. 


For recordkeeping, technical information about the 
transformer should also be captured. This includes 
nameplate data, electrical test data (site and repair 
centre which is before and after repair), and details 
of the repairs required by the customer, the repairs 
performed, and a list of all parts that were replaced 
should also be maintained for physical verification. 
Records should be made available for review by the 
customer as and when required. 


5.1.2 Nameplate 


At the time of service, it should be ensured that the 
nameplate is intact and the information is clearly 
readable. In case the transformer is redesigned, the 
original nameplate should remain on the unit post- 
servicing, the new technical and design information 
should appear on the new nameplate mounted 
adjacent to the original. 


5.1.3 Service Centre Labels 


Before shipment, every repaired transformer should 
be permanently embossed or inscribed with the 
name or identifying logo of the repair centre or 
repair service provider including month & year of 
repair adjacent to the nameplate. The service order 
number for the most recent repair should also be 
clearly marked on the unit. 


5.1.4 Safety Considerations 


Adequate safety measures should be ensured while 
taking up repair of transformers considering the 
bulky size and electrical hazards due to voltage 
potentials involved. Requirements regarding safety 
of personnel, training and equipment are detailed in 
Annex D. 


5.2 Assessment/Investigation for Failure of 
Transformer 


Upon receiving a damaged transformer, the service 
centre should follow the process given below: 


a) promptly inspect and test the transformer to 
identify the problem as per the service order 
and make first investigation report (FIR); 


b) collect data for failure investigation before 
any other assessment; 


c) carry out visual inspection to study the 
presence or absence of all major 
components and accessories with proper 
note-taking and physical recordkeeping; 


d) take images/photographs of any electrical 
tracking, physical damage, oil levels and 
leakages, overheating, tempering, and 
encounters with animal or external factors 
such as natural calamities (disaster) etc; 


e) collect as much information as possible 
about the operating conditions of the 
transformer at the time of failure; 


f) collect and keep debris from any part, 
observed on visual inspection for further 
analysis; 

g) during physical inspection, it is necessary to 
carefully note in as much detail as possible 
namely the position of all operating 
mechanisms, indicating devices, signs of 
physical damage (if visible), manufacturing 
defects, transportation defects, etc; and 


h) testthe transformer for its electrical integrity 
once the visual inspection and physical 
damage assessment are complete. 


NOTES 
1 Vital test parameters for conforming a transformer's 
electrical integrity are described in Annex A of this code. 


2 Coil removal procedures are enlisted in 6 of this code. 
5.3 Cleaning 


Once the transformer is assessed/investigated as per 
the details given above, it should be cleaned to 
remove dust and debris. Prior to the disassembly, it 
is often advisable to clean transformer tanks and 
enclosures to avoid contamination of the core and 
coil assemblies when they are removed. The 
transformer under repair should be dismantled step- 
by-step, only till the extent required. Once 
disassembled, the components should be thoroughly 
cleaned. Any cleaning agent remaining on cleaned 
components should be allowed to evaporate while 
the residue should be removed carefully. Care 
should be taken while cleaning the more delicate 
components. Post-cleaning, the parts should be 
stored in a clean, dry location prior to assembly. 
NOTE — Local environmental regulations must be 


followed and the effects of the cleaning agent upon the 
insulated components should be known before proceeding. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


5.4 Terminals 
5.4.1 Leads 


A lead is often used to extend the start and/or finish 
of the coil to the terminals. A lead can be coloured 
or marked so as to correspond to the connection 
identification as shown on the nameplate or as 
specified in Indian Standards if any. A lead should 
have the correct temperature, voltage and current 
rating for the application and should be capable of 
withstanding elevated temperatures experienced 
during the repair process. Broken or damaged lead 
should be replaced. 


5.4.2 Connectors 


Connectors are electrical terminals of a transformer 
through which power transfer takes place. They are 
also called as Lugs. Once the transformer is received 
from the customer, the damaged or missing 
connectors should be identified and replaced. 
Connectors that require crimping of the connector 
barrel are recommended for use in a transformer. 
The connector should be sized to fit the lead and 
terminal based on the recommendations of the 
connector manufacturer. The connectors should be 
replaced with same material as of the metal part. 


5.4.3 Enclosures 


Transformer terminals are often enclosed within 
metal enclosures or cable box for enhancing safety 
measures. The integrity of these enclosures should 
be maintained. The enclosure should be large 
enough to accommodate leads and terminals so as 
not to cause overheating due to herding and to 
ensure that minimum electrical clearances and 
bending radius are maintained. 


5.5 Accessories 


All accessories, which may have been removed 
during disassembly (for example temperature 
gauges, pressure relief devices (PRDs), bushing, 
liquid level gauges, cooling fans, gas relays, current 
transformers, sudden pressure rise relays, etc, and 
any associated wiring) should be re-checked and 
validated to be complete and operating correctly 
before being returned to service. In case the original 
transformer is fitted with a silica gel breather, it 
should be replaced every time a transformer is 
received for repair. Arcing horn on HV bushing 
should be attached keeping minimum tip to tip 
spacing of 8.5 mm or as per the design. Replacement 
bushings should be similar to the original in design 
that is it should have proper current rating, Basic 
Impulse Level (BIL) and 50 Hz test levels equal to 
or higher than the windings to which they are 
connected. All the accessories must be safely kept 
and reinstalled before delivery. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


5.6 Tanks, Radiators and Enclosures 


After thorough cleaning of the tanks and enclosures, 
rust or corrosion should be removed, and the 
affected areas should be re-painted after surface 
preparation. Additionally, any areas from where 
liquid was leaking should be repaired and painted. It 
is preferable to clean and paint the whole tank 
(inside and outside), radiator or enclosure as 
stipulated in 9. Damaged or blocked radiator should 
be replaced. 


It is recommended that on completion of repairs, the 
radiators (and tank) should be tested as per routine 
test procedure outlined in IS 1180 series. 


5.7 Recommended List of Equipment 


For carrying out quality repair of distribution 
transformer, the repairer should have certain basic 
repair and test equipment as listed in Annex F. 


5.8 Major materials including gasket should 
conform to requirements specified in relevant part 
of IS 1180 series. 


6 REPAIR OF CORE COIL ASSEMBLY 


The most common rewind is that which is based on 
the original design. The winding process has 
essentially three components: 


a) the investigation of the original failure; 


b) gathering physical data for the existing core 
and coils; and 


c) the actual winding of the new coils. 


The capacity and energy performance of the 
transformer can be enhanced, depending on the 
condition and data of the existing core and tank, by 


core and/or winding augmentation. For details, 
(see Annex B). 


6.1 Investigation 


The rewinding process starts with the investigation 
of the failure that necessitated the rewind. 
Information gathered may prove helpful when 
rewinding the coils so that subsequent failures can 
be avoided or delayed. Some of the features that 
should be looked for are signs of overheating and its 
probable cause, reduced electrical clearances, 
material incompatibility, and the mechanical failure 
of components. If the fault cannot be located 
visually, electrical tests (see Annex A) as necessary 
can be carried out to determine the nature and 
location of the failure. 


The customer should provide the detailed 
information recorded before installation, such as 
original no-load losses, load losses and percentage 
impedance etc of the transformer under repair. 


6.1.1 Once the transformer reaches the repairer’s 
workshop, it is necessary to carry out no load test at 
rated voltage with healthy LV/dummy LV turns. 
Based on the results, repair of the transformer shall 
be carried out as follows: 


a) If the measured no-load losses at the 
repairer's workshop exceed 15 percent of 
the original no load losses (provided by the 
customer), then the transformer may not be 
suitable for repair and no repair works to be 
taken up and the core shall be scrapped; and 


b) If the measured no-load losses at the 
repairer's works are found below 15 percent 
of the original no load losses (provided by 
the customer), then the transformer shall be 


taken up for repair works. 


— 


IS 18284 : 2023 


The same is summarized below in the flow chart: 


Transformer received for repair 


| Check no-load losses 


< 15 % of the original no-load losses > 15 % of the original no-load losses 
Transformer shall be repaired Transformer shall be scrapped 


The total losses (pre-repair) shall then be calculated as below: 


No-load losses measured at original load losses 
Total Losses pre-repair repairer’s workshop + (provided by the 
customer) 


6.1.2 After repair, the total losses shall be measured and the same shall not exceed the total losses (pre-repair) by 
more than 10 percent that is. 


Total Losses post-repair < 110 percent (that is 1.10) x Total Losses pre-tepair 


6.1.3 The tolerances on component losses (that is no-load losses and load losses) measured post-repair shall be as 
below: 


SI No. Component losses Tolerances 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) No-load losses + 15 percent on the no-load losses measured at repairer’s workshop 
ii) Load losses + 15 percent on the original load losses (provided by the customer) 


NOTE — The tolerance values specified in above clauses are not applicable for repair of distribution transformers during the warranty 
period. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


6.2 Data Collection 


The repairer should capture maximum of the 
following information as far as possible from the 
earlier collected data (mainly during the core and 
coil assembly, from name-plate and by removing the 
individual winding coils) and should properly record 
the same: 


a) Name plate data; 

b) Physical overall dimensions of core-coil 
assembly including core clamp (for example 
length, width and height etc); 

c) Basic coil design (cylindrical, spiral wound 
or disc); 

d) Physical dimensions of the coils (for example 
I.D., O.D., radial thickness and height etc); 

e) Electrical clearance dimensions, phase-to- 
phase and phase-to-ground; 

f) Number of turns; 

g) Turns per layer (LV and HV); 

h) End clearance/End packing (LV and HV); 

j) Direction the coils are wound; 

k) Tap locations (physical and electrical); 

m) Insulation material of winding conductor 
(wire and strip); 

n) Size of conductor (LV and HV); 

p) Number of conductors in parallel. 

q) Conductor/foil material: Copper/Aluminium; 

r) Resistance of each coil; 

s) Special features such as extra supports, tying, 
main lead lengths etc; 


t) Stacked core or wound core; in case of wound 
core whether CRGO or amorphous; 


Measure core dimensions: In case of stacked 
core, measure width and thickness of each 
packet, core diameter, leg centre, window 
height, window width, total core frame length 
and total core frame height. 


In case of wound core (CRGO/Amorphous), 
mention type of construction (Core type or shell 
type), measure sheet width, total stack thickness 
within LV Coil I.D., window height, window 
width (W1 and W2), total core frame length and 
total core frame height. 


u) Grade of steel used to be found from supplier 
or by loss measurement; 

v) Type of liquid used for liquid-immersed 
transformer: mineral oil or ester fluid; 

w) Measure electrical and chemical properties 


of the liquid including DGA and Furanic 
Compounds, if applicable; 


y) Loading cycle of transformer and maximum 
temperature rises; and 


z) Physical weights of CCA before and after- if 
possible, core weights and coil weights 
separately. 


6.3 Coil Winding 


Coil winding should be carried out in a clean 
environment using a winding former build for the 
particular coil being wound. The winding former 
can either be a pressboard cylinder, wooden, 
metallic, expandable type or any other which gives 
perfect winding diameter. The winding is built up 
according to the data acquired from the original or 
modified design as indicated in 6.2. Attention should 
be given to the size of cooling ducts, wire 
compaction and tension, tap locations, crossovers, 
connections, tightness of winding, uniformity in 
winding and spacers. Proper tension on the 
conductors ensures a tight, solid coil. The tension 
should be appropriate and should not lead to the 
stretching of the conductor. All crossovers and leads 
should have additional insulation applied to avoid 
mechanical breakdown of the conductor insulation 
during processing or service. Connections are made 
using a suitable joint (soldered, brazed or welded 
and cleaned to ensure no sharp edges) and separately 
insulated. Care must be taken to minimize the 
insulation build. Once the coil is complete, the 
physical dimensions and resistance should be 
checked. Coils for liquid immersed transformers 
should be dried for shrinkage and coils for dry-type 
transformers are dried and vacuum impregnated 
with suitable imp regnant material. Cast coils will 
undergo casting process (Encapsulation). 


The no-load and load loss characteristics of the 
transformer can be improved by core and/or winding 
augmentation, (see Annex B). 


6.4 Core Laminations 


Cores are generally stacked cores or wound cores. 
The process of disassembly and assembly of the 
stacked and wound cores are described in 6.4.1 to 
6.4.6. 


6.4.1 Disassembly of Stacked Cores (CRGO) 


Core should be cleaned after removal of the 
windings and an accurate dimensional sketch of the 
core cross-section should be made prior to 
disassembly. In addition, the number of laminations 
stacked together should be counted and noted; this 
is usually two or three but can be more. In most 
cases, it is only the yoke that is un-stacked. Upon 
removal, all laminations should be stored properly 
and stacked together in the same order in which they 
are to be put back. Laminations from dry-type 


transformers may be bonded together with cured 
resin if the core and coil assembly were dipped as a 
unit. This makes un-stacking of the laminations 
difficult and requires extra care to avoid damaging 
them. Laminations should be well supported during 
storage and put in a safe and dry location. 


If there are damaged or welded laminations in the 
core, they are to be kept aside and replaced by new 
ones as part of the repair procedure. 


6.4.2 Assembly of Stacked Cores and Coils 


Prior to assembly, the laminations and clamping 
arrangement should be cleaned. The laminations 
should be thoroughly inspected for signs of 
insulation breakdown and for burrs that should be 
removed. The packing rods between the core legs 
and the coils should be installed at this time which 
helps to centre the coils and secure them to the core. 
During assembly of the yoke, the laminations are 
replaced according to the sketch prepared prior to 
disassembly. It should be ensured that the 
laminations butt tightly against each other at all 
joints as excessive gaps can drastically reduce the 
flux density in the core. Once all the laminations are 
in place, the clamping assembly is put in place, 
insulated and the securing bolts torqued to 
recommended values. Next, the transformer coils 
should be ratio-tested to confirm the overall ratio 
and the electrical location of the taps. Magnetic 
Balance test (MBT) should also be conducted to 
eliminate possibility of any shorted turn. 


6.4.3 Disassembly of Wound Cores (CRGO) 


Wound cores are often difficult to disassemble than 
stacked cores. Similar to the disassembly process of 
stacked cores, the number of laminations stacked 
together should be noted prior to disassembly. 
Overall dimensions also should be recorded 
accurately. The bands securing the laminations are 
cut and the laminations are then carefully removed. 
The urge to straighten the laminations upon removal 
should be avoided. Avoid too much bending since 
that will change the characteristics of the 
laminations and also make assembly very difficult. 
Avoid complete disassembly of the core. It will be 
easier to achieve proper assembly if fewer 
laminations are removed. When laminations are 
removed, they should be well supported and stored 
in aclean, safe location. 


6.4.4 Assembly of Wound Cores and Coils 


Prior to assembly, the laminations and clamping 
structure should be cleaned. The laminations should 
be inspected for insulation breakdown and for burrs 
that should be removed. During assembly, it is 
critical that the butt joints be secured and tight. This 
can be very difficult to achieve on some 


IS 18284 : 2023 


transformers. To help in this process, the core can be 
tightened and banded in stages, that is install a few 
laminations and apply temporary bands to tighten 
them. The temporary bands are then removed before 
additional laminations are installed. Once all 
laminations are assembled, the final clamping bands 
are applied, and the steel clamping structure is put in 
place, insulated and the bolts/tie rods torqued to the 
correct values. As mentioned in 6.4.2, the coils 
should be tested at this point to ensure the proper 
ratio and the correct electrical location of the taps. 


6.4.5 Disassembly of Amorphous Wound Cores 


In amorphous-core transformers, cores are fixed, 
and the coils are inserted. Thus, for such 
transformers following steps should be followed 
prior to disassembly. 


a) The core coil assembly should be upended 
(inverted) as the preferred position of core 
joints is at the bottom in the final 
transformer assembly. This places the core 
joints at the top: 


NOTES 


1 Care should be taken to place enough packing 
material between core and top channel to avoid core 
loop dislocation before inverting the coil assembly. 


2 Amorphous cores have lap joints distributed inside 
the core window. 


3 Amorphous cores are relatively easy to disassemble 
as core laminations are held in place and edges are 
coated with oil resistant epoxy/glue. 


b) After removing the core clamps, yoke 
insulation, tie rods etc. the outer CRGO 
sheet should be unlocked and the core 
packets should be unlaced using a suitable 
round edged knife to avoid damage to 
lamination; 


c) After opening all core joints, lamination 
packets are held vertically with help of 
CRGO sheet having width equal to 
amorphous lamination width and tied with 
the cotton tape; 


d) Same procedure shall be repeated for other 
limbs. The damaged coil is then carefully 
removed with suitable lifting arrangement 
and placed on a clean surface: 


NOTE — Amorphous material being brittle, chances 
of breakages cannot be eliminated but can be 
minimised by careful handling. 


e) Core weight before and after shall be 
monitored for adequate performance; and 


f) Disposal of broken pieces and scrap of 
amorphous metal shall be done as per local 
law of land. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


6.4.6 Assembly of Amorphous Wound Cores 


Prior to assembly, the following steps shall be 
followed: 


a) Core surface should be cleaned. A magnet 
can be used to remove any damaged core 
flakes from bottom core. New insulation is 
provided if necessary and new coil is 
installed; 


b) The CRGO support sheet is removed and the 
core lamination packets are laced. At this 
stage, proper overlapping of core joints as in 
original assembly should be ensured to 
achieve correct electrical parameters; 


c) After lacing, the core packets are closed and 
locked with outer CRGO, same as before; 


d) Core joints are covered using the insulation 
paper to contain amorphous flakes in place, 
if any; 

e) Appropriate insulation is provided, and the 
steel core clamping structure is put in place; 


f) The core coil assembly is inverted to have the 
core joints at the bottom. After inverting the 
core coil assembly, the packing is removed 
from the core and top core channel; and 


g) Relevant tests like turns ratio and correct 
electrical location of the taps, insulation test 
to be performed. 


6.5 Connections and Joints 


There are essentially two connections that should be 
made when winding a transformer, those in the 
winding and connections external to the winding. 
All connections should be carefully prepared, 
cleaned to finish off any sharp edges or burr and to 
ensure mechanical and electrical integrity. 


6.5.1 Connections in the Winding 


There are several methods of making joints and 
splices, and the ones described in this code are mere 
examples. Connections in the winding can be used 
to connect various parts of the winding (as in a disc- 
style of winding), to slice in another spool of wire, 
or to provide tap connections for the winding. In all 
cases, the joint should be prepared and insulated to 
ensure electrical and mechanical integrity and to 
consume less space. Jointing being special process 
should be performed by qualified technicians. For a 
splice to meet these needs within the winding, a 
brazed or welded scarf joint or butt joint is often 
used. The two connecting pieces should be carefully 
prepared to ensure that all local insulation is 
removed and a good fit of one piece against the other 
is achieved. Once the brazing or welding is 
complete, all sharp protrusions and flux material 


should be removed. Strand insulation can be 
restored by applying a few layers of the appropriate 
insulation as described in 6.5.3. If the coils contain 
wire that is smaller than 3.2 mm?, splices within the 
winding should not be used. If the joint is a tap 
connection, a ‘T’ joint can be used. If the joint 
connects two parts of the winding such as in a disc- 
type of winding, a lap joint can be used if space 
permits; otherwise, a butt or scarf joint should be 
used. In all cases, all sharp protrusions should be 
removed after brazing or welding is complete. An 
additional piece of sheet insulation is often wrapped 
around the joint to protect adjacent turns. Where tap 
leads exit the winding, they are often securely tied 
into the winding to avoid breaking the conductor at 
this point. 


6.5.2 External Connections 


In most transformers, external connections are 
generally made to extend the tap leads or the main 
leads or to install a lug or similar connection device 
to the end of the leads. A piece of multi-strand wire 
or cable can be attached to the coil conductor where 
the wire exits the winding, or the connection can be 
made well outside the coil. If the connection is made 
external to the coil conductor, the wire used for this 
purpose can be attached to the winding wire by 
brazing, soldering or welding, or by using a crimp 
connector. The most secure connection can be 
ensured through brazing or welding but requires 
additional skill on the part of the worker. In addition, 
any fluxes or cleaning agents should be removed 
after the connection is made. Crimp connectors, bi- 
metallic ones, should be used when joining 
dissimilar metals or for attaching lugs or similar 
connection devices to the end of the leads. 


NOTES 

1 Cross section of the joint should be at least 1.5 times the 
cross section of wires being connected. 

2 Dry joints should be avoided. 


3 Cross section area of LT/HT leads should be decided 
based on the current carrying capacity. 


6.5.3 Insulating Connections 


For insulating the connections, the insulating 
materials should have proper voltage and 
temperature ratings, and clearly indicated for use in 
air or for use under the dielectric fluid. The 
insulation should extend beyond the connection in 
each direction to establish a creep age path to suit 
the voltage of the winding and to suit the 
environment (air or submerged in the liquid 
dielectric). The insulation should be secured in such 
a manner that it shall not dislocate or fall off during 
processing or in service. In addition, suitable sleeve 
is usually installed over any wire that extends 
beyond the coil. 


6.6 Leads and Winding Connections as per 
Vector Group 


The requirements for dry-type and liquid-filled 
transformers differ slightly. The leads for dry-type 
transformers often have to withstand high 
temperatures in contrast to which the leads for 
liquid-filled transformers should be able to 
withstand submersion in the dielectric. When multi- 
strand wire or cable is connected to the coil 
conductor, the cable or wire conductor is sized using 
a current density that is the same or preferably lower 
than that used for the coil conductor. As a guide, one 
can use a conductor of the same size or a larger size 
than that used by the original manufacturer. On 
small transformers, the coil conductor is often used 
as a lead. In this case, a sleeve is usually placed over 
the wire for added mechanical and electrical 
strength. 


6.7 Final Assembly of the Transformer (After 
Repair) 


The final assembly repair operations are different in 
liquid immersed transformers and dry type 
transformers. 


Dry type transformer is normally assembled in 
ventilated or non-ventilated enclosure with relevant 
ingress protection. It should be offered for routine 
tests after complete fitting of accessories and 
gaskets. 


The final assembly operations to repair a liquid- 
filled transformer needs more attention and care, for 
example: 


a) Ensure dryness, cleanliness of tank and 
prepare tank with all new gaskets of 
suitable material, accessories, assemble 
metal parts and bushings as per design; 


b 


— 


Before placing the assembly in oven IR 
testing should be carried out; 


c 


— 


Before placing the core coil assembly in 
oven proper functioning of all heaters of 
the oven must be ensured; 


d) Core coil assembly to be dried in oven to 
ensure required insulation resistance (IR) 
value so that water content in insulations is 
optimum possible level. Insulation 
resistance test is often used to qualify this 
criterion; 


e 


wm 


Tank the core coil assembly and complete 
all the connections and joints in minimum 
possible time to reduce exposure of dried 
windings to the atmosphere; 


f) Tightening of gaskets/seals must be 
ensured after tanking; 


IS 18284 : 2023 


g) During tanking of the core-coil assembly, 
the oil breakdown voltage (BDV) should 
be checked before filing into the 
transformer. In case used oil is being filled 
after filtration/centrifuging, its BDV 
should not be less than the BDV value 
specified in IS 1866; 

Complete the impregnation process by 
dielectric fluid as per manufacturer's 
guidelines; 


h 


wm 


j) For distribution transformers above 11 kV 
class, Oil filling should be done using 
vacuum pump by creating vacuum in the 
tank; and 


k) Allow transformer to settle for at least 
4 hours before testing. 


Final assembly like tanking and impregnation 
sequence can be vice versa depending on the 
manufacturer’s facility and customers requirement. 


7 REPAIRING OF 
TRANSFORMER 


LIQUID-FILLED 


The operations to repair a liquid-filled transformer 
are similar to those described for dry-type 
transformers except final assembly and 
impregnation process. Much of the additional work 
required relates to the dielectric fluid and the tank. 
Retro-filling, as indicated in Annex C, helps to 
increase the life of the transformer, it is 
overloading capability, and makes it eco-friendly 
and safer from fire safety point of view. 


7.1 Checking for Service Suitability 


All name-plate data should be recorded on the 
service order form as described in 5.1.1. If 
applicable, the PCB concentration should be 
verified. 


7.1.1 Tests 


Recommended that following tests should be 
performed as described in Annex A — the insulation 
resistance HV to LV, HV to G with LV grounded, 
LV to G with HV grounded; check ratio and winding 
resistance on all phases on all taps, if existing; if 
possible, energize the LV winding to attain full 
voltage, recording the magnetizing current and the 
energizing voltage. 


7.1.2 Equipment Checks 


All accessories should be checked for mechanical 
damage, noting the items inspected, those that are 
damaged, and the nature of the damage. The 
operation of any cooling fans and controls should be 
verified. The radiators, threaded fittings and gaskets 


IS 18284 : 2023 


should be checked for leaks. The bushings should be 
cleaned and checked for cracks. The proper 
operation of the tap changer, if any, should be 
checked. Alternatively, the security of the tap 
connections in the tank should also be checked. 


7.1.3 Summary of Results 


As described in 5.1.1, all data and damaged items 
should be listed on the service order form. This 
information should then be passed to the customer 
with recommended repairs for the damaged items. 


7.1.4 Preparation for Shipment 


The transformer should be painted according to 9. 
After the paint is applied and cured, the customer 
should be advised that work is complete, and the 
transformer is ready for shipment. Follow any 
specific instructions provided by the customer. 
Prepare the transformer for shipment according to 10. 


7.2 Overhauling 


This operation usually requires noticeably more 
work for oil-filled transformers than for dry-type 
transformers. The purpose is to totally refurbish the 
transformer and accessories. 


7.2.1 Preliminary Inspection and Tests 


Perform a quick visual inspection to identify and 
record any mechanical damage to the tank or 
radiators and any fluid leaks or trace that may exist. 
The following tests should be performed — the 
insulation resistance HV to LV, HV to G with LV 
grounded, LV to G with HV grounded; ratio check 
all phases on all taps, if existing; and winding 
resistance check. Take insulating liquid samples for 
BDV analysis. 


7.2.2 Removal of Core and Coils 


The oil should be drained out from the tank and 
stored in tanks specially designed for the purpose 
(separate tank for mineral oil, Natural ester, 
Synthetic organic ester and silicon fluid). This will 
help in preventing oil contamination by other 
substances. When draining the oil from a damaged 
transformer, the contaminants in or floating on the 
oil can foul the transformer windings. Thus, a filter 
should be used in the suction line to prevent 
contamination or damage to the pump. 
Precautionary measures should be taken to prevent 
leakages. Once the oil is drained and all components 
(such as the conservator, the bushings, tap switch 
operators, and thermometer pockets) are removed, 
the cover is then removed by removing the clamp 
that holds it in place, unbolting it or cutting the weld. 
For the latter case, the tank should be purged with 
and pressurized with nitrogen prior to cutting the 


10 


weld. Bushings should be removed or protected 
from metal splatter. After the cover is removed, any 
remaining accessories that require access from 
inside the tank can be removed. The core and coil 
assembly can then be carefully lifted from the tank. 
Allow the core and coil assembly to drain over the 
tank for a short time and then place it on the floor 
over a drip tray. Cover the assembly with a 
polyethylene sheet. In case of natural ester 
immersed transformers, core coil shall be cleaned 
with normal mineral oil and stretch wrapped with 
polyurethane film to avoid thin film polymerisation 
if any. 


7.2.3 Major Inspection and Tests 


Underswell-lit condition of the unit, perform a 
detailed inspection of the core and coil assembly, the 
inside of the tank, and all the accessories that were 
removed. Items that require special attention are: the 
tap changer and its connections; the core clamping 
assembly; insulation between the core and the 
clamping structure; blocking; coil insulation; coil 
leads; any accessible conductor joints; bushings; 
inside of the tank; conservator; radiators; and all 
accessories. Tests performed at this time are 
insulation resistance between the core and the 
clamping structure, functional tests on all 
accessories and a degree of polymerization on the 
paper. The results listing the deficiencies, 
recommendations and repair costs should be 
provided to the customer. The customer may choose 
to repair only the most critical deficiencies or 
enhanced repairing/retro-filling for better asset life. 
These should be repaired along with “standard” 
repairs listed by the service centre as part of the 
overhaul. 


7.2.4 Cleaning and Repairs 


All components are cleaned using appropriate 
methods for each item. The core and coil assembly 
is flushed using mineral oil at very low pressure. The 
tank, cover, conservator, control boxes and bushing 
terminal boxes should be thoroughly cleaned using 
shot blasting in case major damage in paintwork is 
observed during visual inspection; otherwise, 
conventional methods for cleaning may also be 
used. On larger transformers, cleaning the inside of 
the tank can expose personnel to additional 
unwanted hazards, such as toxic, flammable or 
suffocating vapours from solvents in a confined 
work space, therefore, relevant PPE to be used. 
These issues should be resolved to avoid undue risk 
to service personnel and to satisfy the local 
regulating authorities. After surface preparation and 
prior to cleaning is the appropriate time to add or 
replace any radiators or cooling tubes. The gaskets 
and seals should be replaced with materials resistant 
to deterioration by insulating fluid. The oil should be 


processed and cleaned to remove particulates, gases 
and acids. For re-utilization of mineral oil, 
(see Annex G). 


For retro-filling of transformer with ester liquid, 
guidelines as per Annex C should be followed. 


Once all the repairs have been completed, the unit 
can be reassembled. 


7.2.5 Reassembly 


Reassembling the transformer starts with drying the 
core and coil assembly. This is best accomplished by 
placing the core and coils into an oven where the 
temperature does not exceed 95 °C. 


NOTE — Ester filled transformer core coil assembly 
required to be dipped in hot mineral oil (60 °C) or cleaned 
with minimal oil pressure before putting in oven. 


Ensure that an absorbent material is present around 
the base of the core and coil assembly to soak up oil 
that will drain from the insulation. Scrap oil and 
other materials (cotton waste etc) used for oil 
soaking to be disposed as per local regulations. Prior 
to removing the core and coil assembly from the 
oven, ensure that the work area is clean, and that 
cleanliness will be maintained throughout the 
assembly process. When the core and coil assembly 
is removed from the oven or drying tank, the 
clamping bolts should be checked for tightness. The 
assembly is then lifted, quickly lowered into the 
tank, and all hold down supports installed and 
tightened. The core coil assembly along with tank 
should be placed in oven as per standard operating 
process based on the available facility. The tank is 
then quickly filled with dielectric fluid (preferably 
under vacuum) to the top of the transformer core to 
ensure all insulating material is submerged under 
dielectric fluid. The dielectric fluid should be above 
room temperature. Install all sidewall components, 
replacing any damaged control wiring. Install the 
cover and all cover-mounted components. The 
transformer is then filled with the remaining fluid 
until the correct fluid level is shown on the fluid 
level gauge. The security of all joints is confirmed 
by pressurizing the transformer tank with 
approximately 03 PSI of dry air and inspecting all 
joints for leak proof connections. If time permits, the 
transformer should remain pressurized for12 hours 
and then the pressure should be checked. Mask all 
the bushings, gauges and valves, and paint the unit 
as described in 9. 


For natural esters, ensure adequate sealing of 
transformer as recommended by the supplier. 


7.2.6 Final Tests 


The following tests should be conducted on the 
transformer-insulation resistance core-to-ground; 


IS 18284 : 2023 


insulation resistances between each winding and 
between each winding and ground; turns ratio test; 
phase relation check or polarity check; winding 
resistance; open circuit core loss; copper loss; 
separate source voltage withstand test for HV and 
LV windings; and an induced overvoltage withstand 
test. Optional test that may be carried out is magnetic 
balance test. All tests are described in Annex A. 
Once all tests are complete, oil samples should be 
taken for conducting BDV test. The results should 
confirm that no internal problems occurred during 
testing and recorded for comparison with the future 
test results. 


7.2.7 Packaging and Shipment 


The transformer should be prepared for shipment as 
described in 10. 


7.3 Rewind 


On receipt of the unit, record the necessary 
information and establish documentation as outlined 
in 5.1.1. 


7.3.1 Inspection and Test 


If a fault initiated the need for a rewind, 
investigation should be carried out as described in 
6.1. The core and coil assembly should then be 
removed as described in 7.2.2. Once the core and 
coil assembly is removed, the extent of the damage 
should be determined, and a cost estimate and scope 
of work should be prepared for the customer. 


7.3.2 Dismantle (for Three-Phase Unit if Necessary) 


Remove the entire superstructure and lead support 
systems. Remove the upper clamping structure, 
upper blocking and insulation between the core and 
the clamping structure. Store all components neatly 
for reassembly. Un-stack the top yoke as described 
in 6.4.1. 


At this point, some of the data listed in 6.2 should be 
recorded. To free the coil from the core, all blocking 
between the core and the ground insulation should 
be removed. The coils can be carefully lifted from 
the core limbs using suitably fashioned lifting 
hooks. It is important to support the coils well at this 
stage to prevent unnecessary damage. Once 
removed from the core, the coil can be placed in a 
winding machine, unwound and the remaining data 
obtained. Depending on coil construction, one may 
be able to separate the HV and LV winding and 
replace the affected coils. 


7.3.3 Winding New Coils 


Winding the new coils should be carried out as 
described in 6.3. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


7.3.4 Reassembly 


The coils are set on the core limbs using the same 
equipment used to remove them. The core is then 
assembled according to 6.4. The block or insulation 
layers between the core and coils are installed to 
centre the coil and to secure the core and coil 
assembly. On wound-core units this material also 
prevents the core from damaging the winding. The 
core clamping structure and the superstructure 
assembly are installed, and it is ensured that the 
clamping structure is properly insulated from the 
core. At this time, the blocking between the top of 
the coils and the clamping structure should also be 
installed. The position of the clamping structure 
should be adjusted to ensure that the blocks are tight. 
Once the bolts securing the clamping structure are 
properly tightened, the lead support structure should 
be installed, and the line leads and the tap leads are 
secured. 


7.3.5 Final Tests 


Once the transformer is fully assembled, the unit 
should be tested to ensure that the repair was 
successful and to provide a record of the transformer 
condition after the repair. Recommended tests post 
repair are—ratio check, phase relation and polarity 
check, winding resistance, insulation resistance, 
separate source voltage withstand test, induced over 
voltage withstand test, core loss test and copper loss 
test. Optional test that may be carried out is magnetic 
balance test. All the tests are described in Annex A. 


7.3.6 Shipment 


The transformer is prepared for shipment according 
to 10. 


8 REPAIRING OF DRY-TYPE TRANSFORMER 


There are three basic levels of repair: verifying 
service suitability, overhaul and rewind or another 
major component replacement. An outline for these 
three basic levels of service is as follows: 


8.1 Checking for Service Suitability 


All name-plate data should be recorded on the 
service order form as described in 5.1.1. 


8.1.1 Tests 


The following tests should be performed — the 
insulation resistance HV to LV, HV to G with LV 
grounded LV to G with HV grounded; ratio check 
and winding resistance on all phases on all taps; 
energize the LV to attain full voltage, recording the 
magnetizing current and the energizing voltage. 


8.1.2 Equipment Checks 


All accessories and enclosures (if available) should 
be checked for mechanical damage, noting the items 
inspected, listing those that are damaged, and the 
nature of the damage. The operation of any cooling 
fans and controls should be verified. Standoff 
insulators in the enclosure or on top of the 
transformer should be checked for cracks or chips. 
All insulators should be cleaned and the security of 
all leads and tap connections should be established. 
Insulated supports used for the HV winding leads or 
tap connections should also be checked for 
mechanical security and damaged components. 
Lastly, the bolted joints on all bus connections 
should be checked for tightness. 


8.1.3 Summary of Results 


As described in 5.1.1, all data and a list of damaged 
items should be mentioned on the service order 
form. This information should then be passed to the 
customer with recommended repairs for the 
damaged items including that of enhanced repair. In 
this case, the customer may choose not to have the 
additional repairs carried out. However, the list of 
items requiring repair may be used at a future date 
to establish the amount of work required. 


8.1.4 Preparation for Shipment 


The transformer should be painted as described in 9. 
After the paint is applied and cured, the customer 
should be advised that the work is complete, and the 
transformer is ready for shipment. Specific shipping 
instructions if provided by the customer regarding 
carrier, routing, packaging, or shipping address 
should be met. The transformer should be prepared 
for shipment according to 10. 


8.2 Overhauling 


Overhauling requires more work than that described 
in preceding sections. The purpose of overhauling is 
to totally refurbish the transformer and accessories. 
In this case, with the customer's concurrence one 
should proceed to carry out the repairs. In addition, 
after cleaning the core and coil assembly, a coating 
of insulating resin may be applied. 


To achieve a better result, the enclosure may be 
thoroughly cleaned using shot blasting process in 
case major damage in paintwork is observed during 
visual inspection. Otherwise, conventional methods 
for cleaning may also be used. 


8.3 Rewind 


Upon receiving the unit, proper records should be 
setup and necessary information should be recorded 
as outlined in 5.1.1. 


8.3.1 Inspection and Test 


If the rewind was initiated by a fault, an 
investigation should be carried out as described in 
6.1. All data should be recorded, and once the fault 
has been located and the extent of damage 
determined, scope of work should be prepared for 
the customer. 


8.3.2 Dismantle Core and Coil Assembly (for 
Three Phase Transformers) 


If necessary, the core and coil assembly should be 
removed from the enclosure including the entire 
superstructure and lead support systems. After this, 
the upper clamping structure, upper blocking and 
insulation between core and the clamping structure 
should be removed. All components should be 
stored neatly for assembly. Un-stack the top yoke as 
described in 6.4.1. The laminations should be well 
supported. 


At this stage, the data for items listed in 6.2 should 
be recorded. The coils can be removed now from the 
core by first removing all blocking between the core 
and the coil ground insulation. The coils can be 
lifted from the core limbs using suitably fashioned 
lifting hooks. The coils should be supported well at 
this stage to prevent unnecessary damage arising out 
of impact. Once removed from the core, the coils can 
be placed in a winding machine, unwound and the 
remaining data can be obtained through 
measurement. Depending on coil construction, one 
may be able to separate the HV and LV windings 
and replace the affected coils. 


8.3.3 Winding of New Coils 


Winding the new coils should be carried out as 
described in 6.3. In case of epoxy cast coils, if found 
faulty, they should be replaced by new ones. 


8.3.4 Reassembly 


The coils are set on the core limbs using the same 
equipment used to remove them. The core is then 
assembled according to 6.4.2. After completion of 
core coil assembly, apply corrosion resistant coat on 
edges of core laminations to avoid rusting of the 
same. 


If the transformer has a wound core, the core should 
be placed in and around the coils as described in 6.4. 
The block or insulation layers between the core and 
coils are installed to centre the coil in securing the 
core and coil assembly. Concentricity of core, LV 
winding and HV winding shall be maintained. On 
wound core units, applying anti-corrosive coat also 
prevents the core from damaging the winding. The 


IS 18284 : 2023 


core clamping structure and the items for 
superstructure are installed and it is ensured that the 
clamping structure is properly insulated from the 
core. At this time, the block between the top of the 
coils and the clamping structure is installed. The 
position of the clamping structure should be adjusted 
to ensure the blocks are tight. Once the bolts for the 
clamping structure are properly tightened, the lead 
support structure is installed in case of Vacuum 
Pressure Impregnated (VPI) transformers and 
mechanically sturdy connection in case of cast resin 
dry type transformers and the line leads and the tap 
leads are secured. 


8.3.5 Final Tests 


Once the transformer is fully assembled, the unit 
should be tested to ensure that the repair was 
successful and to provide a record of the transformer 
condition after the repair. Recommended tests post 
repair are—ratio check, phase relation and polarity 
check, winding resistance, insulation resistance, 
separate source voltage withstand test, induced over 
voltage withstand test, core loss test and copper loss 
test. Optional tests that may be carried out are 
magnetic balance test, PI, power factor, recovery 
voltage and dc step voltage. All these tests have been 
described in Annex A. 


8.3.6 Shipment 


The transformer is prepared for shipment according 
to 10. 


9 PAINTING 


At some point during the repair process, often just 
prior to shipping, the transformer should be painted. 
The customer should specify the colour. Before 
using any paint product, the engineer should know 
its characteristics, and be aware of safety and health 
hazards the product presents. The repairer should 
also be aware of any environmental regulations 
covering the usage of product. It is important that 
painting be carried out under controlled conditions 
according to the paint manufacturer’s instructions. 
The work should be carried out in a heated, well- 
ventilated area isolated from other personnel. For 
spray applications, a paint booth or spray recovery 
system is recommended. The person applying the 
paint should be supplied with all necessary safety 
equipment including the face mask, face shield, 
oxygen supply system, protective gloves and 
coveralls. The surfaces to be painted should be clean 
and free from oil and grease. It is important to 
protect items such as bushings or gauges during the 
painting process. The coverings on the bushings and 
any other items should be removed when the paint 
has cured. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


10 PACKING AND TRANSPORTATION 


After all repairs are completed, the transformer 
should be labelled as described in 4.4 and packaged 
to prevent damage during transportation to the 
customer. The type of packaging and method of 
transport should be provided to the transport 
company and the customer. It should be confirmed 
that no PCB contamination is present in the liquid- 
filled transformers. The distribution transformer 
should be transported generally in liquid-filled 
condition. In either case, the transport agency should 
be equipped with an emergency response kit. 
Additional protection should be provided for fragile 


items such as bushings, gauges, etc. Extra care 
should be taken to secure and support enclosures for 
dry-type transformers to avoid damage by crushing 
during shipment. For larger units, the enclosure may 
be disassembled, or special supports can be 
fabricated to prevent damage. For smaller units, this 
can be achieved by bolting the enclosure (and core 
and coil assembly) to a pallet. In all cases, it should 
be ensured that the transformer has been securely 
tied to the transport vehicle and is properly protected 
against the weather. Unless otherwise instructed by 
the customer, the tap switch or tap connections 
should always be set at the rated voltage position. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


ANNEXA 
(Clause 5.2, 6.1, 7.1.1, 7.2.6, 7.3.5 and 8.3.5) 
METHOD OF TESTS 


A-1 GENERAL 


The test methods specified in this annexure shall be 
used to assess the condition of the transformers and 
to verify the repair results or adequacy of design. 


A-2 INSTRUMENT CALIBRATION 


The test equipment should meet the accuracy 
requirements for recording the test results. 


The test equipment should be calibrated as per the 
relevant standards and should bear a mark or label 
verifying calibration. Calibration certificates should 
be stored and provided to customer if required. 


A-3 INSULATION CONDITION TESTS 


Assessment of insulation condition is fundamental 
to the transformer operation. One or more of the 
following tests should be performed to gain 
information about the insulation system. Note that 
trended test results are usually more informative 
than that of a single test result. For this reason, all 
test results should be recorded and retained for 
further reference. 


A-3.1 Insulation Resistance and _ Di-Electric 
Strength Test 


This test is usually performed to obtain three 
different winding insulation resistance values—high 
voltage to low voltage and ground; low voltage to 
high voltage and ground; and high voltage to low 
voltage. It can also be used to obtain insulation 
resistance values between the core and ground when 
there is core-to-ground connector that can be 
removed so as to electrically isolate the core from 
ground. For best results, the transformer should be 
clean and dry before performing this test. 


If the transformer has more than two windings, the 
insulation resistance of winding should be measured 


in turn with the other windings grounded. The 
insulation resistance should be measured with a dc 
insulation resistance tester, that is, a mega- 
ohmmeter. The test equipment should be suitably 
sized for the transformer or winding to be tested and 
the test performed at a voltage level consistent with 
the voltage rating of the winding under test. 
Suggested test voltages are given in the Table 1. 


Table 1 Insulation Resistance Test Voltages 
(Clause A-3.1) 


SINo. Winding Voltage Insulation Test 
Class (kV) Voltage(dc) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Upto 1.1 1 000 
ii) 33-11 2 500 
iii) 22 — 33 5 000 


The temperature of the winding should be measured 
at the same time as the insulation resistance value is 
obtained, which will allow the resistance reading to 
be corrected to a common temperature such as 27 
°C. Temperature correction factors are given in 
Annex E. Test voltage is applied for Iminute. All 
accessories attached to the winding should be 
disconnected and grounded to the core. 
Recommended minimum insulation resistance 
values may be obtained from the manufacturer’s 
operation manual. In absence of this information 
typical minimum values as given in Table 2 shall 
apply. In case if the resistance values obtained are 
below these values, one should investigate to 
determine the cause of the low values. The 
significance of one insulation resistance reading is 
not well defined for liquid-filled or dry-type 
transformer; consequently, these values are best 
used to determine equipment suitability for over- 
voltage tests or for trending over time. 


Table 2 Recommended Minimum Insulation Resistance for Dry-Type Transformers 
(Clause A-3.1) 


SI No. Winding Voltage Insulation Resistance (MQ) 
Class (kV) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Upto 1.1 600 
ii) 3.3 1 000 
iii) 6.6 1 500 
iv) 11.0 2 000 
v) 22 — 33.0 3 000 


IS 18284 : 2023 


The recommended minimum one-minute insulation 
resistance for oil-filled transformers is given by the 
relationship: 


Rmin = C x EVA)? 


where 

R = the minimum insulation resistance 
in mega ohms (MQ); 

C = 1.5 for transformers at 20 °C and 
30 for un-tanked core and coils; 

E = voltage rating in volts (phase-to- 
phase) for  delta-connected 
transformer and phase-to-neutral 
for wye-connected transformers; 
and 

kVA = rated capacity of the winding 


under test (if three-phase winding 
is being tested where all the 
windings are being tested as one, 
the rated capacity of the three- 
phase winding is used). 


The resistance should be corrected to a reference 
temperature as follows: 


Rret = ki x Ri 
where 
ką = correction factor for the temperature 
at which measurement was taken 
(see Table 5 in Annex E for correction 
factor for various temperatures); and 
R, = measured value of resistance. 


Moisture generally affects the insulation resistance 
of dry-type transformers. To confirm the presence of 
moisture, the insulation resistance can be measured 
at two different voltages. For example, if the 
insulated resistance at 500 V dc and 1 000 Vdc differ 
by more than 25 percent, this can indicate the 
presence of moisture in the winding. 


A-3.2 Polarization Index Test 


This is an extension of the one-minute insulation 
resistance test described in A-3.1, and has the 
advantage that moisture has little effect on these 
measurements. The same dc voltage used for the 
one-minute test is applied for a period of 10 minutes. 
Resistance measurements are recorded after one 
minute and 10 minutes. The polarization index is the 
ratio of the 10 minute resistance to the one-minute 
resistance. Equipment with values below 1.3 should 
be investigated for possible ^ insulation 
contamination. This is most reliable for dry-type 


16 


insulation systems; consequently, the result should 
be interpreted with caution for liquid-filled 
equipment. 


NOTE — This test is optional. 


A-4 OTHER TESTS 


There are other tests that can be performed on a 
transformer to assess its condition. These tests do 
not test the insulation system directly but provide 
meaningful information about the other 
components. 


A-4.1 Winding Resistance Test [IS 2026 (Part 1)] 


To obtain accurate results, this test is usually 
performed using a winding resistance bridge. On a 
new or rewound transformer, this information can be 
used to determine the copper or load losses that will 
occur in the transformer and separate them from 
eddy current losses in the winding. This test can also 
be used to detect faulty joints or tap switch contacts 
within the winding. Note that when measuring the 
resistance of the LV winding on large transformers, 
it can take several minutes for the measurement 
equipment to reach a stable value. At the same time, 
oil temperature and also the winding temperature 
should be measured. The resistance value can be 
corrected to a common temperature using the 
relationship: 


Reet = Rx (Trert 235)/(T 235) (for Copper) 
and 
Rer = Rx (Trept 225) (Tà- 225) (for Aluminium) 


where 


ref = reference temperature; and 
t  -test temperature at which the values were 
obtained. 


A-4.2 Measurement of Voltage ratio or 
Transformer Turns Ratio (TTR) Test 


Low-voltage ac is applied to the low-voltage 
winding of the transformer, and the voltage induced 
in the high-voltage winding is measured through test 
set reference transformers and a null meter. Using 
the TTR test set one can determine the polarity of 
the transformer, phase relations, and turn ratio. 
Measurements should be taken on all taps. 
Unsatisfactory results can be indication of loose 
connections, tap changer misalignment, short 
circuits, incorrect turns after rewind, or open circuits 
in the winding. The maximum variation of the 
measured value is 0.5 percent. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


Table 3 Common TTR Responses and Associated Transformer Condition 
(Clause A-4.2) 


SI No. TTR Reading Condition 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Low current and no output volts Open turn in the excited winding 


ii) Normal current, output voltage low or unstable 


ii) High current and difficulty balancing the bridge 


A-4.3 Polarity Test 


This test can usually be performed with the TTR 
metre described in A-4.2. Alternatively, a low 
amplitude AC voltage source and voltmeter can be 
used. One terminal of the HV winding and the LV 
winding are connected together, and the low 
amplitude ac source is connected to the HV winding. 
The voltage across the remaining terminals HV to 
LV is measured. The result, if greater than the 
voltage applied to the HV winding, indicates that the 
polarity is additive. Alternatively, if the voltage is 
lower than that applied to the HV winding, the 
polarity is subtractive. This test can also be 
performed on three-phase transformers if both the 
ends of the HV and LV windings for each phase are 
accessible. Test one phase at a time with all other 
terminals open circuited. For additive polarity, the 
HV and LV winding are wound in the opposite 
direction. When they are wound in the same 
direction, a transformer is described as having 
subtractive polarity. This characteristic becomes 
very important when more than one transformer is 
connected in parallel to supply a load. If the 
polarities are not the same, large voltage and current 
imbalances will occur that can damage the 
transformers or the connected load. 


A-4.4 Phase Sequence Test 


This test is used to determine the phase relationships 
between the HV and LV windings. It is particularly 
useful after a transformer has been rewound and 
connected following disassembly in the factory or in 
a service centre. It is recommended that this test be 
performed any time the leads from the core and coil 
assembly are disconnected from the terminals. In 
this way, one can be sure they are connected 
properly after the work is complete. The test is 
similar to the polarity test expect that the line and 
neutral coil leads are connected as they would be in 
service. Connect corresponding terminals together, 
one from HV and one from LV (usually U1 and U1). 
Connections for various winding configuration are 
shown in Figure 1 in Annex E. 


A low amplitude (120 V or less) three-phase ac 
voltage is then applied to the HV winding. The 
voltage between the remaining terminals are then 
measured and recorded. The magnitudes are then 


17 


Open turn in output winding 


High resistance in test leads or tap charger 


compared to the expected magnitudes based on 
overlaying the phase relation diagrams from the 
name-plate and calculating the phase relation sum of 
the voltages being measured. 


A-4.5 No-Load Loss Test 


This test is mostly performed on a new transformer 
to verify the core losses or iron losses. However, this 
test can also be performed on a transformer under 
repair to determine whether there are shorts between 
laminations and to provide a reference for future 
tests. This test can be performed using one 
wattmeter on a single-phase transformer and one-, 
two- or three-watt meters on a three-phase 
transformer. The low-voltage winding is energized 
to rated voltage with the HV winding open circuit. 
The watts measured are the no-load losses, and the 
current is the excitation current. It is important that 
the supply waveform be sinusoidal and at the correct 
frequency. The losses are measured with a 
wattmeter suitable for use at low power factor. 
Unfortunately, without knowing the original losses 
it may be difficult to assess the condition of the core 
in a used transformer. The losses obtained in this 
manner include dielectric losses as well as stray 
losses and copper RR losses, both due to the exciting 
current. 


A-4.6 Load Loss and Impedance Test 


This test is carried out to determine the losses within 
a transformer due to the resistance of the HV and LV 
windings. Once again, the energizing source should 
have balanced voltages, and the waveform should be 
sinusoidal. If these two criteria are met, the 
measurement can then easily be made with one, two- 
or three-watt meters. The usual method is to short 
circuit the LV winding and energizes the HV 
winding on the 100 percent tap until rated current is 
achieved. The watts measured are the load losses 
and the voltage required to circulate the rated current 
is the impedance voltage. The winding temperature 
should also be recorded at this time. The reference 
temperature used for determining copper losses is 
75 °C. The recorded readings will contain core 
losses as well as the load or copper losses; the core 
losses can usually be neglected unless the 
impendence of the transformer is unusually high. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


A-5 Applied Voltage Tests 


To confirm that a particular transformer or accessory 
can withstand the electrical stresses in service, it is 
subjected to a high-voltage test. This test uses ac 
source and the electrical stress is usually applied 
between the windings and ground. The HV and LV 
windings are usually tested separately with the 
windings not being tested connected to the ground. 
To avoid damaging the insulation, avoid application 
of the high-potential test voltage. High-voltage tests 
should not be used on equipment with graded 
insulation systems. That is because the insulation 
level at the neutral end of the winding is less than at 
the line end. 


A-5.1 Separate Source Voltage Withstand Test 


A 50 Hz single-phase ac supply is connected to the 
HV and LV windings separately. The winding under 
test has all terminals shorted together. The other 
winding terminals are also shorted and connected to 
the ground. The 50 Hz source should be suitably 
sized to provide the necessary charging current for 
the transformer being tested, and the waveform 
should be purely sinusoidal. The test voltage is 
raised to the test value at a slow, controlled rate. It 
should, however, not be so slow as to unnecessarily 
extend the test period. Usually, the above criterion 
can be met if the voltage is raised to 75 percent of 
the test value in 5 seconds to 10 seconds and the rate 
of rise from there on is 2 percent to 3 percent of the 
test value per second. The test value is maintained 
for one minute, and the voltage smoothly but rapidly 
decreased after that time. The equipment is deemed 
to have passed the test if the test voltage is 
maintained for the one-minute period without any 
disruptive discharge. 


A-5.2 High Frequency Induced Over-Voltage 
Test 


This test is used to verify the integrity of the turn-to- 
turn insulation in single-phase and three-phase 


transformers, as well as phase-to-phase insulation in 
three-phase transformers. It may also be used in 
place of the 50 Hz high potential test for graded 
insulation systems. The test is carried out at high 
frequency to reduce the exciting current required to 
energize the transformer. Common preferences are 
100 Hz up to 200 Hz. To keep the severity of the test 
essentially constant for various frequencies, the 
duration of the test is limited to 7 200 cycles. The 
test supply is applied to each phase of the LV 
winding of the transformer under test. The HV 
winding is left open. The voltage is raised smoothly 
and quickly to the test value (less than 15 s), held for 
the 7 200 cycles, then reduced smoothly and quickly 
(less than 5 s) to zero. The transformer is deemed to 
have passed the test if no disruptive discharge occurs 
during the test. 


A-5.3 Test Levels of Windings 


Test level for transformer windings vary depending 
on the type of transformer and the voltage class. The 
ratings and drawings (R and D) plate test values 
should be used. If R and D plate or the 
manufacturer’s information is not available, refer to 
IS 1180 (Part 1) and IS 2026 (Part 3). If the 
equipment has been overhauled or is being checked 
for suitability of service, values not less than 
80 percent should be used. If all the HV and LV 
windings are replaced, then tests shall be done at 100 
percent values. Values are shown for both liquid- 
filled and dry-type transformers. 


NOTE — Caution: The values indicated in IS 2026 are for 
equipment with fully insulated neutrals. Equipment with 
reduced insulation at the neutral should be subjected to 
induced overvoltage withstand test only. Altitude correction 
factors should be used for equipment tested above 1 000 m. 


A-5.4 Test Levels of Accessories 


New or fully reconditioned accessories containing 
voltage sensitive circuits should be tested at 1 500 V 
Ac 50 Hz for one minute. Current sensing circuits 
should be tested at 2.5 kV Ac 50 Hz for one minute. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 6, 6.3 and 7) 


GUIDELINES FOR ENHANCING RELIABILITY AND ENERGY PERFORMANCE IN REPAIRED 
DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMER 


GENERAL 


This Annex describes redesigning of winding that 
can be made during repair and/or rewinding within 
the bounds of the original transformer tank and core 
design. 


NOTE — All coil dimensions should remain same so as to 
fit in the original core window and tank. 


B-1 ACTIVE REPAIR OFDISTRIBUTION 
TRANSFORMER 


The loading capacity, energy efficiency and overall 
reliability of the repaired distribution transformers 
can be enhanced by way of augmentation or 
replacement of the active materials — core and 
winding, depending on the condition and design of 
the existing core and tank. This type of repair is 
commonly known as 'active repair of distribution 
transformers. 


B-1.2 Types of Active Repairs 


The following two types of active repairs can be 
useful for upgrading transformers apart from normal 
maintenance activities: 


a) Core Augmentation 


Core augmentation can help in reducing the no- 
load losses. However, generally, the core is left 
unchanged. A  repairer may consider 
replacement of core or a part of it or damaged 
laminations by maintaining the matching 
geometry, if necessary. 


NOTE — The laminations shall comply with the 
existing regulations if any. 


b) Winding Augmentation 


Winding augmentation is an approach to increase 
a transformer's useful life by improving its no 
load and load loss characteristics. Augmenting 
refers to replacing high resistivity winding 


material with low resistivity material, using 
material with lower thermal coefficient of linear 
expansion etc. in one or both the windings. 
Distribution transformers can be modified to 
take increased load potential by maximizing the 
efficiency at which excess heat is dissipated 
from the main core and windings. For material 
characteristics, (see B-1.4). 


Alternatively, for enhancing the capacity of the 
transformer, additional cooling methods such as 
adding cooling fans, cleaning the radiator fins, etc. 
can be considered depending on the condition and 
design of the existing core and tank. 


B-1.3 Target for Loss Reduction during Repair 
of Distribution Transformer 


During active repair one should target to attain as 
close as possible to energy efficiency level 1 of total 
losses (No Load + Full Load) at least at 100 percent 
loading as per IS 1180 series. 


B-1.4 MATERIAL CHARACTERISTICS 


Before changing a conductor, it is important to 
consider the following: 


a) How will the differences in thermal 
characteristics of the materials affect short- 
term overload capability; 


b) How will the difference in material properties 
affect the original blocking and bracing 
system; 

c) How will the difference in conductivity affect 
the conductor size; 


d) How will the difference in conductor size 
affect the coil resistance and reactance; and 

e) How can the different conductor size affect 
the size of the coil (axial length) and hence its 
ability to withstand short circuits. 


The material for magnet wire should conform to 
IS 5484 in case of aluminium and IS 12444 in case 
of annealed copper. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


B-1.4.1 Electrical Properties 


Differences in electrical conductivity/resistivity 
allow a copper conductor with cross sectional area 
61 percent as large to replace an Aluminium 
conductor. 


Since a smaller conductor size will require less 
space for the same number of turns, it is necessary 
to consider how this change will affect coil diameter, 
mean length per turn (MLT) and coil height. These 
factors can impact the resistance and leakage 
reactance of the coil. 


B-1.4.2 Physical Properties 


Copper has a lower thermal coefficient of linear 
expansion than aluminium; so, for larger coils 
provision for expansion need not be required for 
copper. Therefore, any such provisions incorporated 
into the original design may not change. 


Copper is also 3.3 times as dense as aluminium, so 
an equivalent copper conductor that has only about 
61 percent of the cross-sectional area would weigh 
about twice as much as the original aluminium 


20 


conductor. Therefore, additional or stronger support 
or blocking may be required for the copper coils. 


B-1.4.3 Thermal Properties 


Due to differences in the thermal properties of the 
materials, a copper coil can absorb more energy for 
a given temperature rise than an aluminium coil. 
Therefore, a copper coil can withstand higher short- 
circuit currents than an equivalent aluminium coil, 
or the same short-circuit current for a longer time. 


B-1.4.4 Mechanical Properties 


Copper coils can withstand mechanical operating 
stresses better because the mechanical properties of 
copper are greater than those of aluminium. This 
assumes that the width-to-depth ratio of the 
conductor is similar, and the coils are blocked and 
supported in a manner similar to the original. When 
copper replaces aluminium, the winding on the new 
coils may be shorter than the original. If the heights 
of the old and new coils differ significantly, the style 
blocking may have to be changed to withstand the 
expected increase short-circuit forces. As part of any 
change in conductor material, make sure the 
replacement coil is of the same height as the original. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 7 and 7.2.4) 
GUIDELINES FOR RETRO- FILLING WITH ESTER FLUID DURING REPAIR 


Transformer’s performance depends heavily on its 
insulation system; therefore, the insulation is 
perhaps the most critical transformer part. The prime 
function of transformer insulating liquid is to 
insulate and cool the system. In the present times, its 
role has been expanded far beyond these two 
important functions. 


Ester dielectric fluid provides fire safety as well as 
prevents thermal ageing. It helps to improve the 
loading capacity without changing design of the 
transformer. Safety and fluid containment are some 
of the major concerns in addition to enhanced life. 
Aging substation infrastructure, environmental 
protection, and resource sustainability are other 
growing issues. Ester based alternate fluids are now 
available in market namely. Natural Esters and 
Synthetic organic ester which overcome the 
limitations of conventional mineral oil in terms of 
biodegradability, low fire point and consequent 
safety issues with transformer explosions and fires 
that can cause catastrophic damages. 


NOTE — All core coil dimensions should remain as such 
so as to fit in the original tank. 


C-1 GENERAL 


Replacing the mineral oil in a distribution 
transformer (retro-filling) with ester fluid can be an 
effective way to upgrade fire safety, slow the 
thermal aging of cellulose insulation, enhance peak 
loading capability and lower the environmental risk 
in otherwise healthy transformers. 


Extensive laboratory testing and field retro-fill 
experience has confirmed excellent miscibility and 
overall retro-fill compatibility for Ester fluid with 
many dielectric fluids including conventional 
mineral oil, high temperature hydrocarbon fluids), 
PCBs, and most PCB substitutes except silicone. 
Ester fluid is not miscible with silicone and should 
not be applied in transformers previously containing 
silicone. 


Ester fluids have service proven stability in sealed 
transformers. Transformers with free breathing 
conservators should be retrofitted with suitable 
liquid preservation system such as airbags in the 
conservator to prevent direct contact of natural ester 
with the atmosphere. This will help ensure long term 
stability of the natural ester fluid. Synthetic organic 
ester can work in free breathing transformers as well 
as non-breathing transformer and fluid may not call 
for any sealing device. 


21 


Draining and flushing cannot remove all the 
dielectric fluid from a transformer, particularly from 
insulating paper. The mineral oil in the paper 
insulation will eventually leach out into the Ester 
fluid until equilibrium is achieved. Mineral oil is 
fully miscible and compatible with Ester fluid; 
however, if the concentration of residual mineral oil 
exceeds 7.5 percent by volume in natural ester, then 
natural ester fluid’s fire point will fall below 300 °C 
and 4 percent by volume in synthetic ester then 
synthetic ester fluid's fire point will fall below 
300 ?C. Following this guide should limit the 
residual oil to 7 percent in natural ester retro-fill and 
4 percent in synthetic ester fluid. 


It is recommended to carry out retro-fill of 
transformers in controlled atmosphere like repair 
workshop or transformer factory. 


Due assessment is needed for the condition of the 
existing insulation of Transformer before such retro- 
filling activity is undertaken so that the benefit is 
realized. 


C-2 TRANSFORMER CONDITION ASSESSMENT 


A visual inspection to confirm integrity of all 
seals/bolted connections and proper operation of 
gauges should be performed. This may indicate 
whether additional maintenance operations should 
be performed while the unit is out of service as given 
in 6. 

The following steps should be followed prior to retro 
filling of the transformers: 


a) Obtain original Operation and Maintenance 
guide for transformer; 

b) Obtain transformer gasket set; 

c) Keep replacement parts; 

d) Note site limitations for service equipment; 


e) Schedule old oil disposal as per local 
regulations; 

f) Schedule fluid and container for flush fluid; 

g) Note location of drain, fill and vacuum 
connections; 

h) Limit air and moisture exposure whenever 
possible; 

j Ensure fluid filling set up or filter machine; 
and 


k) Ensure sealing device fitment in case of 
natural ester. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


C-3 RETROFILL KEYPOINT 


Table 4 Retro fill Key points 
(Clause C-3) 


SI No. Step Key Points Comment 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Adhere to allrequired Follow manufacturer’s recommendations — 
safety precautions, for servicing each transformer; 
codes, and additionally, adhere to all required safety 
regulations precautions, codes, and regulations 

ii) Visual inspection Confirm integrity of seals, bushings, and — 

bolted connections 

lii) Drain oil Allow time for oil to drip to bottom of tank A longer drip time is 
advantageous to reduce 
residual mineral oil 

iv) Rinse with ester This step rinses most of the remaining free Minimizes residual oil and 
(~5 percent- 10 percent oil to the bottom of the tank other contaminants 
of the fluid volume) 

v) Remove dregs from Minimizes the residual oil and other — 
tank bottom contaminants 

vi) Replace Gaskets with Helps ensure proper sealing Original gaskets that weep or 
new set leak should be replaced. 

Elastomers including NBR 
types with higher nitrile 
content, silicone or 
fluoropolymer are 
recommended. Gaskets with 
higher temperature demands 
warrant the use of silicone or 
fluoropolymer (Viton) 
compositions. 

vii) Fill transformer Heating and filtering are not recommended Ester fluid as-received in 
directly from tote or sealed totes and drums is 
drum satisfactory for use in 

distribution transformers 

viii) Top off with dry air Verify gaskets and seals are working Limits exposure to oxygen 
or nitrogen and bring properly and atmospheric contaminants 
headspace pressure to to minimum possible 
2 psing - 3 psig 
(13 kPsa - 20 kPa) 

ix) Install retro fill label Fill out retro fill label using indelible pen Document ester fluid batch 
number from tote or drum for 
future reference 

x) Wait to energize unit 2 hours minimum, 4 hours is preferred Allows gas bubbles to 
dissipate 

xi) Next day, check Limits exposure to oxygen and — 
pressure to ensure atmospheric contaminants 


proper seal 


22 


C-3.1 Preparing Oil Filtration Machine for 
Filling of Ester Fluid at Site (If Separate 
Machine for Ester is Not Available) 


Following instructions are to be used in conjunction 
with OEM guidelines if filter machine requested to 
be used: 


a) Take out all left out mineral oil 
(Old/New/Processed) from degassing 
chamber, heat exchanger, Condenser, 


Cartridge filter chamber, Magnetic Strainer, 
activated alumina chamber, paper filter 
chamber, pipe line etc; 


b) Replace Cartridge filter if used for old 
mineral oil; 


c) Replace paper filter or bypass it, remove 
clay filter or bypass it; 


d) Take ester fluid in clean drum, take fluid in 
machine (heat exchanger, degassing 
chamber.) Heat the fluid at 105 °C; 


After reaching fluid temperature 105 °C, put 
machine in circulation mode with flexible 
pipe also in circulation; 


f) Check suitability of flexible pipes for 105 
°C, if not reduce temperature accordingly 
which may lead to increase time for 
circulation. (Normally pipes are suitable for 
105 °C); 

Take out the ester fluid in separate drum 
including fluid from Degassing chamber and 
Heat Exchanger; 


e 


— 


— 


g 


h 


wm 


Ester fluid used for cleaning of machine and 
pipe can be disposed or mixed with Mineral 
oil (MO) and use in another MO filled 
transformer after treatment. Check the 
transformer for fluid level and ensure tank is 
almost filled with ester fluid. If not check 
fluid level and empty space should be filled 
with slightly overpressure Nitrogen; and 


j) Ensure transformer is assembled with sealing 
device and radiator and all accessories as per 
contract. 


C-3.2 Retro-Filling at Site by Filter Machine 


a) Ensure transformer old oil is removed, all 
leakages attended, faulty parts, accessories 
are replaced, required gaskets are replaced 
and flushing is done and conservator is 
sealed; 


b) Apply rough vacuum in conservator air 
release plug; 


c) Connect fluid filling pipe at bottom/top of 
tank; 


23 


IS 18284 : 2023 


d) Start filling the fluid till conservator is filled; 

e) Open air release plug of radiator and apply 
rough vacuum if possible; 

f) Open bottom valve of radiator this will 
allow fluid to flow from tank; 

g) Fluid filling in Radiators and compensating 
the level in tank shall be done 
simultaneously; and 


h 


wm 


Re-fit air release plug once all radiators is 
fully filled with Fluid. 


C-3.2.1 Filling of Ester Fluid in ON Load 
Tap Changer-OLTC 


a) Check the OLTC tank for fluid level and 
ensure tank is almost filled with ester fluid; 


b) Ensure OLTC Tank is assembled with 
conservator [With Non-Return Valve 
(NRV) in case of natural esters, [see IS 1180 
(Part 3)] for details]and all accessories as per 
contract; 


c) Apply rough vacuum in conservator air 
release plug; 


d) Connect fluid filling pipe at bottom/top of 
tank; 


e) Start filling the fluid till conservator is filled 
to normal level; 


f) Ensure minimum possible exposure of fluid 
to air; 

g) Check fluid parameters as per contract 
before starting filtration (BDV in Normal 
case), Complete filtration cycles as required 
(3 to 4; 


h) Measure parameters after filtration and 
check as per contract (BDV < 70KV is 
normally sufficient); 


j) Allow fluid to cool down to normal 
temperature; 


k) Release air/gasses and ensure fluid level in 
transformer and OLTC as per contract; and 


m) Transformer can be charged as per standard 
recommended practice (follow steps like 
no load for few hours and increasing load 
in steps). 


C-4 MEASUREMENT AND MONITORING 


Transformer retro-filled with ester can be monitored 
and maintained the same way like mineral oil filled 
transformers. Parameters like Fire point, Viscosity, 
Breakdown Voltage, can be monitored and 
acceptance criteria shall be set as per agreement 
between buyer and seller. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 5.1.4) 
ELECTRICAL TESTING SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS 


D-1 PERSONNEL SAFETY 
D-1.1 Training 


Employees should be trained for a safe operation of 
all the equipment they are expected to use in their 
daily activities. This includes all test equipment, 
tools, and lifting or handling equipment. Training 
should be provided using relevant equipment, 
operation manuals, hands-on training and/or video- 
training tapes. When properly trained in the use of 
the service-centre equipment, employees should be 
expected to carry out their activities in a safe 
manner. 


D-1.2 Clothing 


Local regulatory requirements for workplace safety 
should be followed. As a minimum, clothing should 
be suitable for the work to be performed. Flame- 
retardant material is recommended. Wearing 
exposed jewellery should be avoided. Safety glasses 
and safety shoes should be worn at all times. 


D-1.3 Supervision 


Unexperienced employees should work under the 
guidance of an experienced and qualified person 
within the test area. At least two persons should be 
present in the test area at all times. 


D-1.4 First Aid 


Personnel should be trained in the procedure for 
obtaining/providing emergency medical aid. 


D-2 TEST AREA 
D-2.1 Enclosure 


The test area should be enclosed by a fence or 
painted (preferably yellow). Red or yellow warning 
lights may also be placed at the corners of the test 
area. 


D-2.2 Gates 


When a metallic fence is used for the enclosure, it 
should be grounded. If the fence is made from many 
standalone sections, or includes gates, then separate 
sections should be interlocked with the power 
source. The power source will be shut off when one 
of the sections is parted or the gate opened. 


D-2.3 Signs 


Electrical hazard signs should be posted around the 
perimeter of the test area. Unauthorized personnel 
should not enter the test area. 


24 


D-2.4 Lighting 
The test area should be well illuminated. 
D-2.5 Safety Equipment 


Fire equipment and first aid equipment should be 
readily available, and personnel should be trained in 
their use. When oil-filled equipment is being tested, 
an emergency oil spill response kit should be 
available if there is risk that a large oil leak will occur. 


D-2.6 Test Unit Clearance 


The test area should be large enough to allow 
personnel to move around the equipment with ease 
to facilitate setup and inspection. Proper electrical 
clearances between energized test equipment and 
adjacent apparatus must be maintained. Proper 
electrical clearances between energized test 
equipment and personnel performing the test must 
be maintained. 


D-2.7 Exclusivity 


Only the unit under test and the pertinent test 
equipment should be in the test area at the time of 
test. 


D-2.8 Grounding 


Items on the test unit that are normally at ground 
potential should be grounded. In addition, portable 
ground and appropriate “hot stick” should be 
available to ground the energized components when 
the tests are complete. 


D-3 UNIT UNDER TEST 
D-3.1 Suitability for Test 


Test personnel should verify that the unit is 
physically and electrically suitable to undergo the 
proposed test procedures. 


D-4 TEST PANELS 
D-4.1 Construction 


All test panels should be constructed to protect the 
operator from the energized equipment they contain 
(dead front design). There should be no exposed, 
bare, energized items that the operator can 
accidentally touch. The test panel should also 
contain appropriate fault current interrupting 
equipment (fuses or circuit breakers) to limit the 
fault current to the test panel capacity or less. A 
separate interrupting device is preferred for high- 
voltage ac or dc tests that can restrict the fault 


current to very low values, thus avoiding excess 
damage. 


D-4.2 Test Voltage 


The voltage level on all voltage sources should be 
clearly marked. For voltage levels above 600 V, a 
special interlock procedure should be incorporated 
to prevent inadvertent application of the wrong test 
voltage. Voltage sources should be free of 
harmonics, and the phase voltages and currents 
should be balanced. 


D-4.3 Indication of Energization 


It is recommended that a light, clearly visible in the 
vicinity of the test area, be illuminated when the test 
panels are energized and voltage may appear on the 
unit under test. 


D-4.4 Disconnect 


A means of providing a visible disconnect between 
the panel and the power source should be clearly 


25 


IS 18284 : 2023 


seen from the test area. The purpose of this device is 
to provide isolation of the test panel from the power 
source. This is often a manually operated switch or 
thermal-magnetic breaker. 


D-4.5 Safety Switch 


A highly visible switching device should be 
mounted on the panel that will disconnect it from the 
power source. This is frequently an electrically 
operated device such as a contactor or breaker. It is 
usually operated by a clearly identifiable and easily 
accessible push button. A hand-held push button or 
foot operated switch should also be available to one 
or more of the test participants to provide an 
additional means of interrupting the test. 


D-4.6 Test Leads 


Test leads and clips used for testing should be used 
for that purpose only. They should have the proper 
current and voltage rating for the test to be 
performed and should be maintained in good 
physical condition. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause A-3.1 and A-4.4) 
REFERENCE INFORMATIONON CORRECTION FACTORS AND WINDING CONNECTIONS 
E-1 TEMPERATURE CORRECTION FACTORS ON MEASURED VALUES FOR INSULATION 


RESISTANCE TESTS AND INSULATION POWER FACTOR TESTS FOR LIQUID-FILLED 
TRANSFORMERS ARE GIVEN IN TABLE 5 


Table 5 Temperature Correction Factors for Insulation Resistance Tests 
(Clause A-3.1 and E-1) 


SI No. Temperature (°C) Transformers 
Liquid filled Dry-type 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) 0 0.25 0.40 
ii) 5 0.36 0.45 
iii) 10 0.50 0.50 
iv) 15 0.74 0.75 
v) 20 1.00 1.00 
vi) 25 1.40 1.30 
vii) 30 1.98 1.60 
viii) 35 2.80 2.05 
ix) 40 3.95 2.50 
x) 45 5.60 3.25 
xi) 50 7.85 4.00 
xii) 55 11.20 5.20 
xiii) 60 15.85 5.40 
xiv) 65 22.40 8.70 
xv) 70 31.75 10.00 
xvi) 75 44.70 13.00 


26 


IS 18284 : 2023 


Table 6 Temperature Correction Factors for Insulation Power Factor Tests for Liquid-filled 
Transformers 


(Clause A-3.1 and E-1) 


SI No. Test Temperature (°C) Correction Factor 

K 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) 10 0.80 
ii) 15 0.90 
iii) 20 1.00 
iv) 25 1.12 
v) 30 1.25 
vi) 35 1.40 
vii) 40 1.55 
viii) 45 1.75 
ix) 50 1.95 
x) 55 2.18 
xi) 60 2.42 
xii) 65 2.70 
xiii) 70 3.00 


E-2 VARIOUS WINDING CONNECTIONS FOR A PHASE SEQUENCE TEST ARE SHOWN BELOW 
IN FIG. 1 


Connect U to u: 

Measure V-v, W-v, U-V, V-w,W-w 
V-w=W-v 

V-v« U-V 

V-v«V-w 

V-v = W-w 


zero 


p: A 
ae Connect U to u: 
Measure W-v, W-w, U-W, V-v, V-w 
W-v=W-w 
W-v«U-W 
V-v«V-w 
U V-v <U-w 


FIG 1 VARIOUS WINDING CONNECTIONS FOR A PHASE SEQUENCE TEST 


IS 18284 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 5.7) 


LIST OF MAJOR EQUIPMENT REQUIRED FOR REPAIR AND TESTING OF DISTRIBUTION 


TRANSFORMERS 


F-1 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED FOR REPAIRING 


a) LV Coil Winding Machine (For Layer 
Type Coil); 

b) HV Coil Winding Machine (For Cross-over 
Coil); 

c) LV/HV Coil Winding Machine (For Disc 
Type Coil); 

d) Insulation Cutting/Shearing Machine; 


e) Manual Press Machine - For dovetailed 
Spacer/block Cutting; 


f) Air Drying Oven (for Assembly/coils) - 
with Trolley; 


g) Weighing Machine — Digital; 
h) EOT Crane; 

j) Oil Filter Machine; 

k) Oil Storage Tank. 


NOTE — Applicable regulatory requirements for oil 
storage tank, if any, should be followed. 


m) Drill Machine; 
n) Welding Machine; 
p) Gas Welding/Brazing Set; 


28 


q) Compressor; 


r) Spray Painting Gun; and 


s) Other Zigs, Tools and Accessories. 


F-2 TEST EQUIPMENT AND FACILITY 


REQUIRED FOR DT REPAIRS 


a) Turn ratio meter; 

b) Winding resistance meter; 
c) Megger; 

d) Portable HV tester; 

e) HV testing transformer; 
f) Single phase variac; 

g) Three phase variac; 

h) M-G Set (DVDF test set); 


j) Intermediate testing transformer 


k) Current transformers; 
m) Potential transformers; 
n) Power analyser; 

p) Test bench; 

q) Oil test kit (BDV); and 
r) Digital clamp meter. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 7.2.4) 
GUIDELINES FOR RE-UTILIZATION OF MINERAL OIL 


Reconditioning of normal used oil is carried out by 
vacuum dehydration wherein the oil is circulated 
from transformer tank to vacuum dehydration plant 
and back to transformer repeatedly till water ppm 
and BDV values are within specified limits. 
Reconditioning can also be carried out on-site. 


Reclaiming can be done off-line or online. In online 
mode, the used oil from transformer is pumped into 
a column of sorbents consisting of Fuller’s Earth or 
Bauxite or combination of proprietary sorbent and 
the outlet of the sorbent column can be fed into 
vacuum dehydration plant. The oil from vacuum 
plant goes back to transformer. This circulation is 
continued till TAN Value, IFT, DDF, BDV, water 
ppm are reached within the specified range. 


NOTE — The minimum breakdown voltage (BDV) should 


29 


be as per the requirement specified in IS 1866 and 
maximum value of acidity should be 0.03 mg KOH/g. 


In off-line mode, the oil from transformer is 
collected in a storage tank from the transformer and 
the above operation is carried out in off-site facility. 


Online mode is preferred if the oil quantity is small. 


NOTES 


1 Reconditioning eliminates only water and particle 
contamination while reclaiming removes polar impurities 
such as acids from the oil. Reconditioning is preferred when 
only water and BDV are off-limits in a transformer in 
service as per standards. Reclaiming is generally done if 
TAN, DDF, IFT also go outside limits of specs. Re-refining 
is done if the oil is unfit for reclaiming also. 


2 IS 1866 provides guideline for maintenance and 
supervision of mineral insulating oil which includes 
reconditioning or reclaim. 


IS 18284 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Transformers Sectional Committee ETD 16 


Organization 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


ABB India Limited, Bengaluru 


Avi-Oil India Private Limited, Noida 


BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, New Delhi 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


CG Power and Industrial Solutions, Mumbai 


CTR Manufacturing Industries Limited, Ghaziabad 


Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Limited, Kolkata 


Cargill India Private Limited, Gurugram 

Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 

Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Delhi 

Development Commissioner Micro-Small and Medium 
Enterprises 

E.I. DuPont India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Easun-MR Tap Changers Private Limited, Chennai 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. SUDHAKAR REDDY (Chairperson) 


SHRI ABHAY KUMAR AGRAWAL 
SHRI TARUN KUMAR GARG (Alternate I) 
SHRIANKUR TIWARI(Alternate II) 


SHRI VIVEK GUPTA 


MS SUPRIYA RAINA 
SHRI GOPAL NARIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. GUPTA 
SHRI MILIND KULKARNI(Alternate) 


Ms P. SAMAL 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate I) 
Ms NEHA KUMARI (Alternate IT) 


SHRI VIKRANT JOSHI 
SHRI ANAND BHANPURKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIS. A. VYAS 
SHRIB. D. RAUT (Alternate I) 
SHRI O. C. KOLOMBKAR (Alternate IT) 


SHRI RAJARSHI GHOSH 
SHRI KOUSHIK CHOWDHURY(Alternate I) 
SHRI SUKALYAN GHOSAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI RAJARAM SHINDE 
MS MADHUREE HAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI P. P. WAHI 
SHRI VISHAN DUTT (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. K. SWARNKAR 
SHRIMATI VANDANA SINGHAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI BHANWAR SINGH MEENA (Alternate II) 


SHRI M. K. WADHWANI 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
SHRI D. K. TULANI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANUJ SINGHAL 
SHRI ASHISH ARORA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KHUNEKAR 
SHRI DATTA A. POTDUKHE (Alternate) 


SHRI SAILESH POROHIT 
SHRI RAVINDRA PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRIKANT POTNIS 
SHRI R. PRAKASH (Alternate) 


SHRI KAPIL SHARMA 
DR ANIL S. KHOPKAR (Alternate) 


Organization 


Gujarat Energy Transmission Corporation Limited, 
Vadodara 


Haryana Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited, Panchkula 


Hitachi Metals (India) Private Limited, Gurugram 


Indian Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Indian Transformers Manufacturers Association, Vaishali 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


M & I Materials India Private Limited, New Delhi 


Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company 
Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, 
New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 
National High Power Test Laboratory Private Limited, 
Sagar 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation, Faridabad 


Power Grid Corporation of India, Gurugram 


Rural Electrification Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Shri Krsna Sudarshan Urja Private Limited, Jaipur 


Siemens Limited, Mumbai 


Tata Power Delhi Distribution Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Power Limited, Mumbai 


The Brihanmumbai Electricity Supply and Transport, 
Mumbai 


Toshiba Transmission and Distribution Systems (India) 
Private Limited, New Delhi 
Transcon Industries, Hyderabad 


Transformers and Rectifiers (India) Limited, Ahmedabad 


Vijai Electricals Limited, Haridwar 


IS 18284 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI B. P. SONI 
SHRI Z. M. VIJAPURA (Alternate) 


ER VIKAS MALIK 
ER ABHISHEK GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. THUKARAM 
SHRI M. SRINIVAS CHETANYA (Alternate) 


SHRI RISHABH RAJ JOSHI 


SHRI J. M. MALIK 
SHRI B. LAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI A. K. KAUL (Alternate IT) 


SHRI MANAS KUNDU 
SHRI MAYUR KARMAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT KUMAR 
MS MONIKA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH WATH 
SHRI GAJANAN JAISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRIGAURAV KISHOR JOSHI 


SHRI VENKATESH VUPPULURI 
SHRI HIRDESH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH K. PATEL 
SHRI ROHIT SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GUPTA 
SHRI TSERING CHOSPHEL (Alternate I) 
SHRI B. N. DE BHOWMICK (Alternate II) 


SHRI G. S. BHATI 
SHRI RANJIT RANJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY SANGHI 
SHRI KARTIK SANGHI (Alternate) 


SHRI C. JAYASENAN 
SHRI RAVI DHAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT GUPTA 
SHRITANWEER AADIL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA MARUTI BHANAGE 
SHRI VINOD SANKPAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRAMOD TUPE (Alternate IT) 


SHRI Y. N. KHADKE 
SHRI M. A. KHAROTE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. V. KAMESWARA RAO 
SHRI ROHIT RITESH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAR PAL GAMPA 
SHRI SRINIVAS KOLLOJU (Alternate) 


SHRI A. S. JHALA 
SHRI SUNIL THAKKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. V. ESWARAN 
SHRI P. S. RAO (Alternate) 


IS 18284 : 2023 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. K. LAKHIANI 
SHRI P K MUKHERJEE (Alternate I) 
SHRI RAMCHANDRAN PILLAI (Alternate II) 
SHRI MOORKATH VIJAYAKUMARAN (Alternate IIT) 
SHRI NAGARJUNA BABU NANNAPANENI (Alternate IV) 


Ms PRITI BHATNAGAR, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (ELECTRO TECHNICAL) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI NEERAJ KUSHWAHA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, 
ELECTRO TECHNICAL, BIS 


Panel for repair of distribution transformers, ETD 16 : POI 


Organization 
International Copper Association India, Mumbai 
BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, New Delhi 
Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Limited, Kolkata 
Cargill India Private Limited, Gurugram 
Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 
Hitachi Metals (India) Private Limited, Gurugram 
In Individual Capacity 


Indian Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Indian Transformers Manufacturers Association, Vaishali 
International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

M&I Materials India Private Limited, New Delhi 

Savita Oil Technologies Limited, Mumbai 

Skipper Seil Limited, Gurugram 

Tata Power Limited, Mumbai 

In Personal Capacity 

In Personal Capacity 


BIS Directorate General 


32 


Representative(s) 
SHRIMAYUR KARMAKAR (Convenor) 
SHRI GOPAL NARIYA 
SHRI SUKALYAN GHOSAL 
SHRI RAJARAM SHINDE 
SHRI RAJARAM MOHAN RAO CHENNU 
SHRI K. THUKARAM 


SHRI V. K. LAKHIANI 


SHRI J. PANDE 


SHRI A. K. KAUL 

SHRI MANAS KUNDU 

SHRI AMIT KUMAR 

SHRI SANJAY G. JAGDALE 

SHRI K. B KADAL 

SHRI PRAMOD TUPE 

SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE 

SHRI NAGARJUNA BABU NANNAPANENI 


SHRI SHYAM KUMAR SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 16 (19800). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


