YANI TP IS 1725 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Sara Yas Frater À uga 
umia Far Ht sire — fare 


(ART FAME ) 


Stabilized Soil Blocks Used in 
General Building Construction — 
Specification 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.25 


©BIS 2023 


UR AAG SRI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS UA, 9 Ig Me VHX HPT, Ag facet - 110002 
S ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2023 Price Group 7 


Clay and Stabilized Soil Products for Construction Sectional Committee, CED 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Clay and 
Stabilized Soil Products for Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Soil represents the earliest construction material used by mankind. Pure mud constructions suffer from two major 
drawbacks, complete loss of strength on saturation and erosion due to rain impact.Soil is therefore stabilized to 
improve its strength properties and durability and the stabilized soil is used for various engineering applications. 


Stabilized soils have been successfully used for the construction of roads, pavements, foundations, earthen bunds, 
etc, in the past.Use of stabilized soils for the construction of walls of buildings can be seen since thirties. 


Further upsurge of interest in the use of stabilized soil blocks for masonry can be seen throughout the world. 
Large numbers of buildings using stabilized soil blocks have come up in many parts of the world including India. 
This is mainly attributed to the fact that stabilized soil block is energy efficient and low carbon emission alternative 
to burnt clay brick and concrete based blocks. Currently large varieties of machines are commercially marketed 
throughout the world for the production of stabilized soil blocks. Use of these machines has lead to production of 
stabilized soil blocks of higher compressive strength, proper dimensions and precise edges and has also lead to 
better block productivity. Both modular and non-modular sizes of stabilized soil blocks are being manufactured 
in the country. 


This standard was first published in 1960 and subsequently revised in 1982 and in 2013. During its first revision 
the principal modification was in respect of weathering test. The standard had also covered only modular sizes 
of stabilized soil blocks having a maximum strength of 3 N/mm?. It was brought to the notice of Committee that 
there is sufficient demand for sizes other than modular sizes and that the manufacturers were meeting such 
demands at present. This had lead to a situation where bricks satisfying other requirements of the standard, but 
not the requirements regarding dimensions were classified as not satisfying the requirements of the standard. 
Therefore, the Committee reviewed the relevant clause of the standard and decided that the current revision of the 
standard will also include the non-modular sizes of the blocks in addition to the modular sizes specified in the 
standard. Vast amount of knowledge and experience accumulated due to the research and development efforts of 
several organizations throughout the world is also the basis for revising the standard. 


During the second revision, the principal modifications were the inclusion of requirement of raw materials for the 
production of stabilised soil blocks and a guideline on the selection and modification of the soil to ensure good 
quality stabilized blocks; and the modification/inclusion of more test methods and requirements of the stabilised 
soil blocks. 
The major changes incorporated in this revision are given below: 

a) The specific class of lime to be used in the preparation of stabilised soil blocks has been defined. 

b) The stabilized blocks have been classified on the basis of their compressive strength. 

c) The definition of the sand to be used for the manufacture of stabilized soil blocks have been redefined 

to include artificial as well as natural sand as per IS 383 : 2016 ‘Coarse and fine aggregate for concrete— 


Specification (third revision)’. 


d) The requirement of the actual compressive strength of the stabilized soil blocks for use in specific 
masonry walls have been included. 


e) The procedure for the determination of linear expansion on saturation has been modified. 
f) The figure of length comparator has been updated. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is listed in Annex F. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 1725 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


STABILIZED SOIL BLOCKS USED IN GENERAL BUILDING 
CONSTRUCTION — SPECIFICATION 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the requirements for general 
quality, dimensions and physical requirements for 
solid stabilized soil blocks for use in general 
building construction. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Tittle 

269 : Ordinary Portland Cement — 

2015 Specification (sixth revision) 

383 : Coarse and fine aggregates for 

2016 concrete — Specification (third 
revision) 

712 : Specification for Building limes 

1984 (third revision) 

1498 : Classification and identification of 

1970 soil for general engineering purpose 


(first revision) 


1905 : Code of practice for structural use of 

1987 unreinforced masonry (third revision) 

2248 : Glossary of terms relating to clay 

1992 products for buildings (second 
revision) 

2720 Methods of test for soils 


(Part 4): Grain size analysis (second revision) 
1985 


(Part 5): Determination of liquid limit and 
1985 plastic limit (second revision) 


IS No. Tittle 


(Part 26) Determination of pH value (second 
: 1987 revision) 


3495 Burnt Clay Building Bricks — 
Methods of Tests 


(Part 1): Determination of Compressive 


2019 Strength ( fourth revision ) 
(Part 2): Determination of Water Absorption 
2019 ( fourth revision) 
5454: Methods for Sampling of Clay 
1978 Building Bricks (first revision) 
16993 : Microfine ordinary Portland cement 
2018 — Specificiation 
17165 : Manufacture of stabilized soil blocks 
2020 — Guidelines 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 2248 and the following shall 


apply. 


3.1 Fresh Block Density — The ratio of mass of the 
fresh block (ascertained immediately after ejecting 
the block out of the mould) to the net volume of the 
block. 


3.2 Dry Density of the Block — The ratio of mass 
of the dry block divided by the net gross volume of 
the block. 


3.3 Wet Compressive Strength — Compressive 
strength of the block tested in saturated condition 
(see 8.2). 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


The stabilized soil blocks shall be classified on the 
basis of average compressive strength as given in 
Table 1. 


IS 1725 : 2023 


Table 1 Classes of Stabilised Soil Blocks 
(Clause 4) 


Sl Class Average Compressive 
No. Designation Strength, min N/mm? 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) 3.5 3.5 

ii) 5.0 5.0 

ili) 75 LI 

iv) 10.0 10.0 

5 GENERAL OUALITY 


5.1 Stabilized soil blocks shall be manufactured 
from a uniform mixture of suitable soil-aggregate 
mixture and stabilizers such as ordinary Portland 
cement or a combination of lime and ordinary 
Portland cement. The homogeneous mixture of soil- 
sand-stabilizer shall then be compacted into a high 
density block at optimum moisture content. 


5.2 All blocks shall be sound and free from cracks, 
nodules of free lime or other defects which interfere 
with the proper placing of the unit. Minor chipping 
resulting from the customary methods of handling 
during delivery, shall not be deemed grounds for 
rejection. The faces of blocks shall be flat and 
rectangular, opposite faces shall be parallel, and all 
angles shall be square. The bedding surface shall be 
at right angles to the face of blocks. 


5.3 The blocks may be manufactured as per the 
guidelines given in IS 17165. 


6 MATERIALS 

6.1 Cement 

The cement shall conform to IS 269. 

6.2 Lime 

Lime shall conform to class C of IS 712. 
6.3 Aggregate 


The aggregate to be used for diluting the soils shall 
be aggregate conforming to IS 383. The maximum 
size of the aggregate used shall be 6.3 mm. 


6.4 Soil 


Soil shall be of the quality suitable for the 
production of stabilized soil blocks. Generally, soil 
contains clay minerals and inert particles such as 
silt and sand. The percentage and type of clay 
mineral controls the characteristics of soil. In 
majority of the cases the clay mineral content of the 


soil has to be controlled and adjusted by 
dilutingthe solution with aggregate, in order to 
make the soil suitable for stabilized soil blocks. 


NOTE — A broad guideline to select or modify soil for the 
production of stabilized soil blocks is given in Annex A. 


6.5 Water 


The water to be used in the manufacture of blocks 
shall not be detrimental to its durability. Potable 
water is considered suitable for the purpose. 


7 DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES 


7.1 Stabilized soil blocks shall be made in sizes and 
shapes to fit different construction needs. Blocks of 
special shapes such as rounded corner, corbelled or 
any other shape for the purposes of enhancing 
aesthetic appearance of masonry and the building 
may also be manufactured with special attachments 
to the mould. 


7.2 Dimensions 


7.2.1 The modular size of stabilized soil blocks 
when measured according to the procedure given in 
Annex B shall be as follows: 


Length mm Width Height 
mm mm 
290 90 90 
290 140 90 
240 240 90 
190 90 90 
190 90 40 


7.2.1.1 The dimensions of the units are so designed 
that taking account of mortar joints, they will 
produce wall lengths and heights which will 
conform to the principles of modular co-ordination. 


7.2.2 The following non-modular sizes of the bricks 
may also be used: 


Length Width mm Height 
mm mm 
305 143 100 
230 190 100 
230 105 75 
230 105 100 


7.2.2.1 The dimensions of the units shall be 
measured in accordance with the procedure given in 
Annez B. 


7.3 Tolerances 


The mazimum variation in the dimensions of the 
units shall not be more than + 2 mm. 


7.4 Frog 


Each block may have frogs on one or both of the bed 
faces in the form of depressions of rectangular or 
square shape with depth between 10 mm to 20 mm. 
In such cases, the area of the frog on each bed face 
shall be restricted to 25 percent of the surface area 
and it is preferable to have at least one frog. 


8 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS 
8.1 Dry Density of the Block 


The dry density of the blocks, being the average of 
three specimens, when determined in accordance 
with the procedure described in Annex C shall not 
be less than 1750 kg/m7(17.50 kN/m?). 


NOTE — In order to achieve the specified dry density of 
the block, the fresh block density shall be controlled 
by monitoring the quantum of wet mix that is fed into the 
machine mould. 


8.2 Compressive Strength 


8.2.1 The blocks, when tested in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in IS 3495 (Part 1) shall have a 
minimum average compressive strength for various 
classes as given in 4. 


8.2.1.1 The compressive strength of any individual 
block shall not fall below the minimum average 
compressive strength by more than 15 percent. 


8.2.1.2 In above cases the result of the non 
complying sample shall be ignored and two 
additional samples shall be tested and result of a set 
of 4 samples shall satisfying the conditions as per 
8.2.1 and 8.2.1.1. 


8.2.2 The actual compressive strength of blocks for 
use in specific masonry walls may be ascertained 
from IS 1905. 


8.3 Water Absorption 


The average water absorption of the blocks when 
determined in accordance with the procedure 
described in 4.1 of IS 3495 (Part 2) shall not be more 
than 18 percent by mass. 


8.4 Linear Expansion on Saturation 


The linear expansion on saturation of the blocks, 
being the average of three specimens, when 
determined in accordance with the procedure 
described in Annex D, shall not exceed 0.10 percent. 


IS 1725 : 2023 


8.5 Weathering 


The maximum loss of mass, being the average of 
three specimens, when determined in accordance 
with the procedure described in Annex E shall not 
exceed 3 percent. 


9 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


9.1 Sampling and criteria for conformity of the 
blocks for visual requirements (see 5.2), 
dimensional characteristics (see 7), wet compressive 
strength (see 8.2) and water absorption (see 8.3) 
shall be done in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in IS 5454. 


9.2 Out of the blocks which have been selected as 
per IS 5454 for checking visual and dimensional 
requirements and have satisfied the above 
requirements as given in 9.1, three blocks shall be 
subjected to the test for dry density of block (see 
8.1), three blocks shall be subjected to the test for 
linear expansion on saturation (see 8.4) and three 
blocks shall be subjected to the test for weathering 
(see 8.5). 


9.3 For dry density of block, the mean value 
determined shall be greater than or equal to the 
minimum limit specified in 8.1. For linear expansion 
on saturation and weathering test, the mean value 
determined shall be equal or less than the maximum 
limit specified in 8.4 and 8.5 respectively. 


10 MANUFACTURER’S 
CERTIFICATE 


The manufacturer shall satisfy himself that the 
blocks conform to the requirements of this standard 
and, if requested, shall supply a certificate to this 
effect to the purchaser or his representative. 


11 MARKING 


11.1 Each block shall be clearly and permanently 
marked with the following information: 


a) Identification of the manufacturer; and 
b) Year of manufacture, if required. 


11.2 BIS Certification Marking 


Each block may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


11.2.1 The product(s) conforming to the 
requirements of this standard may be certified as per 
the conformity assessment schemes under the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 


IS 1725 : 2023 


2016 and the Rules and Regulations framed 
thereunder, and the products may be marked with 
the Standard Mark. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.4) 


BROAD GUIDELINE TO SELECT OR MODIFY SOIL FOR THE PRODUCTION OF STABILIZED 
SOIL BLOCKS 


A-1 A broad guideline to select or modify a soil for 
the production of stabilized soil blocks is given in 
Table 2 and Table 3.The soil or soil-sand mixture 
meeting the specification given in Table 2 may 


result in production of good quality stabilized 
blocks. The recommended values of stabilizer to 
clay ratio for expansive and non-expansive soil have 
been given in Table 3. 


Table 2 Recommended Specification for Soil or Soil-Sand Mixture 
(Clause A-1) 


SI No. Details Ref to, Indian Standard Limiting values 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Granular composition of soil or soil-sand 
mixture: 
ajn Clay irachonrCs:0,002.mm) IS 2720 (Part 4) and IS 1498 5 to 18 percent 
b) Silt fraction (0.002 — 0.075 mm) 10 to 40 percent 
c) Sand fraction (0.075 — 4.75 mm) 50 to 80 percent 
d) Gravel fraction (4.75 — 6 mm) Oto 10 pencene 
ii) Liguid Limit IS 2720 (Part 5) <30 percent 
ili) pH IS 2720 (Part 26) 6.5-8.5 
Table 3 Recommended Stabilizer to Clay Ratio for Different Types of Soils 
(Clause A-1) 
SI No. Type of Soil Stabilizer to Clay Ratio (by 
Mass 
() l 
3 
(2) (3) 
i) For soils having non-expansive clay minerals = 0.40 
(for example, kaolinite, illite, etc) 
ii) For soils having expansive clay minerals = 0.75 


(for example, montmorillonite) 


NOTE — Stabilizer content should be = 5 percent (by mass). 


A-2 Use of soil containing expansive clay minerals 
such as montmorillonite requires lime as a 
stabilizing additive to manufacture stabilized soil 
blocks. Acidic soils having pH less than 6.5 can be 
stabilized with addition of 1 to 2 percent calcium 
hydroxide (lime) by mass in addition to cement. Soil 
containing excessive silt fraction can lead to 
stabilized soil block having very low green strength 
for handling during the block manufacturing 
process. In such situations, coarse gravel or coarse 


IS 1725 : 2023 


sand fraction can be added to the soil to overcome 
the problem. Some soils may contain deleterious 
salts or chemicals or organic matter which can 
impair the stabilization process when cement or 
cement-lime is used. The behaviour of stabilized soil 
block using such soils depends upon the nature of 
salts or chemicals or organic matter present. In such 
situations, the stabilized soil blocks shall be tested to 
confirm that they meet the requirements specified in 
5.2, 7 and 8. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.2 and 7.2.2.1) 
MEASUREMENT OF DIMENSIONS 


B-1 APPARATUS 


Overall dimensions shall be measured with a steel 
scale or metal tape graduated in | mm divisions. 


B-2 Specimens 


Samples selected in accordance with IS 5454 shall 
be measured for length, width and height. 


B-3 MEASUREMENTS AND REPORT 


B-3.1 Individual measurements of the dimensions of 


each specimen shall be read to the nearest division 
of the scale. 


B-3.2 Length shall be measured on the longitudinal 
centre line of each face, width across the top and 
bottom bearing surfaces at mid-length, and height on 
all four vertical faces at mid-length, and the mean 
shall be recorded. 


B-3.3 The report shall show the average length, 
width and height of each specimen to the nearest 0.5 
mm. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 8 .1) 
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF DRY DENSITY 


C-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


Randomly select three full size specimens from the 
sample of blocks which has been found satisfactory 
in respect of dimensional and visual requirements. 
These blocks shall be designated as specimens A, B 
and C respectively. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


A sensitive balance capable of weighing within 0.01 
percent of the mass of the specimen, ventilated oven 
or a thermostatically controlled oven capable of 
maintaining temperature up to 110 + 5°C and a scale 
capable of measuring upto | mm. 


C-3 PROCEDURE 


a) Dry the specimens in an oven at 100 + 5°C 
to constant mass such that two consecutive 
mass taken at an interval of 2 h shall not 
vary by 0.05 percent. 


b) Measure the dimensions of the dried blocks 
(to the nearest millimetre) and compute the 
volume, in mm?. 


c) Weigh the blocks, in kg (to the nearest 2 g) 
C-4 CALCULATION AND REPORT 


C-4.1 Calculate the density of each specimen as 
below: 


Mass of the specimen,kg 


x10? 


Dry Density = 


Volume of the specimen,mm3 


IS 1725 : 2023 


C-4.2 The average of the results for the three 
specimens shall be reported as the average dry 


density of the blocks and the result shall be reported 
to the nearest 1 kg/m’. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 8.4) 
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF LINEAR EXPANSION ON SATURATION 


D-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


Randomly select three full size specimens from the 
sample of blocks which has been found satisfactory 
in respect of dimensional and visual requirements. 
These blocks shall be designated as specimens A, B 
and C respectively. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


A vernier calliper with a least count of 0.1 mm and 
length more than that of the block, ventilated or 
thermostatically controlled oven capable of 
maintaining temperature of 110 + 5°C and a length 
comparator attached with a digital dial gauge having 
a least count of 0.001 mm (see Fig. 1). 


D-3 PROCEDURE 


a) Cure the specimens for 28 days following 
the procedure as per 6.8 of IS 17165. 


b) Remove the specimens from water and dry 
them in the oven at 60 + 5°C till they attain 
constant mass such that two consecutive 
mass taken at an interval of 2 h shall not 
vary by 0.05 percent and then allow them 
to cool down at ambient temperature such 
that they attain room temperature. 


c) Measure the lengths of the longest 
dimensions of all the three specimens using 
vernier calliper and note them as initial 
length of the specimens, Lai, Legi, and Lci 
respectively. 


d) Fix a metal point or small strip using water 
insoluble glue on the top surface of the 
dried specimens and position the block in 
the apparatus as shown in Fig. 1. Now, note 
down the initial reading of the dial gauge at 
the centre of the metal strip. The readings 
shall be taken by rotating the block through 
90°. The mean value of the perpendicular 
readings shall be recorded. 


e) Remove the specimens from the apparatus 
without disturbing the digital dial gauge 


and then soak them in water for 24 h at 
room temperature. 


f) After 24h take out the saturated specimens 
and position them in the length comparator 
apparatus such that the metal point fixed on 
the surface of the block faces the dial gauge 
tip. Note the final reading of the digital dial 
gauge at the centre of the metal strip. The 
readings shall be taken by rotating the 
block through 90°. The mean value of the 
perpendicular readings shall be recorded. 
Ensure that the dial gauge in the apparatus 
is undisturbed throughout the duration of 
test. The difference between the mean 
initial dial gauge reading and mean final 
dial gauge reading gives the linear 
expansion of the specimens, Lac, Lge, and 
Lce respectively, in mm. 


D-4 CALCULATION AND REPORT 


D-4.1 Calculate the percentage linear expansion on 
saturation of each specimen as the difference 
between the initial length and final length after 
saturation expressed as a percentage of the initial 
length. 


Percentage linear expansion on saturation for 
specimen A, 


_ Lae 
7 Lai 


A x 100 


Percentage linear expansion on saturation for 
specimen B, 


B = “© x 100: and 
Lgi 


Percentage linear expansion on saturation for 
specimen C, 


c = x 100. 
Loi 


IS 1725 : 2023 


D-4.2 Report all results separately for each Linear expansion on saturation (percent) = 
specimen and as the average for the three specimens {L/L;} X 100 
to an accuracy of 0.01 percent. 


Are ez 


TOP PLATE 


=| _~- VERTICAL BAR 
i." WITH THREAD 
<— DIAL GAUGE = 
\ (LEAST COUNT È 
. = = 
a „— MOVABLE 
À = 
= 


THIN METAL 
STRIP 


—— BLOCK IN 
POSITION 


255 


h CEA 


PLAN 
BASE PLATE 


SLOT TO FIX A 
DIAL GAUGE —” 


MOVABLE TOP PLATE DETAILS 


All dimensions in millimetres 


FIG.1 SET-UP LENGTH COMPARATOR 


IS 1725 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 8.5) 


WEATHERING TEST 


E-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


Randomly select three full size specimens from the 
sample of blocks which has been found satisfactory 
in respect of dimensional and visual requirements. 
These blocks shall be designated as specimens A, B 
and C respectively. 


E-2 APPARATUS 


A sensitive balance capable of weighing within 0.1 
percent of the mass of the specimen, ventilated oven 
or a thermostatically controlled oven capable of 
maintaining temperature of 110 + 5°C and a wire 
scratch brush made of 0.40 mm diameter wire 
bristles assembled in 50 groups of 10 bristles each 
and mounted to form 5 longitudinal rows and 10 
transverse rows of bristles on 200 mm x 60 mm 
hardwood block. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


a) Dry the specimens in the oven at 60 + 5°C 
till they attain constant mass such that two 
consecutive masses taken at an interval of 
2 h shall not vary by 0.05 percent. 


b) Determine the initial constant mass of the 
individual specimens and note them as Wai, 
Wai and Wai. 


c) Soak the specimens in water at room 
temperature for 5 h. Remove the 
specimens from water and dry them in the 
oven at 70 + 5°C for 42 h. Remove the 
partially dried blocks from the oven and 
scratch all the six faces of the specimens 
twice with wire scratch brush. Hold the 
brush with its long axis parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the specimen or 
parallel to the ends, as required to cover all 
areas of the specimen. Apply firm strokes 
corresponding to 15 N (see note below). 
Approximately eighteen to twenty brush 
strokes will be required for scratching the 
wider sides of the specimen twice and four 


strokes for each end. This procedure 
constitutes one cycle of weathering test. 


NOTE — The pressure of the brush stroke can be 
measured by clamping the wider face of the specimen 
on one corner of platform scale and the scale to zero 
and putting a standard mass of 1.5 kg on the brush. 


d) Repeat procedure given at E-3 (c) 12 times 
to complete 12 cycles. 


e) After completion of 12 cycles, dry the 
specimens at 60 + 5°C such that two 
consecutive mass taken at an interval of 2 
h shall not vary by 0.05 percent. 


f) Determine the final oven dried constant 
mass of the specimens and note them as 
Was, War and Wer. 


E-4 CALCULATION AND REPORT 


E-4.1 Calculate the percentage loss of mass of each 
specimen as the difference between the initial 
constant mass and final oven dried constant mass 
after conducting 12 cycles of weathering expressed 
as a percentage of the initial constant mass. 


Percentage mass loss for specimen A, 


Wai-Wat 
Waf 


A= x 100; 


Percentage mass loss for specimen B, 


Wpi-Wpr 
Wer 


B= x 100; and 


Percentage mass loss for specimen C, 


Wci-Wcf 
Wer 


C= x 100. 

E-4.2 Report all results separately for each specimen 
and as the average for the three specimens accurate 
to 0.1 percent. 


IS 1725 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Clay And Stabilized Soil Products For Construction Sectional Committee, CED 30 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Science,Bengaluru 
Auroville Earth Institute, Villupuram 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 


New Delhi 
CSIR-Advanced Materials & Processes Research 
Institute, Bhopal 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, 


Kolkata 


CSIR-North-East Institute of Science and Technology, 
Jorhat 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Development Alternatives, New Delhi 


Greentech Knowledge Solution, New Delhi 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 


Representative(s) 
DR B. V. VENKATARAMA REDDY (Chairman) 
SHRI SATPREM MAINI 


SHRI SHARAD GUPTA 


SHRI D. P. SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI B. VINOD BABU 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 


SHRI DIWAKAR AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI U. S. VIDYARTHI 


SHRI B. K. MUNZNI (Alternate) 


DR R. K. MORCHHALE 


DR MANISH MUDGAL (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI HINA GUPTA 


MOHAMMAD REYAZUR RAHMAN (Alternate) 


DR PARVESHAGARWAL 


SHRIMATI ASHAL T. ANIL (Alternate) 


DR PINAKI SENGUPTA 


DRP. S. AMBILY 


DR K. SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (DESIGN) 
(Alternate) 

DR SOUMEN MAITY 


SHRI P. S. HALDAR (Alternate) 


DR SAMEER MAITHEL 


SHRI SONAL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A.M. BARVE 


SHRI SANJAY SHRIVASTAV (Alternate) 


DR SYAM NAIR 


DR RAJESH SATHIY AMOORTHY (Alternate) 


IS 1725 : 2023 


Organization 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, 
Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), New Delhi 


Ministry of Science & Technology, New Delhi 


National Institute of Engineering, Mysore 


National Test House, Kolkata 


NBCC (India) Limited, New Delhi 


NTPC Ltd, Noida 


Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 


Punjab State Council for Science and Technology, 
Chandigarh 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, New Delhi 


The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), New Delhi 


Unique Engineering Testing & Advisory Services, Surat 


Wienerberger India Private Ltd, Bengaluru 


In Personal Capacity, Roorkee 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI KULBHUSHAN JAIN 


SHRI TALVINDER KAUR (Alternate) 


DR RAJKUMAR JOSHI 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR GOURAV K. 


SHRI D. V. S. PRASAD 


SHRI NARESH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL MALLA 


SHRI M. K. CHAWLA (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR 


SHRI MOHIT JHALANI (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 


EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


SHRI PRITPAL SINGH 


SHRI MAGANBIR SINGH (Alternate) 


DR MUKESHGARG 


SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA (Alternate) 


SHRI SACHIN KUMAR 


SHRI HITESH DESAI 


SHRI NEHAL H. DESAI (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNDAN B. DIGHE 


SHRI DEVIDAS RAO (Alternate) 


DR J. M. BHATNAGAR 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING) [ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 


GENERAL (Ex-Officio) ] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI DIVYA S. 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular reguirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision).’ 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 30 (17337). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


