eT di Wah IS 12000 (Part 2) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Bas SINT A AMS JARA sik 
sae + fem mss 


am 2 ds eme via 


Guide for Paper Spoilage and 
Wastage for Printing Industry 


Part 2 Web Offset Processes 


ICS 37.100.01 


© BIS 2019 


ada res A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
® HM HAT, 9 Terme BHC HPT, w$ fercit-110002 
walls. MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2019 Price Group 2 


Publication and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee, MSD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the 
Publication and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee and approval ofthe Management and Systems Division 
Council. 


In printing, binding and other post-press operations, some extra paper are needed over and above the base quantity 
of printable papers to allow for make-ready in respect of proper ink density and proper registration matching, 
spoilage for subsequent printing and other finishing operations etc. The quantity will depend upon the number of 
colours, quality of job, length ofrun, etc and it would include additional allowance for post-press operations like 
paper forwarding, online gluing, cutting, stitching and other binding operations etc. 


Usually before the job is ready for continuous running, some copies are usually spoiled during the process of 
make-ready. Once the machine is set in motion, possible wastage of paper during printing process is considerably 
reduced and is limited to certain mechanical or printing defects/deficiencies and/or adjustments on machines or 
use of materials like ink, paper, plates, etc. Adequate quality control measures, proper maintenance of machinery 
and competent workers are the key factors which reduce wastage of paper to the absolute minimum under normal 
conditions. In colour work, the allowance must be sufficient to cover wastage due to misregister, improper ink 
density causing defective colour, set off, etc, resulting in requirement of additional paper over and above the base 
(printable) quantity. 


Besides the above, web (reel) gets damaged due to handling during the course of transit from the suppliers to the 
printers, during storage and paper issuance from Godown to production floor. Therefore, proper packaging and 
handling of reels is a must to minimize the waste percentage. 


It is necessary to have standard norms for arriving at the admissible spoilage or wastage that has to be allowed for 
various printing and production jobs which at present is based only on understanding between the print buyers and 
print sellers (printers). 


This standard IS 12000 ‘Guide for paper spoilage and wastage for printing industry’ is published in two parts. The 
other Part in this series is: 


Part 1 Sheetfed letterpress and offset processes 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12000 (Part 2) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


GUIDE FOR PAPER SPOILAGE AND WASTAGE FOR 
PRINTING INDUSTRY 
PART 2 WEB OFFSET PROCESSES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the minimum overs that 
should be added to the base (printable) quantity of paper 
needed for a particular job to be printed through web 
offset machine. 


1.2 This wastage formula may vary for paper below 45 
gsm for web offset machine. 


1.3 The wastage report details are based after 
monitoring the working of newspaper industry as well 
as publication houses having web offset machines. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Wastage — Extra quantity of paper required, over 
and above the actual quantity to be printed. 


2.2 Make-ready — Process of setting up a printing 
machine for proper positioning of the printing image 
on paper to print, uniform impression, colours 
registration and substance of paper to be used etc, prior 
to actual run of the job. 


2.3 Fixed Wastage — The wastage of paper involved 
in make-ready process prior to actual running of the 
job. 


2.4 Running Wastage — The wastage of paper which 
occurs during continuous printing of the job subsequent 
to make-ready due to operation, mechanical or electrical 
problem or power failure. 


2.5 Base Quantity — The exact weight/quantity of 
paper required for executing the job, excluding the 
wastage. 


2.6 Cold Start — After make-ready operation, initial 
starting of machine starts for printing. 


2.7 Warm Start — Starting of machines, when it had 
stopped in between the printing operation, due to some 
technical reason. 


2.8 Quality Work — Work of high quality, which 
requires accurate registration, sharpness and high colour 
consistency through-out the print run. 


2.9 Fountain Solution — Chemical used to strengthen 
the dampening solution by controlling its pH, 
conductivity, surface tension etc. 


2.10 Dampening Solution — Water used on plate’s 
non-image area during offset printing mixed with 
fountain solution. 


3 TYPES OF WASTAGE IN WEB OFFSET PRESS 
3.1 Printed Waste 


Copies getting waste during printing for achieving good 
copies in respect of ink density and colour registration. 


3.2 Cut Waste (Tear Off) 


Top most layer of newsprint reel which, if damaged 
due to side cut or small holes, needs to be removed 
from the reel. 


3.3 Sweeping 


Extra paper gets wasted during printing due to web 
break and failure of auto splicing. 


3.4 Wrapper 


The thick top and side cover used to protect the reel 
during transportation. 


3.5 Core (Reel End) 


The cylindrical hard material placed in center of reel, 
used to wind newsprint to make reel. 


3.6 Rewinding Waste 


Paper wastage during rewinding of small reels, which 
is left after partial use of full reels. 


4 FACTORS AFFECTING PRINT WASTE 


a) Cold start waste; 

b) Warm start waste; 

c) Improper machine settings; 

d) Ink water balance; 

e) pHand conductivity of dampening solution; 
f) Unfixed web path; 

g) Web breaks; 

h) Any scheduled or unscheduled stoppages; 
j) Registration control system; 

k) Number of reel changes; 

m) Press run sequence; and 

n) Improper making of plates. 


IS 12000 (Part 2) : 2019 
5 FACTOR AFFECTING CUT WASTE (TEAR 
OFF) 


a) Improper wrapping of reels; 

b) Transportation related problem; 

c) Improper storage; 

d) Mishandling during loading and unloading; 
NOTE — This could by forklift operator, unskilled and 
untrained labour, etc. 

e) Skill or mindset of press operators; 

f) Storage of partially used reels on production 
floor; 

g) Cleanliness and condition of reel issuing bay; 

h) Condition of forklift pad; and 

j) Pressure setting of forklift pad. 


6 DIFFICULTIES IN WASTAGE CONTROLLING 
6.1 Multiple Suppliers of Reel 


The paper (reels) supplied by multiple vendors are 
varying in terms of brightness, tensile and bursting 
strength, K&N density and pH value, Opacity, LAB 
Values etc. Since the quality of reels in such cases is 
not same, it poses difficulty in controlling wastage. 


6.2 Storage at Multiple Warehouses 


Most of the warehouses do not have facilities for 
controlling temperature and relative humidity, which 
is essential for maintaining the desired moisture level 
of web reels. 


6.3 Reel Handling 


Proper reel handling is essential to avoid ovality of core 
and protection from any side cuts etc. 


6.4 Lack of Trained Manpower for Reel Handling 


Most of the labours working for loading and unloading 
of web reels are not technically trained for handling of 
reels. 


6.5 Ageing Problem of Paper 


At times due to the inability of the organization to 
maintain First-in First-out system (FIFO), wastage of 
paper occurs due to ageing problem. 


7 WAYS FOR CONTROLLING WASTE 
7.1 Using Webs with High Mileage (Bigger Size) 


Mostly webs have | m diameter. The reel-stand should 
be customized in such a way that they can handle webs 
upto 1.25 m diameter resulting in reduction in schedule 
breakdowns for the machine having no ARC 
(Automatic reel changer). 


7.2 Technical Training to Supporting Staff 


Providing proper technical training for loading, 
unloading and stacking of web reels to labour, 
contractors and others. 


7.3 Auto Reel Changer (ARC) 


Scheduled stoppages due to change in webs can be 
minimized by using ARC. Number of stoppages is 
directly proportional to wastage. 


7.4 Auto Registration System for Early Colour 
Matching 


By using auto registration system, operator can focus 
on other web control activities. This results in speedy 
production of good copies and enhanced client 
satisfaction. 


7.5 Taking-off of Reel Wrapper 


The paper reel wrapper should be taken off after loading 
the reels on reel stand to minimize wastage of paper. 


7.6 Re-packing Half Used Reels 


After using of reels, partially used reel must be re- 
packed with wrappers instead of leaving them exposed 
in open. 


7.7 Proper Make-ready of Machines 


Before running the machine operator should always 
cross-check rollers settings, ink releasing key openings, 
amount of ink charged, path of web etc. 


7.8 Using of R.O. Water 


Water is an important subtract used in offset printing. 
It will be desirable to use R.O. water to achieve better 
pH and conductivity value of dampening solution. 


7.9 Proper Dosing of Fountain Solution 


To reduce printed waste, the proper strength of 
dampening solution that is pH should be around 4.0 
(tolerance +0.2) and conductivity should be 1 300 us 
(tolerance of +100). 


8 ALLOWABLE WASTAGE FOR WEB OFFSET 
PRESS 


Heat-set web offset machine: 


: Minimum of total 2 
percent for 4 colour and 1 
percent for single colour 
printing subject to 
minimum 400 copies and 
200 copies respectively. 


Printed + White wastage 


Tear wastage : 0.4 percent 


Sweep waste : 0.25 percent 
Core : 0.60 percent 
Wrapper : 0.75 percent 


The wastage depends on quantity of job, machine length 
and splicing facility of machine. The above norms are 
applicable for minimum quantity of 20 000. Percentage 
will differ if print order is increased or decreased, but 
the printed wastage copies would be same, as mentioned 
above. 


Cold-set web offset machine: 


: Minimum of total 1.5 
percent for 4 colour and 1 
percent for single colour 


Printed + White wastage 


IS 12000 (Part 2) : 2019 


printing subject to 
minimum of 300 copies 
and 200 copies 
respectively. 

Tear wastage : 0.4 percent 

Sweep waste : 0.25 percent 

Core : 0.60 percent 

Wrapper : 0.75 percent 


The wastage depends on quantity of job, number of 
reels used for job, machine length and splicing facility 
of machine. The above norms are applicable for 
minimum quantity of 20 000. Percentage will differ if 
print order is increased or decreased, but the printed 
wastage copies would be same, as mentioned above. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 06 (0539). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


