NAT HIAF IS 17436 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


maa area — qd Arai oia 
dieu — aè 


Automotive Vehicles — 
Advance-Warning Triangle — 
Specification 


ICS 43.040.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM SA 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4 freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2020 Price Group 7 


Automotive Electrical Equipment and Instruments Sectional Committee TED 11 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Electrical Equipment and Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering 
Division Council. 


Advance warning triangles are used to indicate the presence of the halted vehicle. This type of signaling device 
will serve as an advance warning to all the vehicles which may approach the halted vehicle. In order to serve its 
purpose, it is proposed to place the triangle on the carriageway at some distance prior to the actual position of the 
halted vehicle, so that the oncoming driver can take evasive action on seeing the triangle even before he/she sees 
the vehicle. The distance at which it is to be placed can be deliberated upon. Also the advance warning triangle is 
to be used both during the day and night. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been taken from AIS 022 : 2001 ‘Automotive 
vehicles — Advance-warning triangles — Specification’. 


Central Motor Vehicles Rules 1989 refers to many Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) formulated by 
Automotive Industry Standards Committee (AISC) till such time corresponding Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
Specifications are notified. Under the same provision Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) referred in this Indian 
Standard will be replaced by Bureau of Indian Standards Specifications after corresponding Bureau of Indian 
Standards Specifications are formulated and notified. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).' The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17436 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — ADVANCE-WARNING 
TRIANGLES — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers requirements of advance-warning 
triangles intended to be on board motor vehicles and to 
be placed on the carriageway (road) in order to signal, 
by day and at night, the presence of a halted vehicle. 


1.1 The motor vehicles mentioned above include all 
four wheelers except agricultural tractors. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards. 


IS No. Title 


IS 2500 (Part 1) : 2000 Sampling procedures for 
inspection by attributes: 
Part 1 Sampling schemes 
indexed by acceptance 
quality limit (AQL) for 
lot-by-lot inspection 
(Third Revision) 

Automotive vehicles — 


Reflex reflectors — 
Specification 


Textiles —Tests for 
colour fastness — Part 
B02: Colour fastness to 
artificial light: Xenon arc 
fading lamp test 


8339 : 1993 


IS/ ISO 105 (Part B 02) 
: 2014 


AIS 090 (Rev 1):2019 Approval of retro- 
reflective markings for 
motor vehicles, their 


trailers and semi-trailers 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in 
AIS 090 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Advance-warning Triangle — The device 
intended to be on board motor vehicles and to be placed 
on the carriageway (road) in order to signal, by day and 
at night, the presence of a halted vehicle and in the form 
of an equilateral triangle. 


3.2 Type of Triangle — Advance-warning triangles 
which do not differ in such essential respects as 


a) Manufacturer 
b) Optical characteristics 


c) Distinctive geometrical and mechanical features 
of the design 


3.3 Retro-reflecting Device — An assembly, ready 
for use, comprising one or more retro-reflecting optical 
units 


3.4 Front Face of the Triangle — The face carrying 
the optical units 


3.5 Axis of the Advance-warning Triangle — The 
straight line which, perpendicular to the front face of 
the triangle, passes through its centre. 


3.6 Fluorescent Material — Material which either in 
the mass or at the surface, when excited by daylight, 
exhibits the phenomenon of photo-luminescence 
ceasing rather shortly after excitation. 


3.7 Luminance Factor — The ratio of the luminance 
of the body considered to the luminance of the perfect 
diffuser under identical conditions of illumination and 
observation. The luminance of the body considered 
includes that produced by reflection and by fluorescence; 


3.8 Co-efficient of Luminous Intensity (CIL) — The 
value obtained by dividing the luminous intensity 
reflected in the direction considered, by the illumination 
of the retro-reflecting device, for given observation, 
entrance and rotation angles. 


4 TYPE 


4.1 The advance warning triangle shall be of following 
types 

a) Foldable type, and 

b) Non-foldable type. 
4.2 The manufacturer shall declare, if protection to 


warning triangle is through protective cover or through 
other means. 


5 GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS 


5.1 The advance-warning triangle shall be open at the 
centre and shall comprise a red border composed of 
an outer retro-reflecting strip and an inner fluorescent 


IS 17436 : 2020 


strip, the whole supported at a certain height above the 
surface of the carriageway. The open centre and the 
fluorescent and retro-reflecting strips shall be bounded 
by concentric equilateral triangle contours. 


5.2 Advance-warning triangles shall be so made that 
in normal use (on the road and when carried in the 
vehicle) they retain the prescribed characteristics and 
their satisfactory functioning continues to be ensured. 


5.3 The optical units of the advance-warning triangle 
shall not be easily disassembled. The various parts 
making up the advance-warning triangle shall provide 
good stability on the road. They shall not be easily 
disassembled. If a triangle has to be folded in order 
to be placed in its protective cover, the movable parts, 
including its supports, shall not be detachable. 


5.4 When the advance-warning triangle is in the 
position of use on the road, the front face of the triangle 
must be vertical. This condition is deemed fulfilled if 
the axis of the triangle does not form an angle of more 
than 5° with the base plane. 


5.5 The front face of the advance-warning triangle shall 
be easy to clean; in particular it shall not be rough, and 
such protuberances as it may exhibit shall not prevent 
such cleaning. 


5.6 The advance-warning triangle and its support shall 
not present sharp edges or corners. 


5.7 The advance-warning triangle shall be accompanied 
by its protective cover, if any, for protection against 
external agents, especially during carriage. It may 
however be supplied without protective cover where 
the necessary protection is provided by other means. 
These means shall be stated as mentioned in 4.2. 


5.8 Each triangle may be accompanied by a copy of the 
instructions. 


6 PARTICULAR SPECIFICATIONS 


6.1 Requirements of Shape and Dimensions 


6.1.1 Shape and dimensions of the warning triangle 
shall be as given in Annex A. 


6.1.1.1 The theoretical sides of the triangle shall be at 
least 500 + 50 mm in length. 


6.1.1.2 The retro-reflecting units shall be arranged 
along the edge within a strip of an unvarying width 
which shall be between 25 mm and 50 mm. 


6.1.1.3 Between the outer edge of the triangle and the 
retro-reflecting strip, there may be an edging not more 
than 5 mm wide and not necessarily red-coloured. 


6.1.1.4 The retro reflecting strip may be continuous or 
not. In the latter case the free area of the supporting 
material must be red. 


6.1.1.5 The fluorescent material must be contiguous 
to the retro-reflecting units. It shall be arranged 
symmetrically along the three sides of the triangle. 
When in use, its surface area shall be not less than 
315 cm’. However, an edging, continuous or not, not 
more than 5 mm wide, which need not necessarily 
be red-coloured, may be placed between the retro- 
reflecting surface and the fluorescent surface. 


6.1.1.6 The side of the open central triangle shall have 
a minimum length of 70 mm. 


6.1.2 Shape and Dimensions of the Support 


The distance between the supporting surface and the 
lower side of the advance-warning triangle shall not 
exceed 300 mm. 


6.2 Colorimetric Specifications 
6.2.1 Retro-reflecting Devices 


6.2.1.1 Retro-reflecting devices shall be made of 
material coloured red in the mass. 


6.2.1.2 When the retro-reflecting device is illuminated 
by the CIE standard illuminant A, with an observation 
angle of 0°20’ and an entrance angle V = H = 0°, or, if 
this produces a colourless surface reflection, an angle 
V=+5°, H = 0°, the trichromatic co-ordinates of the 
red reflected luminous flux shall be within the following 
limits: 


a) Limit towards yellow: y < 0.335 


b) Limit towards purple: z € 0.008 


6.2.1.3 The testing of the colour shall be carried out as 
per C-2.1. 


6.2.2 Fluorescent Materials 


6.2.2.1 The fluorescent materials shall either be 
coloured in the mass or take the form of separate 
coatings applied to the surface of the triangle. 


6.2.2.2 When the fluorescent material is illuminated 
by the CIE standard illuminant C the trichromatic 
co-ordinates of the light reflected and emitted by the 
fluorescence shall be within an area of which the corner 
points are determined by the following co-ordinates 
[the angle of illumination being 45? and the observation 
being made at an angle of 90? to the sample (45?/0? 
measuring geometry)]: 


Point 1 2 3 4 
x 0.690 0.595 0.569 0.655 
y 0.310 0.315 0.341 0.345 


6.2.2.3 The testing of colour shall be carried out as 
per C-2.2. 


6.3 Photometric Specifications 


6.3.1 Retro-reflecting Devices 


6.3.1.1 The values of CIL of retro-reflecting optical 
units shall be not less than those given in Table 1, 
for the angles of observation (or divergence) and the 
entrance (illumination) angle shown 


6.3.1.2 The CIL measured on random slices of 50 mm 
length of the retro-reflecting device shall lie between 
extremes having a ratio not in excess of 3. These slices 
are taken between the perpendiculars to the side of the 
triangle and passing through the corresponding apexes 
of the central aperture. This requirement applies to 
an angle of divergence (a) of 20' and to illumination 
angles of V = 0°, H= 0° or + 5° and V=+ 20°, H = 0°. 


6.3.1.3 Diversity of luminance at angles of illumination 
(B) of V = 0°, H = + 30? and V = 0°, H = + 40° shall be 
tolerated on condition that the triangular shape remains 
clearly discernible, for an angle of divergence of 20’ 
and an illumination of approximately 1 lux. 


6.3.1.4 The measurements referred to in Table 1 shall 
be measured as per C-4. 


6.3.2 Fluorescent Materials 


6.3.2.1 The luminance factor including the luminance 
by reflection and fluorescence, shall not be less than 
30 percent. 


6.3.2.2 The measurement of luminance factor shall be 
taken as per C-3. 


7 TEST PROCEDURE 


7.1 Every advance-warning triangle and its protective 
cover, if any, shall meet the requirements given in 
Annex C. 


IS 17436 : 2020 


7.2 Four samples of advance-warning triangle and 
at least two protective covers, if advance-warning 
triangles are to be supplied with protective covers, shall 
be selected for testing. 


7.3 Two samples of the fluorescent material in which 
a square of 100 mm can be inscribed and which are 
fully representative of the material applied under the 
same conditions to the same base material as used for 
the advance-warning triangle. 


8 MARKINGS 


8.1 Every advance-warning triangle and its protective 
cover shall bear the trade name or mark of the 
manufacturer. Such marking shall be clearly legible, 
indelible and shall be visible from the outside. 


8.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The advance-warning triangle may also be marked with 
the Standard Mark. 


8.2.1 The product(s) conforming to the requirements 
of this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


9 SAMPLING 


Unless otherwise agreed upon between a supplier and 
purchaser, the inspection sampling shall be as per 
IS 2500 (Part 1). 


Table 1 Values of Co-efficient of Luminous Intensity (CIL) in Milli-candela per Lux 
( Clause 6.3.1.1) 


Angles of Divergence (a) Illumination Angle (B) 
Vertical V (f) 0 + 20° 0° 0° 
Horizontal H (£) 0 or 5? 0° + 30° + 40° 
20' 8 000 4 000 1750 600 
1° 30" 600 200 100 50 


IS 17436 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 6.1.1) 
SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS OF ADVANCE-WARNING TRIANGLE 


NOT NECESSARLLY RED 
COLOURED EDGES 


REFRO - REFLECTIN 
AREA,RED 


RED - FLUORESCENT AREA 
TOTAL SURFACE AREA > 
315 CM? 


< 300 


All dimensions are in millimeters 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS OF ADVANCE-WARNING TRIANGLE AND OF SUPPORT 


IS 17436 : 2020 


SQUARE HOLE 300 - 600 


300 - 600 


15 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 Test DEVICE FOR CLEARANCE TO GROUND 


IS 17436 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clause C-11.1 ) 


DETERMINATION OF THE ROUGHNESS OF THE ROAD 
SURFACE - SANDY BEACH METHOD 


B-1 PURPOSE OF THE METHOD 


The purpose of this method is to describe and to 
determine to a certain extent the geometric roughness 
of that part of the road surface on which the advance- 
warning triangle is placed during the test of stability in 
wind, as required in C-11.1. 


B-2 PRINCIPLE OF THE METHOD 


B-2.1 A known volume V of sand is spread evenly 
on the surface of the carriageway (road) in the form 
of a circle. The *mean sand depth' is calculated from 
following formula 


where 
H = mean sand depth, in mm; 
V — volume of sand, in ml; and 


S — area covered, in mm”. 


B-2.2 The test is carried out by means of round- 
grain, dry sand and having a grain size between 
0.160 mm and 0.315 mm. The volume (V) amounts 
to 25 ml + 0.15 ml. The sand is spread out over the 
surface where the test is carried out by means of a 
flat, circular disc with a diameter of 65 mm, one side 
of which is covered with a sheet of rubber having a 
thickness of 1.5 - 2.5 mm and the other being provided 
with an appropriate handle. If the diameter of the 
circular area covered with sand is D, the mean sand 


depth will be calculated from the formula: 
H, = (A/n) x Q5/D?) x 10° 
where 
H = mean sand depth, in mm; and 


D = dia of the covered area, in mm; 
B-3 PERFORMANCE OF THE TEST 


B-3.1 The surface on which the test is to be carried out 
must be dry and at first be brushed with a soft brush to 
remove any dirt or loose gravel. 


B-3.2 The sand which has been firmly filled into an 
appropriate receptacle is then poured out on the surface 
to be tested in a single heap. The sand is then carefully 
spread out on the surface by means of repeated circular 
movements of the rubber faced disc so as to form the 
largest possible round area covered with sand. The sand 
will then fill all depressions and hollows. 


B-3.3 Two diameters, at right angles to one another, 
of the ‘beach’ thus formed are usually measured. The 
mean value is rounded off to the nearest 5 mm, with the 
depth of the sand (4) being calculated according to the 
formula given in B-2.2. 


B-3.4 Six tests of this kind are carried out on the 
supporting surface, with the parts to be tested being 
distributed over the surface to be tested as evenly as 
possible. The overall mean of the results obtained is 
given as the mean sand depth (H ) of the road surface 
where the advance-warning triangle has been placed. 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 6.2.1.3, 6.2.2.3, 6.3.1.4, 6.3.2.2 and 7 ) 
TEST PROCEDURES 


C-1 GENERAL 


C-1.1 After verification of the general specifications as 
per 5 and the specifications of shape and dimensions 
as per 6.1.1, all samples shall be subjected to the heat 
resistance test as per C-7. 


C-1.2 After the heat resistance test and subsequent 
storage for 12 consecutive hours at a temperature of 25 
+ 5? C, the advance warning triangle, in its protective 
cover, shall be subjected to the cold test according to 


C-8. Immediately after removal from the cold room, no 
fractures or visible distortion shall be noticeable on the 
device and especially on its optical parts. The protective 
cover, if provided, shall be properly openable, and shall 
neither tear nor adhere to the advance — warning triangle. 


C-1.3 The CIL value ofthe four samples of the advance- 
warning triangles submitted, shall be measured at an 
observation angle of 20° and at an illumination angle 
with the components V = 0°, H — + 5?. The test shall be 
carried out as per at C-4. 


C-1.4 The two triangles which show the smallest and 
the largest CIL value during the tests carried out as per 
C-1.3 shall be visually compared, during daylight and 
at a distance of 30 m by an observer having normal 
colour response, with the other two samples (see 7.2). 
There shall be no noticeable difference in colour or 
luminance between the fluorescent material on the four 
samples. 


C-1.5 The two samples with the smallest and the 
largest CIL value shall be subsequently subjected to the 
following tests: 


a) Measurement of the values of the CIL in respect of 
the observation and illumination angles referred 
to in 6.3.1.1 and 6.3.1.2 as per C-4. The visual 
inspection as per 6.3.1.3 and 6.3.1.4 shall then be 
performed; 


b 


wm 


Testing of the colour of the retro-reflected light as 
per C-2 on the sample which, as a result of a visual 
inspection seems to have the least favourable 
colorimetric characteristics. In other cases the 
sample with the highest CIL concerned shall be 
examined; 


c) Test of clearance to ground as per C-5; and 
d) Mechanical solidity test as per C-6. 


C-1.6 One sample other than those referred to in 
C-1.4 above shall be subjected to test of resistance to 
penetration of water into the retro-reflecting device 
as per C-12.1 or if relevant, test of resistance of the 
accessible reverse side of the mirror-backed retro- 
reflecting device, as per C-12.2. 


C-1.7 The second sample, other than those referred to 
in C-1.4 above shall be subjected to the following tests: 
a) Water test as per C-9; 
b) Test of resistance to fuels as per C-10; and 
c) Test of stability against wind as per C-11. 


C-1.8 After the tests specified in the C-1.4, the two 
samples of the fluorescent material (see 7.3) shall be 
subjected to the following tests: 


a) Colour test as per C-2.2; 


b) Determination of luminance factor of the 


fluorescent material as per C-3; and 
c) Test of weather resistance as per C-13. 


C-2 COLOUR TESTS 


C-2.1 Colour of the Retro-reflecting Devices 


C-2.1.1 The colour of the retro-reflecting devices to 
be tested as per 6.2.1 may be ascertained visually by 
observers having normal colour response, by means 
of comparison with coloured lights, the trichromatic 
co-ordinates of which is adequately within the colour 
limits defined in 6.2.1.2. 


IS 17436 : 2020 


C-2.1.2 If any doubt remains after this test, compliance 
with the colorimetric specifications shall be verified by 
determining the trichromatic co-ordinates of the most 
doubtful sample. 


C-2.2 Colour of the Fluorescent Material 


C-2.2.1 The colour of the fluorescent material to be 
tested as per 6.2.2 may be ascertained visually by 
the observers having normal colour-response, by 
comparison with fluorescent materials, the trichromatic 
co-ordinates of which is adequately within the 
colour limits defined in 6.2.2.2. The illumination and 
observation of the samples shall be carried out in the 
measuring geometry 45°/0°, and the illuminance shall 
be chosen so as to ensure photopic vision. 


C-2.2.2 If any doubt remains after this test, compliance 
with the colorimetric specifications shall be verified by 
determining the trichromatic co-ordinates of the most 
doubtful sample. 


C-3 DETERMINATION OF THE LUMINANCE 
FACTOR OF THE FLUORESCENT MATERIAL 


C-3.1 For the determination of the luminance factor 
the sample shall be illuminated by a light source of 
the CIE illuminant C, at an angle of illumination of 
45° to the normal, and the light emitted by luminosity 
and reflection observed in the direction of the normal 
(geometry 45°/0°) shall be measured. The luminance 
factor may be obtained by the following method: 


C-3.1.1 By putting the luminance of the sample into 
relation to the luminance of a perfect diffuser whose 
luminance factor is known under identical conditions 
of illumination and observation; the luminance factor 
of the sample shall be calculated from the formula: 


di cb 


where 
B= luminance factor of the sample; 
L- 
L= 


p, = luminance factor of a perfect diffuser. 


luminance of the sample; 


luminance of a perfect diffuser; and 


C-3.1.2 When the colour of the fluorescent material 
has been colorimetrically determined as per C-2.2.2, 
the luminance factor of the sample shall be calculated 
from the formula 


B=YY 
where 
B= luminance factor of the sample, 
Y= tristimulus value of the sample, and 
Y = tristimulus value of the perfect diffuser. 


IS 17436 : 2020 


C-4 MEASUREMENT OF THE CIL VALUE OF 
RETRO-REFLECTING DEVICES 


C-4.1 For this measurement it is assumed that the 
direction of illumination H = V = 0° for the advance- 
warning triangle in its position of use is parallel to the 
base plane and vertical to the lower side of the triangle, 
which in turn is parallel to the said plane. 


C-4.2 The CIL value shall be measured as per method 
described in Annex D. 


C-5 TEST OF CLEARANCE TO GROUND 


C-5.1 The advance-warning triangle shall pass the 
following tests: 


C-5.1.1 The apparatus as shown in Annex A, Fig. 2, 
(inverted hollow pyramid) shall be placed on a 
horizontal base plane. 


C-5.1.2 The individual supports to the ground shall 
be placed one after another in the square hole O of 
the test apparatus. During the test of each support, it 
shall be required to find a position of the test apparatus 
in relation to the advance-warning triangle and its 
supporting device, which is favourable for the triangle 
and which ensures that: 


C-5.1.2.1 All supports are resting simultaneously on 
the base plane, 


C-5.1.2.2 Outside the area covered by the test apparatus, 
the distance between the base plane and parts of the 
triangle as well as of the supporting device is 50 mm, 
Min (with the exception of the supports proper). 


C-6 MECHANICAL SOLIDITY TEST 


C-6.1 With the advance-warning triangle set up as 
specified by the manufacturer and its bases firmly held, 
a force of 2 N shall be applied to the apex of the triangle 
parallel to the supporting surface and normal to the 
lower side of the triangle. 


C-6.2 The apex of the triangle shall not move more 
than 5 cm in the direction in which the force is exerted. 


C-6.3 After the test, the position of the device shall not 
be significantly different from its original position. 


C-7 HEAT RESISTANCE TEST 


C-7.1 The advance-warning triangle in its protective 
cover, if provided, shall be kept for 12 h at a temperature 
of 70 + 3? C. 


C-7.2 After the test, no cracking or noticeable distortion 
of the device, in particular of the retro-reflecting device 
shall be visible. The cover shall be openable and shall 
not adhere to the triangle. 


C-8 COLD TEST 


The advance-warning triangle in its protective cover 
shall be tested for low temperature use at a temperature 
of -10° C for 12 h. 


C-9 WATER TEST 


The collapsible advance-warning triangles shall be 
assembled for use and immersed flat for 2 h in water 
at a temperature of 25 + 5? C, with the active face of 
the triangle slowing upwards and below 5 cm from 
the surface of the water. After 2 h the triangle shall be 
removed and dried. No part of the device may exhibit 
clear signs of deterioration which might impair the 
effectiveness of the triangle. 


C-10 TEST OF RESISTANCE TO FUELS 


C-10.1 The triangle and its protective cover shall be 
immersed separately in a tank containing a mixture of 
petrol and benzene (proportion 90:10). After 60 s they 
shall be removed from the tank and drained of excess 
liquid. The triangle shall then be placed in its protective 
cover and the unit shall be laid flat in a still atmosphere. 
When completely dried, the triangle shall not adhere 
to its protective cover, and there shall be no visually 
noticeable change on its surface and no apparent 
detrimental modifications, however, slight surface 
cracks may be tolerated. 


C-11 TEST OF STABILITY AGAINST WIND 


C-11.1 The advance-warning triangle shall be set up in 
a wind tunnel, on a base measuring about 1.5 mx 1.2m 
formed of a road surface as normally used. This surface 
shall have a geometric roughness H, = 0.5 + 0.05 mm 
(see Annex B). 


C-11.1.1 When set up in this manner, the advance- 
warning triangle shall be subjected for 3 min to an air 
stream exerting a dynamic pressure of 180 Pa (about 
60 km/h under normal conditions) parallel to the 
supporting surface, in a direction which seems to be 
most unfavourable for the stability. 


C-11.2 Alternative Test Method 


The advance-warning triangle shall be set up on 
asphalted road and subjected for 3 min to an air stream 
exerting a dynamic pressure of 180 Pa (about 60 km/h 
under normal conditions) parallel to the supporting 
surface, in a direction which seems to be most 
unfavorable for the stability. 


C-11.3 When tested as per C-11.1 or C-11.2 the 
advance-warning triangle shall neither overturn nor 
shift. Slight shifting of the points of contact with the 
road surface, by not more than 5 cm, is allowed. 


C-11.4 The triangular part of the device shall not rotate 
through more than 10? round a horizontal axis or a 
vertical axis from its initial position. 


C-12 TEST OF RESISTANCE OF THE RETRO- 
REFLECTING DEVICE 


C-12.1 Test of Resistance to penetration of water 


C-12.1.1 The collapsible advance-warning triangle 
shall be assembled for use and immersed for 10 min 
in water at a temperature of 50 + 5° C, with the highest 
point of the upper part of the illuminating surface, 20 
mm below the water surface. Immediately afterwards 
the retro-reflecting device shall be immersed in the 
same way in water at a temperature of 25 + 5° C. 


C-12.1.2 After this test, no water shall have penetrated 
to the reflecting surface of the retro-reflecting device. 
A device clearly revealing the presence of water in a 
visual inspection shall be considered not complying 
with the standard. 


C-12.1.3 If the visual inspection does not reveal the 
presence of water, or in case of doubt the CIL values 
shall again be measured under the same conditions as 
specified in C-1.3 after the retro-reflecting device has 
been gently shaken to remove excess water from the 
outside. The CIL values shall not diminish by more 
than 40 percent of the values recorded before the test. 


C-12.2 Test of Resistance of the Accessible reverse 
side of the mirror-backed retro-reflecting device 


C-12.2.1 The reverse side of the retro-reflecting 
device shall be brushed with a hard nylon brush and 


IS 17436 : 2020 


then thoroughly wetted with a mixture of petrol and 
benzene (proportion 90:10). After 1 min, the mixture 
shall be removed and the device allowed to dry. As 
soon as evaporation is completed, the reverse side 
shall be brushed with the same brush as before. The 
whole surface of the mirror-coated reverse side shall 
be covered with Indian ink and CIL values shall be 
measured under the same conditions as specified in 
C-1.3. The CIL shall not diminish by more than 40 
percent of the values recorded before the test. 


C-13 TEST OF WEATHER-RESISTANCE 
OF THE LUMINANCE FACTOR AND OF 
THE COLOUR OF THE FLUORESCENT 
MATERIAL 


C-13.1 One of the samples of the fluorescent material 
(see 7.3) shall be subjected to a temperature and 
irradiation test as per ISO 105 until the contrast No. 
4 of the grey scale has been reached for the reference 
sample no. 5. 


C-13.2 After this test, the colour co-ordinates of 
the fluorescent material shall comply with colour 
specification of 6.2.2.2. The luminance factor (see C-3) 
shall be at least 30 percent and shall not increase by 
more than 5 percent compared with the value recorded 
before the test (see C-1.8.2). 


C-13.3 The sample shall not exhibit any visible damage 
such as cracks, scaling or peeling of the fluorescent 
material. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause C-4.2 ) 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF THE CIL VALUE OF 
THE RETRO-REFLECTING DEVICE 


D-1 DEFINITIONS 


The notations used in Fig. 3 to Fig. 6 are defined in 3 
and AIS 090. 


D-2 DIMENSIONAL AND PHYSICAL 
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE PHOTOMETRY 
OF RETRO-REFLECTORS 


D-2.1 The CIE-angular system shown in Fig. 3 
shall be used. An adequate support (goniometer) is 
demonstrated in Fig. 4. 


D-2.2 Measuring Distance 


The measuring distance shall be 10 m Min or its optical 
equivalent and shall be so chosen that at least the limits 
for the angles 8, y and n as given in Fig. 6 are respected. 


D-2.3 Illuminance at the Retro-Reflector 


The illuminance over the useful area of the 
retro-reflector, measured perpendicular to the incident 
light shall be sufficiently uniform. A check on this 
condition requires a measuring element, the sensitive 
area of which is not greater than one-tenth of the 
area to be examined. The variation in the value of the 
illuminance shall then comply with the condition: 


Maximum value < 1.05 


Minimum value 


D-2.4 Colour Temperature and the Spectral 
Distribution of the Source 


The source used for illuminating the retro-reflector 
shall as far as possible represent the CIE illuminant A, 


IS 17436 : 2020 


both as regards colour temperature and spectral power 
distribution. 


D-2.5 Photometer Head (Measuring Element) 


D-2.5.1 The photometer head shall be corrected to 
the spectral luminous efficiency for the CIE standard 
photometric observer in photopic vision. 


D-2.5.2 The device shall not show a perceptible change 
in local sensitivity within the area 


of its aperture; otherwise suitable provisions must 
be added, for example the application of a diffusing 
window at a certain distance in front of the sensitive 
surface. 


D-2.5.3 Experience has shown that non-linearity of 
photometer heads may be a problem with the very 
small quantities which are the rule in the photometry 
of retro-reflectors. A check at comparable illuminance 
levels on the photometer head is recommended. 


D-2.6 The Influence of a Regular Reflection 


The amount and distribution of the regular reflection 
from the surface of the retro-reflector depends on 


the flatness and the gloss of the surface. In general, 
the regular is best avoided when the reference axis is 
placed so that the regular reflection is directed on the 
opposite side of the source from the photometer head 
(for example with f, = - 5?) 


D-2.6.4 The CIE angular system for specifying 
and measuring retro-reflectors. The first axis is 
perpendicular to the plane containing the observation 
axis and the illumination axis. The second axis is 
perpendicular both to the first axis and to the reference 
axis. All axes, angles, and directions of rotation are 
shown positive. 


NOTES 

1 The principal fixed axis is the illumination axis. 

2 The first axis is fixed perpendicular to the plane containing 
the observation and illumination axis. 


3 The reference axis is fixed in the retro-reflector and moveable 
with 5, and 2,. 


D-2.6.2 Representation of a goniometer mechanism 
embodying the CIE angular system for specifying and 
measuring retro-reflectors. All angles and directions of 
rotation are shown positive. 


First Axis I Illumination Axis a Observation angle 
2 Second Axis O Observation Axis Po b Entrance angles 
Reference Axis E : Rotation angle 


Fic. 3 CIE Co-ORDINATE SYSTEM 


10 


IS 17436 : 2020 


i à First Axis I Illumination Axis a : Observation angle 
2  : Second Axis O  : Observation Axis Pb, s Entrance angles 

R Reference Axis € Rotation angle 

P  : Retro-reflective material 


FiG. 4 GoNIOMETER MECHANISM EMBODYING THE CIE ANGULAR SYSTEM 


OBSERVATION PHOTOMETER HEAD 
ILLUMINATION DRIVERS EYE 
REFERENCE AXIS: (ENTERANCE) eo 
NORMAL TO THE ANGLE f ee 
RETRO-REFLECTIVE m s (ANGLE OF DIVERGENCE 
SURFACE ———— Ha OBSERVATION IN THIS REGULATION) 
ae ANGLE a 
a oD 
\ SOURCE 
REFERENCE.CENTRE e i MEDIAE 
RETRO-REFLECTOR DISTRIBUTION OF 
DEVICE RETRO-REFLECTED 


INTENSITY 


Fic. 5 


11 


IS 17436 : 2020 


PHOTOMETER HEAD 


SOURCE 


RETRO-REFLECTOR 
DEVICE 


FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS 
REGULATION, THE FOLLOWING 
LIMITS ARE SET UP: 


Fic. 6 Limits FOR THE ANGLES 


12 


IS 17436 : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Automotive Electrical Equipment and Instruments Sectional Committee, TED 11 


Organization 


Vehicle Research & Development Establishment, 
Ahmednagar 


Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 


Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, 
New Delhi 


Automotive Research Association of India, 
Pune 


Automotive Components Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Bosch Electrical Drives India Private Ltd, Chennai 

Cast Master Mobitech India, Faridabad 

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 

Controller of Quality Assurance Vehicles, Jabalpur 
Madhya Pradesh 

Daimler India Commercial Vehicles, Chennai 

Denso India, Gurugram 

Fiem Industries Ltd, Sonepat 

Force Motors Ltd, Pune 

Hero Moto Corp Ltd, Dharuhera 

Honda Cars R & D India, Gautam Budh Nagar 

Indian Society of Lighting Engineers (ISLE), 
Gurugram 

International Centre for Automotive Technology 
(ICAT), Manesar 


Indication Instruments Ltd, Faridabad 


Jay Ushin Ltd, Gurugram 


Representative(s) 
Suri G. R. M. Rao (Chairman) 


SHRI GOPALAKRISHNAN S. 
Ms Sucuismita C. (Alternate) 
Ms Sar ANKITHA (Young Professional) 


Suri R. R. K. KISHORE 
Dn M. TRINATH Basu (Alternate) 


Suri A. A. DESHPANDE 
Suri B. V. SHAMSUNDARA (Alternate) 


Suri UDAY HARITE 
Ms SEEMA BABAL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. NARSIMHAN 
Suri A. V. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ULLAL SUBRAHMANYA 
SHRI N. J. DEVAPRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL JAIN 
Suri RAJU AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKUND VINAYAK DEO 
SHRI SANTOSH Y ASHWANT DEASI (Alternate) 


CONTROLLER (CQA - OFV) JABALPUR 
SHRI SATYAPAL LAKHTAKIA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. V. SUDERSON 


SHRI NOEL ALEXANDER PETERS 
SHRI ALOK Kumar (Alternate) 
Ms ALKA SHARMA (Young Professional) 


Suri G. V. GEORGE 
SHRI ARSHAD JAMEEL (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIRUDDHA KULKARNI 
Suri R. M. KANITKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI FEROZ ALI KHAN 
SHRI SUBRAT Kumar Dasu (Alternate) 


SHRI ADISH AGGARWAL 
Suri S. MUTHU Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER SODHI 
SHRI RAMKRISHNA MAYDEO (Alternate) 


SHRI MADHUSHUDAN JOSHI 
SHRI MAHENDER PAL (Alternate) 
Ms VHAYANTA AHUJA (Young Professional) 


SHRI VISHAL LALANI 
Suri ANUJ GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH Y ADAV 
SHRI ANIL Kumar (Alternate) 


13 


IS 17436 : 2020 


Organization 
John Deere India Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Lucas TVS Ltd, Chennai 

Lumax Industries Ltd, Gurugram 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, MRV Chennai 
Malhotra Cables, Delhi 


Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurugram 


Mercedes Benz India Pvt. Ltd, Pune 
Minda Industries, Haryana 


MINIBIS Tech India, New Delhi 


Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Micro Smalls Medium Enterprises, 
New Delhi 


National Highway Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Test House, Mumbai 

Roots Auto Products Pvt Ltd, Coimbatore 
Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
New Delhi 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Toyota Kirloskar Motor Ltd, Bidadi 


Tractor Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Vehicles Research & Dev. Estt. (VRDE), Ahmednagar 


Volkswagen India, Pune 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 

SHRI PRASHANT PULLIWAR 

Suri ANAND Ra; (Alternate) 
SHRI S. KRISHNA KUMAR 

SHRI O. MuniGEPPA (Alternate) 
SHRI VERENDRA SACHDEV 

SHRI RANDHIR Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI KUMAR MEGHANATHAN 

SHRI S. SAKTHIVELAN (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJEEV MALHOTRA 

Suri VIKAS Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI GURURAJ RAVI 
SHRI SANDEEP RAINA (Alternate) 
Ms. M. BuANEsHwari (Young Professional) 


SHRI SANJEEV MANDPE 

Suri Nikuit Desa! (Alternate) 
Suri V. J. RAO 

SHRI NIRMAL KUMAR Minpa (Alternate) 
SHRI WG CDR I. S. SABHARWAL 


SHRI R. K. JAISWAL 


SHRI SURESH YADAVENDRA 
SHRI ANIL Kumar SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri R. C. PALEKAR 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR AGGARWAL (Alternate) 
Suri D. G. BASUMATRY 
Suri B. R. MANDAL (Alternate) 
SHRI K. SARAVANA SUNDARAM 
Suri R. SELVARAJ (Alternate) 
SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI SAURABH ROHILLA (Alternate) 
SHRI ASHISH WADHWA 
SHRI GOWRISHANKAR P S (Alternate) 


Suri Rasu M. 
Suri VHETH R GATTY (Alternate) 
Suri DINESH G M (Young Professional) 


SHRI MADHAV BHADE 
Suri PuiLir Kosy (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH SAHOO 
SHRI NARENDRA MALviyA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT SHARMA 


Suri R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (TED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SHARAD KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (TED), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 11 (14258). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


