NAT Alan IS 17431 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Ta WI ATT — erret ATTA Het 
(THE ) Tet Heit I TAT 
SITep eren $T — agers cht ferte 


Textile Dyestuffs — Natural Dye 
from Red Flowers of Impateins 
balsamina ( Balsam, Gulmehndi ) — 
Identification 


ICS 59.040 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4 freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2020 Price Group 5 


Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TXD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft was finalized by Textile 
Specialty Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee and had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The revival of natural dyes has happened for two reasons: 
a) Due to the harmful effect of synthetic dyes, safer natural dyes are being preferred globally, and 


b) The ban on the use of azo dyes which release carcinogenic amines has also brought back natural dyes 
into the limelight. Natural dyes are being used extensively for the dyeing of cotton, linen, silk and wool 
substrates. 


Impateins balsamina (Balsam, Gulmehndi in Hindi) is an annual plant extensively cultivated in gardens for its 
ornamental flowers which may be dark coloured in hues of red, purple and magenta or may be light coloured in 
tints of lavender and of pink to cream and white. The red flowered variety produces reddish brown dye which has 
been used for dyeing textiles and as a food dye as well. 


In order to achieve optimum quality with minimum lot-to-lot shade variation, and little differences in colour when 
the same dyestuff is obtained from different manufacturers, it is essential to standardize this natural dyestuff. This 
will improve the cost benefit ratio and help the user adjust their dyeing or printing recipes appropriately. 


It is for the first time that the standard for the natural dyestuff Jmpateins balsamina (red) flower dye has been 
written, for the benefit of buyers, sellers and users of this natural dyestuff. Standardization and identification 
methods will bring all the major parameters under scan and match. The main intention of this specification is to 
identify the natural dyestuff. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17431 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILE DYESTUFFS — NATURAL DYE FROM 
RED FLOWERS OF /MPATEINS BALSAMINA 
( BALSAM, GULMEHNDI ) — IDENTIFICATION 


1SCOPE 


This standard prescribes test methods and identification 
requirements of powder / aqueous extract of [mpateins 
balsamina (Balsam, Gulmehndi) red flower dye, 
and of textiles coloured with this dye. The detection 
and identification. of the natural colourant from 
red flowers of Impateins balsamina is conducted 
using chromatographic techniques i.e, Thin Layer 
Chromatography (TLC) and High Performance Liquid 
Chromatography (HPLC) as given in Annex A and 
Annex B and by UV-Visible spectroscopic technique as 
given in Annex C. The method for extraction of the dye 
from fabric dyed with Jmpateins balsamina red flower 
extracts is given in Annex D. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below. 


IS No. Title 


1070:1992 Reagent grade water — Specification 
(third revision) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


3.1 Impateins balsamina Red Flower Dye — 
Impateins balsamina is the botanical name ofthe annual 
plant Balsam or Gulmehndi (Hindi) widely grown for 
its attractive ornamental flowers. It belongs to family 
Balsaminaceae. /mpateins balsamina produces reddish 
brown dye from the red variety of its flowers, which 
has been used for dyeing textiles and as a food dye. 


3.2 Natural Colourant — Colourants from natural 
origin, particularly materials obtained from plant parts, 
namely - stem, root and leaves, extracted without any 
chemical reaction primarily used in textiles for dyeing 
or printing. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


4.1 Natural dyestuffs are usually never a single 
compound; they are composed of several compounds 
many of which are structurally similar. Their individual 
character will determine how they bind to the substrate, 
and the ratios bound to the substrate may be different 
from their ratios in the extract. These individual 
components can be analyzed by spectroscopic and 
chromatographic techniques which can determine the 
authenticity of the natural colourant. 


4.2 The colouration in red petals of /mpateins 
balsamina is due to the anthocyanidin pelargonidin and 
its derivatives. The pelargonidin is highly conjugated 
with sugars (glucose, rhamnose) and acylated groups 
(coumaroyl, feruoyl). These anthocyanins and its esters 
are susceptible to hydrolysis, especially under alkaline 
conditions to yield the less soluble anthocyanidins. 
The petals also contain other coloured compounds 
such as the flavonol, kaempferol and its glycosides, 
and the naphtoquinones, lawsone and 2-methoxy-1,4- 
naphthoquinone. The sepals contain the conjugates of 
pelargonidin and kaempferol and also conjugates of the 
anthocyanidin, cyanidin and the flavonol, quercetin. 
An extract of red flowers of balsam will contain all 
these coloured compounds and also small amounts of 
various colourless phenolic compounds, tetralones and 
benzofurans which nevertheless will contribute to its 
chromatographic and spectroscopic characteristics. 


5 APPARATUS 


5.] Analytical Balance, with resolution of 0.001 g. 
5.2 Spatula 

5.3 Ultrasonic Water Bath (Sonicator) 

5.4 Stoppered Conical Flask 

5.5 Measuring Cylinder 

5.6 Funnel 


5.7 Qualitative Grade Filter Paper, Particle retention 
11 um. 


IS 17431 : 2020 


6 REAGENTS 


6.1 Impateins balsamina Red Flowers, dried and 
powdered to serve as reference 


6.2 Methanol, analytical grade. 
7 PROCEDURE 


7.1 Preparation of Impateins balsamina Red Flower 
Dye Reference and Test Samples 


Dried and powdered deep red mature flowers from 
Impateins balsamina (red variety) should be used to 
prepare the reference sample. The stock solution of the 
reference natural dye is prepared by steeping 0.5 g of 
dry flower powder in 100 ml methanol in a stoppered 
conical flask. It is then agitated in a sonicator set at 45°C 
for about 20 min, after which the solution is filtered 
using a filter paper, and then transferred to another 
stoppered glass vessel for further analysis. If not used 
on the same day, the stock solution can be stored in 
a refrigerator for about two weeks. Stock solution of 
the test sample is also prepared in the same way from 
dry, powdered plant material. If the test sample is a 
liquid concentrate or a spray dried extract, a shorter 
dissolution time and a smaller amount of sample 
(0.05 g) may be sufficient. If the test material is dyed 
textile, the method for the extraction of the natural dye 
from it is given in Annex D 


7.2 Analysis 


The detection and identification of Impateins balsamina 
red flower natural dye from prepared dye samples is 


carried out by using chromatographic techniques viz., 
TLC and HPLC as given in Annex A and B. These are 
also analyzed by UV-Visible spectrophotometry as 
given in Annex C. 


7.3 Qualification and Identification of Impateins 
balsamina Red Flower Natural Dye 


Comparison between analyses of test sample and 
reference /mpateins balsamina red flower natural dye 
sample through 7.3 can identify whether the test sample 
is Impateins balsamina red flower natural dye. The 
specific tests to be conducted are given in Table 1. 


8 CALIBRATION OF THE ANALYTICAL 
EQUIPMENT 


The instruments/equipment being used (TLC, HPLC, 
UV-Visible spectrophotometer) should be calibrated 
using standard reference materials and procedures 
as recommended by the manufacturer to ensure their 
proper working before start of the analysis. 


9 VALIDATION OF THE METHOD 


The test methods employed should be validated using 
authentic reference dye sample for reliability. and 
repeatability 


10 REPORT 


The report shall include the following information: 
a) Reference to this standard, 
b) Tests conducted and test conditions, and 
c) Results on identification of the test sample. 


Table 1 Specific Tests Recommended for Identification of Impateins balsamina 
Red Flower Natural Dye 


( Clause 7.3 ) 


SI No. Test Type of Test Ref to Annex 
(0) Q) (3) (4) 
i) Chromatography tests: 
a) Thin layer chromatography (TLC) Mandatory test 
b) High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) Additional test (See Note) B 
ii) Spectroscopy tests: 
a) UV-visible spectroscopy Confirmatory test € 


NOTE — HPLC may be performed wherever such instrumentation facilities are available. 


IS 17431 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF IMPATEINS BALSAMINA RED FLOWER NATURAL DYE BY 
THIN LAYER CHROMATOGRAPHY (TLC) 


A-1 PRINCIPLE 


TLC separates non-volatile constituent compounds in a 
mixture by virtue of differences in their affinity for the 
stationary solid phase which is spread as a thin layer 
on a sheet/plate and the selected mobile solvent phase 
which are then seen as different spots on the TLC plate. 
Positioning of a spot on the TLC plate denoted by its 
R, value (distance travelled by the constituent / distance 
travelled by the solvent) depends on its chemical nature 
and is its characteristic property. Therefore, due to 
similarity in constituent chemical components, test and 
reference /mpateins balsamina red flower natural dye 
samples under similar TLC condition should result in 
spots of similar A, values and colour and thus a test 
sample can be identified as whether it is /mpateins 
balsamina red flower natural dye. 


A-2 APPARATUS 


A-2.1 Analytical thickness Silica gel G/ GF 254 coated 
TLC plates (may be cast in-house or procured from 
commercial suppliers). 


A-2.2 Capillary for spotting TLC plates. 


A-2.3 TLC development chamber (of a dimension 
suitable to accommodate TLC plate). 


A-2.4 TLC spot visualization chamber containing 
crystals of iodine (of a dimension suitable to 
accommodate TLC plate). 


A-2.5 Optionally, a viewing chamber for TLC with 254 
nm UV tubes which may also be fitted with daylight 
fluorescent tubes (CRI 95) and photographic camera 
for recording photographs. 


A-3 REAGENTS 


A-3.1 Stock Solutions, of test and reference [mpateins 
balsamina red flower natural dye prepared in 7.1. 


A-3.2 Methanol 


balsamina red flower dye extract 


R,of reference sample of Impateins 


A-3.3 Ethyl Acetate 


A-3.4 n-Hexane 


All reagents except item A-3.1 should be of analytical 
reagent grade and all glassware should be cleaned and 
finally rinsed with reagent grade water and dried. 


A-4 PROCEDURE 


Both reference and the test sample extracts are spotted 
carefully, side-by-side, on a silica gel coated TLC 
plate. The spots are dried and the plate is placed in 
TLC development chamber, pre-equilibrated with 
the developing solvent consisting of 60 percent Ethyl 
acetate and 40 percent n-Hexane. After the solvent 
front has travelled to sufficient distance, the TLC 
plate is removed from the chamber and the solvent is 
allowed to evaporate. Developed spots are visualized 
in daylight. The spots may optionally be visualized and 
photographed in the viewing chamber under daylight 
fluorescent tubes and if a silica gel GF254 plate is 
used, also under UV-254 nm light. The TLC plate is 
then placed in the iodine chamber and the spots are 
visualized in iodine. Another TLC separation can 
be performed in the solvent system consisting of 10 
percent Methanol and 90 percent n-Hexane where a 
greater number of spots are visualized. The constituents 
of the test sample present as spots on each TLC plate 
are compared with the reference dye sample and the 
colour and R, values of the spots in both the test and 
reference sample are noted. 


A-5 OBSERVATION 


Details of stock solution preparation and its dilution if 
any: 

Type of TLC plate used: Silica gel G/ GF 254: in- 
house/commercial 


Solvent system | used: 60 percent ethyl acetate and 40 
percent n-hexane, 


Solvent system 2 used: 10percent methanol and 90 
percent n-hexane 


R, and spot colour of test | Comment 


sample extract 


Solvent system 1 | R,0.50 


Solvent system 2. | R,0.90, 0.60 and 0.20 


IS 17431 : 2020 


Two indicative thin layer chromatograms with both the 
tracks being /mpateins balsamina red flower natural 
dye extract are presented in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. However, 
the position and number of spots may vary due to 
differences in sample preparation and chromatographic 
conditions. 


Fic. 1 THIN LAYER CHROMATOGRAM OF IMPATEINS 
BALSAMINA RED FLOWER NATURAL DYE EXTRACT 
(SOLVENT SYSTEM 1) 


M 


Fic. 2 THIN LAYER CHROMATOGRAM OF IMPATEINS 
BALSAMINA RED FLOWER NATURAL DYE EXTRACT 
(SOLVENT SYSTEM 2) 


A-6 CONCLUSION 


Colour of the spots and the R, values of the reference 
and test samples are similar/different. 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF IMPATEINS BALSAMINA RED FLOWER DYE BY HIGH 
PERFORMANCE LIQUID CHROMATOGRAPHY (HPLC) 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


HPLC is used to separate compounds in a mixture 
by virtue of differences in their affinity for the 
stationary phase which is packed in a column, and the 
mobile solvent phase that is pumped through it. The 
constituents, depending upon their chemical nature, 
are differently retarded during their passage through 
the column and are identified by comparing the time 
taken by a constituent compound in eluting from the 
column, as detected by a detector (retention time), with 
that of a standard reference compound. Selection of a 
detector is important as in the closed system, the eluting 
compounds cannot be seen by the eye and can only be 
detected by their characteristic properties. UV detector 
is a common detector employed as many organic 
compounds absorb in the UV region. Wavelength of the 
detector can be set to a value where absorption by the 
compounds of interest is high so as to achieve higher 
sensitivity. Various parameters of the HPLC assay are 
set in such a way that distinct peaks of the reference 
sample are observed in the chromatogram. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 HPLC System, with binary pump, UV/PDA 
detector and software. 


B-2.2 C-18 Reverse Phase Column (RPC-C18) — 
150 x 4.6 mm; 5 micron. 


B-2.3 Guard Column, compatible with the analytical 
HPLC column. 


B-2.4 Micro-Syringe 


B-2.5 Membrane Filters (0.45 micron), for micro 
-syringe. 


B-2.6 All Glass Filtration Assembly — for micro 
filtering solvents. 


B- 2.7 Oil-Free Vacuum Pump 


B-2.8 Membrane Filters (0.45 micron), for solvent 
filtration. 


B-3 REAGENTS 


B-3.1 Methanol 
B-3.2 Deionized Water 
B-3.3 Reference /mpateins balsamina red flower 


natural dye and test dye stock solutions prepared in 7.1. 


NOTE — All reagents except B-3.3 should be of HPLC grade 
and need to be filtered through 0.45 micron membrane filter 
before use. All glassware used should be cleaned and finally 
rinsed with reagent grade water and dried. 


B-4 PROCEDURE 


B-4.1 Chromatographic conditions 


a) Stationary Column C18, 150 x 4.6 mm; 5 


phase: micron, 

b) Eluent/ Methanol: Deionised water 
mobile phase: (95:5), 

c) Flow rate: 1.0 ml/min, 

d) Detection 254 nm (band width 16 nm), 
wavelength: and 

e) Run time: 15 min. 


B-4.2 Method 


B-4.2.1 HPLC system is started and the selected mobile 
phase is allowed to pass through the column till a stable 
baseline is obtained. Reference dye solution, after 
appropriate dilution, is then aspirated into the micro- 
syringe, a membrane pre-filter is fitted onto it and the 
solution is injected into the sample loop (10-20 micro 
litre capacity) in load position to fill it completely. 
The injection valve is then turned to inject position to 


IS 17431 : 2020 


introduce the sample onto the column. As the mobile 
phase is continuously passing through the column, the 
constituents of the injected dye extract get separated. 
These separated constituents exit the column and enter 
the UV/PDA Detector which detects them by recording 
the absorbance of the individual constituents as they 
pass through it. This absorbance is converted to a signal 
and peaks are seen on the signal intensity versus time 
plot which is continuously displayed on the monitor. 
When a UV-absorbing component passes through the 
detector a peak is seen on the plot. After completion 
of the run, a chromatogram along with a report of peak 
retention times, peak height and peak area for each 
peak is generated by the software. The test sample run 
is also completed in the similar manner. Identity of the 
test sample is established by comparing the retention 
times of the peaks in reference and test chromatograms. 
Peak height or its area provides additional quantitative 
information about the relative abundance of various 
constituents in test and reference samples. 


B-4.2.2 An indicative chromatogram containing the 
peaks obtained after HPLC assay of the Impateins 
balsamina red flower natural dye extract is shown in 
Fig 3. Peak location/retention times and height may 
vary between the indicative chromatogram and the 
injected samples due to differences of the dye sample 
and the extract preparation conditions. 


B-5 OBSERVATION 


B-6 CONCLUSION 


The retention time of the constituents of the reference 
and test sample are similar/different. The reference 
sample and test sample are therefore similar/different. 


In test sample extract Comment 


In reference sample of 
Impateins balsamina red 
flower natural dye extract 
Retention time of the | 2 min 
peaks observed in| 5min 
HPLC chromatogram . 
3.6 min 


Characteristic 3 peaks in 
the ratio of 1:1.5:2 


IS 17431 : 2020 


2998 (Max Plot) 


AU 


CTN PESA aa A SE TE a T EEE 
10.00 11.00 12.00 13.00 14.00 15.00 


Minutes 


Fic. 3 HiGH PERFORMANCE LIQUID CHROMATOGRAM OF IMPATEINS BALSAMINA 
Rep FLOWER NATURAL DYE EXTRACT 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 1, 7.2 and Table 3 ) 


IDENTIFICATION OF IMPATEINS BALSAMINA RED FLOWER DYE BY 
UV-VISIBLE SPECTROSCOPIC METHOD 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


C-1.1 When sample molecules are exposed to light 
having an energy that matches a possible electronic 
transition within the molecule, some light energy 
is absorbed as the electron is promoted to a higher 
energy orbital. An optical spectrometer records the 
wavelengths at which absorption occurs, together with 
the quantum of absorption at each wavelength. The 
resulting spectrum is presented as a graph of absorbance 
(A) versus wavelength. 


C-1.2 Many molecules absorb ultraviolet and/or visible 
light. Fine particles will scatter light and contribute to 
the absorbance. It is therefore essential to remove fine 
particles when measuring absorbance of dye solutions. 
Absorbance (A) is directly proportional to the path 
length, b, and the concentration, c, of the absorbing 
species. Beer 5 law states that 


A =€bc 


Where, € is a constant of proportionality, called the 
absorptivity. 

C-1.3 Different dye compounds within the natural 
dyestuff absorb radiations of different specific 
wavelengths. The spectral curve will thus be a 
summation of their individual absorbances. An 
absorption spectrum of the natural dyestuff will thus 
show a characteristic curve with peaks corresponding 
to structural groups present within the constituent 
molecules. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Ultra 
Spectrophotometer 


Violet Visible Scanning 


C-2.2 Quartz Sample Cuvettes — Matched pair of 
1.00 cm light path. 


C-3 REAGENTS 


C-3.1 Reference Impateins balsamina Red Flower 
Natural Dye Extract 


C-3.2 Methanol 


NOTE — All reagents should be of analytical reagent grade 
and all glassware should be cleaned and finally rinsed with 
reagent grade water and dried. 


C- 4 PROCEDURE 


C-4.1 The stock solution of the reference /mpateins 
balsamina red flower dye prepared in 7.1 may be 
used to record the spectrum in the visible region 
(400 — 700 nm). This solution after diluting five-fold 
may be suitable for recording the spectrum in the UV 
region (200 — 400 nm). The test sample solution is also 
prepared in the same manner as the reference sample. 


C-4.2 Both UV and visible spectra are recorded with pure 
methanol in reference holder of the spectrophotometer. 
Reference dye sample is first analysed. Test sample is 
analysed next and recorded spectra are compared for 


similarity of the spectral curve that is, peak positions 
and their intensity (absorbance value). Indicative UV 
and visible spectra of the /mpateins balsamina red 
flower natural dye extract is presented in Figs. 4 and 5, 
respectively. The absorbance spectral curve of this dye 
extract has specific characteristics both in the UV and 
visible range as shown in these Figures. 


IS 17431 : 2020 


C-5 OBSERVATION 


C-6 CONCLUSION 


The nature of the spectral curve of the test sample in 
the UV and visible range is similar/different to the 
reference sample. 


In reference Impateins | In test sample extract | Comments (Describing 
balsamina red flower dye extract difference/ similarity in spectral 
curve) 
Peak position | 210 nm — 2.40A 
(nm) with | 275 nm. 1.60 A 
absorbance 
360 nm — 1.16 A 
510 nm — 1.40A 
Scan Graph 
2.50 
225 
2 DO 
1.75 
1.50 
125 
1.00 
| O75 
E 0.50 
BO mas 
Tia 
200 225 250 275 2300 325 3% 175 #00 426 


Wiavelangiheinimt 


Fic. 4 Uv-VIsIBLE SPECTRUM Or IMPATEINS BALSAMINA RED FLOWER NATURAL DYE EXTRACT 


ot 


30070 


800°C 


Fic. 5 VISIBLE SPECTRUM OF IMPATEINS BALSAMINA RED FLOWER NATURAL DYE EXTRACT 


IS 17431 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Clauses 1 and 7.1) 


EXTRACTION OF DYE FROM FABRIC/YARN DYED WITH IMPATEINS 
BALSAMINA RED FLOWER NATURAL DYE 


D-1 PRINCIPLE 


Extraction of dyed textile samples with a suitable 
solvent (methanol) is necessary to release the dyes 
from these samples. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 Soxhlet Extraction Assembly with Heating 
Bench 


D-2.2 Scissors 
D-2.3 Qualitative Filter Paper Sheet 


D-2.4 Rotary Vacuum Evaporator with Evaporating 
Flask 


D-2.5 Funnel 
D-2.6 Conical Flasks 


D-2.7 Measuring Cylinder 
D-3 REAGENTS 
D-3.1 Methanol (Analytical Reagent Grade) 


D-4 PROCEDURE 


About 50 g of dyed textile is cut into small pieces and 
packed in a filter paper. The packed filter paper column is 
put for soxhlet extraction with methanol as the solvent. 
The temperature is so adjusted to get about 8-10 cycles 
of the solvent per hour. Extraction is continued for 6-8 
h, till most of the colour is discharged. The coloured 
solvent is filtered and is concentrated under vacuum in 
a rotary evaporator to about 20 ml. This concentrated 
extract can then be used for chromatographic and 
spectroscopic analysis as per the methods described in 
7.3 after appropriate dilution, if required. 


IS 17431 : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Textile Speciality Chemicals and Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TXD 07 


Organization 


Department for Jute and Fibre Technology, Institute 
of Jute Technology, University of Calcutta 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Ama Herbals, Lucknow 
Atul Ltd (Colors Division), Atul 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Archroma India Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


BioDye India Pvt Ltd, Sawantwadi, Maharashtra 


Department for Jute and Fibre Technology, Institute 
of Jute Technology, University of Calcutta 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 


Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata 
Jaysynth Dye-Chem, Mumbai 
National Peroxide Limited, Mumbai 


Northern India Textile Research Association 
Ghaziabad 


Office of the Textile Commissioner Mumbai 
S GS India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Shree Pushkar Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd, Mumbai 
Surya Processors Pvt Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 
The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmedabad 
The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The South India Textile Research Association, 
Coimbatore 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 
Association, Mumbai 


U P Textile Technology Institute, Kanpur 


Representative(s) 


Pror A. K. SAMANTA (Chairman) 


SHRI C. R. PRAYAG 
Ms Birasna Marti (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. A. SHAH 


SHRI SAI GANESH 
SHRI ARINDAM CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) SUJATA SAXENA 
Dn A. S. M. Raa (Alternate) 


Suri RAJESH RAMAMURTHY 
Suri AsHIM GHosH (Alternate) 


Dr Bosco HENRIQUES 
Dr D. Das 


Pror RAJ GANESH S. PALA 


Dr S. K. CHAKRABARTI 
Suri Sannir Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. SHARMA 
Suri P. M. RESHAMWALA (Alternate) 


Suni K. H. DESHPANDE 
Suri V. N. Josui (Alternate) 


Dn M. S. PARMAR 


SHRI Humayun K. 
Suri JAMIL AHMED (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV SARASWAT 
Suni AsHIsH Rawat (Alternate) 


Dn N. N. MAHAPATRA 
Suri G. GANGA REDDY 


SHRI KARTIKEYA DHANDA 
SHRIMATI SHILPI CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJARSHI GHOSH 
SHRI UMASANKAR MAHAPATRA (Alternate) 


Dn (Surimati) PADMA S. VANKAR 
Suri M. P. SATHIANARAYANAN (Alternate) 


DR PRAKASH VASUDEVAN 
SHRI S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr (SuniMATI) MANISHA MATHUR 
Dn RACHNA SHUKLA (Alternate) 


Pnor (SHRIMATI) ABHA BHARGAVA 
Dr Arun Patra (Alternate) 


IS 17431 : 2020 


Organization 
Universal Starch Chem Allied Limited Dhule Suni D. A. PATIL 
Wool Research Association, Thane 


Representative(s) 


SHRIMATI SMITA BAIT 
SHRI CHETAN MAHAJAN (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. BERA 
ScIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEApD (TXD), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 07 (14179). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


