( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard
GEOTEXTILES PART 4 DETERMINATION
OF PUNCTURE

METHODS OF TEST
RESISTANCE BY FALLING CONE METHOD

UDC

677'07 : 624'13 : 677'017'426'3

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

February 1992

Price Group 2

Geotextiles

Sectional Committee,

TXD 029

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geotextiles Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. Geotextiles used as separator and filter in earth constructions are normally subjected to dynamic impact. During the installation process, crushed rock or boulders are dropped onto a fabric supported by weak, water-saturated soil which may penetrate and thus damage the geotextile. It is, therefore, desirable that the geotextiles should resist the sudden impact and penetration of such particles. In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this stacdard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 13162 ( Part 4 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

GEOTEXTILES- METHODSOFTEST
PA7r 4 DIri3MINATIO.U O,z PJNSTU,3E RZSISTANC: BY FALLING CONE

METHOD

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 4 > prescribes a m:thod for determination of the size of the hol: mlde by dropping a standard brass cone onto a geotextile, supported by water, and to provide an indication of the ability of that fabric to resist a sudden impact. 2 PRINCIPLE 2.1 A geotextile sample is clamped in the holding ring free of folds and without prestressing, which is placed on the testing frame. The grooves and edges of the holding rings must fit into each other. The holding rings have to be bolted or pressed together ( e.g. mechsnically. pneumatically or hydraulically ) in such a way, that the compressive stress on the geotextile sample, acting uniformly over the groov:d area of the holding rings, is sufficient to keep the specimen in place during the test. No slipping of the specimen in the clamping rings shall be allowed during the test. 2.2 Water is added to the container secured to the lower clamping ring until it just touches the fabric. Any excess which may reach the upper surface of the fabric must be sponged away. 2.3 The cone is seated in its initial position in the release mechanism and the distance of 500 mm between the tip of the cone and the Then the cone is fabric upper side is checked. released and caused to fall onto the fabric. The resulting hole in the fabric is measured, using the gradation on the measuring cone. .3 APPARATUS 3.1 Specimen Sample Holder 3.1.1 The specimen sample holder ( clamping rings > consists of metal rings which are clamped together with uniformly distributed stress. Dimensions and shape of the sample holder are shown in Fig. 1. The grooved rings must fit into each other. The internal diameter of the rings is 150 mm, the external at least 180 mm. The specimen holding rings are secured to the testing frame. 3.2 Water Container 3.2.1 A trough of water which must have a minimum depth of 200 mm and a volume of .approximately 3'5 litres, and which can be fixed

tightly to the lower clamping ring, shall be used. The water is just allowed to tolch the clsm>ed fabric. 3.3 Testing Frame 3.3.1 The sample clamping ring, together with the water trough fixed to it, is supported by a frame, which holds the cone an3 its shift, in a trigger release mechanism positioned centrally above the clamp:d sample. The distance betwe:n the tip of the cone and the upper surface of the fabric shall b: 530 f 0'5 mm ( sze Fig. 2 ). 3.4 Fall Cone 3.4.1 The brass cone and its release shaft shzll tog:ther have a mtss of IO33 & 1 g. Th: head of the cone shall hsv; a point angle of 45" tapering to a mzximlm diamster of 50 f0'1 ma ( see -Fig. 3 ). To ensure a straight, vertical fall of the cone without roll, the point of gravity shall be situated near to the point of the cone head. To achieve this the cone shall be provided with filled core. 3.5 Penetration Measuring Cone

3.5.1 A cone which serves to measure the diameter of the hole made in the fabric sample by the impact, with a mass of 100 =t 1 g, and a point angle of 14" 15' shall be used ( see Fig. 4 ). The material of the cone shall be stable in respect of its dim:nsions and miss. The tapering wall of the cone shall be graduated in 2 mm stages at the cone diameters from O-50 mm. 4 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS ( 7.1 and 7.2 ) to roll length of 10 m2 free irregular spots,

selected over its full width perpendicular a sample having a minimum area from visible defects such as dirt, creases or holes, etc.

4.1 Cut from each roll

4.2 Cut from all the samples obtained in 4.1, at least ten specim:ns of a minimum size with diameter 190 mm. 4.3 Specimens from a sample shall be cut from positions evenly distributed over the full width and length of the sample, but not closer than 100 mm to the selvedges.

Oetatl: Shape

of

casleltntion

13

23

2Y'-

FIG. 1

SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS OF CLAMPING RINGS WITH MOUNTING MOULD

IS 13162 ( Part 4 ) : 1992

Seating tui table for trigger. release

Water

contabner

soZo,r

FIG. 2

PRINCIPLES OFTESTARRANGEMENT

FIG. 3

STANDARD BRASSCONE

4.5 Before cutting structured geotextiles, exact instructions for cutting shall be laid down, and these shall be followed with great care.
Increarlng 0

dia

4.6 If the cutting causes fragments of geotextile to loosen and if this cannot be avoided causing influence on test results, this fact shall be reported. 4.7 The specimens shall be kept free from dust. tamperature in dark and dry, at ambient protected against chemical and physical damage until the test is performed. 5 PROCEDIJRE 5.1 Dry the srmples in air under prevailing room conditions. Prepare, store and test the samples at prevailing room conditions. 5.2 Insert the support-mould into the lower clamping ring and ensure that the surface of the mould is levelled with the bottom level of the grooves in the clamping ring castellation. 5.3 Place the geotextile clamping ring. 5.4 Assemble ( or press ) ensuring that fabric sample 3 sample onto the lower

CO

FIG. 4

PENETRATION MEASURING CONE

the upper clam-ping ring and bolt it to the lower clamping ring, a uniform stress is acting on the over the castellation of the rings.

IS 13162 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 5.5 Removethe support-mould and secure the clamping rings with the sample to the frame. Fix the water trough tightly to the lower clamping ring. Add water to the container until it just touches the fabric. Any excess, which may reach the upper surface of the fabric must be sponged away. Close any valve used for water level adjustments. 5.6 Seat the cone in its trigger release mechanism, sary, adjust the distance the tip of the cone and fabric. initial position in the check and, if necesof 500 mm between upper surface of the calculate the standard performed. 7 REPORT 7.1 The t:st report information: a) Description b) Conditioning environmental ( temperature, shall include the following deviation for all the tests

of the tested product; of the test specimens, data during the test pressure, RH, etc );

5.7 Pull the trigger to release the cone, causing the cone to fall onto the fabric. Remove the fall cone from the hole and measure the size of the hole with the penetration measuring cone. 5.8 Calculate the average hole size and the standard deviation for all the ten test specimens. 6 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS

c) Test results ( use SI units > i.e. average hole size and its Standard deviation; and d) Any deviations from the test method; 8 SAMPLING 8.1 A random sample shall be selected from the lot. The sample selected should be homogenous and representative of the lot. 8.2 The number of rolls to be selected from a lot shall be in accordance with the procedure laid down in the relevant material specification or 11 as agreed to between the buyer and the seller.

6.1 Express the puncture resistance as the average size of the hole ( in mm ) made by dropping the fall cone onto the fabric and

Standard Mark Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the proStandard marked products are also continuously checked ~by BIS for conformity to ducer. that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtain-ed from the Bureau of Irdian Standards. The use of the Standard
Standards Act, I986 and the Rules

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Buresg of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all-its publications. No part of these publications may any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. TXD 29 ( 2543 > Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected be reproduced in the free use, in and sizes, type or Publication ), BIS.

BUREAU

0% INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (:Common to all Offices ) Telephones

Regional-Offices

:

Central : ManaklBhavan, 9 Bahadur ShahlZafar NEW Delhi-l 10002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. SchemejVII CALCUTTA -700054 Northern Southern

Marg,

331 01 31 331 13 75

M, V.I.P. Road, -Maniktola 37286 62 160036 53 38 43 412916
6 32 92 93

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road,

MADRAS 600113 Andheri ( East >

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC,Marol, BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAGATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Prmted at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

