IS:7022(Partl)-1973 ( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERM$ RELATING TO WATER, SEWAGE AND INDUSTRIAL EFFLUENTS, PART I ( Fourth Reprint OCTOBER 1996 )

UDC 628.V.3 : 001.4

0 Copyright

1974

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
NEW

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

Gr7

February

1974

IS:7022

(Part ' Rdrmd

I

-1973
""'

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO WATER, SEWAGE AND INDUSTRIAL EFFLUENTS, PART I

Water

Sectional hmmittee,

CDC 26

cxmtan
DR T. R. Banex-x,w
Jucwlbers Gee-Miller

ReprmntilIg
& Co Private Ltd. Calcutta

S-IA. K. BKATTACEARYA National Tat House, Calcutta SEW S. DALI GUPTA I Rltemute ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ). New Delhi SHBI V. M. BWCRAR SE-RIJITENDUA RAI ( Altermate) DU M. S. BIXXKAB Ion Exchange ( India ) Ltd. Bombay SHRIV.K. R~~(Altrmote) GNE3fISr AND bhALLVP&s'P, REdWay hl'd ( h'filliStI'y of RIdWayS ) -ALRAILWAYB,B~XBAY ABL)ISTANT RESEARCE OFTICIER ( CM-II ). RDSO, LucKwow ( Akmat4 ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHEI R. M. Drn~ SrrnrT.R. A~ARwAL(A~~~c) Regional Research Laboratory SERI K. L. Gaosa ( CSIR ). Bhubaneawar Alka~ti3emical Corporation of India Ltd, I)B T. GUEA I)BR.S. VPXSKATARAY~~N(AU~~~U) The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd. Jamshedpur hM.I.Gmc~~xnl~r King Institute, Madras SHRIA.S. HARIHARAN Planning commission, New Delhi D I R E c T o R ( WATER J0rn-r SEPPLY) Victoria Jubilee Technical Institute, Bombay PEOF B.L. MAHABAL Central Public Health Engineering Research Institute PROP N. MAJCNDI~I~ ( CSIR ) , Nagpur DE G. J. MOHANBAO ( A&mute ) All India Diitillm' Associition, New Delhi SHRI V. K. MALIK SEEI K. KAMESNWARARAO (Aknutr)

8 Copn'ght 1974
BUREAU
OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Tbia publication ir protected under the Indiun f&&right Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part. by anv mauu except with writtar permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infrinecment of copyright under the said Aa.

ISt7022(PanI)-1973

Membera
?JlouICIPALhALYsT SERI N.B. PATRL

l&prcsen@ng

Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay. Tata Chemicala Ltd. Bombay Bhabhh Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Indian $nstitute of Sciince, Bangalore Ministry of Health

Bornboy

SHBI T. R. RAO ( Alternate ) DR S. D. PAUL
SHRI s. ~HRI c.

tiLLA

DR I.

~ADHAKRI8HNAN

J. D. SHETH ( Altera& ) I&b Private Ltd, Bombay SHRIB.A. %lOLAPURWALA SHRX V. M. SHAH ( Alterma&1 Director Ge~.eral, BIS ( k&f$%ie Member ) SHRI D. Daa Grmra, ' Diwctor ( Chrm )

DR

SCffdUTJ G. M. SAXENA
( them ), BIS

Deputy Director

Panel

for Glossary of Terms Relating to Water, and Industrial Effluents, CDC 26 : P8
The Tata
Central

Sewage

DR

M. I. GURBAXANI
h'fOHANRA0

DR G. J.

DR S. D. PAUL SHRI ?~.A.SAMPATRKUX.~R.~N

SFIRIT.K.

VEDARAMAN

Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur Public Health Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta Ministry of Health

IS:7022(PatiI)-1973

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO WATER, SEWAGE AND INDUSTRIAL EFFLUENTS, PART I
-t

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 13 August 1973, after the draft finalized by the Water Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 This part of the glossary covers terms widely used in relation to water, sewage and industrial effluents in the fields of analysis and tests; treatment of water, industrial and domestic applications of water; sewage and industrial waste; and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes after treatment. Terms relating to water supply and sewerage will be covered in subsequent parts of this standard. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been the following publications, and is gratefully acknowledged: taken from

A glossary of water and sewage terms used in sanitary engineering practice. Fifth European Seminar for Sanitary Engineers. World Health Organization. 1956. D 1129-68 Definition of terms relating to industrial water industrial wastewaters. American Society for Testing Materials.
BOCERT

and and

(C L), ED. Glossary -Water Public engineering. 1949. American American Water Works Association.

and sewage control Health Association;

Glossary of technical terms, Part I Sewerage and sewage purification and Part II Water supply. 1971. Scottish Development Department.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) defines the terms widely used in relation water, sewage and industrial effluents. 3 to

Isr-7822jP8rtI)-l97s

2. TEmfmOLoGY
A Abwrbpice --The logaritlgn to relative transmittance, 7". the base 10 of reciprocal of the

Absorbance thus expresses the excess absorption over that of a specificd rtfcrcnce or standard. It is implied that compensation has been effected for reflectance losses, solvent absorption losses, and refmctive effect, if present, and that attenuation by scattering, is small compared with attenuation by absorption. .Penetration of a liquid or gas into the body of another A_substance without chemical reaction. Acid - A compound which ,dissociates in aqueous solution to furnish hydrogen ions. A&&y -The hydroxyl ions. quantitative capacity of aqueous media to react with

Acidity, Free MineralThe quantitative capacity of aqueous media to react with hydroxyl ions to pH 4'3. Acid Mine DraincgtAcidic drainage from bituminous coal mines, containing a high concentration of acidic sulphates especially ferrous sulphate. Actinonsyceita - A type of micro-organism related to both bacteria and fungi which causes earthy and musty odours in water. Activated Carboa Scs Carbon, Activated.

Activated Sludge ProcessA biological sewage treatment process in which a mixture of sewage and activated sludge is agitated and aerated. The activated sludge is subsequently separated from the treated sewage ( mixed liquor j by sedimentation, and wasted or returned to the process as `needed. The treated sewage overflows the weir of the settling tank in which separation from the sludge takes place.

Adsorption - Taking up

of gases, liquids or dissolved substances on the surface of solids without chemical reaction.
Advanced Treatmemt -See Treatment, Advanced. Aeration - Dissolution of air in a liquid by bringing about intimate contact between air and the liquid by one of the following methods: spraying the liquid in air; bubbling air through the liquid; or by 4

IS:7022(PartI;-1971

agitation of the liquid by passing through a packed tower or by cascading with the aim of transferring from the liquid phase to the gaseous phase or vice ucrsa. ( Ste a&o Oxygenation ). Amtiop, Di&ls4!d through a diffuser. Aeration, t Mechanic AirAeration produced in a liquid by air passed

a) The mixing, by mechanical means, of sewage and activated sludge in the aeration tank of the .activated sludge process, to bring fresh surfaces of liquid into contact with the atmosphere. b) The introduction mechanical action
Aeration

of atmozphcric oxygen into a liquid by the of paddle or spray mechanisms. time, usually expressed in hours, to in aeration tank undergoing of air through the surface of

Period -The theoretical that the mixed liquor is subjected activated sludge treatment.

Aeration, a liquid.
Amtor Aerobic -

Surfice

-The

absorption

A device that promotes

aeration.

Thriving

only in the presence of oxygen.

Agglomeration

- The coalescence of dispersed suspended matter into larger particles or floes which settle rapidly._ Frequently used as synonym for Aocculation. Albaminoid -

keratin.

Protein and protein-like

substances

such as collagen

and

WF-

Primitive plants, uni- or multi-celled, their foodstuffs by photosynthesis.
-

capable

of synthesizing

Algicide

Any substance that is highly toxic to alga.

Alkaki - Certain soluble compounds, principally of sodium, potassium, magnesium and calcium which give rise to hydroxyl ions in solution. AuUliity -The quantitative with hydrogen ions.
Alkalinity, Aikalinity, Biawbonate Carbonate Caustic
-

capacity

of

aqueous

media

to

react

-

Alkalinity Alkalinity

caused by bicarbonate caused by carbonate

ions.

ions.

Alkalinity,
ilk.UWObiC

-

The alkalinity

caused by hydroxyl ions.

Thriving

in. the absence of oxygen. 5

IS : 7022 ( Part I ) - 1973

Anion

-

A negatively charged ion. A water-bearing
Dilution Oxygen -

Aquifer Available

stratum of the earth.

Ssc Dilution Factor. See Oxygen, Available. B

Available

The flowing back of contaminated or polluted water from a plumbing fixture or cross-connection into a water supply line due to a lowering of pressure in the water line.
Back-Siphonage .Bacteria - Primitive micro-organisms, generally free of pigment, which reproduce by dividing in one, two, or three planes. They occur as They may be grown by special single cells, groups, chains, or E!aments. out of their native habitat. Aerobic-Bacteria Anas-obic -Bacteria

culturing

Bacteria,

oxygen.
Bacteria,

which which

thrive

only

in the presence of in the absence of

nxygen.

thrive only

Bacteria Bed - A bed of sand, gravel, broken stone, or other media through or over which.sewage or eflluent flows or trickles, and depends on bioldgical action for its effectiveness. ( See also Filter, Trickling ). Bacteria, Coli-serogenes See Bacteria,

Coliform Group.

Bacteria, Coliform Group - A group of bacteria, predominantly inhabitants of the intestine of man and other vertebrates but also found on vegetation, including ah aerobic and facultative anaerobic Gram-negative, non-spore forming bacilli that ferment lactose with gas formation. Formerly referred to as B. coli and bacteria of coli-aerogenes group. Their presence is indicative of f&al pollution. Bacteria, Bacteria, Facultative -

Bacteria

which can grow in the presence or and excrete to corrosion, its

abrence of oxygen.
Iron - Bacteria which assimilate iron compounds in their life processes, thereby contributing

Bacteria, Non-pathogenic man or the higher animals.
Bacteria, Bacteria Pathogenic Saprophytic-

Bacteria

which do not induce

disease in

Bacteria that produce disease. Bacteria that thrive upon dead organic matter. from

Bacteria, Sulphate-Reducing - Bacteria which assimil.ate oxygen sulphate compounds thereby reducing them to sulphide.

6

IS:7022(PartI)-1973 Buzterici&bacteria. BMerioP~ge Base Ex&u~ge B. CoIi An agent, physical or chemica1, for the destrucrion of

A viral agent that dissolves specific bacterial ~`1s. Softener See Softener, Base Exchange.

See Bacteria, Coliform Group.

Benthic Region - The bottom of a body of water. This region supports the benthos, a type of life that not only lives upon but contributes to the character of- the bottom.
B&&OS -Aquatic bottom dwelling, organisms. These include (a) sessile animals, such as sponges, barnacles, mussels, oysters, some of the worms, and many attached algae; (b) creeping forms, such as insects, snails, and certain clams; and (c) burrowing forms which include most clams and worms.

Berkfeld

Filter -

See Filter, Berkfeld.

Beta Energy, Maximum - The maximum energy of the beta-particle energy spectrum produced during beta decay of a given radioactive species. .
NOTE -Since a given beta-particle emitter may decay to several diRerent quantum states of the product nucleus, more than one maximum energy may be listed for a g;vcn species.

Bioassay -A determination of the concentration of a given material by comparison with a standard preparation; or the determination of the quantity necessary to affect a test animal under stated laboratory conditions. Biochemical -Resulting from biological growth of activity, measured by or expressed in terms of the ensuing chemical change. and

Biochemical Oxygen Demand ( BOD ) -The quantity of oxygen required for the oxidation of organic matter by bacterial action in the presence of oxygen. It is a measure of the strength of organic matter in terms of its ability to deplete oxygen in water. Generally, the standard test consists in measuring the oxygen depletion at 20�C for 5 days. Biochemical Process ice Biological Process. Biological Process - The process by which the life activities of bacteria and other micro-organisms in seatch for food, break down complex organic materials into simple, more stable substances. Self-purification of sewage, polluted streams, sludge digestion, and so-called secondary sewage treatments result from this process. Also called ` biochemical process `. 7

IS:7022(PwtI)-l!m
Biolecal Tests -

presence, identity, in industrial water.
Bleed-Off

Examination for the purpose of determining the numbers, or effects of the presence of any organism

a) To drain a liquid or gas, or to bleed accumulated air from a water line or to drain a tap or a container of accumulated water. b) The exuding,
Bloom, Lake -

percolation

or seeping

of a liquid

through

a surface. plant with

Large

life, such as green
Blowdown

algae,

masses of microscopic and occurring in bodies of water.

macroscopic

-Draining off a portion of the contents of a boiler a view to reduce the concentration of total solids in the boiler. taking place. present in a boiler when steaming ( See Industrial Water. )
See Irrigation,

Boiler Water -Water Broad Irrigation Buffer -A

is, or has beer

Broad. to resist changes in PH of a solution. in resisting a change
in \

substance

which tends

Buffer Action -

hydrogen

The action ion concentration.

of certain C

substances

Carbon,

Activated - Carbon particles usually obtained by carbonization of cellulosic material in the absence of air and possessing a high adsorptive capacity. Commonly used for the removal of colour, taste or odour in water.

Carbonate Hardness - The hardness in water and carbonates of calcium and magnesium.
Carrier

caused

by bicarbonates

carries
Carry

- A person who, though showing ( and disseminates ) large quantities

no clinical signs of a disease, of pathogenic organisms.

liquid

Over - Entrainment in the evolved vapour;

of liquid or solid particles from the boiling also the particles so entrained.

Cascade

a) A stretch of stream, intermediate between a rapids and a waterfall, where the drop in elevation of the stream bed is considerable but not sufficient to cause the water to fall vertically. b) A sudden dtop installed in a water way to produce agitation and aeration of the liquid flowing over. 8

IS : 7022 ( Part I I- 1973

cation -

A positively charged ion. material capable of

Cation Exchange Material - An ion-exchange reversible exchange of positively charged ions. Caustic Embrittlement Set Embrittlement

Cracking.

Cesspool - An underground impervious pit into which raw household sewage or other untreated liquid waste is discharged for temporary storage and from which the contents are removed for final disposal. Chelating Agent - Chemical compounds which have the property withdriwing ions from solution to form closed ring soluble complexes. of

Chemical Oxygen Demand ( COD )- The amount of oxygen, expressed in mg per litre, consumed under specified conditions in the oxidation of the organic and oxidizable inorganic matter contained in an industria; waste water, corrected for the influence of chlorides. Chlorination -The application of chlorine to water, sewage, or industrial wastes, generally for the purpose of disinfection, but frequently for accomplishing other biological or chemical results. application of chlorine to water, Chlorination, Break-Point -The sewage, or industrial wastes containing free ammonia to the point at which free residual chlorine is a minimum. Chlorine, Combined Available Residual - That portion of the total residual chlorine remaining in water, sewage, or industrial wastes at the end of a specified contact period, which will react chemically and biologically as chloramines or organic chloramines. Chlorine Demand -The difference between the amount of chlorine added to water, sewage, or industrial wastes and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact, and temperature. Chlorine, Free Available Residual -That portion of the total residual chlorine remaining in water, sewage or industrial wastes at the end of a specified contact period, which will react chemically and biologically as hypochlorous acid or hypochlorite ion. Chlorine Requirement SeeChlorine, Residual.

Chlorine, Residual - The total amount of chlorine ( combined and free available chlorine ) remaining in water, sewage or industrial wastes at the end of a specified contact period following chlorination. Clarifier - A tank or basin in which water, sewage, or other `liquids containing settleable solids, is retained for a sufficient time, and in which
9

ISr702!Z(PartI)-1973 the vcbcity of Bow is suflicientlylow, to remove by gravity a part of the suspended matter. Circular sedimentation tanks are also known as clarifiers. c&an River SeeRiver, Clean.

Coaguhnt - A material which removes colloidal substances present in water, sewage, etc, in the form of precipitates comprising floe particles more or less gelatinous in character. CoaguIation a) The process of converting colloidal or finely divided suspended matter into particles of such sizes as can be settled reasonably rapidly by the addition of an appropriate chemical coagulant, by biological processes or by other means. b) The process of adding a coagulant and necessary other reacting chemicals. ColIoids - Finely divided solids ( particle size varying from lo-` to lo-' cm ) which will not settle but may be removed by coagulation or biochemical action. bioIogical breakdown of organic solids to stabilize Cornposting -The them, producing a humic substance valuable as a fertilizer base. Condensate --Water obtained by evaporation and subsequent condensation of steam; usually water of high purity, unmixed with any other water. Condenser 7 An apparatus for removing heat from a vapour ( steam ) so as to cause it to revert to the liquid state ( water ). Conditioning -Treatment of water exclusive of disinfection to produce a water free of taste, odours, and other undesirable qualities. The term is more specially used for the treatment of boiler feed water. Contact Period -The time allowed for a sterilizing agent to act on the water under treatment before the water is fed to supply. Occasionally the term is also used for any other reaction period. Contamination - A general term signifying the introduction into water of micro-organisms, chemicals, `wastes. cr sewage, which renders the water unfit for its intended use. Cooling Coil - A coil of pipe or tubing to contain a flowing stream >f hot liquid which is cooled by heat transfer to a cold liquid outside. Cooling Water - Water used for cooling,.mainIy or inte! ~1 combustion engines. 10 for steam condensers

IS:7022(PartI)-1973 Corrosion -Chemical attack, as of metals, to a compound and thus deteriorated.

converted

by which

the

mrtal

is

Counter Background - In the measurement of radioactivitl-, the counting rate resulting from factors other than the radioactivity of the sample and reagents used.
NOTE- Counter background varies with and the electronics: it includes cosmic electrical noise. the location, shielding of the detector, rays, contaminating radioactivity, and

measurement of Counter Beta-Particle EfXcieacyIn the radioactivity, that fraction of beta particles emitted by a source which is detected by the counter.
Counter Efficiency - In the measurement of radioactivity, that fraction of the disintegrations occurring in a source which is detected by the counter.

Counter, Proport'onal - An instrument whose response to I-adiation is based upon the collection of the ions formed by the iuteraction of the radiation with the counter materials, plus a proportionate number of secondary ions formed by gas amplification.
Count, Standard Plate -Number of colonies of bacteria grown on selected solid media at a given temperature and .incubation period, usually exprcs;ed a9 number of bacteria per millilitre of sample. Critical Concentration Range - In bioassay, the interval between the higllest concentration at which all test animals survive for 48 hours and the lowest concentration at which alL test animals die within 24 hours. Crustac~ - Mostly aquatic animals jointed appendages And gills. Examples water fleas and sow bugs. Culture Culture

having rigid are crayfish,

outer crabs,

coverings, barnacles, by

Any organic life which has been intentionally use of suitable food and environment.
Medium -

developed

for study.
Curie -A

-4 nutrient

medium

for the growth of organic life

unit of radioactivity disintegrations per second or 2'220 minute. A microcurie is one millionth one-millionth of a microcurie ( lo-l2

equivalent to 3'700 X lOlo atomic x lOI2 atomic disintegrations per of a curie ( 10-s curie); a picocuric, curie ).

D
Dem-ation -The process of removing air from a liquid in which it is dissolved, usually for control of corrosion.

11

IS : 7022 ( Part I ) - 1973 Dechlorination - The partial or complete reduction of residual chlorine in a liquid by any chemical or physical process. Dcferrization -The from water. Defluoridation removal, usually with the aid of aeration, of fluorides from water. and cations from of iron

Removal

Dedneralization Complete removal of anions water, usually by the use of ion-exchange materials.

Deosygenation - The depletion of the dissolved oxygen in a -liquid. Under natural conditions, associated with the biochemical oxidation of organic matter present. Dtphenolation - The similar waste waters. removal of phenols from gas liquor and other

Desalination -A means of obtaining potable water from sea water, employed mainly in arid parts of the world and by some ships. Detention Period -The theoretical time required to displace the contents of a tank or unit at a given rate of discharge ( volume divided by rate of discharge ). Detritus The heavier solid matter m sewage, usually mainly inorganic.

Diatoxrz- Microscopic unicellular or colonial algae constituting the class Bacillaricre and having silicified cell walls. They are of great importance in self-purification of natural waters and as food for `many other forms of aquatic life.
Difhll3W -A porous or perforated plate or tube through which air is forced and divided into minute bubbles for diffusion in liquids. Commonly mac!e of Carborundum, alundum, silica sand, PVC or nylon.

Digestion - The anaerobic decomposition of organic matter, resulting in partial gasification, liquefaction and mineralization. Dilution a) An operation of disposing of sewage, industrial waste, or sewage treatment plant effluent by discharging it into a stream or body of water. b) The ratio of volume of flow of a receiving stream to the total volume of sewage or sewage treatment plant effluent or industrial emuent discharged into it. Dilution Factor -The ratio, usually expressed in percentage, of the quantity of untreated sewage or partly or completely treated effluent, to 12

IS : 7022 ( Part I ) - 1973

the average quantity of diluting water available effectively at the palint of The factor is sometimes disposal or at any point under consideration. Also called ` available dilution `. taken as the reciprocal. Discharge
a) As

applied to a stream, the rate of flow, or volume of water flowing at a given place and within a given period of time. an or

b) The act involved in water or other liquid passing through opening or along a conduit or channel. c) The water or other liquid which emerges passes along a conduit or channel. from an opening

Disease, Water-Borne -A disease caused by organisms or toxic The most substances which are carried and thus propagated by water. common water-borne diseases are hepatitis, typhoid, cholera, dysentery, and other such intestinal disturbances.
Disinfection -The killing of the larger portion ( but not necessarily all) of the harmful and objectionable micro-organisms in, or on, a medium by means of chemicals, heat, etc. Dissolved Matter -That matter, exclusive of gases, which dispersed in water to give a single phase of homogeneous liquid. Dissolved Dissolved Domestic Oxygen Solids See Oxygen, See Solids, -

is

Dissolved.

Dissolved. Domestic,

Use of Water

See Use of Water, E

E. coliEffluent
a)

See Escher&h& coli.

A liquid which tlows out of a containing

space.

b) Sewage, water or other liquid, partially or completely treated, or in its natural state, as the case may be, flowing out of a reservoir, basin, or treatment plant or part thereof.
Electrical Conductivity - The reciprocal of the resistance in ohms measured between, opposite faces of a centimetre cube of an aqueous solution at a specified temperature.
NOTEThe electrical conductivity shall be expressed in micromhos per centimetre at PC. The actual resistance, R, of the cell is measured in ohms. The conductance, I/R is directly prbportional to the cross-sectional area, A, inversely proportiontil to the length of ihe path, L. and directly proportional to the constant, K. The latter

13

IS:7022 (Part

I)-1973
measured between opposite faces of a
centimetre cube.

is the conductivity MathcmPticalJy.
I R
_e

KA

-_,o~Kw

L

AR

__

L

I

-

cm cm'xoJun5

-

mJKnpcrcm.

The numerical value of tJds arpression conductivity in micromhos per centimetrc.

multiplied by 1 000 MI0 is the cle~tri~l

Ehhriation of Sludge -A process of washing of sludge with water either mechanically or with diffused air. Embrittlement &w.kidg - A form of metal failure that occurs in steam boilers at riveted joints and at tube ends, the cracking being predominantly intercrystalline.
NCJTE-TJ& form of cracking, which has been known as `caustic embrittlcment ' is beJieved to result from the action of certain constituents of concentrated boiler water upon steel under stress.

Entrainment -The carrying over of drops of liquid from an evaporator.or boiler due to the vapour velocity being greater than the rate of settling of the drops. Equalizing Basin - A holding basin in which, by retention, in AOW and composition of a liquid are averaged out. variation

Escherichia

coli ( E. coli ) A speciq of genus Escherichii bacteria, normal inhabitant of the intestine of man and all vertebrates. This species is classified among the coliform group. See Bacteria, Coliform Group.
Commonly, an arm of the sea at the lower end of a river. l&tprrryEstuaries arc often enclosed by land accept at channel entrance point. Eutrophication - The enrichment of water in streams by substances contained in effluents or in the run-off from agricultural land, especially phosphorus and nitrogen compounds. It can greatly accelerate the growth of plant and other life, causing depletion of oxygen and danger to fish. F Filamentous Having the shape of a fine thread-like body or structure.

Film, MicrobialThe gelatinous film of zooglacal growths covering. the media or spanning the interstices of a biological bed.

14

IS:7@2Z(PartI)-1973 Filter - A device or structure for removing solids from water, sewage or other liquids. The liquid is passed through a filtering medium which may consist of a granular material such as sand, infusorial or diatomaceous earth, anthracite, etc, finely woven cloth, unglazed porcelain, or even specially prepared paper. Filter, Berkfeld - A household apparatus diatemacious earth called kieselguhr. Filter Medium -The material example, sand, paper, cloth, etc. Filter, Percolating with for filtering a filter water through a is filled, for

which

SeeFilter, Trickling.

Filter, Rapid Sand - A filter made up of sand, gravel, authracite, etc, through which water is passed during treatment. It may be either of the graviv type open to the atmosphere, or of the pressure type. Unlike a slow sand filter, it is capable of being back washed. The solids are removed mainly by mechanical action which may be assisted by a chemical floe. Filter Run -The period of working of a sand filter sucfcssive cleaning or washing operations. between two

Filter, Sedgewick-Rafter - A cylindrical funnel used as a filter for the concentration of organisms in the Sedgewick-Rafter method for the quantit:ttive determination of microscopic organisms, that is, of a size: largeI- than bacteria, in water. Filter, Slow Sand - A filter in which through a layer of fine sand or other mechanical removal of solids is assisted cleaned by skimming a thin layer from water is passed slowly downwards, suitable material, and in which The filter is by biological action. the upper surface.

Filter, Trickling - A filter consisting of an artificial bed of coarse materials, such as broken stone, clinkers, slate, or othir. materials, over which the effluent is distributed and applied in drops, films, or spray, from troughs, drippers, moving distributors, or fixed nozzles, and through which it trickles to the underdrains, giving opportunity for the formation of biological films, which clarify and oxidize the effluent. These are also sometimes called percolating filters. Filtration - The process of passing a liquid throu& a filtering medium ( which may consist of granular material such as sand, magnetite, or diatomaceous earth, finely -woven cloth, unglazed porcelain, or specially prepared paper ) for the removal of suspended or colloidal matter usually of a type that cannot be removed by sedimentation. Fixed Matter -Residues dissolved matter or both. remainmg 15 after ignition of particulate or

ISt7022(FartI)-I973 not - Small gelatinous masses, formed in a liquid by the addition coagulants or through biochemical processes or by aggregation microscopic and ultramicroscopic particles.
Fhcculation

of of

or chemical or both, by which - A process, mechanical small particles of solids in a liquid are aggregated into larger masses, thus making it easier for the removal of solids by sedimentation. Flotation - The process of raising of suspended solids to the surface of a tank by use of air, gas evolution, bacterial decomposition, heat or chemicals.
Fluorescence -The absorption of radiation at one wavelength . or range of wavelengths and its re-emission as radiation of longer, vrstble wavelengths. Fluoridation -The addition of suitable fluorides supplies, usually for the prevention of dental caries.

to

public

water

G
Gas, Sewage -The

Also called-sludge

gas produced during the digestion of sewage sludge. digestion gas.

Grease - It includes fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and The type magnesium soaps, mineral oils, and other non-fatty materials. of solvents used for its extraction should be stated. Grit Grit

Inorganic

solids in sewage or effluents.
-Basin

Chamber

in which grit is removed

from the sewage or effiuent or sewnge

effiuents.
Grit Channel Ground

A channel through which grit-bearing is allowed to flow to remove the grit.
Water See Water,

Ground.
H

Half

period of time in which one half of the radioactive atoms of a given radionuclide drcay; an unvarying characteristic of a radionuclide. -That property of water, due mainlv to the bicarbonates, chlorides anrf sulphates of calcium and magnesium, which prevents the ljroductior\ of abundant lather with soap.
-v*jTK -orkinail\hardness was understood TV be the capacitv of a water for p:ccipitating ,oap. Soap is precipitated chiefly bv calcium and magnesium ions commonly prcsrnt in industrial water but may also be precipitated by ions of other P~~l~~alcnt ISIC-I&such as iron, manqanese and aluminium, and bv hydrogrn ions. It is corm~nL expressedin terms of thr equivalent amount of calcium carbonate.

Life -The

Hardness

IS:7022 fIar&ess,
Hardness, hardness.

(Part I)-1973

Carbonate -

SeeCarbonate

Hardness. Hardness

Non-carbonate -

Se& Non-carbonate

Hardness, Total -The

sum of carbonate

hardness and non-carbonate

t

IiIlmus - A well stabilized sludge obtained in a sewage and waste w~ater treatment plant similar in aopearance to the dark or black carboniferous residue in the soil resulting from the decomposition of vegetable tissues of plants originally growing the] ein. The term is also applied to the sludge from secondary settling tanks in a trickling filter plant.

Humus

Tank -

SeeTank, Humus.

Hydrogen

operation of cation exchange cycle wherein Cycle -The the removal of specified cations from the influent water is'accomplished by exchange with an equivalent amount of hydrogen ion from the exchange material. I Imhoff

Tank -

SeeTank, Imhoff.
medium

Incubation -

Maintenance of viable organisms in nutrient at constant temperature for controlled growth or reproduction.

Index, Pollutional - A criterion by which the degree of pollution in a stream, as indicated by bacteria! count, plankton, biochemical oxygen demand, or quantity of dissolved oxygen, may `be measured.
Inrlex, Sludge Volume ( SVI) -The volume in mittilitres occupied by rerated mixed liquor containing one gram of dry solids after settling for 30 minutes, commonly referred to as the hsohlman index_

Indicator -

Substance which gives a visible change; usually of colour, at a desired point in a chemical-reaction.

Industrial Use of Water-Industrial Waste Water as a result of formation

See Use of Water,

Industrial. process

Water discharged from an industrial or utilization in that prowess.

NOTE-Industrial waste water may have been utilized directly or hdircctly, such as cmiing water. Industrial waste water may be discharged into other processes, recovery systems, natural streams, or other receiving bodies.

Industrial Water indirectly in industrial

Water ( including processes.

its impurities

) used directly

or

Il&wnt

-&wage, water, or other liquid, raw or partly treated, into a reservoir, basin, OP treatment plant, or part thereof.

flowing

17

IS:7022(PartI)-1973 Inhibitory Toxicity - Any direct inhibitory action of pollutants on the rate of reproduction of diatoms which is demonstrable within 7 days or less of testing.

hocube - To introduce a small amount of substance into a solution for observation of its effect such as organic growth or crystal formation.
Insecticide
ION -

-An agent, chemical or otherwise, for the control or de+ traction of insects, mainly used in agricultural operations.

An atom or radical in solution carrying an integral charge either positive ( cation ) or negative ( anion ).
Ion-Exchange

electrical

- A process by which certain ions of given charges may be absorbed from solution and replaced into the solution by other ions of similar charge from the absorbent.

Material - An insoluble solid that has the ability to exchange reversibly certain ions in its structure, or attached to its surface as functional groups, with ions in a surrounding medium. Irrigation -

Ion-Exchange

purposes.

The artificial application of water to land for agricultural The application of sewage is termed ` broad irrigation `.
It differs

Irrigation, Broad --The irrigation of crops with sewage. from sewage farming in that sewage disFosa1 is the primary

broad irrigation, with the raising of crops being incidental, reverse is true of sewage farming.
Water Sea Water, Irrigation.

object of b&ile the

Irrigation

J
An empirical measure of turbidity in special apparatus, based on the measurement of the depth of a column of water sample that is just sufficient to extinguish the image of a burning standard candle observed vertically through the sample.
Jackson Candle Turbidity L Lagoon -

A large shallow pond for the treatment frequently it does not have a water-tight bottom.

of liquid wastes;

Lagoon, Sludge - A relatively shallow basin or a natural depression, used for the storage or digestion of sludge, and sometimes for its ultimate detention or dewatering. Langelier's Indes - An expression to indicate the hydrogen-ion concentration that a water should have, to be in equilibrium with its. content of calcium carbonate.

18

JS:7022(PartI)-1973 Liquor, Misedaeration tank. Loading, Loading, BOD A mixture of activated rludge and sewage in the

SeeLoading, Trickling Filter.

Trickling, Filter

kilograms of BOD on any other parameter for a) Orgut+ -The orgaruc matter in the applied liquor per m* of filter bed volume per day. b) h'ydioulic - The bed per day. volume in ma of waste M Median Inhibitory Limit ( &, ) - The concentration of test material which decreases the amount of growth to 50. percent of that in the control within a test period of 7 days. It is the recommended measure or index of relative toxicity. Specifically, it is a concentration value derived by graphical interpolation and is based on the amount of growth made in 7 days in the test flasks as compared with that made in a control. Median material period. Lethal Dose ( LDso ) - The minimum amount of the test lethal to 50 percent of a group of test organisms for a specified per hectare of filter

Median Tolerame Limit ( TLm) - The concentration of the test material in a suitable .diluent (.experimental water) at which just 50 percent of the test animals are able to survive for a specified period of exposure.
MCtilbOliSm

in living matter.

-

The process by which food is used and wastes are formed SeeFilm, Microbial. Pertaining to very small living matter and its

Microbial Film Microbiological processes. -

Micro-organi8m - Minute organism, either plant .or animal, invisible or barely visible to the naked eye. Microscopic Minute, very small, pertaining to a microscope,

Mixed Bsd - A physical mixture of anion exchange material and cation exchange material. Mixed .Liquor See Liquor, Mixed. 19

IS:7OZ(PartI)-1973 density Most Probable Number ( MPN ) - In the testing of bacterial by the dilution method, that number of organisms per unit volume which, in accordance with statistical theory, would be more likely than any other possible number to yield the observed test result or which would yield the observed test result with the greatest frequency. Expressed as density of organisms per' 100 ml. Moulds Filamentous fungi composed of many cells. Set Use of Water, N Nephelometry - Measurement scattering of light. of the turbidity in organic in liquids molecules by the Municipal. Municipal Use of Water -

Nitrogen, Organic - Nitrogen combined proteins, amines, and amino acids.

such as

Non-carbonate Hardness - Hardness in water caused by chlorides, sulphates, and nitrates of calcium and magnesium, 0 Odour Intensity Index - The number of times the concentration of the original sample is halved by addition of odour-free water to obtain the least definitely perceptible odour. Odour, Threshold Number - The greatest dilution of the sample with odour-free water to yield the least definitely perceptible odour. Oily Matter - Hydrocarbons, hydrocarbon derivatives, and all liquid or unctuous substances that have boiling points of 90�C or above and are extractable from water at PH 5'0 or lower, using benzene as a solvent. Organisms, Microscopic - Plants or animals microscopic in size or slightly larger, which do not require special culture and are easily studied with the microscope. Outtill - The point or location from a sewer, drain or conduit. where sewage or drainage discharges

Oxidation Pond -A pond, natural (>I artificial, into which partly treated sewage is discharged and in which natural purification processes take place under the influence of sunlight and air. Oxidation Process-Any method of sewage or industrial effluent II eatment for the oxidation of the putrescible organic matter; the usual methods are biological filtration and the acti\yated sludge process. 20

IS : 7022 ( Part I

- 1973

Oxygen Absorbed - The quantity of oxygen taken up from porassium permanganate in solution by a liquid containing organic matter. Commonly regarded as an index of the organic matter. Time and temperature must be specified. Oxygenation - Dissolution of oxygen in a liquid by bringing about ( See Aeration ). intimate contact between the liquid and oxygen gas. Oxygen, Available - The quantity of atmospheric oxygen dissolved in It is the quantity of dissolved oxygen available the water of a stream. for the oxidation of organic matter in sewage. additional quantity Oxygen Deficiency -The satisfy the biochemical oxygen demand in a expressed in mg/l. of oxygen required to usually given liquid, of inorganic matter, by arobic bacterial

0 xygco Demand - Oxygen required for oxidation or for stabilization of decomposable organic matter action.

Oxygen, Dissolved ( DO )- The oxygen dissolved in sewage, water or other liquid usually expressed in mg/l or percent of saturation. Oxygen, Residual -The deoxygenation has begun. dissolved oxygen content of a stream after

Oxygen Saturation Capacity - The maximum quantity of dissolved oxygen that a liquid exposed to the atmosphere can contain at a given temperature and pressure. P matter, exclusive of gases, existmg in the Particulate Matier -That non-liquid stat%, which is dispersed in water to give a heterogeneous mixture. Part Per Million ( ppm ) - A measure of proportion by weight and equivalent to a unit weight of solute per million unit weights of solution.
litre, but this is not precise. per kilogram of solution.
?%TE A part

per million i.r generally considered equivalent to a milligram per
A part per million is equivalent to a milliiam of solute

Pathogenic Pathogens -

Causing disease. Pathogenic or disease-producing organisms. is the logarithm of the ( expressed in g/l ) of the

The pH value of an aqueous solution PHreciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration solution. 2!

fS:7022( Phenolic Pitting -

Part I)-1973 Compounds Localized Hgdroxybenzene and its derivatives.

corrosion

Plallkton - Plant or animal micro-organisms, discrete, and .free-floating, having relatively small power of locomotion, or which drift in the water by wind or wave-action. ( See Organisms, Microscopic ). Polishing - An advanced stage of treatment high quality of effluent is necessary. Palluted Water -See Water, Polluted. used where a
specially

Pollution - Alteration of the physical, chemical or hiolngicai properties of water: or discharge of anv sewage or industrial waste or of any liquid, gaseous or soiid substances into water as may, or is likely to, create nuisance or render such water harmful or in_jurious to public health or safety, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural ot other legitimate u;es, or to animal life and health. Pollutional Load - An expression present in a waste water discharged expressed on the basis of BOD. of the quantity of the into a receiving water, pollutants commonly

Population Equivalent - The calculated population exnressed on the basis of BOD which would contribute the same amount of pollutants per day as the waste. Post-Chlorination -The application of chlorine to water, sewage or industrial wastes subsequent to any treatment, including pre-chlorination. The term refers only to a point of application. Potable Water -See Water, Potable.

Proeration - A preparatory treatment of water or sewage comprising aeration to remove ,gases, add oxygen, or promote flotation of grease, and aid coagulation. Prtcblorination a) Chlorination of water prior to filtration. b) Chlorination of sewage prior to treatment. Pre-treatment a) b) Primary Any treatment of waste water before it is introduced waste water system or before primary treatment. In water treatment. any treatment given before l'rimar) filtration. Treatment See Treatment, 22 into a

IS:70!22(PartI)-1973 priming

a) A carry over of water with a sudden generation of steam, like-the bumping which sometimes occurs when water is boiled in an open vessel. b) The action of starting filling it with water.
Protomm -

the flow in a pump or siphon

by first

Microscopic,

one-celled animals.
Q

*

Qpafity,

Water

-2s

Water Quality.
R

Radioactivity

particulate
RtaerationReagent

nuclear disintegration - Spontaneous or electromagnetic radiations. oxygen

with emission the

of

The absorption of content of which has been depleted.

by a liquid

dissolved

of water Background - In the measurement of radioactivity samples, the counting rate observed when a sample is replaced b' mock sample salts or by reagent chemicals used for chemical separations.
NoreReagent background varies with the reagent chemicals and methods used and may vary with reagents from different manufacturers ditTercnt processing lots.

analytical
and from

R6:carboaation

- The treatment of water softened by means of excess lime, with carbon dioxide or sodium bicarbonate to redissolve the excess lime and to prevent the water having plumbo-solvency. Recirculation -

The return of effluent to the incoming flow to: seed,

a) reduce its strength, b) provide acclimatized c) freshen the incoming waste water,

d) maintain a high rate of loading, and e) maintain the required hydraulic loading.
Regenemtion - That part of the o erating cycle of an ion-exchange the process in which a specific chemica P solution is passed through ion-exchange bed to prepare it for a service run.

Relative Density ( Specific kviq ) - The ratio of the weight in air of a given volume of the sample to the weight in air of an equal volume of reagent water, both being determined at the standard reference temperature. 23

IS : 7022 ( Part I ) - 1973 Reservoir, Impounded - A reservoir wherein surface water is retained for a considerable permd of time, ranging' from several months upward, and released for use at a time when the ordinary flow of the stream is insufficient to satisfy requirements. Residual Oxygen See Oxygen, Residual.

Riparian - Of, pertaining to, or situated, or dwelling on the bank of a river or other body of water. Rights -The legal right which assures to the owner of land abutting upon a stream or other natural body of water the use of such water. It allows each riparian owner to require the waters of a stream to reach his land undiminished in quantity and unaffected in quality except for minor domestic uses. In general, it allows each riparran owner to make a reasonable use of the water upon his riparian land, the extent of such use being governed by the reasonable needs and requirements of other riparian owners and the quantity of water available. Riparian

River-A larger stream of water which serves as the,natural drainage channel for a drainage basin of considerable area. The term is a comparative one as to size; a stream termed ` river ' in the arid section of the country would hardly be designated a `creek' in the humid section.
River, q-lean - A river that gives no sensible evidence of pollution and from whrch wholesome drinking water can be obtained by practicable methods of water purification. - Minute, many-celled aquatic animals, free or attached, which are characterized by rotating movement of the head. S salinity -

Rotifers

The amount of salts ( especially sodium chloride ) in a water.
Organism -

Saprophytic

matter. Scale surface.

Any organism living on dead or decaying

A deposit formed from solution directly in place upon a confining

No~~-S~cale is a deposit that will usually retain its physica! shape when mechanical means arc used to remove it from the surface on which it is dcpbsited. Scale, which may or may not adhere to the underlying surface, is usually crystalline and dense, frquently laminated, and occasionally columnar in structure.

24

ISr702!2(PartI)-1973 Sale, Boiler - An incrustation varying from a porous, friable crust to a dense very hard coating deposited on boiler heating surfaces due to precipitation of minerals out of solution from the water used. Scintillation -The production of light photons by the interaction radiation with a suitable material. of

SerWn -A device with openings, generally of uniform size, used to retain or remove suspended or floating solids in flowing water or sewage, and to prevent them from entering an intake or passing a given point in a The screening element may consist of parallel bars, rods, wires, conduit. grating, wire mesh, or perforated plate, and the openings may be of any shape, although they are generally circular or rectangular. The device may also be used to segregate granular material, such as sand, crushed rock and soil into various sizes. scum The lighter solids which float to the top of water or sewage. Treatment SeeTreatment, Secondary. Secondary

Sedgewick-Rafter sediment

Filter -

SeeFilter, Sedgewick-Rafter. will

a) Any material carried in suspension by water, which ultimately settle to the bottom after the water loses velocity. b) Fine water-borne matter deposited or accumulated Sedimentation -Gravitational system. settling of solid in beds.

particles in a liquid

Seeding, Sludge - The inoculation of undigested sewage solids with sludge that has undergone decomposition, for the purpose of introducing favourable organisms, thereby accelerating the initial stage of digestion. Seepage Pit - A covered pits designed to permit liquid wastes to seep into the surrounding soil. Self-Absorption the source itself. The absorption of radiation particles or photons in

Self-Purification - The natural processes of `purification of pollution in a moving or still body of water whereby the bacterial content is reduced, the BOD is largely satisfied, the organic content is stabilized, and the dissolved oxygen returned to normal. Septicization -A term ap$ed to aruerobic decomposition whereby intensive growths of bacteria with the enzymes secreted by them liquefy and gasify solid organic matter. Septic Tank SeeTank, Septic. 25

IS:7012(ParzI)-1973

Sequester

-

To form a stable, water-soluble receiving water

complex after chemical mixing to

Settling Basin - Reservoir permit settling of the floe.

Sewage - Largely the water supply of a community after it has been fouled by various uses. From the standpoint of source it may be a combination of the liquid or water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, and institutions, together with those from industrial establishments, and with such ground water, surface water, storm and water as may be present. Sewage Farming land for irrigation
Sewage Gas Sewer -A - The raising of crops where sewage is applied to the and fertilization purposes.

See Gas, Sewage.

pipe or conduit, generally closed, but flowing full, for carrying sewage and other waste liquids. A system of sewers constructed

normally

not

Sewerage

to convey sewage.

Sewer, Public Shock Load -A Skimming -

A common sewer controlled by public authority.

sudden load or change in waste concentration which produces an adverse efYect on the micro-organisms in the treatment unit. The removal of scum from the surface of a body of liquid.

Slick-A film of oil on a water surface or in the case of sewage discharged to the sea, the area of discoloration visible on the surface. SIi~eS - Substances of gelatinous nature, frequently derived microbiological growth, found on the inner surface of a conduit: filter medium or elsewhere. from on a

Slxxdge - A water-formed sedimentary deposit, usually in a very wet It may include ail suspended solids carried by the water. condition. Sludge usually does not cohere sufficiently to retain its physical shape when mechanical means are used to remove it from the surface on which it deposits, but it may be baked in place and be hard and adherent. Sludge, Activated - Mass of micro-organisms, flocculated and easil) settleable, metabolizing organic material in a waste in activated sludge aeration tank. This is obtained in settling tanks after aeration and returned to the aration tanks for maintaining adequate concentration of micro-organisms. Sludge Bed -

An area comprising natural or artificial layers of porous material upon which digested sewage or effluent sludge is dried by drainage and evaporation. A sludge bed may be open to the atmosphere 26

IS : 70!22 ( Part I ) - 1973 or covered,

usually with a greenhouse-type `sludge drying bed'.

superstructure. solids

Also called

layer of Sludge Blanket - A horizontal suspended within an enclosed body of water.
Sludge Dewateriug

hydrodynrmically

- The process of removing a part of the water in sludge by any method, such as draining, evaporation, pressing, centrifuging, exhausting, passing between rollers, or acid flotation, wrth or without heat. It involves reducing from a liquid to a spadable condition rather than merely changing the density of the liquid (concentration ) on the one hand or drying ( as in a kiln ) on the other.

Sludge

Volume

Index Bed -

See Index, Sludge Volume.

Sludge Drying Sludge Lagoon

See Sludge Bed.

See Lagoon, Sludge. The completion

Sludge Ripening

of the sludge digestion process.

Sludge Thickener -A type of sedimentation tanks in which the sludge is permitted to settle, usually equipped with scrapers travelling along the bottom of the tank which push the settled sludge to a sump, from which it is removed by gravity or by pump@. Cycle -The operation of a cation exchange cycle wherein the removal of specified cations from the influent water is accomplished by exchange with an equivalent amount of sodium ion from the exchange material. Sodium Softener, Base. Exchange -

material.
Softening,

Water

softener

using

an ion-exchange

substances
Solids, &lids, Solids,

Water - The process of removing from water certain mineral causing hardness. -

Dissolved Fixed Settleable

Solids which are present in solution. be removed by

sedimentation. Solids, Suspended

Solids that remain after ignition. -Suspended solids that can

4

The quantity of material deposited when a quantity of water, sewage or other liquid is filtered through an asbestos mat in a Gooch crucible. in water, sewage, or removable by laboratory other liquids; filtering. 27 and which are larpelv

b) Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension

IS : 7022 ( Part I ) - 1973
Solids, Total rile- suspended Solids,

The solids in water, sewage, or other liquids; it included removable by filter paper) and the solids ( largcl) ul~filtcral~lesolids ( those which pass through filter paper ).
Volatile
on

licluid, lost

-The quantity of solids in water, sewage, or other ignition of the total solids.

Specific Gravity - SeeRelative Density. Spores- These are bodies produced within the cells of a considerable number of bacterial species under adverse environmental conditions. They are more resistant to heat, cold, osmosis and chemicals than the vegetative cells producing them.
Spray Ponds - Ponds or basins in which cooling water is pumped and sprayed through nozzles, thereby reducing the temperature of the water by evaporation. Stabilization Standard -

The aerobic treatment of decomposable organic matter.
See Count, Standard Plate.

Plate Count -

Staphylococci

A genus of sphere-shaped,

pus-forming bacteria.

- Free from any viable organism, either active or dormant. Sterile
destruction of all living Sterilization -The through the agency of heat or of some chemical. Stream organisms, ordinarily

to a body applied to conduit, a a fissure in

-4 body

of flo\king water. The term is usually `applied of water flowing in a natural surface channel, but is also a body of water flowing in a well-defined, open or closed jet of water issuing from any opening, such as a nozzle, rock, etc. waste not containing

Sullage -Any liquid household or community animal or human excreta.
Superchlorination

- The application of chlorine to water to provide free residual chlorine in which the residual is usually so large as to require dechlorination.

Surface Water -See Water, Surface. SuspendedMatter a) Solids in suspension in sewage or effluent. b) Commonly used for solids in suspension in sewage or effluent which can readily be removed by filtering in a laboratory.
Suspended

Solids- See Solids, Suspended. 28

IS:7022(PartI)-1973 T

Turlr, &tritua -A tank or channel used in the primary trel;tment of sewage as a means of removing grit which otherwise might cause damage to machinery.
Tank, Humus-

of wage

A &imentation tank following biological trez&ment for collecting humus sludge.

Tank, ImhoEA deep two-storeyed sewage tank originally patented. by Karl Imhoff, consisting of an upper or continuous flow sedimentatron chamber and a lower or. sludge-digestion chamber. The floor of the upper chamber slopes steeply to trapped slots, through which solids maY slide into the lower chamber. The lower chamber receives no fresh sewage directly, but is provided with gas vents and with means for drawing digested sludge from near the bottom. Tank, Septic - A single storey settling tank in which the settled sludge is in immediate contact with the sewage flowing through the tank, while the organic solids are.decomposed by anzerobic bacterial action. Tertiary
Treatment See Treatment,

Tertiary.

Total Matter
Total Solids -

-

The sum of the particulate matter and dissolved matter.
See Solids, Total.

T~ricity, Actate -Any direct lethal action of pollution to fresh-water fish that is demonstrable within 96 hours or less, following prescribed methods of test.
NOTE - The lethal action includes both internal and external ctfects, but excludes indirrct action such as depletion of dissolved oxygen through chemical or biochemical oxidation of the test material.

Transmittance

- The ratio of radiant power transmitted by the sample to the radiant power incident on the sample.
NOTE --In practice the sample is often a liquid or a gas contained in an absorption cell. In Al& case the transmittance is the ratio of the radiant power transmitted by the sample in its cell to the radiant power transmitted by some clearly specified reference material in its cell, when both are measured under the same instrument conditions such -as spectral posttlon and slit width. In the case of solids not contained in a cell, the radiant power transmitted by the sample is also measured in the presence of that transmitted by a clearly specified reference material. This ratio is called relative transmittance, 1.

Treatment, Advanced -The application to a treated waste water stream of any physical-chemical process or combination of processes to increase the removal of pollutants and render the water more suitable for reuse purposes. 29

IS:7022

(Part

I)-1973

Treatment, Primary - A remove a substantial portion accompanying biochemical and/or flotation with suitable Treatment,

waste water treatment process employed to of gross settleable or floatable solids and the oxygep demand, utilising sedimentation mechanical devices. efftu-

%condary - The treatment df sewage or industrial ent by bin!,jglcal methods after primary treatment.

`rreatmeat, Tertiary - Any waste water treatment process used after secondary treatment that employs physical, chemical or biological methods to further purify effluents of the secondary treatment for possible reuse. Trickling Tubercle Filter Ser Filter, Trickling.

Nodule formed in the process of corrosion in pipelines.
- The

Tuberculation Turbidity -

formation of tubercles. of transparency of a sample due to the presence

of particulate
Turbidity,
light.

Reduction matter.
Absolute

matic light throqh

- The fractional decrease of incident monochrothe sample, integrating both scattered and transmitted

NCTTE -For a small amount of scattering experienced in crscntialIy colourle~~ solutions, absolute turbidity of a l-cm layer corresponds te the extinction cocfkknt in the equation expressing Lambert's law.

U Domestic - The use of water primarily for household purposes, the watering of livestock, the irrigation of gardens, lawns, shrubbery, etc, surrounding a house or domicile. Use of Water, Use of Water, Industrial -

with industrial operations.
Use of Water,

The use of water primarily

in connection

Municipal - The various uses td which water is put in developed urban areas, including domestic use, industrial use, street sprinkling, fire protection, etc. The term is an inclusive one, applied where the uses are varied. V Velocity, Self-Cleansing -The velocity at which the flow in a pipe is slifficiently rapid to prevent deposition of solid matter.

30

IS:7022(PartI)-1973 Virus - A term generally used to denote a living organism which passes through filters which strain out bacteria physically, and which is invisible by ordinary microscopic methods. matter that is changed under conditions of the Voiatile Matter -That test from a solid or a liquid state to the gaseous state. Volatile Solids SeeSolids, Volatile. W liquid wastes from industrial Wastes, Industrial -The distinct from domestic or sanitary sewage. processes as

Water - A chemical compound consisting of two parts of hydrogen and one part of oxygen. It may have other solid, gaseous, or liquid materials in solution or suspension. Water, Boiler Feed -Water forced into a boiler to take the place of that which is evaporated in the generation of steam. Water-Borne Disease Water, Brackish -

SeeDisease, Water-Borne.

Water with a salty taste due to a high concentration

of dissolved salts.

Watercourse -A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently and if the latter, with some degree of reguWatercourses may be larity. Such flow must be in a definite direction. either natural or at tificial. Water Formed Deposits - Any accumulation of insoluble materials derived from water or formed by the reaction of water upon surfaces in contact with water.
NOTE- Deposits formed from or by water in all its phasesmay be further clauifid E&C, sludge, corrosion products, or biological deposits. The overall compwtlon of a deposit or some part of a deposit may be determined by chemical or spectrographic analysis; the constituenta actually present as chemical substances IWV be identified by microscopic or biological methods.
as

Water, Fresh -

A water low in dissolved salts.

Water, Ground -Water in the ground beneath the surface. In a strict sense the term applies only to water below the water table but in the general sense it covers water derived from wells and springs. Water, brigdon - Water which is artificially applied in the process of irrigation. It does not include precipitation. Water, Make-up for losses. Water added to the boiler feed system to make up 31

that contains sewage, industrial waste, or Water, Polltitcd -Water other harmful or ,objectionable substances.

Water, Potable - Water which does not contain objectionable pollution,
contamination, minerals, or infection, and is considered satisfactory for domestic consumption.

Water Q~lity - A term used to describe the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of water in respect of its suitability. for a particular purpose. The same water may be of good quality for one purpose or use, and bad for another dependmg upon its characteristics and the requirements for the particular use. Water, Surface -Water
lithosphere. that flows over or rests upon the surface of the It may occur in either liquid or solid state. process which renders a raw water fit for a

particular use.

Water Tramnent -Any

Water, Waste
a) In a legal sense,, water that is actually wasted or not needed by party wasting the water, or that which, after it has served the purpose for which it was utilized, has been permitted to run to waste or to escape; or which, from unavoidable causes, escapes from ditches, canals, or other conduits, or from reservoirs of the lawful owners of such structures. b) Water which contains contaminating waste products. z -A jelly-like matrix developed by bacteria. The word is =+=a usually associated with activated sludge growth in biological beds.

32

BUREAU

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, Q Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 6375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,Ql 113239399
Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 0-77 00 32

Contra1 Laboratory : Plot No. 20/Q, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010

Regional ollices:
Central *Eastern

: Manak : l/14

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 ClTScheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 160022 709054

323 76 17 337 66 62 603643 23523 15

Northern : SC0 335-336, Southern

Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T.

Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 EQ. Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),

twestern : Manakalaya, MUMBAI 400093

832 92 95

Branch Ofkes::
`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg. Khanpur, AHMEDABAD Road, 386001 5501346 039 49 55

SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Plot No. 6263,

Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL462003 751001 641037

554021 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 68 01 8-71 1996

Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR

Nalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avtnashi Road, COIMBATORE Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZtABAD 201601

121001

5315 Ward No.29. R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 5-8-56C,

781003 500001

541137 20 10 03 37 29 25 21 68 76

L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD JAIPUR 302001

E-52, Chitaranjan Marg. C-Scheme, 117/418 B, Sarvodaya Seth Bhawan, 2nd LUCKNOW 226001

Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road,

23 09 23 26 23 05

Patliputa Industrial Estate, PATNA 600013 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P. 0. Palayam, THIRIJVANANTHAPURAM 695034

621

17

inspection Otfices (With Sale Point)
Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A, NAGPUR 440010 West

:
High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, 52 51 71 32 36 35

Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411005

*Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Printiep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 fSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400667 *Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja BANGALORE 560002 Square,

27 10 85

309 65 26 222 39 71

Printed at Simco printing Press, Delhi, India

