Indian Standard

IS 13058 : 1991 IS0 7592 : 1983 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

CALIBRATED ROUND STEEL LINK LIFTING CHAINS - GUIDELINES TO PROPER USE AND MAINTENANCE

UDC

621*86*065*4

0 BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

April 1991

Pricq Group

3

IS 13058 : 1991 IS0 7592 : 1983

Indian
.

Standard

CALIBRATED ROUND STEEL LINK LIFTING CHAINS - GUIDELINES TO PROPER USE AND MAINTENANCE
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 7592 : 1983 `Calibrated round steel link lifting chains -- Guidelines to proper use and maintenance' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ); was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Cranes and Lifting Chains Sectional Committee ( HMD 14 ) and approval of the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are however not identical to those used is Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they shall be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while practice is to use a point ( . ) as decimal marker. CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their respective places the following : International Standard IS0 1836 Short link chain for lifting purposes - Grade M ( 4 ) calibrated, for chain hoists and other lifting appliances IS0 3077 Short link chain for lifting purposes - Grade T ( 8 ) calibrated, for chain hoists and other lifting appliances . Indian Standard IS 3109 ( Part 2 ) : 1982 Short link chain, Grade M ( 4 ): Part 2 Calibrated load chain for pulley blocks appliances lifting other and ( second revision ) IS 6216 : 1982 Short link chain, Grade T ( 8 ) calibrated for pulley blocks and other lifting appliances ( first revision ) Degree of Correspondence Technically equivalent in Indian Standards, the Current

Technically equivalent

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard hai reviewed provisions of IS0 standard mentioned below and has decided that it is acceptable for in conjunction with this standard: IS0 4301 Lifting appliances Classification ( in five parts )

the
Use

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 13058 : 1991 IS0 7592 : 1983

.

1

Scope and field of application

This International Standard specifies the main principles for the use, inspection, in-service testing and maintenance of calibrated round steel link chains operating over chain wheels. The principal applications include manual, and power driven hoists.
NOTE Lifting chains may be governed by national and local laws and

The chain should not be allowed to pick up dirt, etc. which would impair its free movement and which if carried into the equipment and deposited in the pockets of the pocket wheel could affect the proper seating of the chain in the pockets.

3.3 *There are two types of pocket wheels over which chain
may be required to run:
a) idler wheels, which change the direction of the chain but do not substantially affect its tension;

regulations.

2

References

IS0 1836, Short link chain for lifting purposes - Grade M(4) calibrated, for chain hoists and other lifting eppiiances. IS0 3077, Short link chain for lifting purposes - Grade T(8) calibrated, for chain hoists and other lifting appliances. IS0 4301, Lifting appliances Classification.

b) driving wheels, which change both tension in the chain and its direction. This type also includes driven wheels, such as the wheel driven by the hand chain of a manually operated hoist. 3.3.1 Idler wheels of relatively large diameter (not less than 6 X pitch of chain recommended) used with lightly loaded chain may be plain sheaves with circular grooves. Smaller wheels, or a higher chain tension, require flats or pockets to accommodate the link as chords to the wheel circumference to avoid bending and to provide sufficient bearing area. In most installations guides are required to remove twist from the approaching chain and to align it correctly in the rotational plane of the wheel. Such guides should also prevent the chain disengaging the wheel should it become slack. 3.3.2 Driving wheels are more demanding and generally pocketed wheels are essential. In addition to' the guiding requirements as for idler wheels, there are two conditions which require additional restraints, both involving the chain at the slack side. One is stripping, or-forcible removal from the wheel, of chain whose pitch appears to be too short. When the wheel is rotated __ -I__... :_ 1" "raw 111 ClWlll -,--`- Ulll ..-der tension, the links at the slack side tend to remain in the wheel' ana' I must be mechanically disengaged. The condition may occur wi,th new chain of too short pitch for the wheel or with chain of correct pitch operating over a worn wheel. The stripper usuarry r.-..-".. ' takes the form of a finger installed between the chain I strands and extending well into the centre groove of the whee11.It engages links in the plane of rotation and forces them to leave the wheel. The other condition occurs with chain, either new or worn, whose pitch is too long for the wheel. In this case it is necessary to guide the slack chain approaching the wheel into engagement by advancing the links which are transverse to the plane of rotation. This is a difficult task at best, and in extreme conditions, may cause high rubbing forces and severe external wear.

.

3
3.1

Chain usage

In the interests of safety, reliable operation and satisfactory life, proper usage of chain is very important. Some of the responsibility rests with the equipment manufacturer, being dependent upon choice of relative dimensions of chain an$ pocket wheel, as well as the means provided for guiding, where necessary, the chain on and off the pocket wheel, and in and out of the equipment

. .I.. Tttere are also importalrr, `r,., Iablurs under III~Jdirect control of the us`er. One essential requirement is that the chain be aligned carrectly with the chain wheel. If the chain forms a closed loop, aligned with the wheel and always under tension, no external guide is needed. In any installation where the chain may become slack or twisted or where it may approach the wheel at an angle to the plane of rotation, a suitable chain guide must be provided. Usage should be avoided that prevents direct entry of the chain into a hoist or lower hook block or that twists the chain upon entry.

In order to maintain the gauge length dimensions, it is necessary that the chain be under tension. Very little tension (for example the weight of a few links) is sufficient to maintain the gauge length, provided that the chain is otherwise free and not subjected to restraining side forces.

3.2

-3

IS 13058 : 1991 IS0 7592 : 1983

3.4 The design of end connections to develop full chain tension becomes more difficult as chain strength increases. For example, a circular transverse pin may be used, but is limited to a diameter very little larger. than that of the chain material, whereas a pin of oval cross-section may provide greater strength in bending. Two mating blocks, contoured to fit the end link, also will develop full chain strength. Strength requirements are therefore sufficiently important and demanding that only the equipment manufacturer's recommended replacement parts should be used. 3.6 Chain is a mechanism in which high bearing pressures are developed. In order to attain maximum life it is therefore necessary to ensure that lubrication is maintained, particularly in the interlink contact areas where pressures are highest. Suitable lubricants are those that cling and are capable of withstanding high pressures, but in all cases where equipment manufacturer's recommendations are available they should be strictly followed. In those special applications where chain lubricant cannot be used because of possible contamination of the material being handled or the lubricant itself, the life of the chain and pocket wheel may be drastically reduced. 3.6 A protective coating for steel chain will reduce corrosion. whetever process is chosen, the following points should be taken into consideration : a) /the possibilites of reduction in pitch due to thickness of the coating applied, for example hot galvanizing is generally unsuitable;

by the operator inadvertently passing the hook -through the loop of the chain and turning the hook block over. If such twisting has occurred, it should be rectified by passing the hook through the loops of chain in the reverse direction. I

4
4.1

Inspection
Classification of service

Proper maintenance depends on an evaluation of the severity of usage to which the chain and the appliance, in which it is installed, are subjected. The duty should be evaluated to conform to one of the following classes so that inspection can then be performed as described in 4.2: 4.1.1 light service: Chains and appliances subjected very rarely to the maximum load and, normally, to light loads; 4.1.2 moderate service: Chains and appliances subjected fairly frequently to the maximum load and, normally, to moderate loads; 4.1.3 heavy service: Chains and appliances subjected frequently to the maximum load and, normally, to loads of heavy magnitude; 4.1.4 very heavy service: Chains and appliances subjected regularly to the maximum load.
NOTE - Further information on the classification of lifting appliances is given in IS0 4301, from which the above duties are extracted.

b)

the possible effects on the mechanical properties of the chain.

Users shall not apply any coating unless approved by the chain manufacturer. 3.7 If the slack chain descending from an overhead hoist is undesirable, a chain container may be installed. It is essential that the container be of adequate size, properly aligned and provided with a means of drainage. If a few links of chain overflow the edge of the container (whether caused by improper alignment or inadequate capacity) all of the chain may be caused to run out of the container. The top of the chain pile is a cone, which must not build up so high as to remove all tension from the slack side chain, as otherwise the chain may not re-enter the wheel properly. 3.8 Chains fitted to lifting appliances are usually provided with free swiveiling hooks to ensure that any twists in the chain will be removed automatically before the load is moved. Such chains used in choke hitch (i.e. by back hooking after passing the chain round the object to be moved) renders the safety swivelling ineffective and is therefore an unsafe procedure. Also using the load chain and hook in a choking hitch configuration may damage the load chain and shorten the driving wheel life. Slinging should always be carried out using separate equipment attached to the hook. In the case of hooks supported on two or more falls of chain, care should be taken that the chain does not become twisted

4.2

Inspection

classification

Inspection procedure is divided into two general classifications based upon the intervals at which inspection should be performed for chains in regular service. The general classifications are herein designated as "frequent" and "periodic" with respective intervals between inspection as defined below. (In addition, visual observations shall be conducted during regular service for any damage or evidence of malfunction which might occur between regular inspections. 1 4.2.1 Frequent inspection

This is a visual examination by the operator or other designated personnel, without requiring records to be made. Inspection should be carried out at the following intervals: a) b) c) d) 4.2.2 light service every month; every two weeks;

moderate service heavy service -

every week; every day.

very heavy service Periodic inspection

This is a thorough examination by an appointed person, making records of external conditions to provide the basis for a con-

lS13058:1991 IS0 7592:1983

tinuing evaluation. Inspection should be carried out at least at the following intervals : a) light service yearly (equipment in place); .

4.4

Rejection

criteria

The chain should be rejected if any of the following conditions are observed : al b) cl d) e) cracks; severe nicks or gouges; visible distortion; severe corrosion; deposits which cannot be removed;

b) moderate service - half yearly (equipment in place unless external conditions indicate that disassembly should be done to permit detailed inspection); c) heavy service - quarterly (equipment in place unless external conditions indicate the disassembly should be done to permit detailed inspection); d) very heavy service - six weekly (equipment in place unless external conditions indicate that disassembly should be done to permit detailed inspection).

4.3

Inspection

procedure

f) increase in gauge length which exceeds the manufacturer's recommendations. In the absence of manufacturer's recommendations the chain should be replaced if the gauge length measured over any 5, 7, 9 or 11 links as appropriate exceeds that of the unused chain by: 1) 2) 2 % if power driven; 3 % if manually operated.

4.3.1

Procedure for frequent

inspection

First examine the chain throughout its working length to detect any evidence of wear, distortion or external damage. Next operate the equipment under no load and under a load as near as possible to the usual operating load, in both directions and observe the functioning of the chain and wheels. The chain should feed smoothly into and away from the wheels in each case. If the chain binds, jumps or is noisy, check that it is clean and properly lubricated. If the trouble persists after lubrication, inspect the chain and mating parts for wear, distortion or other damage as outlined below.

g) if interlink wear leaves a rough surface, this indicates that rapid wear is occurring and the chain should be rejected . immediately. A chain with superficial smootn wear or minor gouges may remain in use provided that the gauge length is within the limits given above, and provided that the chain works smoothly in the load wheel pockets. The chain should be relubricated before it is returned to service.

4.32

Procedure for periodic inspection 5 Chain replacement

Chains should be cleaned for inspection, using any cleaning method that will not cause damage. Methods to avoid are those that may cause hydrogen embrittlement (such as immersion in caustic or acid bath), overheating, removal of metal or movement of metal which may cover cracks or other surface defects. Adequate lighting should be provided for the inspector. The chain should be examined link by link for cracks, gouges or nicks, distortion, corrosion, deposits of foreign material and for interlink wear. To inspect for wear at the interlink contact points, slacken the chain and rotate adjacent links to expose the inner ends of the link. If wear is observed or if elongation is suspected, measure the chain according to the equipment maker's instructions. If instructions are not available, proceed as follows: a) select an unworn, unstretched length of chain (for example at the slack end) ; b) suspend the chain vertically under tension. Use a caliper type gauge to measure the accumulated pitch of between 5 and 11 links; c) measure the same number of links throughout the used chain and calculate the percentage increase in length.

5.1 Calibrated chain is chain which, during manufacture has had its pitch carefully adjusted and regular&d, so as to be compatible with a specific design of pocket wheel. It follows therefore that when replacing chain in any appliance, it will not function correctly in the pocket wheel unless it is to the original dimensional specification. Furthermore as chains are available in a variety of material grades and hardnesses, an incorrect chain could result in failure. For these reasons, only those calibrated chains which fully comply with the appliance manufacturer's specification and recommendations should be used as replacements. When replacing a worm chain with a new chain it is generally advisable to install a new pocket wheel and to verify correct chain guide action. A partly worn chain from one appliance should not be transferred to another similar appliance. Care should be taken to re-install chain without any twist between the chain wheels or between a wheel and an anchored end. Proper orientation of the entering link should be established since a twist cannot be corrected except by removing and re-installing the chain.

5

tS 13058 : 1991 IS0 7592 : 1983

Where

the appliance

manufacturer's

instructions

are available

6.1.3

The test force should be applied gradually to the length in the appliance.

they should be followed relationship

strictly, particularly conditions.

with respect to the

of chain in its normal assembly

of the chain link weld to the pocket wheel groove 6.1.4 with proper fit are 4.2.21. A link by link inspection should be made following the (see

so as to ensure best operating

test, using the procedure

given under periodic inspection

5.2

In addition to the problems

associated

those involving transfer of load from link to link and from chain to pocket wheel. This process involves wear as well as the possibility of fatigue failure in the chain-both of which determine the expected bination. of duty, useful life of the chain/pocket hand operated or power wheel comBecause the life expectancy for example of a hoist involves its type driven, slow or

6.2

A chain which

passes the test and inspection

may con-

tinue in service.

7

Repair

of chain
equipment and technology are required to

fast speed, industrial or home duty, the hoist manufacturer will have selected a suitable grade of calibrated load chain from national standards, 1636, IS0 dations. from relevant International Standards i.e. IS0 3077, or from the chain manufacturer's recommen-

Highly specialized produce calibrated recommended.

lifting chains,

Repair of these chains is not

8 6 6.1 In-service
A specified

Record
Adequate

keeping
records as a part of periodic chains. inspection are

testing
in-service

of chain
test may be required by the

8.1

essential for the proper use of calibrated Authority. In no case should test values and test inrecommendations, repeated too freexisted 8.2

Regulating bearing quently,

tervals be more severe than the following in mind that severe overload may cause damage where tests,

The chain record should include a complete

description

and identification inspection, description

of the new chain, the date and results of each

none previously

:

the date and results of each test and the date and of any maintenance.

6.1.1

Routine

tests should not be made additional

more often than at itself.

annual intervals,

tests being made only on replace-

8.3

The

record

is a continuous

history inspected

of the chain and maintained

and in

ment of load bearing parts of the appliance

shows that it has been regularly good operating condition.

6.1.2 The test force should not exceed either 1,5 times the working load limit of the chain or 1.5 times the rated capacity of the appliance.

8.4

When

the chain is removed

from service, chain.

a new record

should be prepared

for the replacement

6

Bareau of Indlan Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright
l

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reprcduced in any from without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does-not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type of grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Directcr (Fublications), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on t,his Indian Standard may be sent in BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. HMD 14 ( 883) Amendments Issued Since Pablication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

I

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters

:

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephone : 33101 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : h4amkxanstha
(Common to all Offices)

Telephone { 331 331 13 01 75 31 37 86 62 53 38 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

NEW DELHI 110001
: I/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola,

CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

: C.I.T. Camgus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

: Manaa,"AF9=:,
: AHMADABAD.

Marol, Andheri ( East )

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARlDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Primed at the Ccatral Electric Press. Delhi, India

