SUNSHINE GRAPHICS: 2013_852 


INATT UTTeh IS 10084 (Part 2) : 2014 


Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2016) 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


am 2 Wa + sd A veiit da T 
gal Hela seat iei: 


( TEM FRAT) 


Design of Diversion Works — 
Criteria 


Part 2 Diversion Channel and Open Cut or 
Conduit in the Body of Dam 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2014 


mA AMA AN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM MA, 9 ARRE Am, ae ferct-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2014 Price Group 3 


Flood Management, Erosion Management and Diversion Works Sectional Committee, WRD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Flood Management, Erosion Management and Diversion Works Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Water Resources Division Council. 


Before the actual construction is taken up in the river bed, the water of the river channel must be temporally 
diverted so as to permit the works to be done in dry or semi-dry areas. Diversion works provide working area free 
from water and river flow for constructing hydraulic structures. These works, as far as possible, are so designed 
that when the diversion needs are over, these may be utilized partially or fully in the main projects as spillways, 
bottom outlets, irrigation outlets, head race or tail race tunnels and also for flushing of deposited sediments 
upstream. The method and magnitude of diversion works will depend primarily upon the cross-section of the 
valley, the type of dam, diversion discharge and the bed material in the river. However, in some specific cases, the 
choice of adam may depend on diversion arrangement, for example an earth dam is not feasible where diversion 
works cannot prevent overtopping of the dam. 


This standard was first published in 1994; however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
decided to revise it based on the experience gained since then as well as considering technological development 
in the field. In this revision, the important modifications are made in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Clause 4.1.2.2, Clause 4.2 (b) 
and Clause 5.2 (b). 


This standard is published in two parts. Part 1 of this standard covers the criteria for design of coffer dams of 
different types, namely masonry, concrete, colloidal concrete, earthen, rockfill, steel and timber coffer dams. The 
passage for diversion of water can be broadly classified into three categories, namely open channel, open cut or 
conduit in the permanent works which are covered in this Part. 


IS 10084 (Part 2) : 2014 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN OF DIVERSION WORKS — CRITERIA 
PART 2 DIVERSION CHANNEL AND OPEN CUT OR CONDUIT IN THE BODY OF DAM 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the criteria for design of open 
channel and open cut or conduit in the body of the 
dam as diversion works. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards listed below contain 
provisions which, through reference in this text 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
4410 (Part 12): Glossary of terms relating to river 


1993 valley projects : Part 12 Diversion 
works (first revision) 
12966 (Part 2): Code of practice for galleries and 
1990 other openings in dams: Part 2 
Structural design 
13912 : 1993 Closure of diversion channel and 
open cut or conduit in the body of 
the dam — Code of practice 
14815 : 2000 Design flood for river diversion 


works — Guidelines 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 4410 (Part 12) shall apply. 


4 OPEN CHANNEL 


4.1 At sites where diversion of flow through tunnels 
or close conduits is not possible (due to topographical 
and geological considerations) or proves to be 
uneconomical, diversion through excavated channels 
called diversion channels is effected. Diversion 
channels are often classified according to the type of 
diversion, namely single stage or multiple stage 
diversion scheme. In the former which is more suitable 
for narrow valleys, the same set of diversion channel 
and coffer dams is utilized throughout the period of 
construction. In the latter, which is generally suitable 
for wide valleys, the channels and coffer dams are 
shifted from place to place in accordance with phasing 
of the work. A more useful classification, however, is 


based on the type of the dam to be constructed, namely 
diversion channel for masonry or concrete dams and 
that for the earth or rockfill dams. The following 
guidelines are followed for their design. 


4.1.1 Diversion Channels for Masonry/Concrete Dams 


Concrete or masonry dams could be allowed to get 
overtopped during floods when construction activity 
is not in progress. The resulting damage is either 
negligible or could be tolerated without much concern. 
Therefore, it is customary to adopt diversion flood 
which is just adequate to be handled during non- 
monsoon season, when construction activity of the dam 
is continued. Generally the largest observed non- 
monsoon flood or 25 years return period flow, 
calculated on the basis of non-monsoon yearly peaks 
is adopted as a diversion flood. This is generally a small 
fraction of the design flood of the spillway and, 
therefore, diversion channel required to handle this 
flood is obviously small. Advantage is also taken of 
passing the floods over partly completed dam or 
spillway blocks, thereby keeping the diversion channel 
of relatively smaller size. In such a case a small 
excavated channel either in the available width of the 
river or one of the banks of the river proves to be 
adequate. Construction sluices are located in such 
excavated channels which allow passage of non- 
monsoon flows without hindrance to the construction 
activity. Such sluices are subsequently plugged when 
the dam has been raised to adequate height. If the 
pondage is not allowed even when the dam has been 
raised to sufficient height, the river outlets are often 
provided in the body of the non-overflow or overflow 
dam to pass the non-monsoon flows which later on are 
kept for permanent use after completion of 
construction. If the diversion channel is excavated on 
one of the river banks, it is possible to use the same for 
locating an irrigation outlet, a power house or a 
spillway depending upon the magnitude and purpose 
of the project. Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 show typical layouts of 
diversion channel for masonry/concrete dams in wide 
and narrow rivers respectively. 


4.1.2 Diversion Channel for Earth/Rockfill Dams 


4.1.2.1 Earth or rockfill dams should not be allowed 
to be overtopped by floods during construction. 
Therefore, it is imperative to ensure that the highest 


IS 10084 (Part 2) : 2014 


CONSTRUCTION 
SLUICES 


RIVER BANK 


SPILL WAY 
me A oa Ree PER! PA ETA ee ee 
IR R et E en OE 
(R OE PE TE E SS] 


RIVER OUTLETS 
DOL) 


boo is 


CONCRETE PLUG 


Fic. 1 DIVERSION CHANNEL FOR CONCRETE/MASONARY DAM IN A WIDE RIVER 


RIVER 
DIVERSION CHANNEL 

U/S COFFER DAM ( ROCK FILL) 
U/S TOE WALL 

D/S COFFER DAM ( ROCK FILL ) 
D/S TOE WALL 

DAM (CONCRETE OR MASONRY ) 
DAM BLOCKS WITH TEMP 
OPENING 


MWL DURING DIVERSION HR 


Orynunnrwn — 


RIVER BED 


$ Ngge ` Ñ 
a. v 3 
un P es S 


ROCK PROFILE 


SECTION 


Fic. 2 DIVERSION CHANNEL FOR CONCRETE/MASONARY DAM IN A NARROW RIVER 


water level, either during diversion of non-monsoon 
flows or passage of monsoon floods is lower than top 
level of the dam during construction. Magnitude of 
the diversion flood should be worked out on the basis 
of IS 14815. Because of the large volume of flood to 
be negotiated and the fact that earth dams are generally 
located in the main river gorge, diversion channels have 
to be excavated on one of the river banks in the case of 
narrow valleys. The layout and principal dimensions, 
specially the cross-section of the diversion channel is 
governed by several considerations such as topography, 
volume of flood to be handled, water levels during 
passage of monsoon and non-monsoon floods in 
consonance with raising of the dam and requirement 
of excavated material from diversion channel for use 
in constructing earth dam, etc. The coffer dams in such 
a case which form integral part of the earth or rockfill 
dam in the finally completed stage, are also not allowed 
to be overtopped (though a few examples exist when 
earth or rockfill dams have been allowed to be 
overtopped during diversion with special protection on 
their slopes with concrete blocks or gabions, etc). 
Because of the considerable expenditure and time 
involved in the construction of diversion channel for 
earth dams, these channels may be explored to be 
utilized for other purpose also such as spillway tail 
channel or power house tail channel. Although, initially 
such channels may be without protective lining on the 
sides, they are protected at a subsequent stage when 
utilized for spillway or power house tail race channel. 


CONSTRUCTION 
SLUICE 


U/S COFFER DAM 


en ae 


L 
= 
i 


IS 10084 (Part 2) : 2014 


Figure 3 shows typical example of diversion channels 
for earth/rock fill dam project, in a narrow river 
channel. 


4.1.2.2 In a wide river channel, provided the height 
of the earth dam is small enough, diversion could be 
managed by a temporary channel involving a gap 
through earthfill dam while the remainder of the 
embankment is being constructed (see Fig. 4). Before 
the stream is diverted, the foundation required for the 
dam should be completed in the area where the 
temporary opening will be left through embankment. 
This preparation would include excavation and refilling 
of a cut-off trench, if one is to be constructed. The 
stream is then channelized through this area after which 
the foundation work in the remainder of the stream 
bed is completed. The portion of the embankment on 
either side of the diversion opening may then be 
completed. The side slopes of the opening should be 
adequate and duly protected by suitable means such 
as gabions, retaining walls etc. The protection measures 
should be dismantled before the plugging of the 
diversion channel. The slope also provides a good 
bonding surface between the previously constructed 
embankment and the material to be placed. The bottom 
level of the temporary channel through embankment 
should be the same as the original stream bed, so that 
erosion in the channel will be minimized. The width 
of the opening will depend on the magnitude of the 
diversion flood and consideration of the equipment 


Fic. 3 DIVERSION CHANNELS FOR EARTH/ROCKFILL DAM IN NARROW RIVER CHANNEL 


IS 10084 (Part 2) : 2014 


TOP OF COMPLETED EARTH DAM _ 


EARTH DAM ` TEMPORARY 

Y GAP LEFT 
FOR 

DIVERSION 


, A 
X. Soo DIVERSION CHANNEL 


Fic. 4 DIVERSION THROUGH A GAP IN THE EARTH DAM IN A WIDE RIVER CHANNEL 


capabilities for filling the gap which would be channel so as to restrict the non-monsoon 
available. Care should be exercised during filling of flow through the fair weather channel thus 
the gap so that the quality of the work is not sacrificed keeping the rest of the diversion channel high 
due to exigencies of the situation. This is of great and dry to enable the work to continue 
importance because frequently the diversion gap is in uninterruptedly. Provision of a fair weather 
the area where the dam would be of maximum height. channel also facilitates placing construction 
Special attention should also be given to bonding of sluices within the dam body so that diversion 
the newly placed material with earth fill previously of the fair weather flow could be conveniently 
placed. handled even after raising of the dam to a 


considerable height (see Fig. 3). Likelihood 
of silting up of the fair weather channel by 
The following points should be considered in the design the monsoon floods should, however, be kept 
of open channel for diversion: in mind; 


4.2 Design Consideration 


d) When the dam is raised and operation of 
construction sluices becomes difficult, 
diversion of non-monsoon flows could be 
effected through river outlets provided in the 
body of the spillway or dam, Often these 
outlets are used for irrigation/power outlets 
after completion of the dam; 


a) Although the alignment of the diversion 
channel is governed by topography, circular 
alignment is by far the most efficient 
alignment. The radius of the circle should be 
3 to 5 times the bed width of the channel to 
obtain equitable flow across the channel. 
However, radius as small as twice the bed 
width may also be adopted because of the e) Although diversion of flow through open 


restraints due to other considerations; channel is for temporary use, the requirement 
of diversion continues for some years. In such 


a condition, it becomes necessary to ensure 
equitable distribution of discharge across the 
width of the diversion channel. For this 
purpose groynes or spurs could be effectively 
used to ensure satisfactory flow conditions in 
the diversion channel (see Fig. 3); 


b) Channels are designed on the basis of 
Manning’s formula, after adopting suitable 
value of rugosity coefficient depending on site 
conditions. The velocity in the unlined and 
lined channels should not exceed 5 m/s and 
10 m/s respectively. While designing care 


should be taken for the following: 
f) For the diversion channel excavated in 


overburden, it is also necessary to ensure that 
the banks are not eroded due to flood flows. 


1) Protection by rip rap, if required in case 
of unlined channel; 


2) Protection of the lined channel so that the While provision of a spur could help ensuring 
lining doesn’t get damaged for the design concentration of discharge in the central 
velocity; and portion of the channel with minimum 

3) Analysis should be made to ensure velocities along the banks, it nevertheless 
stability of channel and to ensure there requires protection to avoid erosion of the 
is no formation of hydraulic jump. banks. If the diversion channel is to be utilized 

c) Itis also advantageous to provide a fair as spillway channel or power house tail race 
weather flow channel within the diversion channel, the protection measures are designed 


such that those could be useful during 
permanent stage also. In other cases, pitching 
with stones, rip rap or gabions is normally 
adopted. 


5 OPEN CUT OR CONDUIT 


5.1 The river floods may be so large that provision of 
diversion passages even for average floods may be 
alternative highly expensive. The only is to have them 
passed over or through the dam, although this does 
apply mostly to concrete dams. Smaller floods 
occurring during non-monsoon period are handled by 
temporary low level outlets works, permanent outlets 
works or other diversion arrangements while the 
monsoon floods are passed by over topping certain dam 
blocks purposely left at low level than others. 


5.2 The capacity of diversion arrangement should be 
worked out on the basis of IS 14815. The conduit for 
diversion arrangement has to be designed normally as 
an outlet sluice in the body of the dam, that is, the 
reinforcement details should be worked out according 
to standard design criteria. The diversion conduit would 
normally be a rectangular conduit with height/ width 
ratio of 1.5/1.0 to 2.0/1.0. It would be desirable to flare 
the downstream end of the conduit to reduce the 
discharge intensity. Structural design of conduit should 
be done according to IS 12966 (Part 2). 


If the conduit/sluice is used as a permanent structure, 
permanent gates and hoisting arrangement should be 
provided. In ease the conduit/sluice is to be closed after 
diversion, there is no necessity of providing a gate in 
the body of the sluice but a bulk-head gate on the 
upstream with proper guidance for closing purposes 
may be provided. The permissible velocity in the 
conduit may be limited to 20 m/s, subject to the 


IS 10084 (Part 2) : 2014 


condition that it is used for diversion purpose only. It 
is necessary to see that diversion channels and diversion 
tunnels are steel lined from intake to end of transition 
to avoid damage to the invert and sides due to rolling 
boulders, if carried in rivers. 


The pressure fluctuations under transient flow 
conditions should be -examined closely. It should also 
be ensured that change from free surface to pressure 
flow take place smoothly. 


The conduit should preferably be in the non-overflow 
block of the dam close to the spillway portion. Proper 
care should be taken for the dissipation of the energy 
at the outlet of the diversion conduit. 


6 CLOSURE 


When diversion channel and open or conduit in the 
body of the dam is no longer required for construction 
purpose, they should be closed as recommended in 
IS 13912. 


7 MODEL STUDIES 


Hydraulic model studies for evolving suitable 
arrangement of the diversion through open channel are 
almost indispensable. The model studies help deciding 
the most efficient alignment of the diversion channel, 
heights of the upstream and downstream coffer dams, 
protection measures for the coffer dams if they are to 
be overtopped, flow conditions in the diversion channel 
and protection measures for the diversion channel 
depending on its utility during diversion as well as 
during permanent stage. The discharging capacity of 
partly constructed spillway blocks could only be 
assessed through model studies as no accurate 
theoretical approach is still available for such a complex 
three dimensional flow situation. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 22 (0578). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


