**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 4556 (1968) : Typing Finger Terminal Device for 
Artificial Limbs [MHD 10: Medical Laboratory Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS 1 4551. i9il 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 

TYPING FINGER TERMINAL DEVICE 

FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 



UDC 615'477-2/'3 





© C&pyrt^ht 1968 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK KHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARQ 

NEW DELHI 1 

Mc^ 1968 



p*-,c1 **'''' 



pWWffiGr 2 



18:4556.1968 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

TYPING FINGER TERMINAL DEVICE 

FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 

Artificial Limbs Sectional Cominittee, CPDC 20 

Chairman Representing 

Col L. K. Ananthanarayanan Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 

Services ( Ministry of Defence ) 

Members 

Shri B. L. Arora India Medico Instruments, Delhi 

Shri a. K. Aurora ( Alternate ) 

Shri G. S. Bhatnagar CIBA of India Ltd, Bombay 

Dr S. S. Bhatnagar National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 

Chief Medical Officer Ministry of Railways ( Medical Department ) 

Divisional Medical Officer ( Alternate ) 

Dr p. K. Duraiswamy Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 

Health, Family Planning & Urban Develop- 
ment ) 

Shri V. Krishnamoorthy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Col D, C. Sachdeva Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 

Services ( Ministry of Defence ) 

Dr M. V. Sant All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Re- 

habilitation, Bombay 

Shri S. N. Sharma Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Maj Sohan Singh Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi 

Shri K. L. Talwar ( Alternate ) 

Shri P. S, Venkatachalam Central Leather Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Madras 
Dr T. S. Ranganathan ( Alternate ) 

Shri A. B. Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex^ojicio Member ) 

Director ( Consr Prod ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. B. Rindani 

Assistant Director ( Consr Prod ), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



18:4556-1968 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Prosthetic and Orthotic Appliances Subcommittee, CPDG 20 : 1 



Convener 
Col D. G. Sachdeva 

Members 
Col L. K. Ananthanarayanan 

Maj S. p. Chaudhri 

Dr M. V. Sant 



Representing 

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 
Services { Ministry of Defence ) 

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 
Services ( Ministry of Defence ) 

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 
Services ( Ministry of Defence ) 

All India Institute of Physical Medicine & Rehabili- 
tation, Bombay 



IS: 4556- 1968 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

TYPING FINGER TERMINAL DEVICE 

FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 1 April 1968, after the draft finalized by the Artificial Limbs Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products Division 
Council. 

©•2 The formulation of Indian Standards on artificial limbs, prosthetic and 
orthotic appliances and rehabilitation equipment has been taken up at the 
instance of the Advisory Committee for Development of Surgical Instru- 
ments, Equipment and Appliances, Government of India. 

0.3 Terminal devices for artificial limbs are working accessories to be fitted 
into the dress or working arm of an amputee of the upper extremity. 
These devices aid the amputee to perform some of the normal functions of 
the hand. 

0,4 This standard is one of a series on terminal devices for artificial limbs. 
Other specifications in this series are: 

IS : 4534-1968 Adapter for terminal devices, artificial limbs 
IS : 4535-1968 Saw-grip terminal device for artificial limbs 
IS: 4554-1968 Hammers terminal devices, ball pein and claw, for 

artificial limbs 
IS: 4555-1968 Biprong terminal device, draughtsman, for artificial 

limbs 
IS : 4557-1968 Appliance, office, flat adjustable, for artificial limbs 
IS : 4567-1968 Pliers terminal device, quick grip, for artificial limbs 
IS : 4577-1968 Spade-grip terminal device for artificial limbs 
0,5 This standard is a necessary adjunct to IS : 4534-1968*. 

0.6 This standard contains a clause 6.1 which calls for agreement between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-19601. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

♦Specification for adapter for tenninal devices, artificial limbs. 
fRulcs for rounding ofif numerical values ( revised ). 



IS: 4556 -1968 

1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard specifics the requirements pertaining to material, shape^ 
dimensions, workmanship and finish for typing finger terminal device, 

2. MATERIAL 

2,1 The typing finger device shall be of carbon steel rod conforming to 
Designation C20 or G40 of IS : 2073-1962*. The tip shall be manufactured 
from vulcanized rubber conforming to Type B, Grade 4 of Indian Standard 
specification for vulcanized rubber compounds ( under preparation). 

Note — Till this standard is published, the requirements of rubber for tip shall be as 
agreed to between the buyer and the seller. 

3. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The general shape and dimensions of the typing finger device terminal 
shall be as given in Fig. 1 . 



V' 



T 

20 

L 



TTT 



UJ 



-12-5 DIA 
7*5 OIA 

-RUBBER TIP 



t: 



t 



OIA 



, <r— MAK 



MARK HERE 



M 10 THREADS 

TO RECEIVE ADAPTER^ 



2 TO 3 



17 



18 



lAl 



13 OIA 



*See IS : 4534-1968 Specification for adapter for terminal devices, artificial limbs. 
All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Typing Finger Terminal Device for Artificial Limbs 



♦Specification for carbon steel bars for production of machined parts for general 
engineering purposes. 



IS:4556-1968 

4. MANUFACTURE, WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

4.1 The typing finger terminal device except the tip, shall be turned from 
carbon steel {see 2.1). The typing finger shall be finished smooth, free 
from burrs and all sharp edges shall be rounded oflf. The rubber tips 
shall be securely fitted and shall not be easily removable when pulled 
manually. The typing finger shall be plated chromium over nickel. The 
plating shall conform to Grade C of IS : 1068-1958*. 

5. MARKING 

5.1 The typing finger terminal device shall be clearly and legibly marked 
with the manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade-mark. 

5.1.1 The typing finger may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by 
the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are 
continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under 
which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufac- 
turers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

6. PACKING 

6.1 The device shall be packed in the manner as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 



* Specification for copper^ nickel and tihrorhiiim electroplated coitiil^i 

5 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

The Indian Standards Institution ( ISI ), which started functioning 
in 1947, is the national standards organization for India. Its 
principal object is to prepare standards on national and inter- 
national basis and promote their general adoption. 

The overall control of ISI, which is run and financed jointly as 
a non-profit nnalcing body by the Government and private 
enterprise, is exercised by the General Council, composed of 
representatives of Central and State Governments; leading trade, 
scientific and technological organizations; and subscribing 
members. The Union Minister of Industry Is the ex-officio President 
of iSl. 

The present technical activity of ISI Is carried out through 
8 Division Councils for Agricultural and Food Products, 
Chemical, Civil Engineering, Consumer Products* Electrotechnical, 
Mechanical Engineering, Structural and Metals, and Textile. 
All technical worl< relating to the formulation and revision of 
standards is done by committees appointed by and under the 
direction of their respective Division Councils, These committees 
consist of experts drawn from manufacturing units, technical 
Institutions, purchase organizations and other concerned bodies. 

To make available benefits of Indian Standards to the common 
man, ISl has introduced its Certification Maries Scheme under the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) AcU 1952, as 
amended by the Amendment AcU 196 L According to this Act, 
quality goods conforming to Indian Standards can carry the ISl 
Certification Mark. This Mark Is a third-party guarantee of 
quality of marked goods. Licences to use the ISl Certification 
Mark are granted to manufacturers using reliable methods of 
quality control subject to overall inspection by ISl. 

In the international field, ISl represents India on the Inter- 
national Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the Inter- 
national Electrotechnical Commission ( lEC ). ISO and lEC 
respectively link 54 and 40 countries, and function through 118 and 
58 technical committees; ISi participates in 83 technical 
committees of ISO and all the technical committees of lEC. The 
committees and subcommittees of lEC and ISO for which ISl holds 
the secretariat deal with: Electric Fans, Lac. Mica, Pictorial 
Markings for Handling of Goods, Liquid Flow Measurements in Open 
Channels, Procedures for Inter-conversion of Values, Spices and 
Condiments, and Stimulant Foods. 



