•••••**••*•**•*• 



i&Sz 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
r Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 1735-1 (1977): Beehive Stand, Part I: Folding Type [FAD 
3: Apiary Industry] 



j*rfiiii^AK>fe ¥i # mj^wafearoASiiTFS 



ZS&W I • ^SS>^^N&^> 



>^xvvfe^ 




• 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge" 



?TR rr^ fnj\ <sMMI | Wf ^ft ^TPTT ^f W ^RTT "f 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



^ *2*~* 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : f735 ( Part I ) - 1977 
( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR BEEHIVE STAND 

PART I FOLDING TYPE 

(First Revision) 



UDC 638*142-381 — 182*6 




© Copyright 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



fjf J December 1977 



IS 1 1735 ( Part I ) - 1977 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR BEEHIVE STAND 

PART I FOLDING TYPE 

(First Revision) 

Apiary Industry Sectional Committee, AFDG 1 1 

Chairman Represent™ g 

Dr G. B. Deodikab Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Members 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of 

Health & Family Welfare ), New Delhi 
Smt Debi Mukherjeb ( Alternate ) 
Director of Laboratories Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad 

Shri K. N. Rtjstagi ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. P. Goyal Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Shri B. P. Gupta Directorate of Fruit Utilization, Government of 

Uttar Pradesh, Ranikhet 
Shri K. M. Joyappa Department of Industries & Commerce, Govern- 

ment of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Apicultural Development 
Officer ( Alternate ) 
j) E R.p, Kapil Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 

DbD.S. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. L- Kaw J & K Khadi & Village Industries Board, Srinagar 

Shri O. P. Krishna Department of Agriculture, Government of Himachal 

Pradesh, Simla 
Shri Jogindek Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr N G. Pant Indian Agricultural Research Institute { I CAR ) 

New Delhi * 

President Goorg Honey & Wax Producers' Co-operative 

Marketing Society Ltd, Virajpet 
Director ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Sambay Kutir Shilpanusthan Ltd, Sibsagar 

r H pt P. L. Sharma Himachal Pradesh University, College of Agriculture. 

Solan 
Shri S. G. Shende Maharashtra State Khadi & Village Industries 

Board, Bombay 
Shri C. S. Bhambure ( Alternate) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1977 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS ; 1735 ( Part I ) - 1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. G. Shende All India Bee-Keepers' Association, Pune 

Da R. P. Kapil ( Alternate ) 
Special Officer Martandam Bee-Keepers' Co-operative Society Ltd, 

Martandam 
Db M. Swaleh Forest Research Institute Colleges^ Dehra Dun 

Dr R. M. Berry ( Alternate ) 
Db I. N. Tandon Government Beekeeping Station, Jeolikote 

Shri Yogeshwar Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. V. Thakar Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shri K. V. Towafi ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, 1ST ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri Manohar T. Santwani 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 

Beekeeping Equipment Subcommittee, AFDC 11:2 

Convener 
Shri C. V. Thakar Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Members 
Shri K. M. Joyappa Department of Industries & Commerce, Government 

of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Shri J. L- Kaw J & K Khadi & Village Industries Board, Srinagar 

Shri O, P. Krishna Department of Agriculture, Government of Himachal 

Pradesh, Simla 
Shri Joginder Singh { Alternate ) 
Shri Bimalendu Mondal 24 Parganas Bee-Keepers' Co-operative Society Ltd, 

24 Parganas ( West Bengal ) 
Shri R. P. Phadke Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shri A. M. Shah All India Bee-Keepers' Association, Pune 

Shri Tirath Ram ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. L, Sharma Himachal Pradesh University, College of Agriculture, 

Solan 
Shri S G. Shexde Maharashtra State Khadi & Village Industries 

Board Bombay 



IS: 1735 (Part I) -1977 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR BEEHIVE STAND 

PART I FOLDING TYPE 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by 
the Indian Standards Institution on 14 October 1977, after the draft 
finalized by the Apiary Industry Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Beehives are kept on stands to protect bee colonies from ants and to 
protect boxes from termites, etc. Beekeeping Industry is now gradually 
switching over from stationary type to migratory type of beekeeping. 
Particularly while using bee-colonies for pollination of agricultural crops 
bee colonies are migrated to farms for a short duration. Even in their 
permanent honey-flow sites bee-colonies are required to be migrated 
locally for deriving maximum benefit of the flora. A portable stand, 
particularly a folding one, therefore, forms an essential accessory of the 
beehive. The stand should be strong but light, compact and handy for 
easy transportation. 

0.2.1 This standard was first published in 1960. The present revision 
includes both the types of stands, namely, folding type and fixed type. 
This standard covers folding type beehive stand. 

0.3 In preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived 
from information supplied by Central Bee Research Institute, Pune; and 
Directorate of Beekeeping, Khadi and Village Industries Commission, 
Bombay. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS :1735( Parti) -1977 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 

mild 



This standard ( Part I ) prescribes the requirements of folding type 
i steel stand used for keeping beehives in the field. 



2. SIZES 

2.1 The sizes of the folding iron stand shall be as shown in Fig. 1. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The folding iron stand shall be constructed from 20 mm diameter 
mild steel tube of 2 mm thickness. Nuts and bolts used shall be of the 
size shown in Fig. 1. The legs shall be fitted with suitable rubber 
paddings. 

4. CONSTRUCTIONAL DETAILS 

4*1 The pieces of tubes should be bent in U-shape as per the sizes shown 
in Fig. 1 . Two small pieces of tubes should be welded at the ends at 
the distance shown in the figure to the bent U-tube of shorter height so 
as to bring its total height equal to the taller one. A piece of tube 
should also be welded to the legs of the bent tubes to keep the legs in 
position. A hole of appropriate size should be drilled exactly in the 
centre of the bent tubes as well as in the pieces of the tubes welded on 
both the main bent tubes. These should then be joined together by bolt 
and nuts of appropriate size. The rubber paddings should befitted to all 
the four ends of the tube. These ends should serve as legs of the stand. 

5. SHAPE AND DESIGN 

5.1 The folding stand shall be, as far as possible, of the shape and 
dimensions as given in Fig. 1 . 

6. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

6.1 The stand shall be finished properly. The welding shall be satis- 
factory and the drilling of holes shall be exactly in the centre of the 
length of the bent tubes. The stand shall be symmetrical on both sides 
and shall stand firm on the ground. 

6.2 The stand should be suitably coated with protective point. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 Each folding beehive stand shall be marked with the following 
particulars: 

a) Manufacturer's name and the trade-mark, 

b) Year of manufacture, and 

c) Batch and serial or code number. 



320 




■20 



I7r 



k80-«4— no 



-i 



i — \ 



300 



-20 



T 



=N\ 



£. 



5 



520- 



60 mm LONG SCREW NUT 



Cn 




RUBBER PADOINGS 
IN ALL THE FOUR 
LEGS 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. I Beehive Stand, Folding Type 



Cfl 



w 



<0 



IS: 1735 (Part I)- 1977 

7.2 The stand may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may 
be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



