IS 16090 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IAA Ae 


fan — pal (rar FAT) eq Faen 
ant — aR 


Indian Standard 


GEO-SYNTHETICS — GEO-TEXTILES USED 
AS PROTECTION (OR CUSHIONING) 
MATERIALS — SPECIFICATION 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


September 2013 Price Group 2 


Geo-synthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geo-synthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Most solid and hazardous waste landfills, lagoons and reservoirs built today incorporate geo-membranes to 
contain liquids. Although these low permeability liners have demonstrated excellent performance, they are 
susceptible to damage when drainage stone or alternate drainage media (such as shredded tires, crushed glass, 
etc) are placed over them. In addition, geo-membranes are prone to damage from isolated protrusions present in 
the sub-grade onto which they are deployed. 


Geo-membranes are often used in civil engineering applications to create hydraulic barrier between two media. 
Their basic function is to remain impervious over the entire design life of the project. However, mechanical 
stresses induced by the confined materials could produce a deformation of the membrane and, in critical situations, 
could ultimately puncture it. Therefore, in any landfill project, properly protecting the geo-membrane from 
tearing or puncturing during construction is critical and of paramount importance. 


Recent and ongoing research indicates that use of a properly selected non-woven, needle-punched geo-textile 
cushion adjacent to (above and/or below) a geo-membrane can effectively protect it from construction and 
operational damage in typical applications including solid waste landfills and liquid impoundments with varying 
load, sub-grade and cover sub-grade soil conditions. 


Survivability is very important from the viewpoint of its long term durability and is defined as resistance to 
mechanical damage during construction and initial operation. The ability of a geo-synthetic to survive installation 
and use must be assured, if it is to perform as designed. Installation damage to a geo-textile is a function of the 
following: 


a) Geo-textile mass per square meter and thickness; 

b) Polymer used in the manufacture of geo-textile; 

c) Geo-textile manufacturing process (needle punching, chemical or thermal bonding); 
d) Condition of the sub-grade; and 

e) Drainage media. 


In formulating this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from GRI Test Method — GT 12 (b) : 2008 
Standard for "Test methods and properties for non-woven geo-textiles used as protection (or cushioning) materials 
(Revision 1)’ published by the Geo-synthetic Research Institute, USA. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16090 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


GEO-S YNTHETICS — GEO-TEXTILES USED 
AS PROTECTION (OR CUSHIONING) 
MATERIALS — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies requirements for needle- 
punched non-woven geo-textiles used as protection (or 
cushioning) materials adjacent to (above and/or below) 
a geo-membrane to protect it from construction and 
operational damage in typical applications including 
solid waste landfills and liquid impoundments with 
varying load, sub-grade and cover sub-grade soil 
conditions. 


NOTE — The typical use shall be as a protective covering or 
underlayment of a geo-membrane against puncture or tear due 
to rock, stones, concrete or other hard surfaces and/or objects. 


1.2 This standard covers physical, mechanical and 
endurance properties that must be met, or exceeded 
by the geo-textile. 


1.3 This is a material purchasing specification and 
design review of its use for intended applications is 
recommended. This is not a construction or design 
specification. Protection (cushioning) of geo- 
membranes is a site specific design issue which should 
be addressed by the engineers responsible for the site 
design. 


1.4 This standard is based on the minimum 
requirements of the geo-textile to provide tensile 
reinforcement and survivability from installation stress. 
In general, the geo-textile shall be placed at the proper 
elevation, location and orientation as detailed on the 
plans and specification. 


1.5 The design, installation and construction guidelines 
for such geo-textiles are being published as a separate 
Indian Standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 


in IS 13321 (Part 1) and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Minimum Average Roll Value (MARV) — For 
geo-synthetics, a manufacturing quality control tool 
used to allow manufacturers to establish published 
values such that the user/purchaser shall have a 
97.7 percent confidence that the property in question 
shall meet published values. For normally distributed 
data, MARV is calculated as the typical value minus 
two standard deviations from documented quality 
control test results for a defined population from one 
specific test method associated with one specific 


property. 
4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 A non-woven geo-textile shall be used as a 
protection (or cushioning) material for protecting geo- 
membranes from construction and operational damage 
in typical applications including solid waste landfills 
and liquid impoundments with varying load, sub-grade 
and cover sub-grade soil conditions. 


NOTE — Normally needle-punched non-wovens geo-textiles 
shall be used; heat bonded and chemical bonded (resin dipped) 
geo-textiles (or others) may also be used. 


4.2 Geo-synthetic materials shall be inert to commonly 
encountered chemicals, resistant to rot and mildew, and 
shall have no tears or defects which adversely affect 
or alter its physical properties. Materials required for 
complete and proper installation of geo-synthetic 
materials that are not specifically described herein 
(such as pins, nails, washers, etc) shall conform to the 
manufacturer’s recommendations and be as selected 
and supplied by the contractor subject to final approval 
by the engineer. 


4.3 Polymers used in the manufacture of geo-textiles, 
and the mechanical fasteners or threads used to join 
adjacent rolls, shall consist of long chain/staple fibres 
of synthetic polymers, composed of at least 95 percent 
by weight of polyolefins (polypropylene, polyethylene) 
or polyesters. They shall be formed into a stable 
network such that the ribs, filaments or yarns retain 
their dimensional stability relative to each other, 
including selvedges. Geo-textile materials shall be inert 
to commonly encountered chemicals, resistant to rot 
and mildew, and shall have no tears or defects which 
adversely affect or alter its physical properties. 


IS 16090 : 2013 


Polyolefin material shall be made resistant to ultraviolet 
light by adding 2-3 percent carbon black. 


4.4 The geo-textiles shall be dimensionally stable and 
able to retain their geometry under manufacture, 
transport, and installation. The finished geo-textile shall 
have good appearance qualities. It shall be free from 
such defects that would affect the specific properties 
of the geo-textile, or its proper functioning. The geo- 
textiles used for protection (or cushioning) shall 
conform to the physical requirements as specified in 
Table 1. 


4.5 The property values given in Table 1 represent 
default values which provide for sufficient separation 
function and survivability of geo-textile under most 
construction conditions. 


4.6 All property values in these specifications represent 
minimum average roll values (MARV) (average value 
minus two standard deviations). Average of test results 
from any sampled roll in a lot shall meet or exceed the 
minimum values specified in Table 1. 


5 MARKING AND LABELLING 


5.1 The geo-textile material shall be marked with the 
following by attaching the printed labels: 


a) Identification of the geo-textile material as per 
manufacturer's recommendation, for 
example, polyester needle-punched non- 


woven geo-textile for protection; 


b) Mass of the geo-textile used, in g/m’; 

c) Batch number, lot number and roll number; 

d) Date and year of manufacture; 

e) Any other information/instruction provided 
by the manufacturer; 

f) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; 
and 

g) Country of origin. 


5.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The geo-textiles may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


5.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the license for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of India Standards. 


6 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


6.1 Lot 


The quantity of the same class of geo-textile 
manufactured from the same polymer under identical 
conditions and supplied to a buyer in one shipment or 
one truckload, whichever is smaller, shall constitute a 
lot. 


6.2 Sampling for testing shall be in accordance with 
IS 14706. Acceptance shall be based on testing of either 
conformance samples obtained using procedure A of 
IS 14706 or based on manufacturer’s certification and 
testing of quality assurance samples obtained using 
Procedure B of IS 14706. 


6.3 Testing of samples shall be performed in 
accordance with the methods referred in this standard 
for the indicated application. The number of test 
specimens recommended for testing is specified in each 
test method. Geo-textile product acceptance shall be 
determined by comparing the average test results of 
all specimen within a given sample to the specified 
MARV. 


6.4 Criteria for Conformity 


The geo-textile shall be tested for all the requirements 
as specified in Table 1 and according to 4.1 to 4.6. 
When any individual sample fails to meet any of the 
specification requirements, the roll shall be rejected 
and two additional sample rolls shall be selected from 
the same lot. When either of these two additional 
samples fails to comply with any part of this standard, 
the entire quantity of rolls represented by that sample 
shall be rejected. 


Table 1 Requirements for Geo-textiles Used as Geo-membrane Protection (or Cushioning) Materials 
(Clauses 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 and 6.4) 


SI No. Property Requirement Method of Test, Ref to 
(1) (2) (3) (4 
eta —__r OO 
I I Il IV Vv VI 
i) Mass per unit area, g/m? 300 400 600 800 1 000 1 200 IS 14716 / ISO 9864 

ii) Tensile strength, kN/m 16 21 PJ. 32 36 45 IS 13162 (Part 5) 

iii)  Trapezoidal tear strength, kN 0.42 0.51 0.66 0.89 0.96 1.32 IS 14293 

iv) CBR puncture resistance, kN 30 35 4.0 5.0 7.5 11.0 IS/ISO 12236 

v) Maximum UV resistance 70 70 70 70 70 70 IS 13162 (Part 2) 


(after 500 h exposure), percent 


7 PACKING 


The geo-textile shall be packed in rolls as per the 
contract or order. Each roll of geo-textile shall be 
protected by wrapping it in a LDPE film of minimum 
thickness of 40u to prevent it from the adverse impact 
of heat and moisture, sunlight, oil, grease, dirt, dust 
and other stains/contaminants during shipment and 
storage prior to deployment. 


8 INFORMATION AND SAMPLES TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY THE MANUFACTURER 


The manufacturer shall submit to the purchaser the 
following: 


a) Geo-textile product sample approximately 
1 m? or larger; 

b) Geo-textile product data sheet and 
certification from himself stating that the geo- 
textile product supplied meets the 
requirements of this standard; and 


c) Manufacturer’s installation instructions and 
general recommendations. 


9 IDENTIFICATION, DELIVERY, STORAGE 
AND HANDLING 


9.1 Identification 


The geo-textile material shall be identified by the 
microscopic and confirmatory chemical tests 
prescribed in IS 667. Product labels shall clearly show 
the manufacturer’s or supplier’s name, batch number, 
lot number and roll number. Each shipping document 
shall include documentation certifying that the material 
is in compliance with this standard. 


9.2 Site Unloading 


Unload the geo-textile fabric at site by using a fork 
— lift or front — end loader fitted with a long, tapered 
pole. This pole is inserted into the geo-textile roll core 
and the roll is lifted off the truck bed. The pole shall 
be long enough to extend at least two-third of the 
way into the geo-textile roll core to avoid the 
possibility of breaking or damaging the roll core. Geo- 
textile rolls may also be lifted from flatbed trailers 
using nylon straps or rope and a crane, backhoe or 
bulldozer. No more than three geo-textile rolls shall 
be lifted at a time. Exceeding this number may cause 
damage to the roll core and hamper geo-textile 
deployment. Chains and cables shall not be used to 
lift the geo-textile rolls. When these equipment are 
not available at site, other locally available methods 
can be used for unloading. If unloaded with care, the 
geo-textile shall remain suitable for laying. A roll 
puller, nylon strap, or rope can be used to unload geo- 
textile rolls from an enclosed trailer by inserting into 


IS 16090 : 2013 


the roll core and dragging the roll to the edge of the 
truck bed and down to the ground surface. Nylon 
straps or ropes may also be wrapped around the geo- 
textile roll using a slipknot. Again the roll is dragged 
to the edge of the truck and down to the ground 
surface. A tarpaulin, sheet of plastic or fabric should 
be placed on the ground where the geo-textile rolls 
are to be unloaded. 


9.3 Site Handling 


Rolls of geo-textile shall always be lifted off the ground 
surface prior to moving. Dragging the geo-textile and 
operating equipment on the geo-textile, which results 
in physical damage, should be avoided all times. 


9.4 Storage and Protection 


9.4.1 The paving fabric shall be kept dry and wrapped 
such that it is protected from outside weather during 
shipping and storage. During storage, geo-textile rolls 
shall be elevated off the ground and adequately 
protected with a waterproof cover from the following: 


a) Site construction damage; 

b) Excessive precipitation; 

c) Extended exposure to sunlight; 

d) Aggressive chemicals (strong acids, bases, 
etc); 

f) Excessive mud, wet concrete, epoxy, or other 
deleterious materials coming in contact with 
and affixing to the geo-textile material; 

g) Flames including welding sparks; 

h) Temperatures in excess of 71°C; and 


j) Any other environmental condition that may 
damage the geo-textile. 


NOTE — If the protective wrapping is damaged, proper 
storage of the geo-textile is particularly critical. If the 
outer layer of geo-textile itself is damaged, the damaged 
portion must be removed and discarded during 
installation. The outermost layer of geo-textiles may 
be needed to be removed when a roll is exposed to 
sunlight for a period beyond that recommended by the 
manufacturer. 


9.4.2 Store the geo-textile paving fabric at temperatures 
above —20°C. The air and pavement temperatures shall 
be at least 10°C and that for asphalt cement/emulsion 
16°C. 


9.4.3 Lay the rolled materials flat or vertical on ends. 
9.4.4 Do not leave the geo-textile material directly 


exposed to sunlight for a period longer than the period 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


9.4.5 Each geo-textile roll shall be wrapped with a 
material that shall protect it from damage due to 
shipment, water, sunlight and contaminants. 


IS 16090 : 2013 


9.4.6 Keep geo-textile dry until installation, and do 
not store directly on the ground. 


9.4.7 If geo-textile rolls become wet, remove the 
waterproof cover to allow for a few days of exposure 
to wind in order to dry the fabric. It is essential that the 
rolls shall be elevated during the process. The protective 
wrapping from one end of the roll may also be removed 
and the opposite end of the roll be elevated which 
allows the majority of excess water to flow out of the 
geo-textile. 


NOTES 


1 In most cases, these procedures shall not allow the fabric to 
dry completely. Once unrolled during installation, the geo- 
textile shall dry quickly in the sun and wind. However, it should 
be noted that non-woven geo-textiles used in conjunction with 
bitumen overlays of existing pavements must be completely 
dry prior to installation. 


2 Exposing geo-textile rolls to moisture or water prior to 
installation can lead to serious handling problems. Non-woven 
geo-textiles in particular, can absorb water up to three times 
their weight. In addition, the cores on which the geo-textile 
rolls are wound, are manufactured from laminating paper. When 
wet, the strength of these cores is seriously diminished to the 
point where the core shall not support the weight of the geo- 
textile. Consequently, it can be extremely difficult to install 
wet rolls of geo-textile. In addition, it is nearly impossible to 
unroll wet, frozen geo-textile without first allowing it to thaw. 


9.4.8 Geo-textiles slowly degrade in the presence of 
ultraviolet light and shall be protected by stabilizing 
chemicals and limiting exposure to sunlight until just 
before installation depending upon the environmental 
conditions or as decided by the site engineer. 


9.4.9 The geo-textile shall be installed within the period 
specified in the project specifications or, otherwise, the 
exposure is limited to a period of two weeks. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
667 : 1981 Methods for identification of textile 14293 : 1995 Geo-textiles — Method of test for 


fibres (first revision) 

Geo-textiles — Methods of test: 
Determination of resistance to the 
exposure of ultraviolet light and 
water (Xenon-arc type apparatus) 
Determination of tensile properties 
using a wide width strip 

Glossary of terms for geo-synthetics: 
Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
properties 


3162 
(Part 2) : 1991 
(Part 5) : 1992 


13321 (Part 1): 
1992 


trapezoid tearing strength 


14706 : 1999 Geo-textiles — Sampling and 


preparation of test specimens 


14716 : 1999/ Geo-textiles — Determination of 


ISO 9864 : mass per unit area 
1990 

IS/ISO 12236: Geo-synthetics — Static puncture 
2006 test (CBR test) (under print) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (0985). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


