**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 2754 (1964) : General requirements for optical 
instruments [PGD 22: Educational Instruments and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 : 2754 - 1964 

Indian Standard Reaffirmed 

■'"'"■"' 2005 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ^^^ 
OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS ^^ 
: 2006 

Third Reprint DECEMBER 1988 

( Incorporating Amendment No. 1 ) 



UDC 535-8 : 681-4 



© Copyright 1981 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARQ 

NEW DELHI U0002 

Gr 6 September 1964 



I8t2754.19M 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 

Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee^ EDC 36 

Chairman lUprtsenting 

Db C. S. Rao Defence Research & Development Organisation 

( Ministry of Defence } 

MtnA^rs 

Ma J N. Bhattachabta ( AlUmaU to 
Dr C. S. Rao ) 
Sbbi p. N. Dxobhakta Department of Technical Development ( Ministry of 

Economic & DHence Co-ordmation ) 
ShBI V. KRISRNAlCOOBTBr ^Mumoti ) 
Db S. p. Vbbma ( AlUmaU ) 
Smu M. W. Dbsai Resef rch, Designs & Standards Organisation ( Minis- 

try of Railways ) 
Shbx J. L. HUMAB Central Public Works Department ( Ministry of 

Works, Housing A Rehabilitation ) 
Col R. S. Kalha Survey of India ( Ministry of Scientific Research & 

Cultural Affairs ) 
Lt-Col K. L. Kbosla {AUtmak) 
Saax B. R. Makkhakd The Koh-i-Noor ( India ) Private i Lulj^iVaranasi 

Dm K. N. Mathub Central Scientific Instruments Organisation ( CSIR ), 

New Delhi 
Sbbz B. G. Natlaxbi J.V. Navlakhi & Co , Bombay 

Sbbi B. V. Dalal ( Aliirtum ) 
Sbbi Pbbm Pbakasr National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ). New Delhi 

Sbbi Om Pbaxasb ( Alkrnak ) 
Shbi £. B. Rajdbbkab Raj-Der-Kar ft Co , Bombay 

Sbbi Subbasb Rajdbbkab ( AlUmaU ) 
Caft S. RAJBia>BA Indian Navy 

Lt Cdb I. J. Bbabdwaj ( AUemaU ) 
Db I. Ramakbishna Rao Madras Institute of Technology, Madras 

PBOF S. HABIRABAir ( AlUfHOti ) 

Sbbi K. V. Sbhovaba Rao Central Water Sl Power Commission ( Ministry of 

Irrigation & Power ) 
Sbbi K. S. Cbbtty ( AlUmaU ) 
Sbbi P. V. SmiBA Rao The Andhra Scientific Co Ltd,^MasuHpaUm 

Shbi M. Paitdubahoa Rao ( AlUmaU ) 
Shbi P. L. Sahoal Office of the Development Commissioner, Small 

Scale Industries ( Ministry of Commerce Sl 
Industry ) 
Shbi A. N. Sbk National Instruments Ltd,! Calcutta 

Shbi R. R. CHAXBABOB^i : ( AlUnuUt ) 

( Continutd on page 2 ) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG ' 
NEW DELHI 110002 



I8s27M-1964 

( Conimmdfrom pagi 1 ) 

Mitnbm R§pftsttUmg 

Shbi i). R. SsTHi Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Miniitry 

of Defence) 
Shbi S. K* Roy ( AUirnati ) 
Shbi V. P. Vaisu Quality Marked Goods Manufacturers Co-operative 

Association \A(\, Roorkee 
Shbi H. C. Vbbma Associated Instrument Manufacturers (India) 

Private Ltd, New Delhi 



SuBi D. NiBODY ( AlUmaU ) 
Bi M. V. Patakkab, 
Deputy Director ( T-niLr)? ) 



Shbi M. V. Patakkab, Director, BIS ( Ex-cjgicio Mtmhtr) 



SecjeUuy 

Shri P. N. Kohli 

Senior Technical Assistant i^l^uf^^, ), BIS 

Optical Instruments Subcommittee, EDC 36 : 2 

Convener 

Shei a. N. Biiattachabyya Defence Research & Development Organisation 

( Ministry of Defence ) 

Members 

Shbi P. K. Sabma ( Alternate to 
Shri A. N. Bhattacharyya ) 
Shbi T. N. Bosk Government Precision Instruments Factory, 

Lacknow 
Shbi S. K. Maheswabi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. N. Dkobhakta Department of Technical Development ( Ministry of 

^ Economic & Defence Co-ordination ) 
Shbi V. Kbishnamoorthy ( Alternate ) 
Pbof S, Harihaban Madras Institute of Technology, Madras 

Db K. N. Matieur Central Scientific Instruments Organisation ( CSIR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri Prkm Praka;? h National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri Om Phakash ( Alternate ) 
Shbi U. Mohan Rao Carborundum Universal Ltd, Madras 

Shri D. C. Roy National Instruments LuC Calcutta 

Shbi S. K. Roy Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry 

of Defence ) 
Shbi K. D. Sharma Central dlass & Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Calcutta 
Shbi S. V. Bhatye ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. V. Subba Rao The Andhra Scientific Co Ltd, Masulipatam 



Itr27M-lM4 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu« 
tion on 20 Tune 1964, after the draft finalized by the Optical and 
Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 A variety of optical instruments is used on a large scale by the 
industry and a number of other establishments. Their requirements, as 
regards the quality of material, workmj|nship and finish, precision and 
performance characteristics vary according to their field of appHcation. 
In view of these considerations, although it would appear to be unpracti- 
cable to lay down a common standard for all types of optical instruments, it 
is still possible to specify the more general requirements which should 
invariably be satisfied by the different types of instruments. Such 
requirements as are specific to the functional characteristics of the 
instnunents are not covered by this standard but are only referred to in 
some cases. For these special requirements, reference should be mid^ to 
the relevant standards. 

0.S In this specification, suiuble methods for measurement of indicated 
parameters are given in the appendices. Other methods giving the same 
or higher accuracy may also he used. 

0*4 As the general requirements dealt with in this standard are applicable 
to ail types of optical instruments, this standard should be ouoted as the 
basic standard of Preference in all other specifications for optical instruments 
as far as the common requirements are concerned. 

03 Taking into consideration the views of producers and consumers, the 
Sectional Gonunittee respcmsible fi^r the preparation of this sUndard lelt 
that it should be related to the manufiicturing practices followed in the 
country in this field. 

•jS The series of lens aperture markings and exposure time markings for 
still cameras specified in this standard are m confonnity with those 
recommended m Draft ISO Recommendations No. 423 Ei^xxure-Time 
Miridng for Shutters Used in Still Cameras, and No. 424 Marking of 
Lens Apertures prepared by Technical Committee 42 Photography, of the 
International ^ganisation for Standardiiatioo. 

S 



Itt27M.lM4 

#•7 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this standard, 
it phM be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard. 

HM For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of thb 
standard is complied with, tht final value, observed or calculated, 
^expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded offin accordance 
with IS: 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values {Htms$d). 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

0*9 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the general technical provi^^ 
sions relating to optical instruments, and it does not include all the necessary 
provisions of a contract. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the general requirements and methods of 
test for optical instruments, such as telescopes, microscopes, still cameras 
and still projectors. For requirements of any partloulai 'nstrument, re- 
ference should be made to the relevant spedficauon for that instnunent. 

2. TBRMINOLOOY 

2*1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 1399* 
1959 Glossary of Terms Used in (^cal Technology shall apply. 

S. GENERAL REQjUIREMENTB 

SM Optical instruments shall conform to the following general require- 
ments. 

3.1 Matwiala 

3.1 •! The materials used shall conform to the requirements of 
IS: 988-1959 General Requirements for Optical Components, and 
IS : 1400-1960 Specification for Optical Glass. 

3.1 .2 When filters are provided, they shall be of good optical quality 
and of suitable trantmtssion characteristics. 

3.1.3 All materials used in Uir manufacture of the instrument shall suit 
their particular purpose and be capdi>le of maintaining all their essential 
properties during 4ise, transit and storage. 

3.1.4 The materials used in the manufacture of the mechanical com- 
ponents shall be uniform in quality and firee from impurities, flaws and 
any other defects likely to impair their performance. 



ISt279«-lMt 

3.1 .5 Sheets or strips used for spinning or drawing shall be of such 
quality that after the respective operation the materiiu may be so finish* 
ed as to present a good smooth surfiu:e. 

SAS Tubing, where used, shall be uniform in quality and condition, 
and shall be sound, smooth, free from irregularities and otner defects likely 
to iippair their performance. 

5.1.7 Materials likely to deteriorate rapidly under normal climatic con- 
ditions shall be avoided as far as possible. 

3.1 .8 The materials used shall be such that they shall not deteriorate 
\^en the instrument is tested to assess its durability for use under appli- 
cable climatic and environmental conditions in accordance with IS : 2352- 
1%3 Procedure for Basic Climatic and Durability Tests for Optical 
Instruments. 

3*1 .9 Lubricants, greases, lutings, cements and paints used for the equip- 
ment shall be suitable for the temperature conditions likely to be encoun- 
tered in normal use. Their properties shall conform to the requirements 
stipulated in the relevant spedfications. 

3*2 CSaastmction 

3«2.1 The mechanical construction of the instruments shall have ad^ 
quate robustness. It shall provide ftability during use and smooth 
operation of moving parts. 

3.2.2 The mechanical components shall be fire from all defects likely to 
impair performance. 

3.2«3 Interchangeability of parts which are liable to wear in use or 
damage shall be ensured. 

3«2.4 For the external finish of optical instruments either stoving paints^ 
or chemical or electrical surface treatments shall be adopted, finishing 
paints shall not be used for the purpose. 

3«2.5 The internal surfaces of mechanical componenU shall be finished 
dull black to avoid stray reflection of light from such surfaces leading to 
reduced contrast in the image. 

3»2«6 Wherever possible, the design shall provide for tropicaligatton to 
a£ford protection against filming, fogging and fungus growth on optical 
components which may cause deterioration of the optical performance. To 
this end, hermetic sealing of the instrument and the provision of a 
desiccant like silica g.! within the instrument is recommended to be 
incorporated. 

S«2«7 To avoid lots of light by reflection at glass-air surfaces^ the 
ooatiiig of lens surfaces with an anti-reflection film ( hard blooming ) is 



ISt27M-lM4 

recommended. The quality of the coated film should satisfy the Irequire- 
ments stated in 18:988-1959 General Requirements for Optical Com- 
ponents. 

SJ Warkmaash!p 

3.3.1 Workmanship shall be of the highest grade in instrument manu- 
facturing practice, commensurate with the intended use of the instrument 
in question. 

3 •3.2 All optical components shall conform to the requirements in 
respect of workmanship^ surface finish,, centring, edging, chamfering, 
silvering, blooming, cementing and optical characteristics as stipulated in 
IS: 988-1959. They shall also be free firom any inherent or induced 
strain. 

3 .3 .3 All optical surfaces shall be perfecdy clean and free from water 
marks, fungus stains, dust, grease or dirt. The mechanical components 
shall be clean and free from deposits of dirt or dust which may affect their 
own functioning apart from the possible transfer of these deposits to 
opdcal surfaces. 

3*3.4 The assembly of optical instruments shall be done under dust free 
conditions and controlled humidity. 

3*3.5 In the case of tropicalized instruments, the interior of the instru- 
ments shall be desiccated and fumigated during assembly before the 
instruments are finally sealed, to minimise the risk of damage due to 
fungus growth. 

3.4 Fvnedommt Rcqvir€m«ats 

3.4.1 The alignments of the optical axis and the mechanical axis are 
imp>ortant characteristics in every optical instrument; the applicable tole- 
rances should be as specified in the relevant specifications. It shall be 
ensured that such alignment renders the system free from errors of coUima- 
tion within the limits specified in the relevant standard. 

3.4.2 All moving parts shall function after assembly without undue 
stiffness, looseness or backlash. 

3.4.3 Stray light causing a veiling |[lare in the imag^ shall be reduced 
to a minimum. A method for determining the veiling glare is given in 
Appendix A. 

3.4.4 The axial light transmission of the optical system shall be adequate 
lor the intended use of the instrument and shall in no case be less than 95 
percent of the stated value. A method for determination of the para-axial 
transmission factor of a telescope is given in Appendix B. 



18:2754-1964 

S,4*5 Leakproofness of the instrument shall be tested in the case of fully 
tropicalized instruments by forcing air to build up a pressure of (hi 75 
kgi/cm* in the instrument. The instrument shall be free from leakage for 
at least one minute. 

3AJS When graticules, cross-wires or reference marks are provided, 
they shall be such as to appear sharp, clear and well-defined against 
tlie background. The width of the lines and the nature of the pattern 
shall not be such as to cause obstruction to the useful field of view. 

3A.7 Wherever required, the instrument shall be subjected to climatic 
and durability tests as laid down in the relevant specification for the 
instrument. 

3.4.8 In instruments meant for special purposes, a suitable arrangement 
for night illumination of the graticule shall be provided. The illumina- 
tion of the graticule shall be such as to bring out the pattern clearly 
against the background without being a distraction to the observer. 

3.5 Stands and Cases 

3.5.1 In cases where a stand is essential for use of the instrument, it 
shall invariably be supplied along with the instrument. 

3JS.2 Carrying-cum-storagc cases shall be provided with all instruments 
which may require to be carried from place to place in actual use. In the 
case of large instruments provided with a number of accessories, separate 
cases may preferably be provided for their storage. 

4. OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

4*0 In addition to the general requirements given under 3.1 to 3.5, 
the following requirements for individual instruments shall be complied 
with. 

4.1 Telescopes 

4.1»1 The magni&cation of a telescope may be measured by the 
method given in Appendix C. The value obtained by measurement shall 
not differ from the specified value by more than 5 percent, unless other- 
wise stipulated. 

4.1.2 The exit pupil of the telescope shall not normally be situated 
at a distance less than 6 mm from the surface of the eyepiece nearest to 
the eye. 

4.1.3 A recommended value for the diameter of the exit pupils of 
telescopes intended for daylight observation is 4 mm. 



■ t27M«19M 

4.1.4 The field of view of a telescope may be meatured by the metkua 

r*ven in Appendix D. The meatured value shall not differ fay more than 
percent nrom the specified value. 

4,1 .S The circles, lines and squares of a definition board of the type 
given in Appendix E, when viewed through the telescope, shall app«ar 
sharply defined, without any distortion and colour. 

4.1 .6 The resolving power of a telescope shall be measured by any of 
the usual methods. A recommended method is siven in Appendix F. 
The measured value of resolving power shall not fSsU short of 80 percent of 
the theoretical resolving power ot the telescope. 

4.1 .7 A vertical object when viewed through a porismatic telescope shall 
not appear inclined beyond 30 minutes to the vertical. A methoa of test 
is given in Appendix G. 

4.1.8 When a dioptric scale is provided in the eyepiece of a telescope, 
the marked values of the scale shall not difler from the actual value at that 
position by more than ±\ D, where D represents dioptre. For a fixed 
focus telescope the eyepiece shall be adjusted between — J O and — ID. 
A method of testing accuracy of the dioptric scale is given in Appendix H. 

4*2 MicircMcopea 

4.2.1 The nuu;nification and numerical aperture NA of the objective 
shall be tagraved on iu mount, for example 40x0*65 NA. 

4.2.1.1 In the case of oil immersion olgectives, in addition to the 
marking specified in 4.2J, the immersion characterisdc shall be engraved, 
(or example 80 x 1*3 NA Immersion. 

4.2.1.2 The magnification shall also be engraved on the eyepiece, fer 
examjde 10 x. 

4.2*2 The nuignification of the objective shall be measured by the 
method given in Appendix J. The measured value of the magnification 
shall not differ from the specified value by more than S percent. 

4J2Ji The numerical aperture of the objective shall be measured by an 
apertometer. The measured value of tlie numerical aperture shall not 
differ from the marked value by more than 5 percent. 

4.2«4 The resolving power of the objective shall be measured by the 
method given in Appendix K. ll^r measured value shall not be less than 
the theoretical value by more than S percent. 

4^3 The magnification of the eyepiece shall be calculated by the 

250 
formula -jr-, where f^ is the measured focal length of the eyepiece in 

8 



I8i2754.19S4 

millimetres. This value shall not diflfer from tlie value marked on the 
eyepiece bv more than 5 percent. 

4«2*6 The following diatoms are recommended as test objects for 
judging the quality of definition and the resolving power of microscope 
objectives: 

Namcula lyra tor objectives of 16 nun focal length and over 

PUurosigma angulatum for objectives of 4 mm focal length 

AmpUplmua ptUucida for objectives of 2 mm focal length 

When observed under white light illumination, the image shall 
appear clear and well defined. The image shall be totally free from 
colour defects up to half the field of view and shall be reasonably free 
from colour up to two-thirds field of view. 

4.2.7 The recommended mechanical tube length of the microscope 
is 160 mm nominal. 

4«2»8 The optical and mechanical characteristics of each objective and 
eyepiece shall be so adjusted in the design that different objectives 
or eyepieces may be substituted one for another without any appreciabli 
change in focus for the same make. 

4.2*9 To facilitate interehangeability with objectives of different origin, 
the following screw threads shall be adopted: 

Form Whitworth 

Major diameter 20*274 mm 

Ktch 0-705 5 mm 

Length of threads of objective 3* i *"' -nm 

Plain fitting above threads of 2*54 mm long, not to exceed 
objective 19*355 mm in diameter 

Length of threads of nosepiece Not less than 3*2 mm 

4.2*19 To facilitate interehangeability, the nominal outer diameter of the 
eyepiece tube shall be 23*2 nun. 

4«2.11 The microscope shall be provided with either a fixed stage, a 
rotatable stage, a mechanical stage or a combination of these. The 
mechanical stage, wherever provided, shall be graduated in millimetres 
and may be provided with a vernier. The movement of the mechanical 
stage shall be smooth and true. The surface of the stage shall be iat« 

4.2.12 The microscope shall be provided with a device for lioth coane 
and fine focussing except for small magnification objectives, where 
only coarse focussing is pmvided. The fi>cussing devices shall be 
such that: 

«} the focussing movement is smooth; 



I8i279i«lfW 

b) there k qd apprectablc backlash or movement of the body tube 
under gravity; 

c) there is no lateral movement of the image during ibcussing; 

d) for fine focusanng, where provided, the movement is perfecdy 
linear throughout the entire nm when a scale for fine focussing is 
provided, that is, a division on the scale corresponds to the same 
focussing movement at any point in the range ; and 

e) the fine focussing arrangement shall have a mechanism which shall 
prevent damage to the slide when the objective comes in ccmtact 
with it. 

4J2AS The microacope shall be provided with two mirrors, one plane 
and the other concave and/or a substage condenser for the purposes of 
illumi nation. 

4.2.14 The numerical aperture of the subsuge condenser, whcrevtr 
provided, shall be higher than the numerical apertare of the objectives. 

43 StmGteoMfM 

4«S.l The seneral requirements of stili cameras are. covered in 43 Jt 
to 43M and do not cover qiecial requirements for different cameras, 
such as microfifamng cameras, aerial cameras, etc. 

43J2 The equivalent focal length in millimetre, the maximum aperture 
and the type and serial number, if any, shall be marked in sequence on the 
mounts of all camera leases as given below: 

50 mm ^2*8 Hind Anastigmat No. 12345, or 
50 mm//2'8 Anastigmat No. 12345 
Where no serial number is to be quoted, the sequence shall be as folbws: 

50 mm//2'8 Hind Anastigmat, or 

50 mm//2-8 Anastigmat 



4«3.3 The equivalent focal length measured by any standard method or 
by the method given in Appendix L shall not differ from the marked value 
by more than 4 percent. 

43 A Every stop uxc other than the maximum aperture shall be chosm 
Trom the following series: ^ 

//0-7, I, 1-4, 2, 8-8, 4, 5-6, 8, 1 1, 16, 22, 32, 45, 64, 90 and 128 

433 The value dfflieAnuint^r for the maximum apertiu-c as measured 
by the method givcfi in Apcifndix M .^hall lie within ±5 percent of the 
marked value. The /^numbers corresponding to the different stop sixes 
shall also lie within ±5 percent of tlie marked value. 

10 



Bs2754.19M 

4 J.6 The ditumce mmrkings shall be deariy indioited in metres and 
tMcfWf as Tar as poasible, the simple series A, A/2, A/3, A/4, etc, where A b 
the hyper-ibcal disunce, every second or third term of the series being 
chosen wherever practicable* Infinity shall be igdicafcd by the mathe- 
matical symbol oo, 

4«S.7 A depth-of^field scale to indicate the range of distances within 
which all objects located shall appear in bcm, k icoosnmended to 
be provided in still cameras. 

43M The exposure time marking for a particular cxpomtt settiM of 
shutler shall be the reciprocal of the effective exposure time in seconds at 
the particular setting. 

4.S«f The exposure time markings shall be selected from the following 
series: 

1.2,4,8, 15,30,60, 125,230,500, 1 000and2000 
The highest speed markti^ need not hofiMcver be sekclcd fr^ 



4.S Jf The front and the badt frame of the camera shall bt strictly 



4J.11 There sban be good 'T^iiiaaM 10 fifisler betwccsi the focussing 
and plate in the daik tf -. 



43M There shall bf no stray rdbctioii of l^jht from the internal 
I of the camera when tested in a darit room. 



434$ The camera shall be absolutdy light-tight. 

4JI.14 In all hand cameritt, the desi|p should provide for one or more 
pfwise view-finders to assist the user m locating the image. While the 
jMiture or the type of view^nder may be conditioned by the reouirementi 
in the design and coastruction of the camera, it b rerommended that the 
field of view indicated in the view-finder should be slightly smaOer than 
tht field recorded on the fitaou 

44*15 As a criterion for the quality of aooBptable definition, the 
ra lens shiill be judged by its nMolviiig power. The resotving power 
be me wired hy using standerd test duuli of the Gobb type and 
in lines per millimetre^ 

4A St» mm or Mdlo w.^'z^c^ 

444 la the choice of all parts and details of eonstniction of a still 
prq}ector, it is of priniary importance to cater for die maximum structural 
stroigtb and reliaUlity unoer all operating conditions. The projector 
shall be of robust construction. 

11 



ISt2754.1§S4 

4.4,2 The equivalent focal length of the projection lens shall be deter* 
mined by any of the standard methods. The measured value shall not 
depart by more than 2 percent of the marked value. 

4A3 The lens shall be mounted in a suitable focussing mount. It shall 
be ensured that there is no shift in the image during focussing. 

4.4.4 The image produced by the lens shall be clear and well-defined 
over the entire image area when viewed from a distance of twice the screen 
width across. 

4.4.5 The optical axis of the projecting system shall be at right angles to 
the object plane as evidenced by good definition over the entire projected 
image on a screen placed at right angles to the same axis. 

4.4.6 The resolving power shall not fall short of the required value 
stipulated in the relevant specification. It shall br tested by projecting a 
test chart of the type given in Appendix N. 

4.4.7 The illumination of the object under projection shall be uniibrm. 
When there is a likelihood of the heat generated by the illuminating unit 
damaging the object or the projector components during prolonged use, a 
fan and heat absorbihg filters shall be provided. 

4.4.S The illumination on the screen shall appear uniform and free 
from objectionable bands and patches. The illumination shall be measured 
at different points on the screen as given in Appendix P. The average 
illumination at the four corners shall not be less than 70 percent of the 
illumination at the centre. 

4.4.9 The gate assembly of the projector should be easily removable as 
a unit without the use of tools. All parts should be easily accessible for 
cleaning. 

4.4.10 The transport of the film or change of slide shall be smooth and 
cause no scratches or otherwise damage the film or slide. 

5. PACaONG AND PACKAGING 

5.1 Optical instrumenu ihi4L be securely packed for storage and transit so 
that there is no po«nbilitf~of deterioration. 

5.2 The description and number of contents shall be clearly marked on 
top of the package. The package shall also be marked with the symbol 
for fh^gile contenu acoording to ^ IS: 1286-1958 Pictorial Maritings for 
Handling Instructions for Non-Dangerous Goods, together wjth the legend 
HANDLE WITH CARE in red and also the symbol for RIGHT-WAY UK 



•Since TevneA 

12 



I8i27M-IM4 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.4.3 ) 

METHOD OF MEASURING VEILING GLARE 
INDEX IN A TELESCX>PE 



A-l. DESCRIPTION 

A-1.1 The veiling glare index may be measured by an appari^tus as shown 
in Fig. 1. The filament of a lamp A fitted in a suitable fixture B, is 
imaged by a large double condenser lens C in the plane of the collimator 
lens D whose focal plane is a few millimetres in front of the nearest surface 
of the condenser. A circular diaphragm E is placed in front of the 
condenser. The opening of the diaphragm is made to suit the instrument 
under test and is kept slightly more than the field of view of the instrument. 
An opaque blackened circular disc F subtending an angle of one degree at 
the collimator lens is supported or^ tV»^ axis of the condenser. The telescope 
under test is placed on a table G which may be so adjusted that tne 
telescope is set co-axial with the collimator; in which position the disc F is 
seen at the centre of the field of the telescope. An iris diaphragm H is 
placed at the exit pupil of the telescope and a shutter J is set either to 
cover the aperture or leave it open. A selenium rectifier photocell K 
placed behind the iris diaphragm is connected to a galvanometer. The 
opening of the photocell is normally kept closed by a shutter L, 



C3C0 

i 



c ' 



^E 



i 



y 



KQ^mm a 







Fio. 1 Appabatus for Measurement of Veiling Glare in TELEtcopxt 

A-2. METHOD OF TEST 

A-2.1 With the shutter J open, the eyepiece of the telescope is focussed 
to obtain a real image of the circular disc F on the aperture of the 



13 



ISt27M-1964 

photocell, the position of which is adjusted until the diameter of the inruige 
IS about 20 percent more than the cell aperture, the width of the overlap 
not being critical. With the shutter J closed and the galvanometer- 
photocell circuit closed, the galvanometer reading g^ is noted. A second 
reading ^i with the shutter J open is taken. The shutter is again closed 
and the disc F swung out of the field. Galvanometer readings with the 
shutter closed g^' and open ^|' are again taken. The veiling glare index 
is given by the ratio: 

The values to be aimed at arc 2 percent of the useful light for instruments 
having less than six glass- to-air surfaces and 3 percent of the useful light 
in instruments haying more than six glass-to-air surfaces. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 3.4.4 ) 

MEASUREMENT OF PARA-AXIAL TRANSMISSION 
FACTOR OF A TELESCOPE 

B*l» Apparatus to measure the para-axial transmission factor is given below. 




Flo. 2 .\FPARATl S FOR TUK Ml^ASt RKMKNT Or pARA-AXlAL 
iRASllMIMtOM KA( tor 



B-1.1 An enlarged image of the filament of the 40-watt lamp G ( s^e Fig. 2 ; 
is formed at a diaphragm S, by the condensing lens system /.,. Coll^natin{ 
lens L| is of about 250 mm focal length whose focus is situated at S. The 
diaphragm at S may consist of a set of small circular holes ranging fronc 
0*5 to 2*5 mm in diameter, mounted in a slide. A rotating shutter D x\ 

14 



ISi 2754- 1964 

located close to 5 and may snap into any one* of the three positions. In 
position (1), it gives clear passage to the beam and in position (2) it 
totally cuts off the beam. In position (3), the light beam en^rrs another 
aperture which is backed by a photocell ^, connected in parallel wi^h 
another photocell e^ (to which reference is made later). A filter F is 
placed in the path of the beam to raise the colour temperature of the ligiii 
to that, of day light as well as to correct the spectral sensitivity of the 
photocell to that of the eye. The lens L^ is fitted with an iris diaphragm 
to control the diameter of the beam entering the collimator. The telescope 
under test is n(iounted co^axially with L^ such that the bright hole at tne 
focal plane of L, may be «"?!cn through it at the centre of the field. The 
iris R may be closed down until the diameter of the emergent beam is well 
below the aperture of the telescope under test. Beyond the eyepiece of tlie 
telescope is mounted an integrating sphere of 15 cm diameter fitted with a 
rectifier photocell e^. A circular disc £*, about 2 cm in diameter is mounted 
by means of a thin supporting rod at the centre of the sphere. // is a lens 
having focal length or 75 mm used as an eyepiece to set the position of dbc 
E and to see the light beam impinging on it. The interior of the sphere 
and both sides of E are nick«A. piated and thickly coated with magnesium 
oxide. 

B-1.2 All the component parts of the apparatus arc first aligned such that 
the emergent beam from the eyepiece -^f the telescope under test falls 
centrally on the disc E. The best arrangement would l>e the use of such 
an aperture at iS as to make the beam enter A with a clearance of 2 to 
3 nmi all round and form a patch at E which leaves a margin of ?*^ <east 
5 mm. 

B-1.3 After the adjustment has been completed, and with the lamp G 
switched on, the zero of the galvanometer is set by means of D at 
position (2). The readings di and d^ of the galvanometer shall be taken 
[ with the shutter D in position (H J with the light entering the integrating 
sphere once with the telescope ana then without the telescope respectively. 

The transmission factor of the telescope is then given by -~ . 

The photocell t^ in combination with the third aperture is used only 
for checking the zero of the galvanometer without disturbing the set up, 
that is, as a reference. 

B-1.4 As the time interval between the observatio** : di and d^ may some* 
times be considerable, the consistency of the incident light should be 
checked. This may be done just before and after every obtervation with 
the sphere by noting the galvanometer deflection dt using the photocell #!• 
If the intensity changes, tibe current to tl^ lamp may be adjusted to ensure 
the consistency otdn. 

15 



I8s27M*lSC4 

APPENDIX C 

{Clause 4.1.1) 

MBTHOD OF DETERMINING THE MAGNIRCATION 
OF A TELE8CX>PE 



G-1. The telescope it first illuminated hy difiused light from the objective 
end. The diameter of the exit pupil is then measured by means of a 
travelling microscope placed at the eyepiece end. 

G-2* The telescope is then illuminated from the eyepiece end and the 
diameter of the entrance pupil is similarly measured by a travelling micro* 
scope. 

The magnification of the telescope is equal to diameter of entranced 
pupil divided by the diameter of exit pupil. 



APPENDIX D 

{Clause AAA) 

METHOD OF DETERMINING THE FIELD 
OF VIEW OF A TELESCOPE 

D-1. The telescope is mounted on a turn-table having an accurately 
divided circular scale. Any distant object is then brought into the field of 
the telescope first at one edge of the field and then at the opposite edge by 
turning the rotatii^ table. The angle through which the table has been 
rotated gives thr field of view of the telescope. 



16 



APPENDIX E 

[Clause 115) 
DDINITION BOARD 



nt27M.lfM 




ZfKAMITOIIfmCltONCfCCefOmfOANO 11 I /i 

\ML0COMAISCMILC0ANOSCClMOtVA ^^ | /A 

•m«iTHiaFI8H^UTlAT|ACHCOI»Nlt fffn (tftt JM^^^lfrfn /fte.. 



tIftO'tTML lAfOt liMl TMCK Klir NQUNO 
POIT UCN IICUNO TO FIAM. IV M1P HUAtOIUi 
HAD NkTI WITH NUTSi lANO ICOUMLV tCMCMfr 
TO POST lY ISIOTTCD COUNTEMUNN ICAO Nahk 
«fO0OSCIICWS4|frMiL0»<0 



.Vf?" NON 29ii2»l| MMTIO lUCR 



/ 



WATCH DIAIS UCQHii PREO TO PlATC IV COUNTEHSUNN 
HEAO MASS SCREWS M3«lmffl LONG WITH NUTS ANO WASHIM 




VM/J 



AU dla«Mkti in miUinttm. 
Von 1 - FMt flf liM plan 10 bt awd btoek. 
Von'2 - All MTMn tad «d|ii of piKbntlooi to bi dtirlr eut 
How 8 - Tobomiyot 90 a diUMW whh iky bad y o und 

17 



APPENDIX F 

{Clause 4.L6) 

METHOD OF DVTERMINING RB80LVIN0 POWER 
OF A TELESCOPE 

F«l. An object screen on which two parallel lines are marked at a distance 

d apart^ is mounted on a rotating table having circular graduations and 

placed at a distance D from the telescope. The object is placed normally 

so that the two lines subtend the maximum pomible an^le in the field of the 

telescope. The ubie is then rotated, when the two Vnes shall appear to 

come closer and closer until these are resolved. If the angle through 

which the table has been turned b 0, the resolving power of the telescope 

. . . ^. cos 6 
IS given by — « — . 



APPENDIX G 

(C/m/M 4.1.7) 

METHOD OF MEASURINO ANGUT 4R DISTORTION 
OF A TELESCOPE 

G-1. A viewing telescope, provided with a crossline graticule is first focussed 
on a plumbline hung near a wall on which are marked two lines inclined at 
an angle of 30 minutes of arc with the plumbline on either side of it. The 
telescope is so adjusted that the vertical crossline coincides with the image 
of the plumbline. The telescope to be tested is then introduced between 

gumbhne and the viewing telescop^^with its objective facing the plumbline. 
bserving through the viewing telescope, the image of the fdumbline is 
now refocussed by adjusting the telescope under test. 

G-2. The image of the plumbline shall remain in coincidence with vertical 
crossline within the limits of the two lines on either side of the plumbline 

APPENDIX H 

{ Clause 4.1.S) 
METHOD OF TESTING AGGITRAGY OF DIOPTRIC SCALE 

B»l« An auxiliary telescope is first focussed on the graticule of a collimator 
accuratdy aiiytisted for parallel light. The telescope under test is then 

19 



I8t27M*lt64 

placed between the collimator and the auxiliary telescope with its eyepiece 
towards the auxiliary telescope. The eyepiece of the telescope under test 
is set at zero dioptric marking. The graticule of the collimafor shall then 
remain in focus. If it is out of focus, it shall be brought to focus by intro- 
diicing a suitable standard dioptric lens in front of the eyepiece. The 
dioptric value of the standard lens is a measure of the inaccuracy of the zero 
dioptric setting. Inaccuracy at other dioptric markings u similariy 
determined. 



APPENDIX J 

( Clause 4.2.2 ) 

METHOD OF MEASimiNG MAGNmCATION 
OF A MICROSOOPB 

{•!• The microscope is focussed on a stage micrometer or a graticule plate 
aving two parallel lines of known separation placed on the stage of the 
microscope. The eyepiece of the microscope is removed after focuntng; 
and the image of the ooject placed on the stage is measured by a micro- 
meter eyepiece or a travelling microscope. The ratio of the distance 
between ttie image as measured to the actual distance gives the magnificat 
tion of the object glass ( for that tube length ). 



APPENDIX K 

{Clause 4.2.4) 

METHOD OF MBASURINO RBSOLVINO POWER 
OF A MICaHOIGOFB OBJECTIVB 

K-1. The objective under test is fitted to a microscope having an illuminm- 
tor plate of good optical quality at the location snown in Fig. S. It is 
focussed on a slide on which a silvered cover glass has been cemented. A 
graticule ( having 24 to 28 lines per millimetre } fitted on a graduated 
ttun-table and illuminated by a pomtolite Uaop. A condensing lens is so 
placed that itt reduced image is formed on the pdane of the silvered 
undersiuface of the cover glass. This serves as an ouject for the lens under 
test. While observing the image of this, the grating on the tum»tabk is 
routed until the lines are retolvad. If the angle throl%h whiclv tfab 

Siting has turned from its normal poiitioii is 0» and d k thcTliiterval 
ween the lines in the ob^ject plane wsien the grating is nonnal to the 
optical aidsy the miniminm mtarval which the lens may reMl^e is 4^. cot 9. 

20 



ISt27M.lM4 




S0URC6 OF tlOHr 

CONOCNSCR 

COUXiR FUTCR 
ORATNO 



»4AGe PLANE 




-s«.veReo COVER ^-uumnator plate 

OCA^S 

Fko. S ArrABATTt voa Mkasubbmbut ov Rbsolviho Fowxm 
OV ▲ MiOKOCOOFI Objxctivk 



APPENDIX L 

( Clause 4.33 ) 

METHOD OF MBA8URBMSNT OF EOUTVALENT 
FOCAL LENGTH OF CAMERA LENS 

1^1. To snotfure the equivmlent hui length of a camera lem a photo- 
graphic i>late b placed in the fecal plane of the imaffe space. A collimator 
aoa gniticuk may conveniently be used to provide ' an in)6nitely distant 
ohj^t p<mit» but the collimator used should be of such a quality that it intro- 
duces no appreciable reduction of the definition of the lens under test. 
Eaqposures are neiade with the beam of light from the collimator dii«cted 
akl^i the axis of the lens and at a series of angles ai» 04, etc On the 



21 



llt27M.19M 

remltant negmtiv€» meaflurettenli are made of the diiUncet k^ IL^ etc» of 
the images corresponding u> the angles 04, «g, etc» from the axial image 
and the quotients A^tan o^, At/tan «t» <^ ^^^^ calculated. The limiting 
value of this quotient, as a appixMiches aero, is the equivalent focal lengdu 



APPENDIX M 

( Clause 4.3.5 ) 

METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OP MAXIMUM 
APERTURE AND f-NUMBERS OP A CAMERA 

M-1. The entrance ]!>upil of the photographic objective corresponding to 
any stop size shiill be measured using a travelling microscope of low 
power ^ 10 X to 20 X ) having adequate travel and working distance. The 
diamejter of the entrance pupil, which is the apparent image of the stop, 
gives the effective aperture. 

M-U The ratio of the equivalent focal length of the objective to the dia* 
meter of the effective aperture gives the /-number. 



I8t2754.1M4 

APPENDIX N 
( Clause 4.4.6 ) 

TEST CHART FOR RESOLVINO POWER OF PROJECTORS 



IIIH^ IllhS llll-S 

II II II III II III 

"lllllhSl "lllllhBl I'lllUI-^^L 



» 



»: 



yiiHiusUi 



......»=|.. ii"«i'^iii ii"""=iii 

^wm^l iiniKl i'liiiii'^!^ 

Is, 



NOTB — The numben in the chart between two similar patterns repreaeot lines 
per miUimeCre. The dbtance between the two neighbouring patterns is not very 
critical and should be adjusted after considering the size of the object and the field of 
view of the lens. 



23 



18t27M.19S4 

APPENDIX P 

( Clause 4.4.8 ) 

METHOD OF MEASURING UNIFORMITT 
OF SCREEN ILLUMINATION 

P-1. The projector shall be focussed on the film plane and illumination 
shall then be measured at a screen not less than 100 cm wide. Measure- 
ment of illumination shall be made with a photo-electric cell at the centre 
and at four points in the corners located one-twentieth of the screen width 
from the top or bottom edge and at the same distance from the side edges 
of the screen. The average illumination at the four comer points shall be 
computed, and any objectionable bands or patches differing in colour or 
brightness from adjacent parts of the screen shall be noted. This test shall 
be made with six new filament lamps selected at randon^ ( botli 750- Watt 
and 1 000- Watt lamps shall be used in this test ). During the entire test, 
a light meter utilizing the same photo-electric cell shall be employed. 



24 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 APRIL 1983 
TO 

15:2754-1964 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 

Alteration 

{Page 20, Appendix J, title) - Substitute 
the following for the existing title: 

'METHOD OF MBASURIHQ MAOHIFICATION OF 
A MICROSCOPE OBJECTIVE' 



(EDC 36) 

PrlntMl at SImce Prlntlno~PrM*rD*ihirindl« 



BUREAU OP INDIAN 8TANPARD8 



Manak Bhavan, Bahadur Shah Zatar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones i 331 Oi 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams ; Manaksanstha 

( Common to all offices ) 



Regional O^tlc^s i 

•Western i Manakalaya. E9 MIDC. Marol, Andhen ( East ), 

BOMBAY 400093 
tEastern 1 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, 

Manlktola. CALCUTTA 700054 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, 
CHANDIGARH 160036 

Branch Offices i 

'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 

AHMADABAD 380001 

'F' Block Unity BIdg, Narasimharaja Square, 
BANGALORE 660002 

Gangotrl Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. NagcH*, 
BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No 82/83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
53 5. Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road 5th Byelane, 
GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C L N Gupta Marg, HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhlsler Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302006 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar. KANPUR 208006 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

Hantex BIdg ( 2nd Floor ). RIy Station Road, 
TRIVANDRUM 695001 

Inspection Ofiicp ( With Sale Point ) i 

Pushpanlall 205-A West High Court Road. 
Bharampeth Extension, NAGPUR 440010 

Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivafi Nagar, 
PUNE 411006 



TaiephonB 
6 32 92 05 

36 24 99 

41 24 42 

2 18 43 

3 16 41 

12 63 48 
{2 63 48 

22 48 06 

6 67 16 
5 36 27 



*8aUt Ofnc« In Bombay It at NovaKy Chambara, Grant Road, 
Bonit>ay 400007 

tSalaa Offica In Calcutta la at I Chowrtnohaa Approach P O. Princes 
S«raat. Calcutta 700071 



23 10 83 


6 08 32 


21 68 76 


6 23 05 


7 66 37 


2 51 71 


5 24 35 


89USI 


t7MM 



Printad at SImco Printino Pr««t. D«lhl. India 



