NAT HA IS 17099 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


atra Ha ao (A Ut Tt ) 
cht Agel ant ATCT 


Site Characterization 
for Underground Coal 
Gasification (UCG) 


ICS 75.020 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERE TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2019 Price Group 3 


Methods and Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional Committee, 
MED 37 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Methods and 
Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


Coal gasification has proven itself as a technologically feasible process for gasifying coal, with the potential to be 
commercially viable under certain conditions. The Large uncertainty about the viability of UCG stems from the 
unknowns associated with suitable UCG sites. Surface gasification provides a precise process with the ability to 
control nearly every variable. In contrast, underground gasification relinquishes a significant degree of control for 
the ability to utilize coal without mining it from the seam. The precision in UCG comes from careful site selection. 
A gasifier can only rely on coal available within the seam, so there remain a number of critical factors, a developer 
must consider to ensure the quality and quantity of syngas needed for a project’s lifetime. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17099 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


SITE CHARACTERIZATION FOR 
UNDERGROUND COAL GASIFICATION (UCG) 


1 SCOPE 
This standard prescribes the: 


a) Degree of control for the ability to utilize coal 
without mining it from the seam. 


b) The precision in UCG comes from careful site 
selection. 
NOTE — The referred standard is compilation of critical 
parameters in site characterization - a developer must consider 
to ensure quality and quantity of syngas needed for project’s 
life time. 


2 GEOLOGY 


In-situ coal gasification is a high technology area. 
Some countries such as UK, USA and Australia have 
developed their own sets of criteria depending on local 
conditions. Following important features concerning 
geology are taken into consideration during site 
selection for UCG: 


a) Geography, topographical and tectonical features 
of the area; 


b) Presence of faults, fractures, fissures etc. and their 
orientation and extension; and 


c) Complete geology and geo data of coal seam as 
well as roof and floor which include complete 
lithology of overlying beds, coal bed and the floor 
rock. 


3 COAL RANK 


The coal rank under combustion helps determine the 
quality of the syngas and the feasibility of conducting 
UCG. Researchers recommend using the lowest 
ranking coals of lignite and sub bituminous coal or 
low-rank high volatile bituminous coals. Low-rank 
coals generally shrink when burned, which improves 
the connection from the injection to the production 
wells. However, a trade-off exists between using low 
rank coals that tend not to swell and high rank coals 
that have higher heating values, which produce more 
energy from less coal. Lignites are attractive to UCG 
because they are more reactive (higher reaction rates). 


4 COAL COMPOSITION 


The amount of ash, sulfur, and moisture in the coal also 
affects the quality of the gas. Coal with Ash content 
above 50 percent decreases the heating value of the 
coal. Additionally, ash contents above 60 percent 


can inhibit the UCG process. The higher the sulfur 
Content, the more the gas will need cleaning to remove 
impurities. Furthermore, moisture Contents below 
15 percent are needed for optimum combustion. 
Without enough moisture in the Seam, the reaction 
will need additional water to facilitate the burn. On the 
other hand, too much Water can reduce syngas quality 
or even stop the UCG process entirely. 


5 COAL POROSITY AND PERMEABILITY 


The porosity and permeability of the coal within the 
coal seam can impede or improve the flow of the 
syngas between the injection and production wells. 
Researchers recommend permeability values of 50 to 
150 mD. Highly porous coal seams, or highly cleated 
seams, lead to higher rates of gasification, due to 
better movement of the gas between the injection and 
production wells. Alternatively, the faster movement 
between injection and production wells allows 
for more water to enter the coal seam, potentially 
preventing the UCG process. Also, increased porosity 
and permeability can allow for more syngas to leak 
out of the coal seam into the surrounding geologic 
structures, reducing syngas output and increasing the 
risk of water contamination. Currently, the extent of the 
effects of porosity and permeability in the coal seam 
are unknown. 


6 PARTINGS 


Partings are layers of clay, limestone, shale, sandstone, 
or other rock that locally separate the coal into multiple 
layers within a given seam. Partings can be problematic 
if they are located near ignition points, injection wells 
and production wells. Researchers recommend a 
single layer parting should be less than one meter in 
thickness. With a parting more than one meter thick, 
the syngas heating value will drop and gasification may 
prove impossible In addition, a coal seam with over 
20 percent of its volume occupied by partings can cause 
the quality of the gas to decrease to the point that UCG 
becomes economically impractical. 


7 DEPTH AND AQUIFERS 


7.1 Optimal coal seam depths exist between 92 to 
460 m, with the preference for seams below 200 m 
to avoid major subsidence issues. Deeper gasification 
projects are also desirable due to their increased 


IS 17099 : 2019 


separation from potable groundwater aquifers. Thus, 
the deeper the coal seam, the less risk of contaminating 
underground sources of drinking water (USDW). 
Researchers recommend that aquifers above the coal 
seam should not be within 25 times the coal seam 
height. In addition, no overlying strata with water 
should be within 31 m of the seam. 


7.2 There are also problems with drilling wells too 
deep. The cost of drilling increases at greater depths. 
More importantly, the pressure on the gas created at 
deeper depths can alter the gas composition. At greater 
depths the gas composition may prove inefficient 
for powering a gas turbine for an electricity plant. In 
addition, drilling to depths more than 460 m creates 
complications that restrict the flow of the gas in the coal 
seam and potentially stop the gasification process. 


8 DEPTH AND SUBSIDENCE 


Structural integrity of the geologic layers above the 
coal seam is required to support the overlying strata and 
the grounds surface. Researchers recommend no less 
than 15 m of consolidated rock above the coal seam 
to prevent subsidence from occurring. Additionally, 
relatively impermeable rock around the seam helps to 
prevent the escape of product gases, as well as reducing 
the flow of ground water into the seam. 


9 HYDROLOGY 


Despite recommendations that no overlying strata 
with water should exist within 31 m of the Coal seam, 
some water inflow, whether from surrounding water 
aquifers, direct injection into the Coal seam, or present 
within the coal seam, remains necessary to maintain 
the gasification Reaction. High moisture content in 
the seam relieves the necessity of surrounding water 
sources. Lacking high moisture contents, permeable 
sand stone above the coal seam or within rock layers 
that are relatively impermeable allow water to flow into 
the coal seam. 


10 COAL SEAM THICKNESS 


The thickness of the coal seam should remain between 
2 to 15 m with no more than 25 percent Variation in 
the thickness throughout the coal seam. Variations in 
thickness can complicate drilling for wells. Greater 
coal seam thickness leads to higher utilization of the 
coal seam for gasification. Moreover, researchers have 
shown that coal seams thicker than 2 meters greatly 
increase the heating value, and consequently, the 
amount of energy available in the output gas. 


11 COALSEAM ANGLE (DIP) 


The recommended dip or angle of the seam should 
preferably lie between 0 and 70 degrees with less than 


2 degrees in angle variation in order to avoid problems 
with drilling. As the angle in the seam increases, the 
potential for damaged equipment and material in the 
seam rises accordingly. Still, a coal seam with a slight 
angle is favorable for UCG because it helps to move 
water and ash away from the area where oxidation 
occurs. 


12 COAL RESERVES AND ACCESSIBILITY 


12.1 Depending on the amount of electricity and the 
life cycle of the power plant, varying amounts of coal 
are needed to meet the energy requirement. 


12.2 For a general reference, using results found 
in experiments at the Chinchilla plant in Australia, 
Researchers calculated the amount of coal required 
to run a 300 MW UCG combined-cycle power plant 
operating for 20 years with a 50 percent efficiency, 
producing a syngas with a heating value of 5 MJ/m!. 
The researchers found that under the site conditions, 
33 million metric tons of coal converts to roughly 
75.6 billion m? of syngas. 


12.3 Some amount of coal must be left in the seam 
after gasification to prevent large scale collapse of the 
overburden and subsidence of the ground surface. This 
limits the amount of coal available in a given site to 
meet specific energy demands. The amount of coal 
required depends on specific characteristics of the site, 
such as the thickness of the coal seam, the structure of 
the overlying rock, the spacing between the injection 
and production wells, and the depth underground. For 
a point of reference, the distance between injection 
and production wells in the UCG operation Hanna, 
Wyoming stood between 16 and 18 m. The site in 
Wyoming successfully gasified 4 600 tons of coal at a 
depth of approximately 130 m without any subsidence 
issues or contamination to overlying potable aquifers. 


12.4 In addition to underground characteristics, there 
are other limitations above ground to consider once the 
production wells begin to receive syngas. Engineers 
mush take into account available Infrastructure for 
the gasification process, transportation of syngas, 
existing land use, environmental and other land-use 
restrictions when choosing an appropriate site for 
UCG Development. Researchers suggest that land- 
use restrictions for UCG most likely present the same 
restrictions as typical underground coal mines. 


13 LAB STUDIES OF GASIFICATION 


Lab studies of gasification of the coal under simulated 
condition should be carried out to help in assessment 
of injection parameters. Along with temperature 
measuring devices, tracer such as Argon (Ar) can 
be used during gasification to understand the in situ 


phenomenon including cavity growth, to ascertain the 
other properties of the coals and to assess the impact of 
the various factors of gasification. 


14 WELL COMPLETION/LINKING OF 
WELLS 


14.1 Availability of high temperature resistant (NTR) 
cement, special completion design, keeping provision 
for well bore cooling and use of high pressure 
temperature and corrosion resistant well head, flow line, 
down hole casing and tubings etc. is a pre-requisite. 


14.2 Evaluation of reservoir parameters of coal seam 
and roof and floor rocks and finding out of most 
economical and feasible linking technique suiting to 
the coal seam conditions is a must. 


14.3 The main factor determining the cost effectiveness 
is the specific consumption of linking fluid on a unit of 
the obtained channel. The intensity of the connecting 
blast on a burning point depends not only on the 
consumption of blast injected but also the distance 
between the injection and burning point, thickness of 
coal seam, and design of the borehole. Significantly, it 
also determines the filtration characteristics of the coal 
rocks and surrounding rocks. 


15 CHEMICAL KINETICS/ENVIRONMENTAL 
STUDIES 


Knowledge of chemical kinetics of in-situ gasification, 
under the prevailing condition of the coal seam, and 
determination of optimum composition of reactant, that 
is, air, steam, (O,), nitrogen (N,) etc. during reverse 
combustion as well as forward gasification, is required. 
Prediction of cavity growth and subsidence etc. during 


IS 17099 : 2019 


gasification with the help of UCG process models or 
simulators is also to be done. Identification of required 
sophisticated capital equipment and instrumentation 
and their availability for complete UCG process is also 
necessary. Itis also necessary to evaluate environmental 
impact of UCG process, such as ground water pollution 
and surface treatment and disposal of produced water 
and finally to work out economics ofthe overall process 
for its commercialization under possible utilization 
patterns. 


16 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OFCOAL 


16.1 A comprehensive analysis as given below has to 
be performed to ensure that the site is suitable. This 
includes the correlation of the individual coal beds, 
seam structure, rank and quality of the coal seams: 


a) Band by band analysis; 

b) Proximate analysis; 

c) Ultimate analysis with sulfur distribution; 
d) Calorific value; 

e) Coking properties; 

f) Low temperature gray-king essay; 

g) Coal petrography; 

h) Ash analysis; 

3) Ash fusion temp-range; 

k) Coal reactivity; 
m) Chlorine and phosphorous content; and 
n) Permeability and porosity of coals. 


16.2 Table 1 provides recommended values for different 
parameters associated with UCG: 


Table 1 Ideal Characteristics for UCG 
( Clasuse 16.2 ) 


Parameter Desired Value Imperial Units and 
Comments 

Coal thickness (m) 2-15 5 - SOft 

Thickness variation (percent of seam thickness) <25 — 

Depth (m) 92 - 460 300 - 1, 500 ft 

Dip (degrees) 0-70 — 

Dip variation (degrees/31 m, 100 ft) <2 — 

Single parting thickness (m) <1 <3 ft 

Total parting thickness (percent of seam thickness) < 20 NN 

Fault displacement (percent of seam thickness) <25 — 

Fault density (Number of faults/31 m) <] Number of faults/100 ft 

Coal rank Lowrank < Bituminous 


bituminous 


IS 17099 : 2019 


Table 1 (Concluded ) 


Parameter Desired Value Imperial Units and 
Comments 

Coal moisture (wt percent) <15 — 

Ash content (wt percent) <50 — 

Coal sulfur (wt percent) <1 — 

Thickness of consolidated overburden >15 50 ft 

Seam permeability (mD) 50-150 — 

Immediate overburden permeability (mD) <5 15 m (50 ft) above 
the seam 

Distance to nearest overlying water-bearing unit (m) >31 > 100 ft 

Coal aquifer characteristics Confined — 

Nearest producing well completed in coal seam (km) >1.6 > 1 mile 

Available Coal Resources (10% m?) 15.4 543 x 10° Cubic ft for 


20 year-long operation 


IS 17099 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


Organization(s) 


Oil and Natural Gas 


Atlas Copco Construction & Mining Sales, 
Pune (Atlas-Copco) 


Bhel, Hyderabad 
Central Fuel Reasearch Institute, Dhanbad (CFRI) 


Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 


(CMERI) 
Central Mine Planning And Design Institute Limited, 


Ranchi (CMPDI) 
Directorate General Of Hydrocarbons (DGH) 
Essar Oil Limited 
Gail India Limited 
Great Eastern Energy Corporation Limited (GEECL) 
Geological Survey Of India (GSI) 
ISM, Dhanbad (IIT-ISM) 
Neyveli Lignite Coporation (NLC) 


TIT, Madras 


In Personal Capacity 


In Personal Capacity 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR SINGHAL (Chairman) 
Suri O. N. Gyanı (Alternate I) 
Suri A. K. Paswan (Alternate II) 
Ms VISHAKHA SINGH (Alternate II) 
SHRI KHALEQUZ ZAMAN (Alternate IV) 
SHRI SHAKEEL AHMED (Alternate V) 
Suri S. MARANDI (Alternate VI) 


SHRI ANIMESH NANDY 


SHRI D. SATYA MOHAN RAO 


Dr ASHOK KUMAR SINGH 


Dr P. K. CHATERJEE 
Dr M. K. KarmaKar (Alternate) 


Dr AKHILESH SINGH 


SHRI SANJEEB GOSWAMI 
SHRI T. ASHWINI Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI NILESH KAMAT 
SHRI ARUN SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri D. M. Rao 
Dr D. BURAGOHAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ANOOP GUPTA 
SHRI PRIYARANJAN PATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 
SHRIP. N. SINHA (Alternate) 


ProF M. JAWED 
Suri A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. ALAGAR 
Suri M. KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS JAYANTI 
Pror PREETI AGHALAYAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR 


SHRI RUDRA PRATAP SINGH 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 37 (13132). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


