( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 10236( Part 11)- 1985

Indian Standard
PROCEDURE FOR BASIC CLIMATIC AND DURABILITY TESTS FOR OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS
PART 11 VIBRATION `TEST Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee, EDC 36
Chairman LT-GEN K. L. KHCJSLA Members MAJ-GEN G. C. AGARWAL COL M. G. ARUR ( Alfemafe ) DR K. L. AWASTHY COL M. S. BOPAXAI The Institution Raprascnting of Surveyors, New Delhi

Survey of India, Dehra Dun of Mechanical Engineers ( India), Institution Bombay Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Service ( Ministry of Defence ) National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta

SHR~ J. CHOUDHURI SHRI A. K. GHOSHAL ( Alferno~) Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ), Dehra Dun SHRI M. M. GUPTA Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), Dehra Dun DR R HRADAYNATH DR 0. P. NIJHAWAN( Alfurnafs) Directorate of Industries, Government of Haryana, SHRI P. K. JAIN Chandigarh SHRI D.D. KIIO~LA ( Affrrnafe ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) BRIG H. LAL SHRI R. C. JAIN, ( Alfcrnafe ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI D. B. MALIK New Delhi SHRI MOHANJEET S~N~H ( Alfwnafe) Chief Hydrographer to the Government of India, LT-CDR A. J. MODAK Dehra Dun Instruments Organization Scientific Central DR E. K. MURTHY ( CSIR ), Chandigarh SHRI H. C. ASYJA ( Alfernafc ) Madras Institute of Technology, Madras DR S. RANOANATHAN Bhahha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR K. V. S. R. APPA RAO SARI R. P. SHUKLA ( Altdrnafs ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Machilipatnam SHRI C. NARAYANA RAO SHE1 A. M. JOSE ( AIfernafe) ( Confind an pug0 2 )

@ Copyrighf 1986
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Acf (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyri&t under the said Act.

IS : 10236( Part 11) - 1985 ( Cm~hn~edfrom bag8
MdWS Sxiar S. K. ROY
1)

R$W&Whl~
Electra-Photonics India Pvt Ltd, Hyderahad ( CSIR ), New Delhi Physical Laboratory

SHRI R. K. DUWAL ( Aftematr ) DR D. .%!N National SWRI RAM PRASAD ( AItem& )

SHRl S. P. SlNQH

SXRI K. SANTHANAY( ANcraate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' SHRI J. K. SONEJA Association, Bombay SHRI C. L. BATRA ( Alternate) LT-COL SUKHDnVSINQH Ministry of Defence ( EME ) MAJ T. V. RAMAKRNHNAN ( Alternate) Associated Instrument Manufacturers SHRI H. C. VHRMA Ltd, New Delhi
SHRY K. G. PURANO ( Af:mok) SHRI M. K. VERUA SHRI K. S. LAMBA (

Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( Miniatry of Railways ), Lucknow and Dealers,

( India ) Pvt

Development Commissioner, Small New Delhi

Scale Industries,

SHRI S. CHANDRA SEKHARAN, Director ( Mech Engg )

Ahnata )

Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oj'icio Member )

Secretary Sxnr S. K. Puar
Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI

Panel for Basic Climatic and Durability Tests for OpticalInstruments, EDC 36 : P 1
SHRI:BHAGWANSIN~I~ SHRI C. L. JATAV ( Altsrnatr) SHRI A. K. GHOWAL LT-COL JO~INDSR MOHAN 6nnx U. P. S. ASWAL ( Altrmatr DR E. K. MURTHY
SHRI H. C. ASIJA ( Al&mals ) SHRI S. P. ROY

Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), Dchra Dun National
Ministry

Instruments Ltd, Calcutta of Defence ( DGI ) Organization

) Instruments Central Scientific ( CSIR ), Chandigarh

Survey of India, Dehra Dun SHRXSrnutsn CHAND ( Alturnatc ) Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ), Dehra Dun SHRI G. K. SACHDBV

IS : 10236 ( Part 11) - 1985

Indian Standard
PROCEDURE FOR BASIC CLIMATIC AND DURABILITY TESTS FOR OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS
PART 11 VIBRATION TEST

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard (Part 11 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 21 June 1985, after the draft finalized by the Optical and Mathematicdl Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Fast development in the field of instruments had brought a significant change in their basic content and design. It has been felt over the years that IS : 2352-1963" does not cater for the present day needs of the instruments and is also not in line with the recent trends in climatic and environmental testing procedures to be adopted for improving their quality and reliability. It has, therefore, become necessary to have uniform and more rational testing procedures as far as possible. This series of standards on climatic and durability test ( IS : 10236 ) has been prepared with this objective. 0.2.1 It it proposed to withdraw the existing Indian Standard ( IS : 23521963" ) as soon as the tests mentioned therein are covorod in the now series (IS : 10236 ). 1. SCOPE. 1.1 This standard ( Part 11 ) covers the procedure for conducting vibration test for optical instruments.
2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions in addition to those given in IS : 10236 ( Part 1 ) 7 shall apply. 2.1 Vibration - Vibration is an oscillating motion of a system defined by a quantity whose magnitude is alternately greater and smaller than a specified reference.
*Procedureforbasic climatic and durability testa for optical instruments.
tProcedure for basic climatic General ( under fireperotion ) . and durability test for optical instruments: Part 1

a

IS : 10236 ( Part 11) - 1985 3. OBJECT 3.1 The object of this test is to determine the structural robustness and suitability of optical instruments to withstand vibrations encountered during transportation and use. 4. GENERAL DETAILS AND REQUIREMENTS 4.1 The purpose of this test is to determine the mechanical weakness and/ or deterioration if any, in the performance of instrument when it is subjected to conditions involving vibrations and to use this information in conjunction with the relevant instrument specification to decide whether the instrument is acceptable or not. Although the methods adopted in this standard for this test reduce the dependence upon the skill of the test engineer to a minimum, it is emphasized that vibration testing always demands a certain degree of technical judgement and as such both the supplier and the purchaser should be aware of this fact. 4.2 Whether an instrument has to function during survive conditions, of vibrations should be clearly instrument specification. In either case, the relevant should always prescribe the acceptable tolerance in vibration or merely to stated in the relevant instrument specification performance.

4.3 A comparison of resonance frequencies before and after endurance testing may provide evidence of possible of mechanical weakness. If there are no changes in the frequencies the instrument can be assumed to have suffered no fatigue due to the prescribed endurance. However, if any change is observed, it will indicate that some damage may have been caused by testing and that the instrument may not be suitable for its service environment. The relevant instrument specification should state what action should be taken in such cases. 4.4 A number of separate procedures have been described here. The relevant instrument specification shall prescribe the procedure or procedures to be adopted. Although the procedures given here cover majority of the vibration tests, the relevant instrument specification may allow or incorporate certain modifications in specific cases. Where the prescribed endurance may be equivalent to the life of the specimen, satisfactory survival of the endurance conditioning may be sufficient grounds for acceptance and the final resonance search may not be needed. 4.5 The vibration amplitude are specified in terms of constant displacement or constant velocity or constant acceleration. The term amplitude is used in the wider sense of peak value of an oscillating quantity. Each value of displacement amplitude ( that is, half of total movement ) is associated with 4

IS : 10236 ( Part 11) - 1985 corresponding value of velocity or acceleration between them is given below: Acceleration ( g ) = amplitude. The relationship

4 Gf2 d 9.806 x 1 000 4 x'f2d 1000

Acceleration ( m/s2 ) Velocity ( m/s) r= $$-

where f is frequency in Hz, and d is displacement amplitude in mm.
and acceleration amplitude or any combination of displacement NOTE -For displacement and velocity amplitude, a cross-over frequency can be calculated from the above relationship so that the magnitude of vibration in terms of displacement and acceleration is the same at this frequency. Hence a frequency range may be swept continuously changing from constant displacement to constant acceleration (or constant velocity) and vice-versa at the cross-over frequency.

4.6 The vibration test is controlled by measurements made at reference point and control points related to the fixing points of the instrument. 4.6.1 Fixing Point - A fixing point is a point where the instrument is attached to the fixture or vibration table using one of its normal mounting means of use during service. If a part of real mounting structure is used as a fixture, the fixing point shall be taken as that of mounting structure and not of the instrument. 4.6.2 Control Point -A control point is a point on the fixture or vibration table as near as possible to the fixing point having a rigid connection with it. In case of small instruments a point near to one of the fixing points ( nearest td the centre of vibration table ) shall be taken as control point. In case of large instruments if four or less fixing points exist, a point near to each fixing point shall be used as control point. If more than four fixing points exist, four representative points shall be selected and specified for use as control points.
NOTE - For large and/or complex instruments, in the relevant instrument specification. the control points should be defined

reference point is the single point from 4.6.3 Reference Point -The which the reference signal is obtained to confirm the test requirement and is taken to represent the motion of the instrument. It may be a control point or a fictitious point created by manual or automatic processing of the signals from the control points. Unless otherwise specified, the signal from the reference point shall be the average of signals from the control points. The relevant instrument specification shall state the point to be used or how it should be chosen. It is recommended that for large and) or complex instrument a fictitious point be used. 5

IS : 10236 (Part 11) - 1985 5. VIBRATION SYSTEM 5.1 The vibration generator and fixture when loaded for the conditioning shall have the characteristics as specified in 5.1.1 to 5.1.3. 5.1.1 Basic Motion - The basic motion shall be sinusoidal and such that all the fixing points of the instrument are moving substantially in phase and in straight parallel lines, subject to the requirements of 5.1.2. 5.1.2 Transverse Motion - The maximum vibration amplitude at the fixing points in any direction perpendicular to the intended direction ( including that due to rocking, tortional vibration, etc ) shall not exceed 25 percent of the specified amplitude.
NOTE - In some cases, for example, for large equipment it may be difficult to maintain a limit of 25 percent. In such cases, the value shall be noted and agreed between the cl;stomer and the supplier.

5.1.3 Distortion - The total rms harmonic content of the acceleration, at the fixing points of the instrument related to the actual acceleration corresponding to the specified amplitude at the driving frequency shall not exceed 25 percent unless compensated for by increasing the driving amplitude so as to restore the amplitude at the fundamental frequency to the specified value. Tn such cases, the distortion value shall be noted and agreed between the customer and the supplier. The distortion measurement shall cover the frequency range up to 5 000 Hz or five times the driving frequency, which ever is greater. 5.2 The system shall be capable of meeting the needs of vibration testing methods and frequencies, displacement and acceleration amplitudes, resonancb search and sweeping required by these methods. 5.3 Vibration Amplitude Tolerances - The actual vibration amplitude in terms of constant displacement or constant acceleration in the required direction shall be equal to the specified value within the tolerances specified below: a) At the reference point ( which may be specified by the relevant instrument specification; see 46.3 ) 1) In the frequency range where displacement amplitude is specified. 2) In the frequency range where acceleration amplitude is specified. rt 15 percent f 10 percent

b) At each specified control point ( see 46.2) as given in Table 1. 6

is : 10236 (Part 11)-1985
TABLE 1 VIBRATION AMPLITUDE TOLERANCES ( ckzu&? 5.3 )
FREQUUBNCY IN THE FREQUENCY
RANOB WHERE IkPLACEYENT IN THE FREQIJBNCYRANOE

WHDRE

ACCEtltRATlON

AMPLITUDE ~a SPEC~PXED (1)
Up

AMPLITUDE1s SPECIFIED

(2)

(3)
f

to 150 Hz
150 Hz

b25

percent

15 percent
percent

Above

&25

NOTE - In some cases, for example, for large instruments and/or at high frequencies, it may be difficult to achieve the tolerances given above at same discrete frequencies within the frequency range. In such cases, it is expected that a wider tolerance or an alternative method of assessment will be specified and agreed between the customer and the supplier.

5.4 Frequency Tolerances 5.4.1 Measurement of frequency for resonance determination shall be made with a tolerance of fO_5 percent or 3~0.5 Hz, whichever is greater. 5.4.2 Frequency tolerances in other cases shall be f 1 Hz for frequencies up to 50 Hz and Jt2 percent for frequencies above 50 Hz. 5.5 Sweep Method -A sweep is defined as a traverse of the specified frequency range once in each direction, for example, 10 to 500 Hz and back to 10 Hz. 5.5.1 The sweeping shall be continuous and logarithmic and sweep rate shall be approximately one octave per minute or as specified by the relevant instrument specification. A linear sweep approximation may be used, provided the actual sweep rate does not exceed one octave per minute ( or the specified rate ) at any time and the duration of passage through each octave above 60 Hz is approximately the same as with the logarithmic sweep. Whilst resonance search testing, the sweep rate may be decreased or stopped temporarily, if necessary, but undue dwell time should be avoided. 5.6 Driving Force - The system shall be capable of producing the peak driving force to a level not less than ma newtons, where m I mass in kilograms of the complete moving assembly ( that is, vibration table, drive coil, jig or fixture, instrument under test, etc ), and a = the required acceleration level in m/s*. 7

IS : 10236 ( Part 11) - 1985 6. TEST SEVERITY 6.1 The vibration severity parameters: is given by the combination of the foIlowing

a) Frequency range, b) Vibration amplitude, and c) Endurance duration. For each parameter the relevant instrument specification shall specify the appropriate vibration requirements chosen from 6.1.1. to 6.1.3. The typical vibration severities for various categories of instruments are tabulated in Appendix A. 6.1.1 Frequency Range - One range from the following shall be specified. In some cases the range may be divided into two or more intervals, each with different amplitude, depending on the role of the instrument. In such cases the range intervals shall be specified: 1 to10Hz 5 to 35 Hz 5 to 55 Hz ( see Note 1 ). 5 to 150 Hz ( see Note 2 >. 5 to 350 Hz 10 to 500 Hz ( see Note 3 ). 10 to 1000 Hz ( see Note 3). 10 to 2 000 Hz ( see Note 3).
No-lNOTE 2 In speciai cases, the range may be kept to 50 Hz or extended to 65 Hz. In .special cases the range may be extended to 200 Hz. the relevant instrument specification may extend the

If necessary, N-S-range down to 5 Hz.

6.1.2 Vibration Amplitude
6.1.2.1 In case of frequency range not extending beyond 35 Hz the amplitude shall be specified as constant displacement ( that is, half of total movement ), unless otherwise specified by the relevant instrument specification. The values of constant displacement shall be chosen from Table 2. Where the range is divided into intervals, each interval shall be stipulated with one value of constant displacement chosen from Table 2.

6.1.2.2 In case of frequency range extending beyond 35 Hz the amplitude shall be specified as constant displacement below the cross-over frequency and constant acceleration above this frequency. For conducting 8

IS : 10236( Part 11) - 1985

a test, the frequency range shall be swept continuously changing from constant displacement to constant acceleration and vice-versa at the crossover frequency. The cross-over frequency will be dependent on the constant displacement and constant acceleration specified for test. For example, for a constant displacement and constant acceleration of 3.5 mm and 5 g respectively, the cross-over frequency will be 19 Hz. For a constant displacement and constant acceleration of 0.75 mm and 20 g respectively, the cross-over frequency will be 81 Hz. The constant displacement below the cross-over frequency shall be specified from the values given in TabIe 2. The constant acceleration above the cross-over frequency shall be specified from Table 3.
TABLE 2 DISPLACEMENT AMPLITUDE BELOW THE CROSS-OVER FREQUENCY (mm1 0.075 0.125 0.15 0.25 0.35 0.50 0.75 1.00 l-25 1.50

TABLE

3 ACCELERATION AMPLITUDE ABOVE THE CROSS-OVER FREQUENCY * \ r--m/s2 g
4.9 98 19-6 29-5 4.0 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 39.2 490

2-00 2'50 3.50 6.00
10.00* 100~00* *These values are applicable to the 1 to 10 Hz range only.

98.0 147'0
196.0

30-O 50-o

294-o 490-o

6.1.3 Endurance Duration 6.1.3.1 The endurance duration shall be the total time that the instrument shall be tested for and shall include, the initial resonance search, firiai resonance search, sweeping and/or testing at resonance or predetermined frequencies for all the axis ( maximum three ). The different durations given under 6.1.3.2 are for three axis. If relevant instrument specification calls for testing in one axis it will specify one-third and if two axis it will specify 9

rs :10236(Plwtll)1985
two-thirds of the durations given under 6.1.3.2. Division of endurance duration thus specified in the relevant instrument specification with two or three (if relevant specification calls for testing in two or three axis ) will give the test duration per axis for testing in each axis. For method (a) given under 7.2.2 the whole test duration shall be used for sweeping in each axis. per axis

For methods (a) to (c) given under 7.2.2 the initial and anticipa?ed final resonance search time shall be subtracted from the test duration per axis and the remaining time shall be either used for testing by sweeping or shall be equally divided among the different resonance or predetermined fiquencies for their testing in that axis. For method (d) given under 7.2.2 the remaining time shall be obtained as given above for methods (a) to (c). The remaining time shall be equally divided between sweeping and the set of resonance frequencies. The time thus obtained for the set of resonance frequencies shall be further equally divided among the different resonance frequencies for their testing in that axis. 6.1.3.2 The endurance duration to be specified shall cover testing in three axis and shall be chosen from the following: 15 minutes 30 ,, ;; 9, 3 x :: I:"0 hoks :: :: ::

6.1.3.3 If the specified duration leads to a conditioning time of 10 hours or more per direction or frequency, this time may be split into periods, each of not less than 5 hours, provided that stresses in the instrument (due to heating, etc ) are not reduced. 7. TEST REQUIREMENTS 7.1 Mounting 7.1.1 The instrument with or without isolators, shall be fastened to the vibration table, either directly or by means of mounting fixtures, by its normal means of attachment or as otherwise stated in the relevant instru10

IS : 10236 (Part 11) - 1985 ment specification. The use of any additional stays or straps shall be avoided. Any connections to the equipment ( such as cables, wires, etc ) shall be so arranged that they impose no further restraint or mass than they would when the epuiqment is installed in its operational position. 7.1.2 The mounting fixtures and any other arrangement shall be such as to enable the instrument to be vibrated along the various axes specified for testing. 7.1.3 The relevant instrument specification should state, if necessary, the maximum level of magnetic interference to which the instrument under test may be subjected. 7.1.4 If ment ( or table the frequency it is necessary to provide brackets in order to connect the instrunormal means of attachment of the instrument ) to the vibration brackets shall be designed to be effectively rigid within the range to be covered by vibration test.

7.1.5 Instrument intended for use with vibration isolators should normally be tested with its isolators. If it is not practicable to carry out vibration test on instrument with its isolators, for example, if the instrtiment is mounted with other equipment in a common mounting system or if the dynamic characteristics of the isolators are variable (for example, temperature dependent ), then it may be tested without the isolators at a different vibration severity which shall be specified in relevant instrument specification. This severity shall be determined by taking into account that transmissibility of the isolator system in each axis which causes the most severe conditions of vibration.
NOTE - The relevant instrument specification may require an additional test on an instrument with the external isolators removed in order to demonstrate that a minimum acceptable structural resistance to vibration has been achieved.

7.1.6 The relevant instrument specification shall state whether the effect of gravitational force is important. In this case, the instrument shall be so mounted that the force acts in the same direction as it would in use. Where the effect of gravitational force is not important, the instrument may be mounted in any attitude.

test shall consist of the following three distinct 7.2 Test Stages -The stages for each axis for all the methods specified under 7.2.2 except for method given in 7.2.2 (e). 7.2.1 Initial Resonance Search (see 9.3 ) - The instrument shall be vibrated sinusoidally over the complete frequency range specified. It shall be checked functionally and examined for any frequency dependent effects, such as mechanical resonance and malfunctioning. These vibration 11

IS : 10236 ( Yart 11) - 1985

characteristics as well as the frequencies occur are noted (see note).

and amplitudes

at which they

NOTE - The initial resonance search is carried out for information only for the methods (a) and (c) of7.2.2 and is necessary for the methods (b) and (d) of 7.2.2.

7.2.2 Endurance Testing - One of the following methods as specified in the relevant instrument specification shall be employed.

a) Endurance testing by sweeping (see 9.4.1) - This is the method to be preferred as it is most appropriate for reproducing the stresses experienced by an instrument in use. This is carried out at specified amplitude, sweep rate, frequency range and duration according to 6.1.3. b) Endurance testing at resonance frequencies ( see 9.4.2 ) - This method is suitable for instruments where these are to be guarded against, a few clearcut resonance frequencies. This is carried out at resonance frequencies at specified amplitude and duration according to 6.1.3. c) Endurance testing at pre-determined frequencies ( see 9.4.3 ) - This method is suitable for instruments when the vibration environment uncountered in service is known to impose significant stresses at certain dominant frequencies only. This is carried out at one or more such frequencies ( or narrow band of frequencies ) at speci. fied amplitude and duration according to 6.1.3. d) Endurance testing by sweeping and at resonance frequencies (see 9.4.4 ) - This method is suitable for instruments where these are to be guarded against a few obvious resonance frequencies, in addition to many less obvious ones. In such circumstances there may be a need for the endurance testing by sweeping to be supplemented by endurance testing at selected resonance frequencies. These are carried out according to (a) and (b) above. e) Endurance testing by sweeping without initial and final resonance searches( see 9.4.5 ) -This method is specially applicable to very small instruments where it is known that there are no resonances within the specified frequency range. The sweeping is carried out according to (a 1 above. 7.2.3 Final Resonance Search ( see 9.5 ) - After the endurance stage the specimen is retested functionally and re-examined for vibration characteristics as in the initial resonance. search. The frequencies determined in initial and later in the final resonance search are compared. 7.3 Test Sequence - The relevant instrument one of the test sequences given as under: 12 specification shall specify

IS : 10236 (Part 11) - 1985 a) Initial resonance search Endurance testing by sweeping Final resonance search b) Initial resonance search Endurance testing at resonance frequenices Final resonance search c) Initial resonance search Endurance testing at pre-determined frequencies Final resonance search d) Initial resonance search Endurance testing by sweeping Endurance testing at resonance frequencies Final resonance search ' e) Endurance testing by sweeping. 7.4 Unless otherwise stated in the relevant instrument specification, the instrument shall be vibrated in' three mutually perpendicular axis in turn, which should be so chosen that faults are most likely to be revealed. 7.5 The three test stages (see 7.2) shall be performed in a sequence for each of the axis unless otherwise stated in the relevant instrument specification. 7.6 The relevant instrument specification will state, if so required, whether the instrument shall be electrically loaded and operated and checked for performance during the various stage of the test. 7.7 The relevant instrument specification will indicate tho conditions acceptance after testing and the acceptable tolerance in performance. 8. INITIAL MEASUREMENTS 8.1 The instrument shall be visually examined and checked optically, electrically and mechanically as required by the relevant instrument specification. 9. TEST PROCEDURE 9.1 The instrument shall be mounted requirements of 7.1. for vibration test as to meet the for

9.2 The procedure adopted for testing shall be according to 7.2 to 7.7. Further details of the various test stages are given in 9.3 to 9.5. 9.3 Initial Resonance Search - The instrument shall be vibrated over the complete frequency range in order to study the behaviour of the instrumenr 13

IS : 10236 ( Part 11) - 1985 under vibration to determine resonance frequencies and to obtain information for comparison at the time of final resonance search. (For sweep rate see 5.5 ). Endurance testing is carried out on these resonance frequencies, if so required. Normally the initial resonance search shall be carried out at the same amplitude 3s for the endurance testing but the vibration amplitude may be decreased below this full value if thereby more precise determination of resonance characteristics can be obtained. 9.3.1 The instrument shall be functioning during the resonance search if required by the relevant instrument specification. When the mechanical vibration characteristics can not be assessed because the instrument is functioning, an additional resonance search with the insirument not functioning shall be carried out. Any arrangements made to detect the effect of vibration upon internal parts of the instrument shall not substantially change the dynamic behaviour of the i:lstrument as a whoIe. 9.4 Endurance Testing 9.4.1 By Sweeping [see 7.2.2 (a) ] - The frequency shall be continuously varied in the form of a sweep as stated in 5.5. If necessary, the frequency range may be subdivided. A number of such sweeps in each axis shall be required to make up the specified duration. When called for by the relevant specification the instrument shall be functioning and checked during this test for such proportion of the total time as may be specified. 9.4.2 At Resonance Frequencies [ see 7.2.2 (b) ] - Vibration shall be applied at all those resonance frequencies at which failure, maIfunctioning or other undesirable effects are likely to occur. It is expected that the number of such frequencies in each direction will be small and normally will not exceed four. If the number exceeds four, the preferred testing by sweeping wouId normally be used. However, in exceptional cases the relevant instrument specification may specify a greater number of frequencies. While carrying out test at resonance frequencies, the driving frequency shall be so adjusted that the resonance is aIways fully excited.
NOTE- In the case of an instrument mounted on isolators, the relevant instrument specification shall state whether or not the fundamental resonance frequencies of the instrument on its isolators should be chosen for this endurance terting.

9.4.3 At Predetermined Frequencies [ see 7.2.2 (c) ] - Vibration at specified amplitude shall be applied at certain predetermined frequencies which will be indicated by the reIe\rant instrument specification, for the duration as arrived at under 6.1.3.

14

IS : 10236 (Part 11) - 1985 9.4.4 By Sweeping and at Resonance Frequencies [ see 7.2.2 (d) ] - The procedure for endurance testing by sweeping (see 9.4.1) shall first be applied and the endurance testing at selected resonance frequencies shall then be carried out in accordance with 9.4.2. 9.4.5 By Sweeping Without Initial and Final Resonance Searches [ see 7.2.2 (e) ] - The instrument shall be subjected only to the endurance testing by sweeping in accordance with 9.4.1 omitting the initial and final resonance searches. 9.5 Final Resonance Search (see 7.2.3 ) - The fmal resonance search shall be performed in the same manner as the initial resonance search and at the same vibration amplitudes. The relevant ir,strument specification may state what action should be taken if any change of resonance frequency or response occurs. NOTE - Prior to final resonance search it may be necessary to provide a period of
time in which to allow the instrument to attain the same conditions as existed at the commencement of the inital resonance search, for example, as regards temperatures.

10. FINAL MEASUREMENTS 10.1 The mechanical checked in instruments instrument shall be visually examined for' any sigl?s of damage or looseness of parts. Its performance shall also be accordance with the relevant instrument specification. The sealed shall also be checked for leaks.

11. DETAILS TO BE GIVEN IN RELEVANT INSTRUMENT SPECIFICATION 11.1 The relevant instrument specification shali state the following for carrying out this test as far as they are applicable: Initial observations/measurements; b) Test procedure to be used; C>Whether the instrument in use has to function during vibration or merely to survive the conditions of vibration; Test severity; (i) frequency range(s), (ii) Vibration 4 amplitude(s), and (iii) endurance duration; Control point(s) and reference point to be used; Details of mounting and isolators ( those which are relevant ); g) Vibration severity for instruments which are used with vibration iso,lators but shall be tested without the isolators; Tolerable level of magnetic interference, if important; 11) The axis and directions during conditioning; .j)

a>

e> f>

15

IS : 10236 ( Part 11) - 1985 the instrument is to operate during different. stages of the test; Sweep rate for resonance searches and endurance testing; n) Whether endurance testing at resonance frequencies to be carried out, if their number is more than four; PI In the case of an instrument mounted on isolators, whether the fundamental resonance frequencies of the instrument on its isolators shall be chosen for endurance testing at resonance frequencies; Predetermined frequencies, if required, for endurance testing; Operational and functional checks during the various stages of the test; S>Action to be taken if any change in resonance ,frequencies during initial and final resonance search occurs; t > Conditions for acceptance after testing a.nd acceptable tolerance in performance; and d Final observations/measurements; w) Any deviation from the normal procedure.

k) Whether

m>

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.1 )
TYPICAL SEVERITIES A-l. GENERAL

A

FOR VIBRATION TEST

A-l.1 The vibration experienced by an instrument during transportation and use is generally of complex nature. It is dependent on excitation source, the inherent characteristics and mass of the instrument and the transmission path linking the source with the mounting point of the instrument. Therefore, while selecting severities due consideration should be given to these variables. In this connection, it should be kept in mind that combined effect of these variables produces a vibration environment which is rarely amenable to accurate simulation. A-l.2 it is, therefore, usual to test an instrument using certain standard procedures, arbitrarily framed to ensure reasonable confidence in the instrument during its life in the service environment. Such procedures are, 16

IS : 10236 ( Part 11) - 1985

therefore, always a compromise between simplicity and standardization of tests on the one hand and realism in relation to the service environment on the other. A-l.3 An instrument encounters vibration of varying amplitudes and frequencies in the course of its life. The most severe levels against which an instrument must be designed occur only for a small proportion of that life of the instrument. Lower levels invariably persist for long periods and cumulative damage caused by the varying vibration environments can be simulated by a test of reduced duration applied at a level representative of the most severe conditions. A-l.4 Where the test is simply to demonstrate the ability of the instrument to survive and/or to operate at the appropriate amplitude, the test need only continue for a duration sufficient to demonstrate this requirement. In case where the ability of an instrument to withstand a cumulative effect of vibration is to be demonstrated (fatigue, brinelling, etc) the test should be of a longer duration sufficient to produce these effects. A-l.5 The problem being complex, it is difficult to assign precisely the severities in terms of amplitude, frequency range and total endurance duration that the instruments would have to encounter. However, in view of their applications here an effort has been made based on certain known environments, to give typical severities for testing of different categories of instruments. These are for general guidance and not exhaustive and do not overrule the severity to be stipulated in the relevant instrument specification in consideration to the specific use of instrument and its other features and requirements. A-2. Typical Severities A-2.1 Typical severities in the form of combination of frequency range, vibration amplitude and total endurance duration for testing of different categories of instruments are given in Table 4.

17

TABLE St
NO.

4

TYPtCAL

VIBRATION 3EVERlTY

SEVERITIES Fnn~uaucY
R~QE Hz

FOR

VARIOUS

CATEGORIES
WON

OF

INSTRUMENTS

z . .

CATEGORY

DISPLACW~NT

AccaLraaAMPLITIJLX AFTSR CSlO!B-OVER FREQUENOY (B)

ENDUaANCE
DURATION FOR 3 AXIS

REY&

ALbPLWDa BELOWTHE CWFis-OVtXR FRlQlJRNCY (mm)

Cl)

(2)
transported trailon and 1A

14) 5-55

(6s) 2

(7) 3/6 hours Lower severity for civil use Higher reverity for civil /military use For military For military For civil use For military
USC

i) Instruments by truck railways

IB

j-150

2

3/6/q

hours

1C ii) iii) Instrumeuts tralwported by tracked vehicle Instrument8 by Air Instruments by ship transported 2 3A 3B iv) transported 4 5A 5B 6 7

5-350 5-500 10-150 IO-500 5-50 5.350 5-500 5-500 5-500

3 4 4 10

9 9 6

hours hours hours

use use

9/12 hours S/9 S/9 hours hours

use

2 2 4 4 4

For civil/military For civil use For military use

v) Instruments installed in wheeled vehicles and railvrays vi) vii) Irutruments irtstalled in two wheeled trailers Instnmxnts iDstalled tracked vehicle; in

9/12 hours 9/12 12/30/50 hours hours

For civil/military use For military use

viii)

Instruments ships a)

installed

in 8A

5-14

f 1.25 Cons-

Most head (sea Fig. 1)

region 14.23 23-35 RB 8 in
9.4

tant displacement ,: :: ,)

-

6/9/30

hours

Yor civil/military

rho*50 f0.125 rho.5 *0*125 ao.125

b) After region (see Fig. 1) c) Main region !ser Fig. 1) ix) Instruments helicopters installed

5-23 .23-35 5-35

6/9/30 hours F/9/30 hours

-do-do-

c:

a) Instruments with or without vibration isolators b) Instrument mounted on isolated panels or racks but tested without panels or racks or when the instrument is teated with isolators removed x) Instrument aircraft installed in

j-500

&I.25

5

9

hours

For civil/military
USC?

9B

5-500

k1.25

2

6

hours

-do-

a) Instrument mounted directly on aircraft engine b) Instrument located engine the in compartment or pylons of aircraft

10 A (a) 10 A (b) 10 B (a) 10 B (b)

5-500 5-2 000 5-509 .i-2 000

&-I.25 &1'25 hl.25 -+1.25

20
20 15 15

12/30/50 hours

For civil/military use For military use

12/30;0

hours

For civil/military use For military use

r
( Continued ) P

TABLE SL
NO.

4

TYPICAL

VIBRATON
SEVERITY

SEVERITIES FREOUENCY RAN%E Hz

FOR

VARIOUS

CATEGORIES ACCELERAAMPLITLTDE AFTER
CROSS-OVER FREQUENCY (9)

OF INSTRUMENTS ENDURANCE DURATION FOR 3Ax1s

-

Contd

CATEGORY

DISPLACEMENT AMPLITUDE BELOW THE
CROSS-OVER FREQUENCY (=I

REMARKS

(1)
c)

(2)
Instrument in rear half of fuselage or in wing areas of aircraft having wing or front mounted engine Instrument in forward half of fuselage or instruwing ment in areas of aircrafts having engines at rear of fuselage Instrument mounted Ofi isolated panels or racks but tested without panels or racks or when the instrument is tested with isolators removed.

(3) 10 c (a) 10 C (bj

(4)
5-500 i-2 000 i f

(5) 1.25 1.25

(`3)

(7) 9/12/30 hours

(8)
For civil/military use For military use

10 10

d)

10 D (a) 10 D (b)

5-500 5-2 000

f f

1.25 1.25

5 5

g/12/30 hours g/12/30 hours

For civil/military use For military use

e)

10 E (a) 10 E (b)

j-500 5-2 000

f f

1.25 1.25

2 :!

9/12 hours 9/12 hours

l'or civil/military use I:or military use

_____-

_

-.
~

-z_--_

FIG. 1

SUB DIVISIONOF SHIP FORVIBRATION TEST

INTERNATIONAL

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

(SI

UNITS

)

Base

Units Symbol metre kilogram second current ampere kelvin m kg
S

Quantity Length Mass Time Electric

A K

Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance

candela mole

cd mol

Supplementary Quantity Plane angle

Units

unit
radian steradlan

Symbol rad sr

Solid angle

Derived

Units Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal Symbol N J W Wb 1 HZ S V Pa 1 1 1 Definition N 1 kg. m/s*

Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force

J = 1 N.m W = 1 J/s 1 V.s

1 Wb 1 1 1
1
1

T = 1 Wb/m' Hz=lc/s(s-`I S 1 A/V

Electromotive Pressure,

V = 1 W/A Pa 1 N/m'

stress

22

