**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7709 (1975): Standard Hydrophone [LITD 8: Electronic 
Measuring Instruments^ Systems and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15:7709-1975 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
STANDARD HYDROPHONE 



UDC 62r395-614: 681 •883-43 




® Copyright 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NBW DELHI noOOI 

fnct°'Es%'^ Stptmber 1975 



IStTTW-lfTS 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
STANDARD HYDROPHONE 

Acoustics Sectional Committee, ETDC 27 

Chairman Represtnting 

Db M. Panoholy National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Members 

Shbi I. S. Ahuja Ahuja Radios, New Delhi 

Shbi H. K. L. Abora All India Radio and Electronics Association, Bombay 

Shbi R.G. Keswani ( Alternate ) 

( Bombay ) 
Shbi Abttp Chaudhubx ( Alternate ) 

( Calcutta ) 
Shbi L. S. V. Easwab ( Alternate ) 
( Madras ) 
Db A. S. Bhadubx National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi B. P. Ghosh ( Alt^rnaU ) 
Lt-Col T. R. Bhalotba Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Maj T. S. Ghowdhabt ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi p. S. End law Posts & Telegraphs Department, New Oelhi 

Shbi J. S. Mono a Bolton Industrial Corporation, New Deljbi 

Shbi M. S. Mono a ( Alternate ) 
Cmdb B. G. Mudholkab Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shbi M. S. Nabayanan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. D. Pavatb Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Pilani 
Shbi M. R. Kapoob ( Alternate ) 
Db B. S. Ramahbishna Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Rssbaboh Ekoinbbb Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shbi M. Sanxabalinoam Directorate General of Supplies 9l Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Db D. L. Subbahmanyam Sarabhai Electronics Research Centre, Ahmedabiid 

Skex L. C. VASWAia Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Dbputy Dibkotob, Standabdb 
( Tblboommunioations ) ( Alternate ) 
SrbiL. K. Viswanath Philips India Ltd, Calcutu; and The Radio 

Electronics & Televisioa Manu&cturers' Associa- 
tion, Bombay 
Shbi K. G. Ajwavi ( Alternate ) 
%!Baa D. P. Shabma ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi If. SBXNnrASAK, Director General, ISI ( Bx'^fftia Memher ) 

Director ( Elec tech) ( Secretary ) 



• Coprigf^t 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

protected under the IniUm CepyrigM Act ( XIV of 1957) wid 

repioauction in whole or in part by any means except with written permissioii of the 
pmkbitt shsdl be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



ISr770»-t97S 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
STANDARD HYDROPHONE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 May 1975, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard covers the design requirements of standard piezoelectric 
hydrophones and the data required to specify their characteristics. Such 
requirements and characteristics are given as to specify the hydrophone 
to be suitable as a standard hydrophone for calibration purposes, to be used 
as a standard for comparison with other hydrophones that are intended for 
daily use. 

0.3 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from lEG 
Pub 500 ( 1974 ) ' lEC Standard hydrophone ' issued by the International 
Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

1. SCOPE 

l.l This standard covers the design requirements of standard piezoelectric 
hydrophones and the data required to specify their characteristics. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions covered in 
IS : 1885 ( Part III/Scc 4 )-1966t shall apply. 

3. GENERAL DESCRIPTION 

3.1 The requirements for a standard hydrophone, to be used as a reference 
for underwater sound pressure levels, are mainly concerned with its free 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revisid ). 

fElcctrotechnical vocabulary: Part III Acoustics, Section 4 Sonics, ultrasonics and 
underwater acoustics. 



18:7709-1975 

field open-circuit voltage sensitivity ( see also Appendix A ). The following 
general requirements shall apply: 

a) Over a frequency range of at least 3 decades, the sensitivity level 
shall be constant within 3 dB (that is ±1*5 dB). The lower 
limit of this frequency range will generally not be lower than 1 Hz 
and the upper limit will not exceed 100 kHz; 

b) Between the temperature of 5®C and 30°G, the sensitivity level 
shall be constant within 1 dB ( that is ± O'S dB ); 

c) Within a dynamic range of 60 dB, the output voltage of the 
hydrophone shall be linear with the free field sound pressure within 
1 dB (thatis±0-5dB); 

d) At any depth between and 10 metres the sensitivity level shall 
not differ by more than ± 0*5 dB from the nominal value; and 

e) The stability of the hydrophone shall be such that a calibration 
can hold good for a period of at least one year. The hydrophone 
should, therefore, preferably be recalibrated at intervals not longer 
than one year. 

3.2 The sensor shall be of the piezoelectric type, either with a piezoelectric 
single crystal or a piezoelectric ceramic element. 

3.2.1 The sensor material, however, shall be selected carefully in order 
to meet the specific requirements ( see A-1.2 ) . 

4. FREE FIELD OPEN CIRCUIT VOLTAGE SENSITIVITY 

4.1 Over the specified frequency and dynamic ranges the free field 
open-circuit voltage sensitivity level of the standard hydrophone shall be 
from — 1 70 dB to -210 dB re 1 V per micropascal ( or -70 dB to - 1 10 dB 
re 1 V per microbar ) { see A-1.3 ). 

4.2 The frequency response of a piezoelectric hydrophone has a fiat part 
limited at the lower frequency end by the lower cut-off frequency due to 
the capacitance of the piezoelectric element and the resistive load on this 
capacitance. At the high frequency end the sensitivity may change either 
by diffraction effects or as a result of mechanical resonance of the sensor 
clement. 

4.2.1 Approximately one octave below this resonance frequency the 
frequency response curve starts to rise. In accordance with 3.1(a) the 
deviation in the flat part of the frequency response curve shall be less than 
3 dB over at least three frequency decades. Hence the lower cut-off 
frequency and the resonance frequency shall be at least four decades apart. 

5. DIRECTIVITY 

5.1 For free field calibrations, the standard hydrophone shall be 
omnidirectional in azimuth. The deviation from an ideal omnidirectional 
pattern should not exceed 3 dB. 



ISt 7709- 1975 

& ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS 

6»1 The hydrophone shall be connected to a cable of shielded construction 
with a length of at least 10 metres. The end-of-cable leakage resistance 
shall be at least 100 megohm, the test voltage being 100 V. 

6.2 Electrical shielding of the high impedance sensor element of the 
hydrophone housing and shield shall be connected to the cable shield. If 
the sensor element has a capacitance smaller than the capacitance of the 
cable, a preamplifier shall be incorporated. 

6.3 For the calibration of a complete signal measuring system, a resistor 
of 1 to 10 ohm shall be inserted between the sensor element and the lower 
side of the preamplifier input. Insertion of a calibrated electrical signal 
across this resistor through two wires in the cable, independent of the 
preamplifier output circuit, yields an overall calibration of the hydrophone, 
analyser, tape recorder or other auxiliary equipment. In any case the 
sensor element ground connection shall be kept separate from the hydro- 
phone case and cable shield. 

Note — Calibration of the system by the insert voltage technique is valid only 
when the shunt capacitance of the cable has an impedance much greater than the 
insert resistance. 

6.4 Long cables at higher frequency will alter the measured end-of-cable 
open-circuit voltage due to cable losses and standing waves. Under these 
conditions a cable terminated at each end by its characteristic impedance 
shall be used. 

6.5 Both sides of the calibration resistor shall be connected to separate 
wires in the cable, so that the calibration current does not flow through 
the earth lead of the output signal, nor through the cable shield. 
Crosstalk between the calibration signal and the output signal shall be less 
than -40 dB. 

7. SENSOR ELEMENT 

7.1 The sensor element sl>all be acoustically stiflT relative to its environment 
(that is, its volume compliance shall be less than that of an equivalent 
volume of water ) so that its presence in a coupler calibrator for low 
frequency calibration does not affect the pressure level. In this way the 
free field calibration is obtained. 

NoTB — This characteristic is also useful in a free field com^rison calibration 
when the standard and the unknown are simultaneously immersed in the sound field. 
If the hydrophone dimensions are small in relation to the wavelength of sound, the 
presence of an acoustically stiff hydrophone will not noticeably alter the free field 
sound pressure. 



IS 17709:1975 

7.2 The suspension of the sensor element shall be such that the frequency 
of mechanical resonance, caused by the mass of the element and 
the compliance of the suspension falls below the specified frequency range. 

NoTB — At this resonance frequency the movement of the element induced by the 
vibration of the preamplifier case may generate a voltage across the sensor terminal 
and the hydrophone may be sensitive to a pressure gradient. 

7»3 A sensor element which is small enough to be omnidirectional in azimuth 
may have a low sensitivity or a low capacitance, or both. The sensitivity 
level shall not be below the minimum value given in 4. The capacitance 
should preferably not be lower than the shunt capacitance formed by the 
connecting wires and the preamplifier input circuitry. 

Note — In order to increase the capacitance without affecting the sensitivity, an 
array or multiple elements, mechanically uncoupled but electrically connected in 
parallel, may be extended in the vertical direction. It should be borne in mind that 
the length of the array determines the vertical directivity at the upper limits of the 
useful frequency range. The size of the individual elements determines the frequency 
of mechanical resonance and hence the upper limit of the useful frequency range. 

8. OTHER REQjUIREMENTS 

8*1 Supporting Structure — The hydrophone will require some support 
structure for positioning it in the sound field. In a typical design the 
sensor element is housed in an acoustically transparent capsule beneath the 
preamplifier case with the cable coming out at the top. Xhe support 
structure is attached to the preamplifier case or the cable. The directivity 
in the vertical plane shall be such that the influence of the preamplifier 
case and the supporting structure on the sensitivity does not exceed 1 dB in 
the frequency range specified by the manufacturer according to 9.1. 

8.2 Exposed Metal Parts — All metal parts of the hydrophone exposed 
to water shall be made of corrosion resistant material. The use of different 
metals shall be avoided because of galvanic corrosion that may occur. It 
is generally desirable to coat all metal parts with an elastomer. 

NoTB — The existence of potential differences between different parts of the case 
when the hydrophone is immersed in sea water may give rise to electrical noise in the 
system. 

8.2.1 Exposed metal parts of hydrophone housing and electrostatic 
shield shall be connected to the cable shield ( see 6.2 ). 

9. REQjUIREMENTS FOR STANDARD HYDROPHONE 

9.1 The specification of characteristics and requirements for standard 
hydrophone shall be as given in Table 1 ( see also Appendix A ). 



IS 17709-1975 



TABLE 1 GHARAGTERISnCS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR 
STANDARD HYDROPHONE 



(Oause 9.1 ) 



Sl No. Ghabactebistio 


Requirement 


(1) (2) 


(3) 


i) Free field open-circuit voltage sensitivity: 




a) Frequency of fundamental mechanical resonance 
of the sensor 


> 100 kHz 


b) Frequency range of fiat frequency response 
curve within 3 dB limits 


At least 3 decades within 
1 Hz to 100 kHz 


c) Sensitivity level in flat part of frequency 
response 


— 170 to— 210 dB re 1 

V/uPa 


ii) Hydrophone without preamplifier: 




a) Frequency response curve of end-of-cable 
sensitivity 




b) Frequency response curve of end-of-cablc 
capacitance 




c) Frequency response curve of cnd-of-cable leakage 


> 100 MQ 



resistance 
iii) Hydrophone with preamplifier: 

a) Hydrophone ( sensor element ): 

1) Frequency response curve of open-circuit 
voltage sensitivity 

2) Capacitance in pF 

b) Preamplifier: 

1) Frequency resjjonse curve 

2) Nominal gain in dB 

3) Input impedance in ohm 

4) Output impedance in ohm 

5) Minimum allowable load impedance in ohm 

6) Characteristic impedance of cable in ohm 

7) Maximum output signal level in dB re I V 

8) Overload sound pressure level in dB re 1 (a Pa 

9) Maximum safe peak sound pressure level in 
dB re 1 |A Pa 

10) Curve of equivalent noiic pressure spectrum 
level versus frequency 

1 1 ) Maximum value of equivalent noise pressure 

gpectrum level in dB re 1 |a Pa Si 

12) Dynamic range 

13) Calibration provision, value of insert voltage 
resistor 

14) Circuit diagram showing the connections 
between hydrophone ( sensor clement ) 
preamplifier, insert voltage resistor, cable, 
screens and exposed metal parts 



>60 dB 

10 ohms dc 1 % 



{Ctmmud) 



IS 1 7709- 1975 



TABLE 1 GHARAGTERISTIGS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR 
STANDARD HYDROPHONE -> Gwi/i. 

Sl No. Charaotijbistio Requirbmbmt 

(1) (2) (3) 

iv) Directivity: 

a) Horizontal and vertical directivity patterns at 
four specified preferred frequencies chosen from 
IS ; 22(54.1963* 

b) Equivalent line length up to the high frequency 
limit in mm 

v) Sensor element: 

a) Element material 

b) Size of sensor element in mm' 

vi) Electrical parametert: 

a) Type of electrostatic shield 

b) Diagram of cable connections 

c) Power requirements: 

1) Power supply voltage to preamplifier in V 

2) Current drain in mA 

3) Maximum ripple allowed in percentage 

4) Required stability in percentage 

5) Source impedance in ohm 

vii) Mechanical parameters: 

a) Type of exposed metal 

b) Type of exposed rubber 

c) Type of oil 

d) Position of sensor element 

ej Cable length in m > 10 metres 

f ) Size without cable in nim 

g) Weight with cable in kg 

viii) Environmental factors: 

Operating temperature range 5 to 30*C 

Variation of free field open-circuit voluge Not more than db 0*5 

sensitivity level over the specified temperature 
range 
c) Maximum operating depth Not less than 10 metres 

Variation of free field open-circuit voltage Not more than ± 0*5 

sensitivity level over the specified depth range dB between and 10 



8 



metres 



e) Storage temperature range in °C 

f) Sensitivity to sunlight, oxygen, chemicals, 
ionizing radiation and mechanical shock 

NoTB — The manufacturer of the hydrophone shall specify the values for all the 
characteristics given in the table. For such characterbtics for which values have been 
indicated, the values declared by the manufacturer shall be better than those specified. 

*Pireierred frequencies for acoustical measurements. 



I8}7709^1975 

APPENDIX A 

(C/att^^x 3.1, 3.2.1,4.1 and 9.1 ) 

GUIDANCE ON HYDROPHONE CHARACTERISTICS 
A-l. DESIGN REQjinREMENTS 
A-1.1 General 

A-l«l«l In underwater acoustics the primary standard for sound pressure 
measurements is the hydrophone. Unlike airborne sound, where the 
condenser microphone is so widely used, the hydrophone is generally of 
the piezoelectric type with a built-in preamplifier. 

A-1.1.2 Maximum operating frequency range and stability with age, 
minimum equivalent noise pressure level and sensitivity change in ambient 
temperature and operating depth are some of the aspects the designer of 
the hydrophone needs to consider. 

A-U.3 A standard hydrophone should consist of a sensor element and 
a built-in preamplifier. This combination serves two following purposes: 

a) The output impedance is constant over a large frequency range, 
and has a low resistive value, thus providing assurance that the 
effective open-circuit voltage is measured throughout the operating 
frequency band by connecting the sensor element to a device with 
a high input impedance or by the use of the calibration resistor. 

b) It ensures that the standard hydrophone cannot be used as a 
source, thus avoiding the possibility of damaging the sensor by 
overloading. 

This configuration will have a constant free-field voltage sensitivity 
over a broad frequency range below the frequency of mechanical resonance. 

A-I*i.4 At a low frequency the capacitivc reactance will equal the 
electrical leakage resistance across the sensor in combination with the 
preamplifier input impedance. The sensitivity at thb frequency will be 
3 dB below the constant sensitivity at higher frequencies and the 
sensitivity will continue to decrease 6 dB per octave as the frequency is 
lowered. 

A-1.1.5 The upper limit of the useful fr^uency range is determined by 
the frequency of mechanical resonance of the piezoelectric element. A 
high resonance frequency requires a small clement, but this small size 
limits the obtainable capacitance and sensitivity. A high stability will 
only be obtained with a relatively insensitive material. Hence a large 
frequency range and a high stability arc difficult to combine with a high 
sensitivity. 

8 



18:7709-1975 

A-l«l*6 The high specific acoustic impedance of the water may create 
multiple paths of coupling between the water and the piezoelectric element 
through the hydrophone housing and the cable. Anomalies in the 
sensitivity and the directivity as a function of frequency, temperature and 
operating depth may then occur. 

A-1.1.7 The sensor element may consist either of a stack of piezoelectric 
crystals or of a single piezoceramic element or of a group of ceramic 
elements. The sensor material shall be selected carefully in order to meet 
the requirements specified in 3. 

A-1.2 Sensor Material 

A-1.2«l The standard hydrophone should use lithium sulphate or one of 
the piezoelectric ceramics such as lead metaniobate or lead zirconate 
compositions. These ceramics are not as stable with time, temperature 
and depth as lithium sulphate, but they will yield a hydrophone having 
a lower equivalent noise pressure level for the same directivity and 
bandwidth. 

A-1.2«2 The sensitivity of lithium sulphate will change less than one 
percent from to 1 600 m and from 20 to 0°C. By comparison lead 
metaniobate will change TS percent and lead zirconate titanate 2 to 3 
percent over the same range of depth and temperature. 

A-l«2«3 Ageing or prolonged stress will not affect the sensitivity of 
lithium sulphate but will affect the piezoelectric ceramics. Other piezo- 
electric crystals have either a lower dielectric constant ( tourmaline ) , or 
require an unstable isolation material to shield two or more surfaces 
from the sound field [ for example, ammonium dihydrogen phosphate 
(ADP), Rochelle salt ]. 

A-1.3 Sensitivity 

A-1.3.1 The sensitivity of the standard hydrophone shall be as specified 
in 4 and its self noise level shall preferably be closed to the background 
noise level. 

A-1.4 Signal Lead Balance — The calibration of the hydrophone is 
usually done with an unbalanced connection since no electroacoustic device 
can be truly balanced electrically due to unbalanced stray capacitance. 

A-1.5 Optimum Capacitance 

A*l*5«l A hydrophone for the measurement of low signal levels over a 
large ultrasonic frequency range has a small sensitive clement with either 
a low capacitance or a low sensitivity or both. 



IS:7709.1975 

A-1.5.2 For a given size of element and a given cable capacitance the 
electrode-configuration shall be chosen such that the element's capacitance 
is equal to the cable capacitance, while for a high sensitivity the cable 
capacitance should be low. 

A-1.5.3 Hydrophones to be used at high ultrasonic frequencies, therefore, 
require a preamplifier close to the sensor element. 

A-1.6 Amplifier Input Resistance — The input resistance R of the 
preamplifier should be sufficiently large that the cut-off frequency is not 
higher than the lower limit of the useful frequency range. The higher 
the resistance /?, the lower the thermal noise of this resistor will be at the 
input of the amplifier. An input resistor of a built-in preamplifier of the 
order of 100 megohm is quite normal. 

A-1.7 Equivalent Noise Pressure Threshold Level 

A-1.7.1 The equivalent noise pressure threshold level of a hydrophone 
is determined by the electronic noise level at the input of the preamplifier 
and the sensitivity of the sensor element. Restrictions in this sensitivity 
and the capacitance of the sensor as a result of high-frequency require- 
ments put a lower limit to the noise pressure threshold level. 

A-1.7*2 Reduction of this threshold is possible either by increasing the 
size of the sensor, but this reduces the upper frequency limit, or by using 
more sensitive material, such as one of the piezoelectric ceramics instead of 
lithium sulphate. With lead metaniobate, for example, the noise 
threshold level will be 3 dB lower, with lead zirconate titanate the level 
will be 8 to 15 dB lower, as compared to lithium sulphate. 

A-1.8 Mechanical Design 

A-1.8.1 The stability of a hydrophone with age, ambient temperature 
and operating depth is dependent upon the sensor element and the means of 
coupling the element to the sound field. The acoustic properties of the 
coupling medium, for example some plastics or rubbers, may change with 
temperature or due to moisture absorption. The presence of gas bubbles 
or gas filled materials for gaskets or mechanical isolation will alter the 
sensitivity of the hydrophone as a function of operating depth. 

A-1.8.2 The directivity may vary as a function of depth, particularly if 
there exist multiple paths of coupling between the water and the sensor 
element. In one or more of these paths the coupling can easily vary with 
depth if compression type gaskets are used in the construction. O-ring 
seals are not so severely affected by pressure. 

A-1.8.3 The sensitiviy of the hydrophone should be unaffected by the 
support structure. The transference of vibrations from the cable should 
be minimized. For example, the sensor clement may be simply suspended 

10 



IS:7709<*197d 

on a light metal frame with rubber fittings, and coupled to the sound 
field through castor oil and a butyl rubber boot. The suspension structure 
would be clamped on a heavy metal case that houses the preamplifier* 

A-1.8.4 Such a flexible sensor support and a heavy preamplifier housing 
will de-couple the sensor element from the cable vibrations. A combination 
of sensor element directivity and remoteness from the point of attachment 
of the hydrophone support structure will minimize the structure's effect 
upon the measured sound field. 

A-1.8.3 In this design the butyl rubber minimizes water vapour 
penetration and the castor oil will absorb some water, thus prolonging the 
life of the hydrophone. In time, the presence of water on the surface of 
the sensor element will lower its leakage resistance and reduce its sensiti- 
vity at low frequencies. 

A-1.8.6 At the frequency of mechanical resonance, caused by the mass 
of the sensor element and the compliance of its support, the sensor may be 
excited by the pressure gradient in the sound field and produce a voltage 
across the sensor. Thus the hydrophone may be sensitive to a pressure 
gradient at low frequencies. This is a problem particularly in the 
calibration of the hydrophone where the short distance from the source to 
the hydrophone increases the ratio of pressure gradient to sound pressure. 

A.2. INDICATIONS OF HYDROPHONE DETERIORATION 

A-2*l There are generally distinctive signs that a hydrophone has deterio- 
rated and can therefore no longer be relied upon as a standard. Most of 
these indications appear in the low frequency range and can be detected 
by means of a closed chamber calibration method. 

A-2*2 If moisture has penetrated to the sensor element then the low cut- 
off frequency will increase. 

A-2«3 The oil in which the sensor is immersed should be carefully de-aerat- 
ed during the construction of the hydrophone. The presence of a small gas 
bubble in the oil due to poor workmanship, chemical action or subsequent 
leakage of air into the oil will produce a higher volume compliance of the 
hydrophone at low frequencies and a spurious resonance. For example, at 
shallow operating depths, a bubble of 5 mm diameter resonates at about 
I 250 Hz, and will affect the sensitivity by 2 to 4 dB at resonance and 
about 1 dB below resonance. Smaller bubbles, which resonate at higher 
frequencies, will produce a lesser effect. 

A-2*4 An increase in hydrostatic pressure will increase the resonant frequen- 
cy of the bubble. Calibration of the hydrophone inside a closed chamber 
at the lower frequency range may reveal the presence of an air bubble, 

ai 



A^23 Otfier caunfs of hy^roph^j^e dete|ioration are he following: 

^) The presen^^ of frof sulpHvir in tlit oil, coming from the rubber boot 
or from met^l partly in contact wi^ the oil, may destroy the silver 
electrodes on the seizor. 

b) Poor or deteriorated C0ment |;K>nds reduce the acoustic coupling; 
fractured sensof elem^ts re^^ce the element's capacitance; both 
failures lower t^^ sensillyity ^ the ooinstant-sensitivity frequency 
range and alter t|^ character of the frei|uency response curve and 
of the directivity pi^tterns. 

c) High stresses developtd diuing demp submi^rgence may change the 
sensitivity of a piezoe||ctric c^amlo element permanently. 

d) Exposure to sunlight mi^y overheat the sensf^T element, and thus 
lower its sensitivity. 

A*2«6 All these deteriosations mentioned in A«2*l to A-2.|^ can be detect- 
ed by a routine check of the frequency response ciiMTve of t^e hydrophone 
inside a closed chamber calibration unit* 



12 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

ACOUSTICS 



IS: 

]885 ( Part III/Scc 1 )-1965 Electrotcchnical vocabulary; Part III Acoustics, Section 1 
Physical acoustics 

1885 ( Part Ill/Scc 2 )-l966 Electrotcchnical vocabulary: Part III Acoustics, Section 2 
Acoustical and cjectro-acoustical systems 

1885 { Part Hl/Sec 3 )-l967 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part III Acoustics, Section 3 
Sound recording and reproduction 

1885 ( Part III/Scc 4 )-1966 Electrotcchnical vocabulary; Part III Acoustics, Section 4 

Sonici, ultrasonics and underwater acoustics 
1885 ( Part III/Scc 5 )-1966 Electrotechnical vocabulary; Part III Acoustics, Section 5 

Speech and h^^arin^ 

1885 ( Part Ill/Sec 6 )-1967 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part III Acoustics, Section 6 
Acoustical instruments 

2032 ( Part XII )-1969 Graphical symbols used in clectrotcchnology: Part XII Electro- 
acoustic transducers, recording and reproduction systems 

2264-1963 Preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements 

2748-1964 Methods of measurements on microphones 

3932-1966 Sound level meters for general purpose use 

6964-1973 Octave, half-octave and [tliird-octavc band filters for analysis of sound and 
vibrations 

7709-1975 Standard hydrophone 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg« NEW DEIH1 110001 

Telephone : 27 01 31 ( 20 lines ) Telegram* : Maneksanetba 

Regional Off fees: Telephone 

Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road BOMBAY 400007 37 97 29 

Eastern 6 Chowringhee Approach CALCUTTA 700072 23-0a02 

Southern : 54 General Patters Road MADRAS 600002 8 37 81 

Branch Off has: 

* Pushpak \ Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur AHMEDABAD 380001 2 03 9t 

f Block, Unity BIdg, Narasimharaja Square BANGALORE 660002 2 76 49 

KothI No. 90, Sector 18A CHANDIGARH 2 83 20 

6-8-56/57 Nampally Station Road HYDERABAD 600001 4 67 1 1 

1 1 7/41 8 B Sarvodaya Nagar KANPUR 208006 82 72 

B.C.I. BIdg ( Third Floor ), Gendhi Maiden East PATNA 800004 2 66 66 



Printed at Caak>e Prass, Ntw Dalhl, India 



