IS 7620 ( Part 3 ) : 1991
( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard MEDICAL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT DIAGNOSTIC X-RAY EQUIPMBNTS
PART 3 RADIATION SAFETY REQUIREMENTS ( First Reprint AUGUST 1997 )

tiDC 621'386'1 : 614'876: 616-073

0 BIS 1991

BUREA?U

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

M A N A K B H A V A N , 9 BAHADUR S H A H Z A F A R MARG

NEW DELHI 110002
December 199 1 Prke Group 4

Electromrdical Equipment Sectional Committee, MHD 19

FOREWORD

*

This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electromedical Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. This standard ( Part 3 ) specifies exclusively the requirements for radiation safety in the use of diagnostic medical X-ray equipment. Other parts of this standard are: Part 1 Mechanical and electrical safety requirements Part 2 Performance requirements The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board ( AERB ), constituted by the Government of India in November 1983, is entrusted with the responsibility of developing and implementing appropriate regulatory measures aimed at ensuring radiation safety in all applications involving ionizing radiations. Before the constitution of AERB, the division of radiological protection of the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre and the Safety Review Committee of the Department of Atomic Energy were responsible for the implementation of safety provisions envisaged in the Atomfc Eirergy
Act, 1962.

In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from the following documents : a) IEC Pub 407-( 1973 ) - Radiation protection in medical X-ray equipment, 10 kV to 400 kV (first edition ). International Electrochemical Commission; and b) International CommZssion on Radiological Protection (ICRP) - Publication 33 - Protection against ionizing radiation from external sources used in medicine. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 7620 ( Part 3 ) : 1991

Indian Standard MEDICAL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT DIAGNOSTIC X-RAY EQUIPMENTS
PART 3 RADIATION SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 1 SCOPE 2.9 Field Emission Equipment Equipment which uses an X-ray tube in which electron emission from the cathode is due solely to the action of an electric field. 2.10 Filter A layer of radiation attenuating material incorporated in the tube housing to preferentially tibsorb the less penetrating components of the useful beam; `permanent filter' is an integral part of the tube housing and cannot be removed by the user unlike the `added filter'. 2.11 Fluoroscopic Imaging Assembly The assembly of components comprising of the device in which X-ray photons produce a fluoroscopic image and include as appropriate the fluorescent screen image intensifier, equipment housing, electrical interlocks, primary shielding and structural linkage between image receptors and diagnostic X-ray tube assembly. 2.12 Half Value Layer ( HVL ) The thickness of specified material which when introduced in the path of radiation beam attenuates the beam of radiation to one-half of its original value.
NOTE -In this definition, the contribution of all scattered radiation other than any which might be present initial1 y in the beam concerned, is deemed to be excluded.

1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) specifies the measures for radiation safety of diagnostic X-ray equipment uved in medical practice by persons having adequate knowledge and understanding of radiation hazards and protection. 1.2 This standard does not apply to dental X-ray equipment. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard. the following definitions in addition to those given in Part 1 of this standard, shall apply. 2.2 Accessible Surface The external surface of X-ray tube enclosure or housing provided by the manufacturer. 2.3 Aluminium Equivalent In respect of a material under specified conditions, the thickness of aluminium that under those conditions, affords the same attenuation as that material. 2.4 Assembler Any person engaged in the business of assembling, replacing or installing one or more components into an X-ray equipment or sub-system. 2.5 Attenuation A decrease in radiation intensity caused by absorption and scattering in a medium. 2.6 Automatic Exposore Control A device which automatically controls one or more technique factors to obtain at a pre-selected location(s), a required quantity of radiation., 2.7 Beam Axia A line from the source through the centres of the X-ray fields. 2.8 Exposure The quotient of dQ/dm where dQ is the absolute value of the total charge of the ions of one sign produced in air when all the electrons ( negatrons and positrons ) liberated by photons in a volume element of air having mass dm are completely stopped in air. 1

2.13 Image Receptor Any device, such as, fluorescent screen or radiographic film, which converts incident X-ray photons either into a visible image or into another form which can be made into a visible image by further transformations. 2.14 Kerma The energy transferred ( per unit mass ) by gamma rays, X-rays or neutrons in the form of kinetic energy of secondary charged particles at the point of interest in an irradiated medium. If the irradiated medium is air, the corresponding kerma is called air kerma. The SI unit of kerma is gray. 2.15 Lead Equivalence Thickness of lead which under specified conditions of irradiation affords the same attenuation as the material under consideration.

IS 7620 ( Part 3 ) : 1991 2.16 Leakage Radiation Radiation emanating from the diagnostic source assembly except for the useful beam. 2.17 Leakage Technique Factors The technique factors associated with the tube housing assembly which are used in measuring leakage radiation. 2.18 Light Field The area of light in the plane of the image receptor that is directly outlined by the beam limiting device, the perimeter of which is the locus of points at which the illumination is onefourth of the maximum in the plane of the image receptor. 2.19 Mobile Equipment Transportable equipment designed to be moved from one location to another, between periods of use, on its own wheels or similar means of support. 2.20 Portable Equipment The equipment intended to be moved from one location _to another or between periods of ruse while being carried by one or two persons. 2.21 Primary Protective Barrier The material excluding filters placed in the useful beam and incorporated into the equipment by the manufacturers to- reduce the radiation exposure to the medical personnel during operation. 2.22 Radiation Protection Measures taken to minimiz: exposure to patients, medical and para-medical staff and general public so as to limit the bidogical consequences of ionizing radiation to acceptable levels. 2.23 Radiation Tberapy Simulation System A diagnostic type X-ray system intended for localizing the volume to be exposed during radiation therapy and confirming the position and size of the therapeutic irradiation field. 2.24 Rated Tube Current The maximum allowable tube current of the X-ray high voltage generator. 2.25 Rated Output Voltage The maximum allowable p:ak potential in volts at the output terminals of the X-ray tube. 2.26 Safety Safety means radiation safety and does not include electrical/mechanical and other safety considerations. 3 2.27 Scatter Scatter or scattered radiation means radiation scattered by the medium on which the primary beam is incident. 2.28 Source The focal spot of the X-ray tube. 2.29 Source Image Receptor Distance ( SID ) The distance from the source to the centre of the surface of the image8 receptor on which X-rays transmitted ~by the patient are incident. 2.30 Useful Beam Useful beam or primary beam is the part of the emergent radiation from an X-ray tube housing which is capable of being used for the purpose for which the X-ray equipment is intended. 2.31 Variable-Aperture Ream-Limiting Device A beam limiting device which has capacity for stepless adjustment of the X-ray field size at a given SID and is provided with an optical source for light field. 2.32 X-Ray Field The area of the intersection of the useful beam and any one of the set of planes parallel to and including the plane of the image receptor whose perimeter is the locus of points at which the exposure rate is one-fourth of the maximum in the intersection. 2.33 X-Ray Tube Any electron tube which is designed for the conversion of electrical energy into X-ray energy ( henceforth termed `tube' ). 3 MARKING 3.1 The provisions of Part 1 of' this standard shall apply. .3.2 In addition, the equipmen~t shall bear the markings of a warning sign that: includes a statement prohibiting unauthorized use, and b) indicates that hazardous radiation emission is produced when the equipment is in operation.

a>

3.2.1 The X-radiation warning sign is shown in Fig. 1. 4 ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS Relevant requirements of*Part 1 of this standard shall apply. 5 RADIATION SAFETY 5.1 All components except those specified in this standard shall meet the relevant and available

IS 7620(Part 3_):1991

CAUTION X-RAY

F I G. 1 X-RADIATION W ARNING S I G N Indian Standard specifications on the design, construction and performance and be certified to that effect. Such certified components only shall be used in the manufacture/assembly o f X-ray equipment/accessories. features: 1) Separate warning lights in clear view of the operator that respectively indicate: i) When the control panel is energized and the device is ready to produce Xrays, and ii) When X-ray are produced. 2) Where the device has adjustable technique factors, electrical m e t e r s o r other indicators that enable the following factors or any combination thereof to be determined before the irradiation is initiated: i) Operating tube potential in kV, ii) Tube current in mA, and iii) The exposure time in s. 3) Where the device has non-adjustable technique factors, permanently affixed marks or labels or electrical meters or other indicators that enable,~at specified source to image receptor distances, the folkwing factors or any combination thereof to be. determined b e f o r e the exposure, is initiated: i> Operating tube potential in kV, ii) Tube current in mA, iii) The exposure time in s, and iv) Keyed filter interlock switches or other positive means to ensure that necessary added filtration is in place in any tube housing assembly that; - has permanent inherent filtration of 0'5 mm or less aluminium equivalence, and

cl A control panel having the following

5.2 The X-ray tube shall be securely fixed and correctly aligned within the tube housing.
The manufacturer of X-ray tube housing assembly shall specify the source to collimator ilange distance and maintain this for tubehousing assemblies within a tolerance of f3 mm. 5.3 The X-ray tube housing shall maintain its required exposure position or movement without excessive drift or vibration during operation. 5.4 Where more than one X-ray tube is controlled by one control panel except in the case of a diagnostic X-ray machine specifically designed for simultaneous two-tube operation, it shall not be possible to energize more than one X-ray tube at the same time and there shall be at the control panel, a clearly visible indication as to which X-ray tube is connected and is ready to be energized. 5.5 The diagnostic X-ray machine shall be .equipped with the following: Means to compensate for variation' in X-ray tube potential caused by line voltage fluctuations to within f10 p:rcent of the snlected value. ,b) A visible indication that warns the operator or alternative!y, a device that prevents X-rays from belrg produced when the variation in line voltage causes variation in t u b e p o t e n t i a l in Excess of fl0 percent of tb selected value.

a>

3

IS 7620( Part 3):1991 -- is designed to be operated with added filtration. v) Where the device is designed to move under remote control around or across a patient, provision for an emergeccy stop switch, the activation of which immediately terminates both the motion of the device and the production of X-rays. 6 BEAM LIMITATION AND PROTECTION AGAINST PRIMARY AND STRAY RADIATION 6.1 Tube Housing Leakage Every tube housing for medical diagnostic X-ray equipment shall be so constructed that the leakage radiation through the protective housing in any direction. averaged over an area not larger than 1 m'J shall not exceed an air kerma of pGy, in one hour ( approximately 115 mR in one hour ) at a distance of 1'0 m from the X-ray source when the tube is operating at each of the ratings specified by the manufacturer. 6.2 Radiation Leakage from Transformers The radiation level at 50 mm from the transformer surface of the X-ray unit shall not exceed pGy, in one hour ( approximately 0.6 mR in one hour ). 6.2.1 Compliance shall be determined by measurements averaged over an area of 10 cm2. 6.3 Beam Limiting Devices Beam limiting devices, such as light beam diaphragms, cones or collimators shall be provided to limit the useful beam to the area of clinical interest. Wherever practicable, preference should be given to the use of light beam diaphragms. The beam limiting devices in combination with the tube housing shall comply with the requirements for leakage radiation specified under 6.1. 6.4 Filtration The total filtration in the useful beam for normal diagnostic work shall be equivalent to not less than 2'5 mm Al of which 1'5 mm shall be permanent. 6.4.1 Special Application ( Mammograplly )
For certain applications, it may be desirable to work with a total filtration less than that given above ( for example, for mammography ) bet in no case shall the total filtration be less than 0'5 mm Al equivalent.

In such cases, the presence of t'ne lower filteration shall be indicated at the tube assembly. Additional filters should be provided for the use of these tubes for normal techniques. In this case, -the appropriate filtration for the various ranges of potential differenceshall be marked on the control panel and should be electrically interlocked. 6.5 The Half Value Layer ( HVL ) 6.5.1 HVL of the use!ul beam for a given X-ray tube potential shall be not less than the values shown in Table 1. 6.5.2 If it is necessary to determine such halfvalue layer at an X-ray tube potential which is not listed in Table 1, linear interpolation or extrapolation may be made. Positive means shall be provided to ensure that at least the minimum filtration needed to achieve the above beam quality requirement is in the useful beam during each exposure. Table 1 Half-Value Layer (Clauses 6.5.1 and 6.5.2 ) Design Operating Measured Potential Range Range
(kV penk ) (1) Below 50 Total filtration 0.5 mm Al
50 to 70 Total filtration 1.5 mm Al

HVL
(mm) (3) 0.3 0.4 0.5 ;:; 1'5 2-l 2.3 2.5 2.7 3.2 3.5 3.8 4.1

( kV peak J (2) E 49 I 70

120 130 150

140

7 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS RADIOGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT

FOR

7-O The provisions of this clause apply to equipment used for radiography.
7.1 Every radiographic X-ray machine shall be designed and constructed to include: a) field limitation, b) exposure control system, c>l icdication of technique factors, and d) radiographic timing device.

7.1.1 When a light localizer is used to define the fn the case of use of an edge filter, for X-ray field, it shall provide an average example, molybdenum in mammography, the illumination of not less than 50 lux (4'693 foot attenuation equivalent shall be given for the candles) at 1 m or at the mamximum SID, whichever is less. The average illumination low energy side of the absorption edge. 4

IS 7620 ( Part 3 ) : 1991 shall be based upon measurements made in the appropriate centre of each quadrant of the light field in perfect darkroom. 7.2 Except when spot-film devices are provided, every mobile and stationary general purpose radiographic X-ray system shall meet the following requirements. a) There shall be a means provided for stepless adjustment of the size of the X-ray field with collimator completely closed. The field size at an SID of 1 m shall not exceed 50 mm x 50 mm. b) Means shall be provided for visually defining the perimeter of the X-ray field. The total misalignment of the edges of the visually defir,ed field with the respective edges of the X-ray field along either the length or width of the visually defined field shall not exceed 2 percent of the distance from the source to the centre of the visually defined field when the surface upon which it appears is perpendicular to the axis of the X-ray beam. When a light localizer is used to define the X-ray field, it shall provide an average illumination of not less than 100 lux ( 9'385 foot candles ) at 1 m or the maxim u m SlD, whichever is less. The average illumination shall be based upon measurements made in the appropriate centres of each quadrant of the light field in perfect darkroom. 7.3 Except when spot film devices are provided, every statiouary general purpose X-ray system shall meet the following requirements in addition to those prescribed in 7.2. a) Means shall be provided to indicate when the axis of the X-ray beam is perpendicular<to the plane of the image receptor, to align the centre of the X-ray field with respect to the centre of the image receptor to within 2 percent of the SID, and to indicate the SID to within 2 percent. b) The beam-limiting device shall numerically indicate theafield size in the plane of the image-receptor to which it is adjusted. c) Indication of the field size dimensions and SID's shall be specified in millimetres and shall be such that aperture adjustments result in X-ray field dimensions in the plane of the image receptor which `correspond to those of the image receptor to within 2 percent of the SID when the beam axis is perpendicular to the plane of the image receptor. d) Compliance measurements shall be made at discrete SID's image receptor dimensions in common clinical use and nominal image receptor dimensions at which the beam-limiting device or its associated diagnostic X-ray system is uniquely designed and operated. e) The radiographic system shall be capable of operation at the discretion of the operator such that the field size at the image receptor can be adjusted to a size smaller than the image receptor. 7.4 A radiographic timing device provided with a diagnostic X-ray machine shallbe designed so that: a) it terminates an exposure on completion of any one of the following:
I ) A preset time interval,

2) A preset produgt of current and time ( mAs ), or 3) A preset number of pulses. b) it permits the operator to terminate the exposure at any time; and c) it automatically resets to its original position or zero at the termination of the exposure. 7.5 Permanent diaphragms, cones or other beam limiting devices shall be provided with a diagnostic X-ray equipment to collimate the useful beam and these shall afford the same degree of shielding as that required of the source housing assembly. 7.6 Every radiographic equipment equipped with an automatic exposure control shall:

c>

4 be designed to include on the control

b)

panel, a clear indication as to when the automatic exposure control mode of operation has been selected; where the X-ray tube operating potential is 50 kV peak or greater, be designed and constructed to have minimum exposure time capability as under:

1) in the case of a field emission machine rated for pulsed operation equal to or less than the time interval equivalent of two pulses, or 2) in the case of all other machines equal to or less than l/60 second or the time interval required to deliver 5 mAs, whichever.is the greater. c) be equipped with a means for ensuring that: 1) where the X-ray tube potential is less than 50 kV peak, the product of the X-ray tube current and the exposure time does not exceed 2 000 mAs per exposure, or 2) where the X-ray tube potential is 50 kV peak or more: i) the product of, the X-ray tube current and the exposure time does not exceed 600 mAs; however, for special radiography equipment, such as, neuro radiography, the value is up to 800 mAs.

IS 7620 ( Part 3 ) : 1991

ii) the product of the peak X-ray tube potential, current and exposure time does not exceed 60 kWs per exposure. d) be equipped with a back-up timer having a maximum setting: 1) in the case of a tomographic machine, of 10'0 s, and 2) in the case of any other machine, of 3'0 s. e) be designed :

8.6 When the adjustable diaphragms are fully open, the X-ray field produced by non-image intensifier fluoroscopic -equipment shall not extend beyond the entire visible area of the image receptor. 8.6.3 The focus to table top distance must be so adjusted mechanically that it shall not in any case be less thin 300 mm for fluoroscopy units and should preferably be ( a ) 450 mm for general fluoroscopy units and ( b ) 600 mm for units used exclusively for chest screening. 8.7 For image intensiped fiuoroscopy equipment other than treatment simulators, the useful beam should be centred on the input phosphor and during fluoroscopy or tine recording, it should not significantly exceed the diameter of input of phosphor. The primary protective barrier around input phosphor shall extend at least 25 mm each side beyond the edges of the useful beam. 8.8 The image intensifiers and adjacent fittings which may be exposed to the useful beam shall provide the same protection as that required for fluoroscopic screen assembly. 8.9 The fluoroscopic screen shal! be covered with a protective glass sheet having a lead equivalence of not less than the following: kV
Lead Equivalent of Protective Glass -Co; ering
I

1) to include, on the control panel, a 2)
visible light indicator that will warn the operator, and to require manual resetting of the machine before another automatically timed exposure can be made when termination of an automatically timed exposure occurs because the limits specified in 7.6( c ) or ( d ) above have been reached.
FOR

8 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FLUOROSCOPY EQUIPMENT

8.0 The provisions of this clause apply to

equipment for fluoroscopy with or without an image intensifier.
8.1 Every fluoroscope X-ray machine shall be

designed arid constructed to include: a) beam limitation device, b) primary productive barrier, c) exposure control system, d) indication of X-ray and exposure parameters, and e) fluoroscopic timer. 8.2 Fluoroscopy X-ray equipment may be designed and constructed as combined radiography and fluoroscopy equipment or exclusive fluoroscopy equipment and may have facilities or attachments for tine fluorography. 8.3 Mobile X-ray equipment shall not be used for fiuroscopy unless an image intensifier is employed. The equipment shall be so constructed that the radiation beam is fully intercepted by the image receptor area of the image intensifier. It is preferable to use image storage devices. 8.4 An adjustable collimator or diaphragm should be provided to define the useful beam.

SO

70 10'; 110 120 150 200

1'5 1'5 2'0 2.0 ;:; 2'5 3'0

8.10 The Auoroscopy tube shall not produce X-rays unless the primary protective barrier of the fluoroscopic image assembly is in position to intercept the entire useful beam. In case where a separate X-ray tube is provided for fluoroscopy, the equipment shall provide protection against inadvertent operation of the flcoroscopy tube when the image assembly is not intercepting the useful b e a m . The focus to the table top distance must be so adjusted mechanic:llly that it shall not in any case be less than 300 mm for fluoroscopy units and preferably 450 mm for gene:-al fluoroscopy units and 6CO mm for units used exclusively for chest screening. The exposure rate due to transmission through the barrier, shall not exceed 8.5 The X-ray tube, adjustable beam liyiting 2 mR/h at 100 mm from any accessible surface device and image receptor shall be linked of the fluoroscopic imaging assembly beyond together~so that the beam will not fall outside the plane of the image receptor for each 5 R/min the image receptor at any source-image receptor of entrance exposure rate. This requirement is distance. In case of failure, an indication shall not applicable for treatment simul:itors provided the systems are intended only for remote control warn the operator.

6

IS 7620 ( Part 3 ) : 1991 operation. The manufacturer shall provide instructions to the user concerning t h e importance of remote control operation. surface of the fluoroscopic imaging assembly positioned 300 mm above the table top. Movable grids and compression devices shall be removed from the useful beam during the measuremer t. 8.11 Table Top Dose The air kerma rate measured at the table top 8.14 If a provision for taking spot films during for the minimum focus to table to distance fluoroscopic examination is made, the beam should be as low as possible and in any case shall be intercepted by a barrier having a lead shall not exceed 5 cGy per minute ( approxi- equivalent specified in 8.9 and shall be designed for the highest X-ray tube voltage at which mately 5'75 R per minute ). radiographic exposure can be made. 8.12 Compliance with 8.11 shall be determined 8.15 All tables and stand: for fluoroscopy shall as follows: be provided with barriers for protecting the a) If the source is below the table, exposure fluoroscopist against scattered radiation from rate shall be measured IO mm above the the patient and from materials between the table top; and source and the patient. Openings such as bucky b) Jn the C arm type of fluoroscope, the slots should be covered with barrier having a exposure rate shall be measured 300 mm lead equivalence of not less than 0'5 mm. from the input surface of the fluoroscopic Protective flaps or drapes which may consist of overlapping parts shall be attached to the lower imaging assembly. edge of the screen holder when the screen is NOTE - T h e e x p o s u r e s w i t c h f o r Ruoroscopy vertical or to the nearest edge to the operator shall be of the `deadman' type. that is, a switch when the screen is horizontal. The lead equiso constructed that a circuit closing contact can be maintained only by continuous pressure on the valence of the flaps or drapes shall be not less switch. than 0'5 mm. In equipment for those applications where a `deadman' type exposure switch for fluoroscopy would prejudice the radiologist's conduct of the examiration, a permanent contact switch instead of a `deadman' typz switch can bz accepted provided the cumulative timing device mentioned below is constructed and connected to terminate the fluoroscopic exposure at the end of a predetermined time not more than IO minutes. In all cases, a cumulative timing device activated by the exposure-circuit for fluoroscopy shall be provided which shall ~give a characteristic signal at the end df a predetermined time not more than IO minutes. The cumulative timirg device activated by the exposure-circuits should terminate the irradiation when the total exposure time of fluoroscopy exceeds a predetermined limit not exceeding IO minutes. In that case, instead of the characteristic signal at the end of the predetermined limit, a characteristic signal shall indicate just prioi to the end of~the predetermined time in order to permit the device to be reset, if necessary. 8.16 Electrical meters or other visual indicators on the control panel shall provide continuous indication of X-ray tube potential ( in kV ) and current (in mA ). 8.17 The total aluminium equivalent of all the materials other than the screen, its associated mechanical support panel or grids that ark present ~between the patient and the image receptor shall not exceed 3'5 mm. 8.18 X-ray production in the fluoroscopic mode shall be controlled by a switch or a device which requires continuous pressure by the operator for the entire time of any exposure. When recording serial fluoroscopic images, the operator shall be able to terminate the X-ray exposure( s ) at any. time but means mny be provided to permit completion of any single exposure of the series in process.

8.19 Means shall be provided to represent the cumulative on-time of the fluoroscopic tube. The maximum cumulative time of the timing device shall r.ot exceed IO minutes without rzsetting. To allow resetting if clinically essential, it shall be supplemented by an audible signal giving warning of the impending cessation The use of a patient area exposure meter or of fluoroscopy. TLe elapsed fluoroscopy time other type of measuring instrument indicating should be visible to the fluoroscopist. 117 case patient exposure is recommended. of treatment simulators, means to indicate the total cumulative exposure and provision of its 8.13 The exposure rate due to transmission resetting between X-ray examination shall be through the primary barrier combined with provided. radiation from image intensifier shall be determined by measurements arranged over an area 8.20 The fluoroscopic table top and the radiation of 1 ma with no linear dimension greater than cassette faces and non-opaque parts of grid 200 mm. If the source is below the table top, should preferably be made of materials of low the measurement should be made with the input X-ray attenuation, such as, carbon fibre. 7

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards
8

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. MHD I9 ( 2223 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 01 31,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: C e n t r a l : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 E a s t e r n : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 { 60 60 38 20 43 25 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross broad, CHENNAI 600113 { 235 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15 Western : Mannkalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed by Reprography Unit, BE, New Delhi

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617,3233841 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 9120

832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

