**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9436 (1980) : Performance Requirements and Methods of 
Tests for Wheels for Passenger Cars [TED 7: Automotive 
Tyres, Tubes and Rims] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629-1 14-5-012-3: 620M78-3 ,g : 9436.1930 




( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND METHODS OF 
TESTS FOR WHEELS FOR PASSENGER CARS 



8 
o 

Q 

UJ 



E 
E 

o 
o 

-D 

3 

CO 

w 

E 



4) 



1. Scope — Specifies laboratory test methods and performance requirements for evaluating certain 
essential strength characteristics of wheels intended for use on passenger cars. 

1.1 Failure criteria for the tests on wheels has also been specified. 

2. General —Only fully processed new wheels which are representative of wheels Intended for the 
vehicle shall be used for the tests. No wheel shall be used for more than one test 

3. Tests — Following two tests are covered: 

a) Dynamic cornering fatigue test, and 

b) Dynamic radial fatigue test. 

3.1 Dynamic Cornering Fatigue Test 

3.1.1 Equipment — The test machine shall have a driven rotatable device whereby either the 
wheel rotates under the influence of a stationary bending moment or the wheel is stationary and Is 
subjected to a rotating bending moment. 

3.1.2 Procedure 

3.1.2.1 Preparation — The rim flange of the wheel shall be clamped securely to the test fixture. 
The face by which the wheel centre is supported on the testing machine shall have the same fixation 
characteristics as the face of the hub used on the vehicle. If a tyre and wheel assembly is used as 
a combination for the test, the tyre pressure shall be higher for clamping purposes. The recommen- 
ded minimum pressure is 375 kPa. The load arm and adapter assembly shall be attached to the 
mounting surface of the wheel using non-lubricated studs and nuts ( or bolts ), in good condition, 
representative of those used on the vehicle. These wheel nuts ( or bolts ) shall be tightened at the 
beginning of the test to the vehicle/wheel manufacturer's specified torque values. Wheel bolts or 
nuts may be retorqued once during the test. Tightening torque shall not fail below 50 percent of Its 
initial value when the minimum load cycle number has been attained. The bending moment shall 
be maintained within ±2"5 percent. In the final clamped position, the wheel shall be concentric to 
the rotating device within 0'25 mm Max ( TIR ) at the point of loading in the unloaded condition. 

3.1.2.2 Bending moment — To impart a bending moment to the wheel, a force may be applied 
either perpendicular or parallel to the plane of the mounting surface of the wheel at a specified 
distance (moment arm). 

3.1.3 Bending moment determination — The bending moment M ( force x moment arm ) in newton 
metres, is determined from the formula: 

M==(fl n + d) fvi XS 

where 

R = static loaded radius in metres of the largest tyre to be used on the wheel as specified 
by the vehicle manufacturer; 

^ = assumed coefficient of friction developed between tyre and road; 
d -= inset or outset of the wheel in metres; 
Fvi — half of the maximum vertical static load in newtons, on the front axle; 
S = accelerated test factor. 
Note — For values of n and S, see Appendix A. 

3.1.4 Failure criteria 

a) Inability of the wheel to sustain load. 

b) A fatigue crack penetrating through a section of the wheel. 

c) The wheel shall withstand a minimum of 18 000 load cycles without failure. 



Adopted 27 February 1980 



© September 1980, ISI 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS s 9436 -1980 

3.2 Dynamic Radial Fatigue Test 

3.2.1 Equipment — The test machine shall be equipped with a means of imparting a constant 
radial load only as the wheel rotates. The suggested equipment incorporates a driven rotatable 
drum set which presents a smooth surface wider than the loaded test tyre section width. The 
preferred diameter of the drum is 1 700 mm ( nominal ). 

3.2.2 Procedure — The tyre selected for this wheel test shall be representative of the maximum 
size and type specified by the vehicle manufacturer for the wheel. The recommended cold inflation 
pressure of the test type shall be in accordance with the following values: 



Service Pressure 
kPa 


Test Pressure 
kPa 


Up to 160 
161 to 280 


280 

450 



There will be a slight increase in pressure during the test. This increase is normal and no 
adjustment is necessary. The loading system shall maintain the specified load within ±2'5 
percent. 

3.2.3 Radial load determination — The radial load F r , in newtons, is determined as follows: 

F T = f v x K 

The value of radial ioad F T to be used is f r i or Frz whichever is greater as determined by the 
following formulae No. (1) and (2): 

oi = fvi xAfi (1) 

where 

f v1 = half of the maximum vertical static load in newtons on the front axle, and 
K\ = accelerated test factor; 

or 

F r2 = F v2 X K 2 (2) 

where 

Fy,2 «= half of the maximum vertical static load in newtons on the rear axle, and 
K z = accelerated test factor. 

Note — For values of K x and K 2 , see Appendix A. 

3.2.4 Failure criteria 

a) Inability of wheel to sustain load. 

b) A fatigue crack penetrating through a section of the wheel. 

c) The wheel shall withstand a minimum of 400 000 test cycles without failure. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 3.1.3 and 3.2.3) 

TEST FACTORS 

A-1. To permit a uniform application of the test methods specified, the test factors given in the 
following table should be used when conducting the tests. 



Test ' 


Accelerated Test Factors 


Dynamic cornering fatigue 

fL= 0*7 

(see 3.1.3) 


S = 1*60 


Dynamic radiai fatigue 
( see 3.2.3 ) 


Ki - 2 '25 
K 2 - 2"00 



IS: 9436- 1980 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is in agreement with the International Standard ISO 3006-1976 ' Road vehicles — 
Passenger car wheels — Test methods ' issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 
It also includes the performance requirements apart from test methods. 

Assistance has also been derived from SAEJ 328a, * Wheels — Passenger cars — Performance 
requirements and test methods 1 , issued by the Society of Automotive Engineers ( Inc ), USA. 



printed at New India Printing Press. Khurta, India 



