NAT Alan IS 17101 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


aterra Ra Aa (Tat St) At 
ATRAÍA yrearactt 


Terminology in Underground Coal 
Gasification (UCG) 


ICS 75.020 


© BIS 2019 


anda NAK YO 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR NGA, 9 Te TH HM, ay Rei - 110002 


Ma rent Y MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DEL H1-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2019 Price Group 2 


Methods and Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional Committee, 
MED 37 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Methods and 
Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard provides the details of various terms and processes used in Underground Coal Gasification (UCG). 
This standard is relevant and useful for students, research scholars, scientists, engineers and also for those 
interested in understanding the evolution and development processes in the field of underground coal gasification. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17101 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


TERMINOLOGY IN UNDERGROUND 
COAL GASIFICATION (UCG) 


1 SCOPE 


UCG refers to gasifying in-situ a coal seam under 
controlled combustion and bringing the resulting 
synthetic gas (syngas) to the surface. The syngas is 
a mixture of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, methane, 
carbon dioxide (CO,) and higher hydrocarbons. This 
standard provides the details of various terms and 
processes used in Underground Coal Gasification. 
NOTE — The referred standard is compilation of similar 
definitions for terminology/abbreviations as highlighted 
above, covering areas related to: - geology, reservoir, drilling, 
gasification, subsidence and extraction processes. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Aquifer — A body of rock whose fluid saturation, 
porosity and permeability permit production of ground 
water. 


2.2 Coal — A carbon-rich sedimentary rock that forms 
from the remains of plants deposited as peat in swampy 
environments. Burial and increase in temperature 
bring about physical and chemical changes called 
coalification. Because of the organic origin of coal, it 
cannot be classified as a mineral. The main types of 
coal, anthracite, bituminous coal and lignite, can be 
distinguished by their hardness and energy content, 
which are affected by their organic content as well as 
their conditions of formation. Natural gas associated 
with coal, called coal gas or coalbed methane, can be 
produced economically from coal beds in some areas. 
In some basins coals form source rocks. 


2.2.1 Coal Combustion Waste — Coal combustion 
wastes contain a variety of toxic compounds such 
as ash arsenic, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, lead, 
mercury, selenium, thorium and uranium, as well as 
dioxins and poly-aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and 
flue-gas desulphurization products. 


2.2.2 Coal Seam — Coal is found in sedimentary rocks 
as layers and beds which are known as seams. 


2.2.3 Combustion — It is the sequence of exothermic 
chemical reactions between a fuel and an oxidant 
accompanied by the production of heat and conversion 
of chemical species. The release of heat can produce 
light in the form of either glowing or a flame. 


2.3 Crip Technology — A “controlled retractable 
injection point” (CRIP) is a point where coiled tubing 
burns through the horizontal tunnel borehole casing; 
oxygen and steam are forced through the point to ignite 
the coal. The injection tube is to be retracted back as 
the coal is consumed, to ensure maximal usage of the 
coal in the seam. 


2.4 Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) — It is a generic 
term for techniques for increasing the amount of crude 
oil that can be extracted from an; oil field. Enhanced 
oil recovery is also called improved oil recovery 
or tertiary recovery (as opposed to primary and 
secondary recovery). 


2.5 Gasification — Gasification is a process that 
converts carbonaceous materials such as coal, petroleum 
coke, residue and/or biomass in presence of air/oxygen 
and steam, into synthesis gas (syngas) in which major 
components are hydrogen and carbon monoxide. 


2.6 Ground Water Contamination — Groundwater 
contamination has been a major problem in almost 
all pilot UCG projects. The combustion of coal traps 
a variety of toxic substances such as mercury, phenol, 
and benzene into the former coal seam. Additionally, 
the solubility of heavy metals in water can be increased 
if the coal seam is fully oxidized. Pollutants can leach 
out through the surrounding rock or be taken up water 
that enters the chamber. 


2.7 Horizontal Drilling — A subset of the more general 
term “directional drilling,” used where the departure of 
the wellbore from vertical exceeds about 80 degrees. 
Note that some horizontal wells are designed such that 
after reaching true 90 degree horizontal, the wellbore 
may start drilling upward. In such cases, the angle past 
90 degrees is continued, as in 95 degrees, rather than 
reporting it as deviation from vertical, which would 
then be 85 degrees. Because a horizontal well typically 
penetrates a greater length of the reservoir, it can offer 
significant production improvement over a vertical 
well. 


2.8 H/C (Hydrogen/Carbon) Ratio — Combustion 
energetics can be estimated from the bond energies for 
all the classifications of fossil fuels. 


The amount of energy released is dependent on the 
oxidation state of the carbons in the hydrocarbon 


IS 17101 : 2019 


which is related to the hydrogen/carbon ratio. The more 
hydrogen per carbon, the lower the oxidation state 
and the more energy that will be released during the 
oxidation reaction. Thus, the greater the H/C ratio, the 
more energy release on combustion. 


2.9 Hydrostatic Pressure — The normal, predicted 
pressure for a given depth or the pressure exerted per 
unit area by a column of freshwater from sea level to a 
given depth. Abnormally low pressure might occur in 
areas where fluids have been drained, such as a depleted 
hydrocarbon reservoir. Abnormally high pressure might 
occur in areas where burial of water-filled sediments by 
an impermeable sediment such as clay was so rapid that 
fluids could not escape, and the pore pressure increased 
with deeper burial. 


2.10 In Situ Combustion — A method of thermal 
recovery in which fire is generated inside the reservoir 
by injecting a gas containing oxygen, such as air. A 
special heater in the well ignites the oil in the reservoir 
and starts a fire 


2.11 Injection Well — A well in which fluids are injected 
rather than produced, the primary objective typically 
being to maintain reservoir pressure. Two main types 
of injection are common: Gas, and water. Separated gas 
from production wells or possibly imported gas may be 
re-injected into the upper gas section of the reservoir. 
Water-injection wells are common offshore, where 
filtered and treated seawater is injected into a lower 
water-bearing section of the reservoir. 


2.12 Mercury — Mercury is released into the air from 
the combustion of coal. This mercury accumulates and 
concentrates in the food chain, where it is ingested by 
people (often through eating fish). Mercury is a toxic 
chemical that can affect the nervous system, immune 
system, and reproductive system, and is especially 
damaging to developing foetuses. 


2.13 Overburden — Rock overlying an area or point 
of interest in the sub- surface. UCG is expected to 
be practiced on coal seams that are surrounded by 
impermeable and mechanically strong rock layers/ 
overburden. 


2.14 Oxidant — An oxidizing agent (also oxidant, 
oxidizer or oxidiser) is the element or compound in 
an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction that accepts an 
electron from another species. Because the oxidizing 
agent is gaining electrons (and is thus often called an 
electron acceptor), it is said to have been reduced. 


2.15 Permeability — The ability, or measurement of a 
rock's ability, to transmit fluids, typically measured in 
Darcie’s or millidarcies. 


2.16 Phenol — Phenol, also known as carbolic acid and 
phenic acid, is an organic compound with the chemical 
formula C,H,OH. It is a white crystalline solid at 
room temperature. The molecule consists of a phenyl 
group (-C,H.) bonded to a hydroxyl group (-OH). It is 
mildly acidic but requires careful handling due to its 
propensity to cause burns. 


2.17 Porosity — Porosity can be generated by the 
development of fractures, in which case it is called 
fracture porosity. Effective porosity is the interconnected 
pore volume in a rock that contributes to fluid flow in 
a reservoir. It excludes isolated pores. Total porosity 
is the total void space in the rock whether or not it 
contributes to fluid flow. Thus, effective porosity is 
typically less than total porosity. 


2.18 Producing Well — A well producing fluids (gas, 
oil or water). 


2.19 Proximate Analysis of Coal — The parameters 
of proximate analysis are moisture, volatile matter, 
ash, and fixed carbon. There are ASTM standards for 
analyses of coal that ought to be used. 


2.20 Subsidence — Subsedence occurs when the 
ground sinks or collapses over an area where mining 
has occurred. Subsidence is inevitable with UCG 
because the supporting coal layer is being burned and 
removed as gases, leaving only residual ash and a 
void. However, most UCG projects propose to gasify 
coal seams that are deep enough to be inaccessible 
to conventional mining, and therefore the subsidence 
at the surface may be minimal and spread out. This 
deep subsidence may be subtle or invisible on the 
surface but could change patterns of groundwater 
flow. 


2.21 SYNGAS — Syngas (synthesis gas) is the name 
given to a gas mixture that contains varying amounts of 
carbon monoxide and hydrogen. 


2.22 Ultimate Analysis of Coal — Elemental or 
ultimate analysis encompasses the quantitative 
determination of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, 


sulfur and oxygen within the coal. There are ASTM 
standards for analyses of coal that ought to be used. 


2.23 Underground Coal Gasification — Underground 
Coal Gasification (UCG) is an industrial process, 
which converts coal into product gas. UCG is an in- 
situ gasification process carried out in non-mined coal 
seams using injection of oxidants and bringing the 
product gas to surface through production wells drilled 
from the surface. 


Organization(s) 


Oil and Natural Gas 


IS 17101 : 2019 


ANNEXA 
( Foreword ) 
Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR SINGHAL (Chairman) 


Suri O. N. Gyani (Alternate I) 
Suri A. K. Paswan (Alternate 11) 
Ms VISHAKHA SINGH (Alternate II) 
SHRI KHALEQUZ ZAMAN (Alternate IV) 
SHRI SHAKEEL AHMED (Alternate V) 
Suri S. MARANDI (Alternate VI) 


Atlas Copco Construction & Mining Sales, Pune Suri ANIMESH NANDY 


(ATLAS-COPCO) 
BHEL, Hyderabad 


SHRI D. SATYA MOHAN RAO 


Central Fuel Reasearch Institute, Dhanbad (CFRI) Dr ASHOK KUMAR SINGH 


Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute Dr P. K. CHATERJEE 


(CMERI) 


Dr M. K. KARMAKAR (Alternate) 


Central Mine Planning And Design Institute Limited, Dr AKHILESH SINGH 


Ranchi (CMPDI) 
Directorate General Of Hydrocarbons (DGH) 


Essar Oil Limited 


Gail India Limited 


SHRI SANJEEB GOSWAMI 
Suri T. ASHWINI Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI NILESH KAMAT 
SHRI ARUN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI D. M. Rao 
Dr D. BURAGOHAIN (Alternate) 


Great Eastern Energy Corporation Limited (GEECL) Suri ANoop GUPTA 


Geological Survey Of India (GSI) 
ISM, Dhanbad (IIT-ISM) 

Neyveli Lignite Coporation (NLC) 
IIT, Madras 


In Personal Capacity 


In Personal Capacity 


SHRI PRIYARANJAN PATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 
Suri P. N. Sinna (Alternate) 


Pror M. JAWED 
Suri A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. ALAGAR 
Suri M. KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS JAYANTI 
Pror PREETI AGHALAYAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR 


SHRI RUDRA PRATAP SINGH 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 37 (13131). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


