IS/IS0

4412-2 : 1991

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard
HYDRAULIC FLUID POWER -TEST CODE FOR DETERMINATION OF AIRBORNE NOISE LEVELS
PART 2 MOTORS

UDC 621.225 : 534.835.46

0 BIS 1995

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW PELHI 110002

August 1995

Price Group 8

Hydraulic

Fluid Power Systems Sectional Committee,

PE 15

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS.0 4412-2 : 1991 `Hydraulic fluid power - Test code for determination of airborne noise levels - Part 2: Motors', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Hydraulic Fluid Power Systems Sectional Committee and approval of the Production Engineering Division Council. The text of the IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are however not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) b) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be while in Indian

.

Comma (J has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standard Standards, the current practice is to use point (.) as the decimal marker.

In the adopted standard reference appears to certain International Standardsforwhich Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their respective place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard I5 9876 : 1981 Guide to measurement of airborne acoustical noise and evaluation of its effects on man IS 9466 :1980 Viscosity industrial sification of lubricants clasliquid Degree of , Correspondence Not equivalent

IS0 2204 : 1979 Acoustics - Guide to International Standards on the measurement of airborne acoustical noise and evaluation of its effects on human beings IS0 3448 lubricants tion : 1975 Industrial liquid IS0 viscosity classifica-

Technically equivalent Identical

IS0 5598 : 1985 Fluid power systems and components - Vocabulary IEC Pub 651 : 1979 Sound level meters

IS 10416 : 1992 Fluid power systerns components and Vocabulary (first revision) IS 9779 : 1981 Sound level meters

Technically equivalent

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of following IS0 standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: lS0 3744 : 1.981 Acoustics - Determination of sound power levels of noise sources - Engineering methods for free-field conditions over a reflecting plane Acoustics - Sound power levels of noise sources methods for anechoic and semi-anechoic rooms Precision

IS0 3745 : 1977

IS0 6743-4 : 1982 IEC 50 (801) : 1984

Lubricants, industrial oil*and related products ( class L ) tion - Part 4: Family H ( Hydraulic systems ) International electrotechnical and electro-acoustics vocabulary -

Classifica-

Chapter 801 : Acoustics

IS/IS0 4412-2 : 1991

Indian Standard
HYDRAULIC FLUID POWER - l-EST CODE FOR DETERMtNATlON OF AIRBORNE NOISE LEVELS
PART 2 MOTORS

1

scope

2

Normative

references

This part of IS0 4412 establishes a test code describing procedures, based on IS0 2204, for the determination of the sound power levels of a hydraulic fluid power motor, under controlled conditions of installation and operation, suitable for providing a baSk *>r comparing the noise levels.of motors in terms of: A-weighted sound power level;

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of IS0 4412. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of IS0 4412 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 3448:1975, Industrial
cosity classification. liquid lubricants IS0 vis-

octave band sound power levels.

From these sound power levels, if required, reference sound pressure levels may be calculated for reporting purposes in accordance with annex A. For general purposes, the frequency range of interest includes the octave bands with centre frequencies between 125 Hz and 8000 Hz.11 Due to the inherent difficulties in the measurement of low-speed motor performance, this part of IS0 4412 is limited to motors operating at speeds exceeding 50 r/min. Guidelines for the application are given in annex C. of this part of IS0 4412

IS0 3744:1981, Acoustics - Determination of sound power levels of noise sources - Engineering methods for free-field conditions over a reflecting plane. IS0 3745:1977, Acoustics - Determination power levels of noise sources - Precision for anechoic and semi-anechoic rooms. IS0 5598:1985, Fluid power Vocabulary.
systems of sound methods

and components

-

IS0 6743-4:1982, Lubricants, industrial oils and related products (class L) - Classification - Part 4: Family H (Hydraulic systems). IEC 50(801):1984, international Electrotechnical Vocabulary - Chapter 801: Acoustics and electroacoustics.

This part of IS0 4412 is applicable to all types of hydraulic fluid power motors operating under steady-state conditions, irrespedtive of size, except for any limitations imposed by the size of the test environment (see clause 5).

IEC 651:1979, Sound level meters

1) 1 Hz -

1 g_-' 1

Is/is0

4412-2:

1991

3

Definitions

NOTE 4

The weighting

network

or the width of the frebe indicated. The refer-

For the purposes of this part of IS0 4412, the definitions given in IS0 5598, IEC 50 and the following definitions apply. It is accepted that the latter definitions may differ from those in other specific International Standards. 3.1 free sund field: Sound field in a homogeneous, isotropic medium Free of boundaries.
In practice, it is a field in which the effects of NOTE 1 the boundaries are negligible over the frequency range of interest.

quency band used should always ence sound power is 1 pW'.

3.6 volume of source under test: Volume velop'e of the whole motor under test.

of the en-

4

Measurement

uncertainty

Methods of measurement should be used which tend to result in standard deviations which are equal to or less than those specified in table 1. Methods given in IS0 3744 meet this requirement.

free field over a reflecting plane: Field produced by a source in the presence of one reflecting plane on which the source is located.
3.2

Table

1 -

Standard deviation of sound power level determinations
Standard for octave deviation, dB, on:

3.3 reverberant sound field: That portion of the sound field in a test room over which the influence
of sound received directly from the source is negli-

bands centred

gible. 3.4 anechoic room: A test room having boundaries which absorb,essentially all of the incident sound energy over the frequency range of interest, thereby affording free-field conditions over the measurement surface. 3.5 mean-square pressure averaged square basis. sound pressure: in space and time The sound on a mean-

The standard deviations given in table 1 include the effects of allowable variatjons `in the positioning of the measurement points and in the selection of any prescribed measurement surface, but exclude variations in the sound power output of the source from test to test.
The A-weighted sound power level will in most NOTE 5 practical cases be determined with a standard-deviation of approximately 2 dB.

NOTE 2 In practice, this is estimated by space and time averaging over a finite path length or over a number of fixed microphone positions.
3.6 mean sound pressure level: Ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratto of the mean-square sound pressu.re to the square of the reference sound pressure, in decibels (dB).

5

Test

environment

NOTE 3 The weighting network or the width of the frequency band used should always be indicated; for example, A-weighted sound pressure :evel, octave band sound pressure level. The reference sound pressure is 20 lIPa*).
3.7 sound power level: Ten times the logarithm the base 10 of the ratio of a given sound power the reference sound power, in decibels.

shall be conducted in an environment which "free-field over a reflecting plane" or provides conditions which meet the "special reverberant" environmental qualification requirements described in IS0 3744:1981, clause 4 and annex A.
Tests For more precise measurements, conduct

to to

tests

in

accordance

with

IS0 3745.

2) 3)

1 ItPa = 10-s N/m2 1 pw = 10-12 w
2

is/Is0

4412-2:

1991

6

Instrumentation

6.1 The instrumentation used to measure fluid flow, fluid pressure, motor speed and fluid temperature shall be in accordance with the recommendations for "industrial class" accuracy of testing; i.e. class C given in annex B.
The instrumentation used for acoustical measurements shall be in accordance with IEC 651. This instrumentation shall be in accordance with IS0 3744 for both performance and calibration; i.e. type 2 instruments for engineering (grade 2) measurements.

7.4.2 The test fluid and degree in accordance with the motor ommendations.

of filtration shall be manufacturer's rec-

7.4.3 Inlet and discharge lines shall be installed with diameters in accordance with the manufacturers' recommended practice. 7.4.4 The outlet pressure gauge shall be mounted at the same height as the outlet fittings or it shall be calibrated for any height difference. 7.4.5 Pressure fluctuations and standing waves in the inlet and outlet ports shall be minimized by such measures as selected line lengths, long lengths of flexible hose, accumulators, inline silencers and inline pulsation pumps. 7.4.6 A stable load valve shall be used in the outlet line if back pressure is regulated.
Unstable load valves in the lines can generate NOTE 6 and transmit noise through the fluid and piping which can emerge as airborne sound at the motor.

6.2

7 7.1

Installation
Motor

conditions

location

The motor may be located in any position consistent with the source installation and measurement surface (or microphone traverse) requirements specified in IS0 3744 for the test environment being used. 7.2

Motor

mounting
so the*

7.4.7 Any controf valves from the motor, preferably minimize the interaction.

shall be positioned far outside the test room, to

7.2.1 The motor mounting shall be constructed that it will minimize the noise radiated by mounting as a result of motor vibrations.

7.2.2 The mounting bracket shall be constructed of high-damping material or with sound-damping and sound-insulating material applied to the bracket as required. 7.2.3 Vibration isolation techniques, if needed, shall be used even if the motor is usually securely mounted. 7.2.4 Flange mountings that are as small as practical shall be used so as to minimize interference with radiation of sound towards the shaf? end of the motor.

7.4.8 All fluid tines and valves in the test space shall be wrapped with sound-isolating materials, if required (see 10.1). Material having a soundtransmission loss of at least 10 dB at 125 Hz, and a greater loss at higher frequencies, shall be used.

8 8.1

Operating

conditions

Determine the sound power levels of the motor for any desired set of operating conditions (see 11.3.7).

8.2 These test conditions shall throughout the test within the limits
Table 2 -

be maintained given in table 2.

Allowable variations of mean indicated values of controlled parameters
Allowable +2 variation %

7.3

Motor-driven

load

Test parameter Pressure Speed Temperature Torque

The load system shall be located outside the test space and the load shall be driven through flexible couplings and an intermediate shaft, or the load system shall be isolated in an acoustic enclosure.

+ 2 % f2 *2 "C %

7.4

Hydraulic

circuit 8.3
tested in the shall be motor The "as-delivered" condition with any ancillary equipment operating normally during the test, so as to include their noise contributions to the airborne noise level of the motor.

7.4.1 The circuit shal; include all oil filters, oil coolers, reservoirs and restrictor valves as required to meet the motor hydraulic operating conditions (see clause 8). 3

IS/SO

4412-2:

1991

9

Location

and number points

of sound

sysrem

measurement

condition, Measure

and to stabilize all variables, including fluid to within the limits specified in table 7 the following for each test:

The location and number of measurement points shall be as required by, IS0 3744 for the method of measurement selected for the motor noise test.

a) motor speed; b) output torque;

10
10.1

Test

procedure
noise measurements noise noise itself. of interest test which

cl fluid temperature
fluid pressure point provided

Background

and pressure at motor inlet and at discharge fittings or at the test by the motor manufacturer; at each measurerange of interest; level at each

10.1.1 Measure the background that is present during the motor does not emanate from the motor

d) band
ment

sound pressure levels point over the frequency sound pqint. pressure

Over the frequency range of interest, the band sound pressure levels of this background noise shall be at least 6 dB below the motor band sound pressure levels at each measurement point. 10.1.2 Correct for this background noise, if evidenced by these measurements, by applying the corrections for this purpose given in IS0 3744. 10.1.3 When measurement of band levels of background noise is not practical, the A-weighted background sound level of each measurement point shall be at least 6 dB below the motor A-weighted sound level. Correct ground NOTES 7 Easing the requirements for background can lead to an overestimate of the motor
pressure levels. noise levels band sound

e) A-weighted
measurement

10.2.2

New or rebuilt motors

10.2.2.1 Repeat the initial motor measurement test of the series at the end of a test series or after 1 h of testing. 10.2.2.2 If the A-weighted sound level at any selected measurement point does not duplicate that of the first test within 2 dB (A), the whole test series shall be invalidated.

these noise.

A-weighted

measurements

for back-

11

Information

to be recorded

11.1

Specifications

8 The A-weighted background sound level at each measurement point may be checked by covering the motor with sound-insulating materials capable of a transmission loss of at least 10 dl3 over the frequency range which is "determining" the A-weighted sound level of the motor.

given in 11.2 and 11.3 shall be The information compiled and recorded for all measurements made according to the requirements of this part of IS0 4412.

11.2

General

information motor manufacturer

10.1.4 If the background level is found to be too high, check for further noise control of the motor mounting, driven load or hydraulic circuit, as indicated. IO.15 Ensure that the orientation phone and the period of observation in IS0 3744. of the microare as specified

name and address of the and, if applicable, the user;

b) reference
tor,

number(s)

for identification

of the mo-

cl name

and responsible

address of persons or organization for the acoustic tests on the motor; of acoustic tests;

10.2
10.2.1

Motor

measurements
sequence

d) e)

date and place

Measurement

Prior to commencement of a series of tests, operate the motor for a sufficient time to purge air from the
c

statement that the sound power levels of the motor have been obtained in full conformance with this pat-l of IS0 4412 and IS0 3744 for the determination of sound power levels of noise sources (see also clause 13).

4

Is/IS0

4412-2

: 1991

11.3 11.3.1

Motor

under

test of motor or piston), including an-

11.3.5

Location of motor in test envlronment

Description

4 b)

type of motor (e.g. gear cillary equipment; type of displacement overall necessary); motor maximum linear

11.3.5.1 Include a sketch showing the location of the motor in relation to walls, floor and ceiling of the test room. 11.3.5.2 Show on this sketch the location reflecting or absorbing screens and noise which can influence measurements. of other sources

(e.g. fixed or variable); dimensions (with sketch if

cl motor

11.3.6 displacement; controller and setting.

Instrumentation

d) e)

a) details

type of displacement Acoustic

of equipment used to monitor motor operating conditions (see 11.3.7), including type, serial number and manufacturer;

11.3.2

environment

for tests

b)

a)

internal dimensions of the test room and the type of acoustic field for the measurements (e.g. free field over a reflecting plane); the acoustical treatment of the test room;

details of equipment used for acoustic measurements including name, type, serial number and manufacturer; of frequency analyser; of instrumentation of calibration; and date

cl bandwidth

4 e)

overall system

frequency response and date and method

the date of measurement; ambient air temperature (in degrees Celsius), relative humidity (in percentage) and barometric pressure (in pascals");

method of calibration of microphones and place of calibration. Motor operatlng the following conditions for each test:

11.3.7 Include

4

results of acoustical qualification ments as required by clause 5. Reference

of test environ-

details

4
applicable)

11.3.3

sound source (when type and serial calibration laboratory

full description of fluid, including accordance with IS0 6743-4;

classification

in

a) manufacturer,

number; data, including and date of cali-

b)

fluid viscosity classification in accordance with IS0 3446, in centistokes or in square millimetres per secondsl; shafl speed, in revolutions in newton per minute; metres; (barse'); (bars); inlet, in degrees

b) sound power level name of calibrating bration. 11.3.4 motor Mounting

4

d) output torque,
and installation conditions of

e) inlet pressure,
of motor mounting conditions;

in megapascals in megapascals at motor

a) description

9

outlet

pressure,

b) nature and characteristics of the hydraulic circuit and details of any acoustic insulation treatment: c) nature and description of other machines being used which could have an influence on the measured sound pressure levels of the motor.

9) temperature
Celsius. 11.3.6 Include Acoustical

of fluid

data by IS0 3744

all data as required

4)

1 Pa = 10--s bar

5) 6)

1 cSt = 1 mm*ls 1 bar 105 N/m' 105 Pa 0,l MPa

IS/IS0 4412-2:lQQl

12

Test report
report shall contain the following infor-

paragraphs of IS0 3744 for the determination sound power levels of noise sources.

of

The test mation:

a) the A-weighted sound power level and octave band sound power levels for each frequency band of interest for each set of operating conditions; . b) a statement that the sound power levels have been obtained in full conformance with the pro: cedures of this part of IS0 4412 and specific

13 ldentiflcatlon statement tnis.part of IS0 4412)

(Reference

to

Use the following statement in test reports, catalogues and sales literature when electing to comply with this part of IS0 4412: "Airborne noise levels determined in accordance with IS0 4412-2, Hydrau/ic fluid power - Test code
for determination Motors" of airborne noise levels Part 2:

6

IS/IS0 4412-2.~1991

Annex A (normative) Calculation
A.1 Calculation of motor mean sound pressure levels and sound power levels A.l.l Refer to IS0 3744 for information regarding corrections to be applied and the method of calcolating the mean levels and the motor sound power levels.
A.1.2 Correct the measured band sound pressure levels (and A-weighted sound levels, where appropriate) at each measurement position for the measured background noise (background noise corrections). Use these corrected motor mean band sound weighted sound level.

of sound levels
A.2 Calculation of mean sound pressure level at a reference distance
The mean sound pressure level at a distance r, in metres, from the equivalent point source radiating into a free field over a reflecting plane (hemispherical radiation) from the calculated motor sound power level is evaluated as follows: & = I,, where t; is the mean sound pressure level, Aweighted or in bands, in decibels (reference: 20 pPa); is the A-weighted the motor under ence: 1 pW); or band power test, in decibels level ot (refer- lolog[27cP/s,]

A.1.3

levels levels

to calculate and mean

the AIJW

A.1.4 Calculate the motor sound power level from these mean sound pressure levels, taking into account any correction for unwanted environmental reflections (environmental correction factor).

2nr2

is the area of the hemisphere, metres, of radius r: = 1 m*.

in square

c0 `.

For calculation purposes, choose a reference distance of r = 1 m, in which case the numerical value of 17, is obtained by subtracting 8 dB from the numerlcal value of the calculated sound power level, L,.

7

IS/IS0

4412-2

: 1991

Annex 6 (normative) Errors and classes of measurement
B.l

Classes of measurement

Depending on the accuracy required, the tests may be carried out to one of three classes of measurement, A, B or C. The classes of measurement shall be agreed betwe'en the parties concerned. The use of class A and B is restricted to special cases when there is a need to have the performance more precisely defined. Class A and B tests require more accurate apparatus and methods, which may increase the costs of such tests.

Table B-1 - Permissible systematic errors of measuring instruments as determined during calibration
Class of measurement Input signal Flow Pressure Temperature Units

A

B

C

% % %
"C % %

f0.5 AI 0,5 +0,5 *0,5 +0,5 +0,5

z!z1,5 f 1,5 * 1,5 f f,O I!I t,o f 180

f

23

f 2.5
f ~5 f 2.0 + 2.0 I!I 2,o

8.2

Errors

Speed Torque

Any device or method which by calibration or comparison with International Standards has been demonstrated to be capable of measuring with systematic errors not exceeding the limits in table B.1 may be used.

t
NOTE - The percentage limits given are of the value of the quantity being measured and not of the maximum values of the test or the maximum reading of the instrument.

IS/IS0

4412-2:

1991

Annex C (informative) Guidelines
C.l Introduction

for the application

of this part of IS0 4412
dication, acoustic but not an exact performance. measure, of its overall

This annex describes a series of recommended techniques that are designed to enable reliable measurements of hydraulic motor airborne noise to be taken, using an anechoic chamber, in accordance with this part of IS0 4412.

Pressure

line Bell housing

C.2

General
read in conjunction with

This annex should be IS0 2204 and IS0 3744.

The principle of this pat-t of IS0 4412 is based on measurements taken over a hemispherical surface centred over the motor unit under test. It does, however, present certain operational difficulties. The methods outlined in this annex represent a practical solution to these problems and allow compliance with the requirements of this part of IS0 4412. In a hydraulic installation, the vibrational energy of the motor becomes distributed among other components in the system, such as the connecting pipe-work, the motor mounting, the output shafl and the load. This distribution of energy is a characteristic of the particular installation and is not inherently a measure of motor noise. The motor, however, produces sound energy which can cause the installation as a whole to emit noise. FigureC.l illustrates the mechanism. It is the objective of this annex ta ensure that the measured noise is that radiated by the external surface of the motor and nothing el!e. This comoonent of noise will then be genuinely a characteristic of the motor and as little affected as possible by the particular installation. The total airborne noise of a practical installation includes radiation from all the components of the hydraulic system. These are excited, in the main, by pumpand mater-generated fluid-borne .noise (pressure ripple) present in the circuit and by structural transmission of vibration from the pump and motor to attached components. These mechanisms may well predominate in the generation of total system noise. It is found, however, that low airborne noise radiation from the motor surface tends to be associated with low fluid-borne and structural noise generation. The values. obtained for airborne noise radiation from the surface of a motor may thus be taken as an in9

L

Return Line

--M -

Alrborne noise Fluld-borne noise Structure-borne noise

Figure

C.l

-

Transmission paths of sound energy from motors

C.3

Choice

of measurement

environment

This part of IS0 4412 permits measurement in* a reverberant or an anechoic room. The anechoic room may take the form of a fully free-field environment or a free field over a single reflecting plane, termed a "semi-anechoic chamber" An anechoic or semi-anechoic room is normally preferable for motor testing work because there are fewer measurement uncertainties associated with the strongly periodic noise typically radiated by motors. Anechoic or semi-anechoic environments also allow directivity information to be obtained which,

lS/lSO 4412=2: 1991

though not required by thk+ part 0[ ISO 4412, can provide valuable assistance when setting up a system or cfiagnos[ng motor acoustic output. Although a reverberant room is the Ieasi affected by accidental oil spillage,. the acoustic advantages of room are frequently an anechoic or semi-anechoic more important. Oil spillage in a semi-a nechoic room is less serious tb$o in a fully anechoic room if the floor is used as the reflecting plane. The following discuss[op relates only to the use of anechoic or semi- anechoictest environments.

C,4.2

Number

and position

of microphones

In order to obtain a vaiid estimate of the mean sound pressure, the sound field has to be sampled at several points over the measurement surface. A basic array of 10 points is called for, but this number may be reduced if experience shows that the sound fieid is sufficiently symmetrical for the resultant loss in accuracy not to give errors greater than 1 dB when compared with data obtained using the full array As a guide, use at least as many microphones as :here is difference between the lowest and highest sound pressure levels, in decibels, recorded on the individual microphones. with an Each sampling point should be associated equal area of the measurement surface and should be placed in a sequence that minimizes the effect of interference patterns. ISO 3744 gives relative coOtdltMtf3S and preferred radii for suitabie hemispherical arrays Sources with the dimensions of a motor usually require a normal fluid power measurement radius of 1 m and frequently greater. Avoid microphone positions close to necessaly ancillary equipment such as the motor output shaft and fluid lines, and ensure that, as far as possible, each microphone has a clear "line of sight" to the motor under test. It is possible to use a single microphone, moving it to each sampling point in sequence, but it is usually more economic to invest in one microphone channel per measurement point.

C.4
C.4.I

Measurement Microphones

techniques

High-quality condenser microphones, complying with the requirements of the appropriate international Standards listed In ISO 3744 are required to measure the sound pressure levels in fhe anechoic connecting chamber. The profile of the microphones, leads and support frame should be minimized to reduce interference with the sound f[eld. The sound tevel meter is placed outside the chamber, and is connected to the microphone via a pre-amplifier and extension lead, A typical set-up, with two microphones connected via a common power supply, is shown in figure C.2.

..!'.
/

1-

Mlcrq@rrss

Figure C.2 � Instrumentation for manual data Iogglng

10

IS/IS0

4412-2

: 1991

C.4.3

Calculation

of mean sound pressure
from

The mean sound pressure can be calculated equations 1 and 2 in IS0 3744:1981.

C.4.4

Recording

lktruments

from an eight-microphone array covering the range 100 Hz to 10 kHz. If directivity information is not required, it is possible to multiplex the channels into a time-integrating r.m.s. meter. The maximum scan speed is limited by the lowest frequency of interest. Normally a scan speed of 10 channels per second is satisfactory for frequencies of 100 Hz and above. The scanning device has to operate with very low level switching transients if the background electronic noise is not to influence the sound signal. A typical set-up is shown in figureC.3. This arrangement can be used in conjunction with octave or one-third octave filter sets as well as the weighting networks built into the sound level meter. Comparisons between individually logged data channels and scanned data using the equipment shown in ffgureC.3 show very good agreement above the 100 Hz one-third octave band.

Themicrophones may be directly connected to individual sound level meters, but this is a rather uneconomic use of expensive equipment. Used in conjunction with microphone power supplies, which allow individual microphone gain adjustment, each channel may be fed into a single meter via a manual selector switch. Either technique involvas a considerable amount of manual data logging. For example, 168 data records are required to obtain a one-third octave spectrum

0

dL

Pre-omplltlers

b* 99

r

Slgnal generator

cl

0

Sound meter

level

Fllter set

L- Channel selector

L
Figure

MIcrophone power suppllcs

Mlcrophoncr

C.3 -

Multiple

microphone

scanning

instrumentation

11

IS/IS0

4412-2

: 1991

C.4.5

Calculation

of sound

power be

level from

The sound power level can equation 3 in IS0 3744:1981.

calculated

Assuming a measureme?t radius of 1 m, the correction for free-field conditions (i.e. fully anechoic) is + 11 dB. The correction for a free field over a reflecting plane, as required by this part of IS0 4412, is + 8 dBT It is recommended that, whenever possible, the sound field be calibrated by placing a standard sound source at the position normally occupied by the motor, with motor load shaft and fluid lines in position. Significant variation from the + 8 dB correction may indicate excessive distortion of the sound field by motor ancillaries, inadequate reflecting plane, or some other problem. For measurement priate correction cording to the used. C.4.6 radii greater than 1 m, the approfactors should be calculated acarea of the measurement surface

pletely eliminated but tb effect or the unwanted additional noise becomes insignificant if this background level is more than 10 dB below the measured total noise. If the difference is less than 10 dB but more than 6 dB, corrections can be made to the messured level to take this into account. In the case where the background noise is 6 dB or less below the measured total noise, the requirements of this part of IS0 4412 are not satisfied, although an estimate of the motor noise can still be made. FigureC.4 shows the relationship between the correction and the background noise margin.

Insuttlclent backwound marpln

CorrectIons nqulred by this part of 1st)4412

No correctlons requlrd by this part ot IS0 4412

-6

Frequency

analysis

-5

The response of the human ear is very dependent on the frequency as well as the amplitude of sound. Microphones complying with the requirements of IEC 561 have a linear response to sound pressure from 10 Hz to 20 kliz. In order to model the physiological effect of sound, a frequency-weighting filter is built into sound level meters. This weighting is termed the "A scale" and overall sound levels are measured in terms of decibels (A). This single figure rating is the common basis for rating sound levels. If more information is required about the spectral content of the sound, octave or on&third octave filters are used to give low resolution frequency analysis. For diagnostic and development work, a higher resolution frequency analysis may be required to help identify particular noise sources or pathways. The two basic forms of narrow-band frequency analysers are analog filters or digital Fourier analysers. The analog filters are rapidly becoming obsolete with the availability of hard-wired dedicated digital Fourier analysers, made possible by advances in microelectronics. An alternative to the dedicated digital analyser is a minicomputer which, although slower in operation, retains the high degree of flexibility of its associated software. A detailed the scope C.4.7 description of this equipment of this part of IS0 4412. noise is outside

?I -4 Ei z-3 d -2

-1

0
0

I
2

I
4 6

I
I3 10 Bockpround nofse margln. dB

I
12

1
l4 16

Figure

C.4 -

Corrections

for background

noise

Background

The airborne noise from the motor under test has to be the dominant component of the noise reaching the microphones. Other noise sources, from both inside and outside the chamber, cannot be com12

The background noise level may be determined by running the motor under test conditions and measuring the noise level. An acoustic cover is then placed over the motor and the noise measurements repeated. The performance of the cover has to be sufficient to attenuate substantially the noise emitted by the motor itself, so that the measured noise with the cover in place is dominated by background noise sources. The cover should mask only the motor itself, and not cover the cladding over the input shaft or fluid lines, as these might be contributing to the unwanted background noise. It is normally difficult to devise a motor cover that shrouds the entire motor when mounted according to this part of IS0 4412 without also partially covering the motor mount. This is acceptable only if the mount is known to produce a negligible contribution to overall sound level (see C.5.2). Adequate backgrounds are particularly achieve In the lower frequency ranges difficult to due to the

IS/IS0

4412-2:

1991

reduced performance of acoustic cladding. Difficulty may also be experienced when testing a small or quiet motor when the emitted noise is low. Cladding techniques that can help to overcome these problems are described in C.5.5.

C.5
C.5.1

Installation
Test layout

and test layout

the load shaft, the fluid lines and the load, etc. are all structurally isolated from the floor to prevent vibrations exciting the whole building. The motor and shaft support bearing are therefore mounted on massive concrete blocks and flexible mountings placed between the concrete blocks and the chamber floor. The mass of the concrete blocks allows a considerable degree of isolation to be incorporated while preventing excessive movement of the motor mounting or shaft bearing due to torque reaction. A reflecting plane of sealed concrete slabs is built up above the floor to a level just below the motor. This sealing may be achieved by applying a suitable oil-proofing compound to the concrete. It has been found that, provided the slabs are carefully aligned and levelled, no special treatment of the joints between adjacent slabs is required.

The following arrangement has been used successfully for motor noise measurements in accordance with this part of IS0 4412. FigureC.5 shows the basic arrangement in which the motor is placed at the centre of the reflecting plane. FigureC.6 shows details of the mounting and drive arrangements. It is important that the motor,

Figure C.5 -

Motor noise test configuration

with hemispherical

measuring

array

13

ISilSO

4412-2:

1991

Anechalc

chamber

llnlng

--,

,

r
Retlectlna olane --, \

Hooke Joint

oke

Ftcxlble

mount

Isolated

concrete

blocks

L-

lntermedlate

suppo~

bearing

Figure

C.6 -

Mounting

and driveline

arrangement

for hemispherical

measurement

C.5.2

Motor

mounting

This part of IS0 4412 requires that the motor mounting be so constructed that it creates minimum disturbance to the sound field at the shaft end of the motor. This can be achieved if the mounting flange does not extend beyond the motor flange. The test method also requires the mount to be acoustically shielded to prevent it emitting a significant level of sound. These two requirements can. cause problems, as any acoustic cladding will add to the bulk of the mount. A solution may be to use a close fitting, but free-standing, glass fibre moulding over the mount. The mount would have to be profiled to facilitate sealing with this cover. An alternative is available, however. The test method specifically allows the use of flexible isolators to be used at the interface between the motor and its mount although it recognizes that this does not represent current commercial practice. This arrangement offers several advantages. First, the transmission of structure-borne noise into the mount is attenuated. This reduces the airborne noise radiated by the mount and thereby eliminates the need for acoustic cladding. Secondly, the mount can be constructed to allow the shaft face of the motor to contribute to the overall measured sound

level. Most forms of commercial mount only partially cover this face, so the sound radiation characteristics of this area should logically be included in the measurement, although this part of IS0 4412 is not specific in this respect. Thirdly, the structural impedance mismatch .between the motor and its mount attenuates interactive dynamic responses. This ensures the motor casing noise is unaffected by the mount's characteristics, resulting in a higher degree of system independence. The mounting devised is shown in figureC.7, and consists of two vertical hollow steel columns so spaced as to coincide with the motor mounting bolts. The motor is carried on isolation bushes at the top of each pillar. Versions have been designed for the two-bolt and four-bolt flange mounting configurations which are the subject of IS0 3019-2. The vertical columns create minimum disturbance to the sound field. It should be borne in mind that high-torque motors may require mountings that are more substantial. The use of adapter flanges to enable motors of different sizes to be mounted on the same mount is not recommended. Development work has shown that these can significantly affect the measured sound level.

14

IS/IS0

4412-2:

1991

l-

loolotlng tlexlble mount posItIoned ot motor/mount Intcrfoce

Vertlcol columns to mlnlmlzc Interference wlth sound field

`.

.

Attached to mosrrlve concrete support

Approximate of reflecting

posltlon plane

Flgure

C.7 -

"Minimized"

motor mount (two-bolt

flange mounting

configuration)

C.5.3

Drive

shaft

Drive is carried to the load via a cardan shaft, having a Hooke joint at the motor end and a polymeric ring ("doughnut") coupling at the other end. The polymeric coupling provides structural isolation between the load and the drive shaft, while the Hooke joint, being small in diameter, minimizes interference with the sound field. A centring bush is required at the polymeric coupling end to prevent shaft whirl at high speed. Ideally, a single shaft should be used between the load and motor. If, however, chamber dimensions and required running speed prevent this, an intermediate bearing is required. This bearing should be placed outside the measurement hemisphere. A suitable layout uses a self-aligning rolling contact bearing mounted on a concrete block just inside the anechoic chamber, within the "wedge depth". A second shaft passes through this bearing and connects with the load via a Hooke joint outside the chamber wall. Figure C.6 shows the arrangement.

The side and end loadings imposed by this form of drive can be very low if the shafts are well balanced. Careful shaft alignment is not required. High-torque substantial C.5.4 motors may require the use of a more type of drive shaft system. lines

Hydraulic

Fluid inlet, outlet and, when applicable, leakage return lines need to be routed to the motor. It is possible for these lines to approach the motor from under the reflecting plane, but this causes problems of adaptability when testing different configurations of motors. It is operationally much simpler to run the lines above the reflecting plane. This allows direct access and eliminates the need for tight bends close to the motor. The noise radiation from these lines has to be prevented from reaching the microphones by acoustic cladding. It is essential to use hose for these fluid lines as it has been found that motor structural vibrations cause rigid lines to emit very high airborne noise levels, thus making them more difficult to clad effectively. Avoid curved hose runs 15

IS/IS0

4412-2:

1991

as these are also awkward to cover. An efficient solution is to use short stub hoses incorporating 90" swept bends and fittings as shown in figureC.6. This arrangement can be simply covered with straight acoustic ducts. The rigid fittings between the motor and the hose should be minimized. The outlet fitting incorporates a pressure tapping which should be connected to a pressure sensor mounted at the same height as the tapping. Care should be taken to ensure that there are no air leaks between the fitting and sensor. Also the line should be purged of air to prevent air locks that create false readings of the relatively low pressures. C.5.5 Acoustic cladding

sound. The absorbent material may be used to support the barrier layer on the source, but the amount of material used should be minimized to prevent structural transmission. Fluid lines should be enclosed in a massive, welldamped duct, such as a rigid PVC water pipe. Rings of polyurethane foam can be placed at 1 m intervals and at bends to support the fluid line away from the duct wall and to prevent the build-up of reverberant sound. If the fluid lines are hose, they can be strapped to lengths of light-gauge steel angle section to prevent sagging. The ends of the duct should be sealtd with rings of foam. The outside dimensions of the duct should be kept as small as possible to minimize interference with the sound field around the motor. Normally, an air gap of 20 mm to 25 mm surrounded by a duct of approximately 6 mm wall thickness will sufficiently reduce sound. Little deterioration in acoustic performance has been found if the PVC ,duct is split lengthways to facilitate assembly, providing the gaps are closed with heavy tape. FigureC.6 illustrates the cladding technique.

All the motor ancillaries, such as output shaft and fluid lines, have to be covered in acoustic cladding to prevent their noise radiation being included in the motor's measured noise output. The function of the cladding is to act as a sound transmission impedance mismatch. This may be achieved most effectively by use of a dense impervious layer separated from the radiating surface by an air gap. Sound-absorbent material is also required in this air gap to prevent the build-up of high levels of reflected

Flcxfble mount Chamber Llnlng

Motor

Acoustlc claddlng: rl.I;;;; Layer ,\

Absorbent mater101 usedassupport

Safety

hoop

-I
layout showing

Shntt and benrlng claddlng

Figure

C.8 -

Diagrammatic

view of the hemispherical

fluid line cladding

16

wso

4412.2 : 1991

The PVC duct may, if r,equired, be solidly mounted to the reflecting plane or chamber wall since it provides an effective isolated support for the fluid line inside. The load shaft should be enclosed in an acoustically lined duct. PVC water pipe is again a suitable material, split lengthways for ease of assembly and sealed with heavy tape. In order to minimize the external diameter of the duct, it is recommended that it be lined along the length of the cardan shaft only, and not over the couplings at either end. It may prove necessary to cover the Hooke joint at the motor end, in which case a light unlined cover of glass reinforced plastic or similar material is recommended, shaped to give minimum masking at the shaft face of the motor. The shaft cover should be carefully aligned and rigidly mounted to the reflecting plane to ensure that it cannot foul the rotating shaft. The intermediate bearing, if used, may be covered with a free-standing acoustically lined box, constructed of glass reinforced plastic or 19 mm plywood. In `the installation illustrated, this box is mounted and sealed between the chamber wall and the reflecting plane (figureC.6) and forms the support for one end of the shafl cover. The bearing and shaft covers thus form an acoustic duct to attenuate airborne noise passing through from the load unit. C.5.6

Special care should be taken to eliminate resonant interactions or beating between the pump and motor fluid-borne noise in both the inlet and outlet lines. Accumulators or silencing devices `may be necessary in these lines which should also incorporate at least a 1 m length of flexible hose close to each motor port. Beating between the pump and motor fluid-borne noise should be checked for by repeating one microphone position sound pressure level three times and looking for repeatability of the result. C.5.7

Running-in

of test motors

The noise characteristics of some motors have been found to change markedly in the first few hours of running. Therefore new motors should be run-in before testing. C.5.8

Safety precautions

The presence of a long drive shaft in the anechoic chamber necessitates certain precautions. The acoustic cladding of the shaft should cover all rotating parts and be of sufficient strength to act as a safety guard. It is also recommended that a strong steel hoop be placed over the shaft cladding near the motor end and firmly attached to the chamber floor to guard against coupling or motor-mounting failure. C.6

Results Test ranges

Hydraulic

test circuit C.6.1

An open- or closed-loop circuit should be employed, the outlet pressure being regulated and in line with the manufacturer's recommendations. An example of a suitable test circuit is shown in figureC.9. An appropriate load should be applied to the motor using an absorbtion dynamometer. If a hydraulic pump is used as the load, care should be taken to ensure that a torsional resonance is not created by interaction between the pump's and the motor's torque ripple. Contamination protection and temperature control are also required. Oil temperature and inlet pressure should be measured at the motor inlet fitting with a calibrated sensor. The outlet pressure should be measured at the motor outlet fitting. The sensor should be mounted in accordance with 7.4.4. A shut-off valve is not recommended as a snubber because a non-return action can occur at small openings causing the gauge to indicate peak rather than mean line pressure.

It is often useful to obtain a standard set of data for each motor which allows assessment of the noise output throughout the operating range, as well as taking measurements at specific operating conditions relating to a particular application. This standard set of data aids both with comparison between motors and in studying the effect of modifications or wear. The validity of the measurements in terms of spatial averaging and background levels is also checked. It has been found convenient to carry out measurements as follows.

4 A-weighted

sound power, in decibels (A), versus motor shaft rotational speed for small increments over the motor's permissible speed range at the maximum continuous rated pressure. measurements, for at least five commonly the operating range. in decibels (A), taken used speeds covering

b) Directivity

17

IS/IS0

4412-2

: 1991

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 fl

Controlled tlow source lntcgrntlng flaw meter Temperature transducer Pressure guugc wlth snubber Motor under test Pressure control valve IIf requlred) Temperature controller Torque meter ond absorption dynamometer

Figure

C.9 -

Example

of test circuit

c)

The motor is then covered with an acoustic enclosure and test a) repeated to establish background levels. octave measurements are still covered, at the speeds

C.6.2

Interpretation

of check data

d) One-third octave or taken, with the motor used in b). e) One-third repeated r)

octave or octave measurements with the motor exposed.

are

Finally, the effect of pressure may be obtained by measuring A-weighted levels, in decibels (A), for at least five pressures evenly spaced throughout the rated operating range. For example: 25 MPa, 16 MPa, 10 MPa, 6,3 MPa and 4 MPa (250 bar, 160 bar, 100 bar, 63 bar am? 40 bar) at each standard rotational speed giver in b).

If a strong resonance exists in the motor mounting or shaft, it can show up as a sharp peak in the run speed versus A-weighted levels, in decibels (A). The background noise checks of overall A-weighted levels, in decibels (A), and one-third octave plots will show up weaknesses in the structural isolation or acoustic cladding of the ancillaries in the chamber. The directivity measurements will indicate whether a sufficient number of microphone measurement points is being used. This test sequence does not give the full checks called for in this part of IS0 4412. These represent an unrealistic work load for every set of measurements. After the initial commissioninb of the facility, and once a degree of confidence in the measurements has been built up, periodic checks have been found to be adequate. C.6.3 Oil temperature

This test sequence minimizes the effort required in changing cladding and instrumentation, whilst highlighting measurement problems at an early stage.

.

Only the temperature tolerance (+ 2 "C) is specified in this part of IS0 4412. Obviously, it is up to the individual manufacturer or user to specify the test temperature. The normal test temperature for many motors is 50 "C. 18

IS/IS0

4412-2:

1991

C.6.4

Presentation

of results
noise levels to be sound pressure or picowatts respectliterature specifies

This part of IS0 4412 permits presenfed in the form of either sound power, in decibels or in ively. In practice, most sales

noise levels in terms of sound pressure measured at 1 m radius in a free field over a single reflecting plane, which gives a value numerically 8 dB less than the sound power value. The argument is that the sound pressure value relates more directly to the sound field encountered in practice than the more abstract concept of sound power.

IS/IS0 4412-2:1991

Annex D (informative) Bibliography
[I J IS0 2204:1979, Acoustics - Guide to International Standards noise and evaluation of its effects on human beings. [2] IS0 3019-2:1966, Hydraulic fluid power identification code for mounting flanges - Metric series. on the measurement of airborne acoustical

- Positive displacement pumps and motors - Dimensions and and shaft ends - Part 2: Two- and four-hole flanges and shaft ends

20

Uureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from ~0~ : No. PE 15 (0082 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 3310131,331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3310131 331 13 75 37 84 99,37 85 61 378626,378662 603843 1 602025 235 02 16,235 04 42 1 235 15 19,235 23 15 632 92 95,632 78 58 1 632 78 91,632 78 92

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUlTA

700054 160022

Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Simco Prinling Press, Delhi

