IS 12827

: 1989

IS0 7396 : 1987

Indian Standard
NON-FLAMMABLE MEDICAL m+tP GAS PIPELINE SYSTEMS 3T;iR

UDC

621.644-2'02-213-34

: 615.458

@ BIS 1990

.

BUREAUOF
MANAK BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NfiW bFLHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR ' Price Group 13 MARG

May

1990

IS 12827 : 1989
IS0 71#)6 : 1997

hdian
NON-FLAMMABLE
NATIONAL FOREWORD

Standard
GAS PIPELINE SYSTEMS

MEDICAL

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IS0 7396 : 1987 `Non-flammable medical gas pipeline systems', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 3, was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 16 June 1989 on the recommendation of the Anaesthetic Resuscitation and Allied Equipments Sectional Committee ( MHD 13 ) and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard. the following respective places the following:
international Standard

International
Indian

Standards
Standard

are referred

to.

Read in their

Degree of Correspondence

IS0 65 : 1981 Carbon steel tubes suitable for screwing in accordante with IS0 7/l

IS 1239 (Part 1 ) : 1979 Mild steel tubes, tubulars and other wrought steel fittings: Part 1 Mild steel tubes ( fourth revision ) SP 30 : 1984 electrical oode National

Technically equivalent

IEC

364 : Electrical of buildings

Installations

Technically equivalent Technically equivalent

Medical electrical IEC 601-l equipment - Part 1 : General requirements

IS 8607 ( Part 1 ) : 1977 General and safety requirements for electrical equipment used in medical practice: Part 1 General

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following IS0 standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: IS0 32 IS0 274 IS0 407 Gas cylinders for medical use Marking for identification of content Dimensions

Copper tubes of circular section Small medical gas cylinders -

Yoke type valve connections Selection and dimensions use with

IS0 6145 Cylinder valve outlets ( at present at the draft stage )

for gases and gas mixtures -

IS0 5359 Low-pressure flexible connecting assemblies medical gas systems ( at present at the draft stage )

( hose assemblies ) for

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

0

Introduction

In medical gas pipeline systems it is vital that high safety standards are maintained and that there is no risk of failure of supply or plant without adequate warning. To ensure this, particular consideration has been given to the following: a) design of equipment to ensure non-interchangeability

Medical gases, particularly oxygen, require knowledge of their characteristics and hazards, and the precautions to take regarding their care, handling, distribution and control. Reference should be made to national codes and regulations appropriate authority for such information. The scope of this International provision for gas-specific Standard and/or an

does not include the for cryogenic storage connecSuch gas-

connectors

between b) c) d) e) f)

services; and cleanliness of materials:

vessels and transport tors or portable

vehicles,

nor for the inlet/outlet or gas cylinders.

use of correct materials, correct installation;

liquid, cryogenic

specific connectors, however, are essential to ensure that only the correct gas can be used for the gas supply to a patient. The user of this International Standard should ensure that the supplier of the gas is using such gas-specific
NOTE Terminal

provision of reserve supplies of gas, and reserve plant; warning systems; to ensure that pipelines are

connectors.
screwed

units have a range of non-interchangeable

testing and commissioning ;

not cross-connected g) identification

and quick-connect connectors which are specified in IS0 5359. These are intended for use, for example, as inlet connectors to a continuous flow anaesthetic machine and other medical devices (see also IS0 407 and IS0 5145).

of pipelines.
medical gas system should be installed by

NOTE Components of the non-flammable (hereinafter referred to as the "pipeline system")

1
1 .l

Scope

and field

of application
Standard specifies minimum gas requirepipeline

a manufacturer(s) or under the supervision of a manufacturer(s) or person(s) familiar with the correct practices for construction, installation and use.

This International and testing of

ments tation there are national standards, Standard, for example regulations or

for the installation,

construction,

function, medical

documen-

non-flammable

In many countries, legal requirements in this International electrical recognized quirements

systems to ensure patient safety by delivery of the correct gas from the pipeline system. It includes requirements for the source of supply, distribution system, terminal units, warning systems, ponents and for non-interchangeability between key comand service outlets.

dealing with one or more matters referred to building, fire and These often vary in their details and it is over the reStandard.

regulations.

that these may have to take precedence of this International

1.2 It is impossible maintenance in system continues International system schedules is required to the to overstress the importance of ensuring that a medical gas pipeline to perform to the requirements of this For this reason, drawings the installer of

It applies only to pipeline systems for the following medical gases

non-

flammable a) b) c) d) e) f) g)

:

oxygen; nitrous oxide: medical air; nitrogen; helium 11; carbon dioxide; specified mixtures of the gases listed in a) to f);

Standard. owner

a

to provide

and maintenance (see 11.5) or user to ensure

or user of the system of the owner

and it is the responsibility

that proper maintenance is carried out under an effective method of control. Annex D gives recommendations for the gives organization of a maintenance for emergency operation. Annex F recommendations procedures.

When the installer retains ownership of parts of the gas supply system, he is responsible for their maintenance.

h)

medical vacuum

1)

Special consideration

should be given to matenal and installation for helium services.

3

IS 12827

: 1989

IS0 7398

: 1987

1.3 It applies to pipeline systems used at pressures required for patient care, including therapeutic, diagnostic and prophylactic applications and surgical tool applications. Pipeline systems used for non-clinical purposes are excluded. A medical air pipeline, supplied from in air compressor system only; may be extended to applications not directly related to patient care and certain precautions are given in annex G, for applications such as a) b) c) d) e) f) the operation of ceiling columns in theatres; anaesthetic waste gas systems; sterilizer departments; breathing air for surgical personnel; pneumatic control of air conditioning; testing of medical equipment.

3.1

(non-flammable medical gas) pipeline system: `I he complete system which comprises a central supply system with control equipment, a pipeline distribution system and terminal units at the points where non-flammable medical gases may be delivered (see figure 1). 3.2 central supply system: A source of medical gas comprising one or more of the following items of plant: a) a system of gas cylinders (see figures 5 and 12);

b) cryogenic or non-cryogenic liquid supply (see figures 7, 8 and 121;
Cl

air compressors (see figures 9 and 12); proportioning equipment (see figures 11 and 121; medical oxygen concentrators; vacuum pumps (see figure 10);

d) e) f)

Extensions are not permitted for applications such as a) b)
Cl

general workshop use; motor repair workshops; spray painting ; tyre inflation. 3.3 primary supply: That portion of the central supply system which supplies the pipeline distribution system.

d)

3.4

e) those which may impose unforeseen demands, which could prejudice the availability and/or quality of medical air for normal patient care purposes; f) reservoirs for pressurization of hydraulic fluids.

secondary supply: That portion of the central supply system which automatically supplies the pipeline distribution system when the primary supply becomes exhausted or fails and then becomes the primary supply.

2

References

3.5 reserve supply: That portion of the central supply system, activated manually or automatically, which supplies the pipeline distribution system in the event of failure of the primary and secondary supplies.

IS0 32, Gas cylinders for medical use - Marking for identification of content. 150 65, Carbon steel tubes suitable for screwing in accordance with IS0 7/ 1. IS0 274, Copper tubes of circular section IS0 407, Small medical gas cylinders nections. Dimensions.

3.6 cryogenic liquid system: Liquid oxygen or liquid nitrogen central supply system which consists of a primary supply with either a secondary supply, a reserve supply or both (see figures 7, 8 and 12).
NOTE Liquefied nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide are not cryogenic.

Yoke-type valve con-

3.7 non-cryogenic liquid system: Supply system of nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide with reserve supply.

IS0 5146 Cylinder valve outlets for gases and gas mixtures Selection end dimensioning. 1). IS0 5959, Low-pressure flexible connecting assemblies (hose assemblies) for use with medical gas systems. 1) IEC Publication 354, Electrical installations of buildings. IEC Publication 501-1, Medical electrical equipment General requirements. Part 1:

3.8 source of supply: Central supply system with associated control equipment and that portion of the pipeline up to and including the main pipeline shut-off valve.

3.9 air compressor system: System which comprises two or more air compressors designed to provide clean, dry, oil-free air to a pipeline distribution system at a constant pressure through its contrcl equipment (see figures 9 and 12) which should include a reserve supply. 3.10 vacuum system: A system which comprises two o more vacuum pumps designed to provide a vacuum (set figure 10).

3

Definitions

For the purposes of this International Standard, the following definitions apply.

1)

At present at the stage of draft.

IS 12827 IS0 7396

: 1989 : 1987

3.11 proportioning
12).

equipment:

Central

supply system

in

3.23

gas-specific

connectors:

Connectfjrs

which

are

which gases can be mixed in specified ratios (see figures 11 and

either NIST (non-interchangeable screw-threaded) or DISS (diameter-indexed safety system), or no;-t-interchangeable quick connectors.

3.12 nitrogen

medical adsorber air.

oxygen unit(s) clean,

concentrator and dry, reservoir oil-free

(for

example

a 3.24 pressure-safety valve: A valve to limit the pipeline pressure downstream of line pressure regulators.

pressure swing adsorber) oxygen-enriched, atmospheric

: System comprising compressor(s),
by means of which from air is generated

3.25
3.13 control equipment: Those items necessary to maintain the gas supply at a set pressure within the pipeline distribution system, such as pressure-control regulators, relief valves, alarm initiators, and manual and automatic valves. 3.26

pressure-relief valve: A valve to limit downstream of any operating pressure regulator.

pressure

operating

cllarm:

Visual, or visual and auditory,

alarm

to indicate the necessity for technical staff to adjust the supply or to correct a malfunction.

3.14 pipeline distribution system: That part of a pipeline system linking the source of supply to the terminal units, including any necessary branch isolation valves and any additional line pressure regulators required (see figures 1 and 12).

3.27

emergency

alarm: limits

Visual

and auditory

alarm to in-

dicate to technical normal operating

and medical staff that the supply is outside

.

3.15

terminal medical

unit:

An outlet assembly (Inlet for vacuum) system at which the (see figure 4).

in

a piped

gas distribution

user

makes connections

and disconnections

3.26 nominal operating which pipeline distribution .

pressure: The normal pressure at systems are designed to operate.

3.16 terminal unit check valve: A valve which remains closed until opened by insertion of an appropriate probe and which then permits flow in both directions.

3.29 system design flow capacity: Flow Capacity calculated from the maximum flow requirements of Ihe health care facility corrected by operational diversity factor,

3.17 terminal unit maintenance valve: A valve within the terminal unit assembly which permits maintenance of the term minal unit without
terminal units.

4

Matm?ds
Special consideration for helium services. should be given to materials and

shutting

down

the

pipeline

system

to other

NOTE installauon

3.18

terminal

unit base block: attached to a connecting

That part o? a terminal to the pipe!ine assembly.

unit

which system,

is permanently or attached

distribution

4.1

Compatibility

with

oxygen

4.1.1 3.19 gas-specific connection point (socket assembly): That part of a terminal unit which is the receptor for a noninterchangeable gas-specific connecting assembly and which is attached to the base block device. by the appropriate noninterchangeable gas-specific

Except

for

vacuum

systems,

the

components

of a

pipeline system for medical gases shall be compatible with oxygen under all conditions and shall be clean and free from oil. grease and particulate
NOTE The

matter.
propenles of all components against

anti-corrosion

oxygen, moisture and Compatibility involves Materials materials

surrounding materials both combusttbility

should br= considered. and ease of ignltlon.

shut-off valve; isolating valve: A manual or 3.20 automatic valve which prevents flow in both directions when closed.

which burn in air will burn violently in pure oxygen. Many which do not burn in air will do so in pure oxygen, particularly

under pressure. Similarly, materials which can be Ignited in air require lower ignition energins in oxygen. Many such materials may t)e igrlited by friction at a valve seat cv stem packing by adiabatic compresslon produced when oxygen at high system initi2lly at low pressure. pressure is rapidly introducczd into in

non-return 3.21 direction only.

valve:

A valve

which

permits

flow in one

No relaxation of the requirement in 4.1 .l is pcrmlttcd for any qas because of the dlfftculties of segregation of m3terial:, in stores and pdi tlcularly on hosiattal sites during installafiorl.

3.22 low-pressure flexible connecting hose, tube or pipe with permanently attached nectors, which is normally operating designed at its nominal pressure (see IS0

assembly: A gas specific cona medica! gas

tc conduct 5359).

a wider selui:i~on uf materials IS posslhle, for For vacuum systems, example plastics, dnrl in this GISH the provIsIon :or compatthlllty with oxygen need n(,t lnply.

5

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

.

Source of supply (see 3.8)

Central supply system ke 3.21

Control system lsee 3.13)

Pipeline distribution (see 3.14)

system

Terminal units (see 3.15)

Flexible

)

Alternatives

7
May be cylinders, liquid oxygen or nitrogen, air compressor, vacuum pump or proportioning equipment Pressure range from 300 to 1 400 kPa Vacuum range at least 40 kPa below atmospheric pressure NOTE It is possible to have more than one pipeline pressure in the distribution system of a medical gas supply. layout of a non-flammable medical gas ,HF `ine system Figure 1 Typical general 6

Flexible

End points on a pipeline distribu tion system to which medical equipment is connected

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7398 : 1987

4.1.2

Components

as specified

in 4.1 .l shall include,

but not fittings

NOTES 1 If the reserve supply is housed separately and the normal source of supply isolated, this inlet may not be necessary. 2 For all other systems except vacuum, an alternative emergency inlet point may be provided. Any such connector should be gasspecific. 3 For special care locations (such as an anaesthetizing area, a recovery area, an intensive care unit or a coronary care unit) where patients are dependent on medical gas and/or medical vacuum, an alternative local source should be available, for example a cylinder or cylinder combination with a pressure regulator, or in the case of medical vacuum, a portable suction unit. 4 When a single cylinder with pressure regulator is used, the cylinder valve and regulator inlet should be of the same type gas-specific connector. The regulator outlet should be gas-specific as required for lowpressure flexible connecting assemblies.

be limited to, containers,

pipes, valve seats, lubricants,

and gaskets. 4.1.3 Pipelines shall be made of materials given in annex A or appropriate equivalents.

4.2

Cleaning
shall be cleaned and degreased

All pipes, valves and fittings before installation. NOTE All

These items should be supplied clean and degreased. shall then be taken to maintain cleanliness

precautions

during transportation,

storage and installation.

5 5.1
5.1.1

Source

of supply
5.1.4 Manifolds shall be of a construction broken and of a design and Manifold operachanging materials suitable for the service pressures involved. cylinder capacity of any source of 5.1.5 All bulk liquid vessel connections between shall be gas-specific are proconnections during cylinder tions shall be gas-specific.

General riquirements
The design of the storage

supply system and its reserve shall be based on the estimated usage and the frequency of delivery by the gas supplier. and non-interchangeable 5.1.2 The source of supply may consist of one or more of the services. Adaptors

following

:
portable cylinders;

hibited on the delivery vehicles. The vessel should be fitted with an outlet where a sample can be taken for analysis.

a)
b) c)

gas in manifolded
gas in manifolded cryogenic liquid

NOTE - A report on the concentration of gas should be provided by the supplier with each shipment of cryogenic liquid medical gases.

cylinders on a trailer or pallet; in portable cylinders (sometimes 511.6 All pipeline regulators within a system shall together at levels which be

manifolded) d) e) f) g) h) i) j)

;
liquid in manifolded liquid in a stationary cylinders on a trailer; vessel(s);

capable of controlling pipeline pressure the requirements specified in table 1.

meet

cryogenic cryogenic

liquefied gas in a vessel; a medical air-compressing a medical vacuum-pumping a proportioning system: system; system;

NOTE ~ Heating of pressure-control regulators or associated pipework may be necessary under high flow conditions to reduce frosting and condensation within the control equipment. Precautions to avoid overheating should be taken.

5.1.7 Control systems shall be designed so that regulators, relief valves, pressure alarm sensors and change-over valves can be maintained without interrupting pipeline distribution system. the gas supply to the

a medical oxygen concentrator.
5.1.8 A pressure-relief valve shall be installed downstream of each operating pressure regulator and upstream of the line pressure regulator(s). This relief valve shall be set to lift at a pressure 30 % to 40 % above the nominal operating pressure and shall reach its maximum designed flow capacity (i.e. maxim mum The and relief valve full discharge) at a pressure not more than 50 % above its maximum lifting pressure (see figure 2).

5.1.3 made.

The following

provision

for failure

of supply

shall be

In a cryogenic connecting

liquid oxygen system, source

an inlet to the system for

a temporary

for emergency/maintenance

situations shall be incorporated in a convenient location. inlet shall be physically protected to prevent tampering

unauthorized access. It shall have a gas-specific inlet. This connection shall be suitably controlled with the necessary valves to allow standby or emergency supply of medical gas and isolaThe emergency and safety-relief source device tion of the normal source of supply. shall incorporate a pressure regulator which may or may not be a permanent system.

5.1.9

A pressure-safety

valve shall be installed downstream

of

line pressure regulator(s) but before the emergency alarm switch and main shut-off valve. This safety valve shall open at a pressure 30 96 to 40 % above the nominal line operating pressure and shall reach its maximum designed flow capacity (i.e. maximum safety valve full discharge) at a pressure not

part of the inlet to the

IS 12827 IS0 7396

: 1989 : 1987

Percentage operating

of nomlnal pressure

210

Maximum

relief valve fltll discharge

140 130

Mavrmum relief valve lift

Minimum relief valve lift

100

Nominal operating

pressure

Figure
more

2 -

Control pressure

settings (see

of a pressure-relief separate

valve When the content of the primary

than 60 % above

the nominal

operating

pressure regulator.

figure 3). For a nitrous oxide system the safety valve shall open at a pressure 25 % to 35 % above the nominal line operating pressure and shall reach its maximum (i.e. maximum safety more than 55 % above the nominal
NOTE When a high percentage

bank becomes exhausted, the secondary bank shall come into operation automatically to supply the pipeline.
NOTES 1 A supply system wirh cylinders may Include non-cryogenic

designed

flow capacity not

valve full discharge)

at a pressure pressure.

operating

of nitrous oxide is being used during above 20 % of the

anaesthesia,

a rise of the nitrous oxide pressure

cylinders, i.e. as used for the supply of nitrous oxide and carbon dloxide The requirements of 5.2.1, 5.2.2, 5.2.3 and 5.2.4 apply to such cylinders. 2 When an exhausted bank of cylinders is replaced, the change-over

operating pressure would further raise the percentage of nitrous oxide in the gas mixture which could be hazardous to the patient.

system and alarm system may be reset either manually or automatically.

5.1.10
systems

Safety/relief
shall

valves for air may be vented to the outThose for all other gases of the in single building. pressure

side of the building.

5.2.2 between

A non-return

valve or manually-operated header.

isolation valve pipe

be vented

to the outside

shall be installed at the manifold

end of each connecting

each cylinder and the manifold

NOTE - The luwer pressure section of a multiLpressure dlstnbutmg system should be vented to the outside of the building, where praciicdbk?.

NOTE The purpose of this valve is to prevent the loss of gas from the cylinders connected to the manifold if the safety/relief device on an individual cylinder should function or a cylinder flexible Lonnection should fail.

I\IO

shut-off

valve

or flow-restricting safety/relief

device valves.

shall

interfere

with

the operating

of these

NOTE - To maximize safety and ease of maintenance, it is recomb mended that a three-way duplex safety/relief valve be fitted.

5.2.3 a)

A cylinder a primary

supply gaseous

system

shall comprise liquid supply which sup-

or cryogenic

plies the

pipeline: gaseous automatically becomes or cryogenic to supply exhausted. connected reserve bemg supply which in the event of both liquid the supply which as the

5.2
NOTE and 7

Supply
Typical

system
supply

with

cylinders
with cylinders are shown tn figures 6

b) shall

a secondary operate supply

pipeline

systems

primary

It may also have a permanently 5.2.1 groups) bank A cyitnder of cylinders havtng manifold which system alterrlatPly shall have two hanks (or each with d

may be operated the pnmary me pipeline.

manually

or automatically supplies

sttpply

the pipeline,

and the secondary

unable

to supply

its cylinders

connected

to a con~rno~~ hearler

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

Percentage of nominal operating pressure Nitrous oxide system All other positive pressure systems

160
Maximum safety valve full discharge

Maximum

safetv valve full discharge

-155 140 -135 130 - 125 I ;g - 100 90 80
Maximum safetv valve lift

Maximum

safety valve lift

Minimum

safetv valve lift

Minimum

safety valve lift

Over-pressure Maximum operating

alarm

Over-pressure Maximum

alarm pressure

pressure

operating

Nominal operating

pressure

Nominal operating

pressure

Minimum

operating

pressure

Minimum

operating

pressure

Under-pressure

alarm

Under-pressure

alarm

Figure

3 -

Pressure-safety

valve

and alarm

pressure

settings

5.2.4

There shall be a supply to the manifold, available. The

of gas cylinders

in reserve

either reserve de-

5.3.1

The cryogenic

supply

system

shall consist of at least

attached is readily

or held in a hospital storage area that volumetric capacity of the taking into account the average

two sources of supply at all times. These may be either of the following : a) two or more the units alternately supply is refilled becomes supplying the pipeline. the secondary takes

supply shall be specified, mand and availability

of the gas concerned.

(See annex F.1

When 5.2.5 If a cryogenic liquid cylinder supply is installed, indicated it shall

primarv supply

is exhausted, after the

supply automatically secondary place; b)

the primary supply and the change-over

be in accordance

with the principles

in figure 7.

5.2.6

Cryogenic

liquid cylinder

supply systems shall be pro-

one or more units continuously another unit remains as the

supplying reserve

the pipeline supply and

vided with pressure-relief

devices on the manifold.

while

operates

only in case of an emergency.

5.3

Supply

systems

with

stationary

cryogenic 5.32
cryogenic cryogenic vessels are vessels are cylinder availability

vessels
NOTE - Typical supply systems with stationary shown in figure 8 and the location of stationary specified in 5.8.

The reserve supply shall comprise
supply.

either a liquid or a of the reserve supply
demand and F.)

The volumetric
taking

capacity
(See

shall be specified,

into account

the average annex

of the gas concerned.

9

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 f396 : 1987

NOTES 1 Any secondary and/or reserve supplies should have the designed flow capacity of the primary supply. 2 Where the gaseous or liquid supply is connected upstream of the line regulator, the line regulator and its associated relief valve should be .duplexed with isolating valves. 3 In the case of a cylinder supply, additional cylinders should be held in an adjacent store.

automatic the system.

controls

arranged

so that the units will supply the according to the demand on

system in turn or simultaneously

NOTE - The noise level arising from the operation of some corn pressors may be unacceptable in some situations and appropriate action should be taken.

5.5.2.2

Compressors

may be of any type provided there is a to approved levels (see 12.4.7).

means to reduce contaminants

5.4

Oxygen concentrator adsorber (PSAII

[pressure

swing
5.5.2.3 Each unit shall have a control circuit arranged so that shutting off, or failure of, one unit will not affect the operation air via and of other units. reserve supply, a concentration 552.4 conform All electrical wiring of the compressor of IEC Publication system 364. shall

If a PSA plant is used for the supply of oxygen-enriched a pipeline system, an automatically-operating of oxygen means of continuous analysis alarms shall be provided. NOTES

to the provisions

Electrical

systems shall be connected to both the normal and emergency power supplies. With more than two compressors, not all compressors need to be connected to the emergency power source, provided that an adequate tained during an emergency. supply of gas can be main-

1 It is intended that an International Standard specifying requirements for PSA plants will be prepared and this clause will be superseded by that International Standard when it is published. 2 Until an International Standard for PSA plant has been developed, it is recommended that before a PSA system is installed, the medical and otttar responsible staff of the facility agree on the specific use(s) planned. This will ensure that proper guidance is given for the safe management of problems such as aJ gas-specific fittings; b) labelling;

5.5.2.5 Receivers, if required, shall be capable of meeting the operational needs of the system. NOTE - If only one receiver is provided, a by-pass system should be installed for inspection and maintenance.

cl areas of distribution, e.g. operating rooms, intensive care units, emergency departments. 3 It is strongly recommended that the medical oxygen pipeline and its terminal units are not used for piping the output from oxygen concentrators. 4 Further information on PSA plants is given in annex H.

5.5.2.6 separators

Drains

shall

be

installed

on

dryers,

after-qgolers,

and receivers so that condensate

can be drained.

5.5.2.7 The intake for the air system shall be located in a position where there is minimal contamination from internafcombustion engine exhausts, vacuum systems, anaesthetic gas scavenging systems, ventilation system discharges and other contaminants. The air intake shall be provided with a filter for protection of components.

5.5

Medical

air systems
5.5.2.8 demand, The air compressor system shall be equipped with at least two dryers, each having the full capacity of the calculated and such filters as are necessary to produce air of the required quality (see 12.4.71, which shall be located upstream of the final pressure-control equipment. system for medical air shall be one of the 5.5.2.9 system, as specified in 5.52; system Except for air for surgical tools, an air compressor system shall include a duplexed pressure-regulating system to maintain a constant pressure in the pipeline distribution system.

NOTE 12.

Typical medical air systems are shown in figures 6, 9, 11 and

6.6.1

General
supply

A central following a) b)

:

an air compressor an

automatically-controlled of producing a

proportioning mixture of

capable

approximately

21 % (V/v) oxygen and approximately 79 % nitrogen, from a central supply, as specified in 5.7; c) d) a cylinder supply system for air, in accordance a combination of the above.

(V/VI

5.5.2.10
compressor bration.

A flexible connection and the pipeline

may be installed between to prevent transmission

the

of vi-

with 5.2;

5.5.2.11 55.2 5.5.2.1 Air compressor system
entering

After-coolers

may be necessary to ensure that the air temperature.

the receiver shall be at or near ambient

Each central source (see figure 9) shall comprise two or more units of such a capacity that the average calculated demand can be supplied with one unit out of service, and

5.5.2.12

If the compressed

air supply

is extended

for ,non-

clinical purposes, observed.

the precautions

given in annex G shall: be

10

IS 12827 : 1388 IS0 7386 : 1887

5.6 Medical
NOTE -

vacuum

systems

Typical medical vacuum systems are shown in figure 10.

5.7.2 A central source of medical air employing a proportioning system shall include a reserve supply in the form of a cylinder manifold system which shall be permanently connected and which shall operate automatically. 5.7.3 A proportioning system for air shall operate automatically to produce air of the quality required by 5.5.1. The mixture shall be analysed continuously and the results shall be recorded. The system shall be arranged so that manual intervention is necessary to correct the composition of the air before reconnecting the mixer to the pipeline.
NOTE - Two sets of instruments should be provided, at least one of which is capable of independently and automatically shutting off the gas mixture from the pipeline.

5.6.1 A central source shall comprise two OJ more units of such capacity tiiat a minimum of 75 % of the system design flow capacity cz? be supplied with one unit out of service.
NOTE - The A-weighted sound pressure level arising from the operation of some vacuum pumps measured within the central supply room will exceed 85 dB. This level may be unacceptable in some situations and appropriate action should be taken.

5.6.2 Controls fo; a central source shall be provided to activate the additional unit(s) automatically should the operating unit(s) of the systeh be incapable of maintaining an adequate vacuum. 5.6.3 Each unit of the central source shall have a control circuit arranged so that shutting off, or failure of, one unit will not affect the operation of other units. 5.6.4 Electrical wiring of vacuum systems shall conform to the provisions of IEC Publication 364. The electrical source for the units shall be connected to both the normal and standby electrical power supplies. With more than two pumps, not all pumps need to be connected to the emergency power supply provided that an adequate vacuum can be maintained during an emergency. 5.6.5 Reservoirs, if required, shall be capable of meeting the operational requirements of the system. 5.6.6 If a reservoir is installed, a drain shall be fitted.

5.7.4 A proportioning system shall be capable of supplying the mixture of the required composition over the entire range of specified flow. 5.7.5 A, proportioning system shall include means for verifying the calibration of the analysers and the performance of the instruments by reference to a mixture of known composition. 5.7.6 If a proportioning system is required to supply medical gas mixtures other than air, it shall include all the safety features specified in 5.7.2 to 5.7.5.

5.8

Location of stationary

cryogenic

vessels

5.6.7 The exhaust from the vacuum pumps shall be piped to the outside with the end turned down and should be screened against insects. It shall be in a position where risk of contamination of occupied buildings is minimized. 5.6.8 A flexible connection may be installed between the vacuum pump and the pipeline to prevent the transmission of vibration. 5.6.9 Duplicate bacterial filters shall be fitted or other effective methods used to prevent the entry of bacteria into the equipment and tci prevent their discharge to atmosphere.
NOTE -. The use of a medical vacuum system as a means of evacuation of waste anaesthetic gases is not recommended unless careful consideration is given to the capacity of the system and to the hazard which may occur due to flammable or corrosive gases in the system.

5.6.1 Stationary cryogenic liquid systems shall not be installed over subterranean structures such as underground bunkers, basement rooms, etc., and shall be more than 5 m away from openings to trenches, subterranean structures, manholes, gullies or traps, and at least 3 m from public access routes. (See figure 13.) 5.8.2 Except for vessels located as specified in 58.3, stationary cryogenic liquid oxygen and nitrogen vessels shall be installed in a position which is open to the air and at ground level, not on the roof of a building. The control equipment shall be protected from the weather and the area fenced. 5.8.3 If a stationary cryogenic vessel is to be installed inside a building, then it shall be positioned in a room specially constructed for the purpose with adequate ventilation to the open air in order to avoid the hazards of oxygen enrichment or deficiency. An access door and an emergency exit as in 5.10 shall be incorporated in this building. 5.8.4 Adequate access for a vehicle shall be provided so that a cryogenic liquid supply plant can be filled. The ground in the immediate vicinity of an oxygen filling point shall be of concrete or other non-combustible material.

5.7

Proportioning

systems 5.9 Location of manifolded cylinders

NOTE - A typical proportloning system, for example for blending oxygen and nitrogen to produce air, is shown In figures 11 and 12.

5.7.1 The sources of medical gas for proportioning systems shall conform to the requirements of 5.2 and 5.3 and may be the same sources as those supplying the medical gas pipelines separately.

A supply system with manifolded cylinders may be installed in the open air, with the control panel protected from the weather or especially constructed for operation in the open air, and the area fenced. Alternatively, it may be installed inside a room specially constructed, suitably modified, well ventilated and fire-resistant.

11

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

.

5.10

General requirements

for supply plant

f) a warning notice shall be clearly displayed on both sides of each door or gate, for example Warning - Oxygen/nitrous bol, etc., as appropriate) No smoking No open flames or sparks No oil or grease No combustible material to be placed within 5 m oxide (or chemical sym-

5.10.1 Rooms or areas for supply systems shall not be used for any purpose other than for supply plant equipment containing the non-flammable gases that are to be distributed through the pipelines, except that empty cylinders disconnected from the supply equipment may be stored, pending their removal; in addition, one group of full cylinders sufficient for one side iof the manifold may also be stored. A separate storage a$ea should be provided for empty cylinders.
NOTE - Only nominated persons should be authorized to operate and attend the plant.

g) fences and walls shall be of a height not less than 1.75 m. NOTES
1 Enclosures should be easily accessible to vehicles delivering cylinders or liquid gas and be at ground level or vehicle height according to the method of unloading used. 2 Enclosures should be located so that no part of the enclosure is less than 5 m (for stationary oxygen cryogenic plant) or 3 m (for other supply plant1 from any occupied building or from any roadway or footpath.

5.10.2 Services containing combustible gases or liquids are not permitted within any manifold room or source supply area. 5.10.3 The ambient temperature in enclosures or rooms for supply systems shall not exceed 50 OC for any gas and shall be not less than 10 OC for nitrous oxide, oxygen/nitrous oxide mixtures and carbon dioxide, unless other means are provided for preventing loss of pressure or gas separation in these cylinders. In the plant room for medical air compressors and vacuum pumps, the temperature shall not exceed 40 OC. NOTE Any heating system may be used to heat supply plant

5.10.9

enclosures or storage areas, provided that no part of the heating system in contact with the air within the room exceeds a temperature of 225 "C and that the supply plant or cylinders are prevented from coming into direct contact with the heating system.

Vacuum and air compressor plant shall be installed in a well lit, ventilated and clean location with ample accessibility. The location shall be provided with drainage facilities. Vacuum and air compressor plant when installed as a source shall be located separately from other medical gas system sources, and shall be readily accessible for maintenance.

5.10.4

All electrical fittings in supply rooms shall be located in fixed positions to minimize the risk of physical damage.

6
6.1

Warning General

systems

5.10.5

Fire fighting equipment shall be provided.

5.10.6 The room or enclosure shall be well ventilated to the open air, and ducting for such ventilation shall not be connected to that serving any other building.

6.1 .l

Warning systems, whether for operating or emergency purposes, shall comply with the following requirements: a) the location shall allow continuous observation; alternatively, an auxiliary alarm signal shall be provided at the telephone switchboard, the security guard room or some other suitable location; b) emerg'ency alarm signals shall be installed in operating theatres and critical care areas, for example intensive care wards and coronary care units; c) pressure gauges or indicators shall be provided to indicate deviations from normal working pressure range (see figure 31, in suitable places, for example in manned areas of operating theatres and in the vicinity of the nurses' station in critical care areas - these gauges or indicators shall be labelled to indicate the gas and the zone monitored: d) each warning system shall consist of a visual signal and may include an auditory signal - the visual signal shall persist until the cause of this signal is corrected;
NOTE - It may be possible to silence the activated auditory signal for a maximum period of 15 min. e) each signal shall be labelled according the colour 60-l of visual signals shall to its function; with IEC

The doors or gates provided to facilitate cylinder handling or plant filling shall be capable of being locked. An emergency exit shall be provided which shall be free from obstruction at all times. All doors shall be capable of being opened from the inside, at any time, without a key. All doors shall ooen outwards.

5.10.7

5.10.8

Enclosures (interior or exterior) for supply systems shaIl conform to the following requirements: a) when enclosures are located near sources of heat such as furnaces, incinerators or boiler rooms, construction shall prevent cylinder temperatures from exceeding 50 OC; b) they shall not be located within 3 m of open electrical conductors and transformers; c) d) e) they shall not be located adjacent to oil storage tankers; they shall comply with local building cod. +;

f)

comply

they shaH have concrete ftoors;

Publication

;

12

IS 12827

IS0 7396

: 1989 : 1987

gl the sensing device for all warning systems shall be located so as to ensure the monitoring of normal operation and emergency h) means shall and conditions; be provided for testing of visual the activation

c)

malfunction

of a proportioning

system

or oxygen

con-

centrator.

6.3.3 vided nitrous

When oxide

nitrous high line

oxide regulator

is delivered, serving

an alarm shall be proof every care areas final and critical

mechanism alarms; i)

electrical

integrity

and auditory

to indicate theatres.

line pressure

downstream

operating device from shall not be isolated, the pipeline to which device for exit is conby a stop valve, if a valve

a pressure-sensing

ample nected

or flow-limiting device.

is incorporated by the inser-

7
7.1

Requirements
Pipelines and

for pipelines
fittings including connecting within the assemblies specified

for maintenance

purposes,

it shall be opened

tion of the sensing

6.1.2

When

operated

electrically,

warning

systems power

shall

be

shall provide pressure drop
NOTE -

the system design flow limits as given in table 1.

connected

to both

the normal

and standby

supplies.

Connecting

assemblies in a pipeline's distribution system are

NOTE - Systems should normally be electrically energized so that the alarm is initiated on electrical failure between the sensor and indicator.

normally used a) as a part of the main pipeline, for example for isolation of vibration, building movement and relative movement of the pipelines;

6.2 6.2.1
NOTE 6.2.2.

Operation
All operation
Auditory

alarms
alarms shall be visual.
for the alarms listed in

b)

for emergency

supply of gas to a pipeline;

c) as part of permanently dants and pendant tracks.

fixed equipment such as booms, pen-

alarms should be provided

.
Table 1 Allowable pressure drop between terminal unit outlet source and

a), c) and d).

6.2.2 a) b)

Alarms

shall be provided from primary going

to indicate to secondary into operation supply; in automatic into opera-

change-over reserve

supply

systems, tion ;

or the need to bring

manual

reserves

c)
d)

when the liquid level in the operating has reached 30 % of the liquid capacity;

cryogenic

vessel

/~:g~=~
Nitrogen and air for surgical

/

I3

1

when the liquid level in the reserve cryogenic to 50 % of the capacity; malfunction oxide of thermal and carbon pressure dioxide control

vessel has

fallen e)

1) The pressure drop is that allowable for the system operating at its design capacity, calculated in accordance with appropriate diversity
systems in bulk
factors. 2) Where the system includes one or more line pressure regulators, pressure is the delivery pressure of the last regulator.

nitrous f)

supplies; and vacuum
the "source"

malfunction

of medical

air compressors

pumps.
NOTE a) bl Alarms should also be provided to indicate increase in moisture decrease content in compressed air pipelines;

7.2

If a connecting or regularly removed flexible
the

assembly is readily accessible to the user, for maintenance, for example in a ceiling ceiling column with access panels,
(see shall be gas-specific

pendant

or a rigid
assembly

in any reserve supply to below 50 % of its capacity.

connecting

IS0

5359).

6.3
6.3.1

Emergency
All emergency

alarms
alarms shall be visual and auditory.

7.3

If a connecting significant

assembly

is not readily of fixed

accessible equipment

to the such

user without

disassembly

as hinged-arm booms, tracks and pendants, connectors of the assembly need not be gas-specific. In all cases, the tests specified in 12.3 and 12.4 shall be carried of the assembly. out following any repair and reattachment the

6.3.2 a)

. Emergency
low

alarms

shall be provided in pipelines,

to indicate i&e. when

mainline monitored

pressure

pressure pressure; b) high

falls 20 % below

the nominal

working

7.4 for

If the connecting assemblies are part of the main pipeline, example when used for isolation of vibration, building and relative movement of the pipelines, and are not

movement mainline monitored pressure, in pipelines, i.e. when the rises 20 % above the nominal working

pressure pressure;

normally replaced during their life, the assembly need not be gas-specific. These flexible components shall be tested as part of the main pipeline in accordance with 12.3.1.

x3

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 `: 1987

8 8.1

Shut-off

valves

Shut-off valves are classified as follows: service shut-off valves: 1) 2) main service shut-off valve, riser service shut-off valve, lateral service shut-off valve, equipment service shut-off valve;

8.8 Except for vacuum systems, a zone shut-off valve shatl be provided in each gas pipeline serving an anaesthetizing and/or critical care area.
NOTE - One or more associated anaesthetizing locations may be considered as one area.

a)

*3)
4)

8.9 Except for vacuum systems, all zone shut-off valves shall be provided with a means to allow physical separation of the downstream pipeline for maintenance and modification.

NOTE - These valves should only be used by the maintenance and operating staff and should not be accessible to unauthorized persons. Valves which cannot be locked in the open or closed position should be protected against improper operation.

8.10 If zone shut-off valves are provided with a pipeline connecting point, this point shall be gas-specific (see 11.1.8).

b) zone shut-off valves in boxes with fixed covers or doors.
NOTE - These valves are accessible and are used to isolate areas within health care facilities for maintenance purposes and in case of emergency. Their operation in the latter case should be included as part of the emergency disaster plan.

9

ierminal

units')

NOTE - Principal components of a typical terminal unit are shown in figure 4.

9.1 8.2
All shut-off valves in a medical gas pipeline system except those in the source of supply (see clause 5) and those in terminal units (see clause 9) should be ball or diaphragm valves. It should be apparent by observation whether the valve is open or closed.

Each terminal unit shall accept only the appropriate gasspecific connector on an item of medical equipment or its connecting assembly. The socket assembly shall be the body of a DISS or NIST screw-type connector or a quick-connect socket.

9.2

Each terminal unit shall be a) equipped wrtn a non-interchangeable gas-specific connection point (socket assembly); b) providea with a terminal unit check valve (automatic closing) which will open the gas supply when the connection is made and which will shut off automatically when the connection is broken; cl equipped with a terminal unit maintenance valve usually located in the base block, which may be manual or automatic, to permit maintenance without turning off the zone shut-off valve to the unit (this need not apply to vacuum units). This valve shall not be the same valve as in b). NOTE - The maintenance valve may be omitted only in the case where pipeline systems are duplicated or where a shut-off valve serves a single terminal unit. d) designed to prevent accidental interchange of any gasspecific internal parts and bodies between terminal units of different gases; e) permanently and legibly labelled with the name of the gas or symbol and may additionally be colour coded according to IS0 32 ~ lettering shall have a minimum height of 3 mm; f) installed at a height which is easily accessible but which minimizes the risk of damage from furniture and equipment.

8.3

Boxes enclosing zone shut-off valves shall have fixed covers or doors which can be locked in the closed position. The covers or doors shall have a means of quick access in case of emergency.

8.4 a)

All shut-off valves shall be identified to indicate the gas service name or symbol;

b) to indicate, in a manner appropriate tq their classification as specified in 12.2, the zone, area, section of pipeline being served or their purpose. This identification shall be secured to the valve, valve box, or service pipeline (as specified in 10.1) and be readily visible at the valve site.

8.5 All zone shut-off valves for operation in an emergency shall be within normal hand height and not concealed.

8.6 The main medical gas supply pipelines shall be provided with a service shut-off valve adjacent to the source of supply.

8.7 Each riser from a main shall be provided with a service shut-off valve. NOTE - Such shut-off valves may be provided for other branches.

1)

Temtinal units will be dealt with in a future International Standard.

14

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

Pipeline

Alternative position of maintenance valve

Enclosure for wall terminal unit

Non-interchangeable, gas-specific

I
I

J

I

Terminal unit check

I

I

Figure 4 -

Schematic

representation

df principal components

of a typical terminal

unit

10
10.1
name

ldentificatign
Pipelines or symbol

<

of pipelines
and labelled with the gas valves, at

11
11.1
11.1.1

Installation General

requirements

for pipelines

shall be identified and colour, of direction,

adjacent

to shut-off

junctions partitions, to terminal

and changes units.

before and after walls and Pipeline systems shall be used only for patient care. No shall be made into systems for other uses except air system, when extensions of use are perwith the requirements of 1.3, annex G, connections

etc., at intervals of not more than 10 m and adjacent

for the compressed Such labelling shall be durable and effected, for example, by means of metal tags, stencilling, stamping or with adhesive markers.

mitted in accordance and figure 9.

11.1.2
10.2 a) Identification coloured shall be in accordance with IS0 32, with a) to be read along b) separate

Except when pipelines and electrical services are run in compartments, pipeline systems shall be separated

from electrical services and lettered letters not less than 6 mm high; b) applied with the words and symbols the longitudinal axis of the pipeline.
NOTE flow. Identification

by more than 50 mm in normal pipeline installations; by more than 10 mm when installed in pendants or

similar equipment.
direction of

should include arrows denoting

11.1.3 10.3 If a pipeline is painted for all or part of its length the

The pipeline shall be bonded

to an earth terminal

as

.

near as possible to the point at which the pipeline enters the colour(s) shall be in accordance with IS0 32 and the gas name or symbol shall also be applied as required i? 10.2. building. The pipelines shall not themselves be used for earth ing the electrical equipment. The relevant parts of IEC Publication 364 shall be observed.

15

IS 12827 : 1988 IS0 7396 : 1987

11.1.4 Pipelines
damage

exposed

to physical

damage,

for example of por-

11.2

Pipeline supports

which might be sustained

from the movement

table equipment, such as trolleys, stretchers and trucks, in corridors and in other locations, shall be protected.

11.2.1 Medical gas pipelines shall be supported at intervals as
shown in table 2, sufficient to prevent sagging or distortion.

11.1.5 Unprotected
special stored. hazard, Where e.g.

pipelines shall not be installed in areas of in areas where flammable materials are is of pipelines in such a location

Table 2 -

installation

Recommended intervals between copper pipeline supports
Maximum m intervals

unavoidable, the pipeline shall be protected by an enclosure which will prevent the liberation of medical gas within the room should leaks occur in the pipeline system installed in the area.

Outside diameter mm

11.1.6 Buried pipelines

shall be protected rosion and physical damage.

from

frost,

cor-

NOTE - Ducts or casings may be used. Pipelines may be placed in the same tunnel, trench or duct with fuel gas pipelines, electrical lines or steam lines, provided the pipelines are more than 50 mm from other services. Medical gas pipelines shall not be placed in a tunnel, duct where there is exposure to oil. NOTE trench or

11.2.2 The supports shall ensure that the pipeline cannot be
displaced accidentally from its position.

11.2.3 The supports shall be of corrosion-resistant
or shall be treated to prevent corrosion. treated or isolated from the pipeline corrosion. to minimize

material, electrolytic

Ducts in which pjpelines are installed should be ventilated.

The supports shall be

11.1.7 Pipelines shall not be located in elevator shafts.
NOTES 1 Pipelines may be installed in vertical shafts if they are protected against physical damage, excessive heat, corrosion and contact with oil. 2 A full-bore purge valve with a preceding lockable shut-off valve may be provided at the bottom of each main vertical riser.

11.2.4 Where

pipelines cross electric cables, the pipelines shall be supported adjacent to the cables (see 11.1.2).

11.2.5 Pipelines shall not be used as a support for or be supported by other pipelines or conduits.

11.3 11.1.8 A test or purge valve fitted adjacent to each zone shutoff valve shall be capped specific connection.
NOTE -

Pipeline joints

and sealed,

and fitted

with a gas-

11.3.1 Except for threaded joints used in shut-off valves, including terminal unit valves, and where systems, plastics materials are or used for vacuum welded. all joints shall be hard-soldered

It is not necessary to run pipelines with a "fall" for drainage

purposes.

11.1.9 A shut-off
cavity.

valve shall not be installed where of gas, for example

a leak is

likely to cause an accumulation

in a sealed

NOTE - Threaded joints used in shut-off valves, including terminal unit valves, may be made by tinning the male thread with solder, by using approved sealing compounds or tape or they may be made as part of a compression joint.

11.1.10 Contact with corrosive materials shall be avoided by
the use of impermeable non-metallic materials applied to the outer surface of the pipework in the area where contact can occur.

11.3.2 During the brazing of pipeline connections, the interior of the pipeline shall be purged with carbon dioxide, argon or
nitrogen, except when performing nections or emergency repairs. small extensions, final con-

11.1.11 Allowance
tion of pipelines.
NOTE Attention

shall be made for expansion

and contrac-

11.4 Connection systems
11.4.1 Connections
NOTE -

and modifications

to existing

is drawn to national building requirements

and fire

to an existing system shall be undertaken

regulations.

in only one gas system at a time.
Careful consideratton should be given to the location of this

11.1.12 A pipeline for meoical air shall be routed in such a way
that it is not subject to a temperature the operating pressure. below the dew point at

connection

to minimize problems of access in installation and testing.

11.4.2 Where an addition is to be made to an existing system,
the new pipeline take-off shall be equipped with a zone shut-off valve at the intended point of connection to isolate the existing pipeline, except whenan used for this purpose. existing zone shut-off valve can be

11.1.13 If a hyperbaric chamber is provided for medical treatment, it may be necessary pressureto instal a separate and flow-control pipeline(s) and the appropriate equipment.

16

IS 12827 IS0 7396

: 1989 : 1987

11.4.3
be locked

During construction,
in the closed

the valve required by 11.4.2 shall and labelled as follows:

NOTE

-

The

fields

of

responsibility

of the

different

persons

or

position

authorities

participating

in the tests should be clearly defined

before

testing begins.

Construction All terminal
dicate

isolation

valve -

DO NOT OPEN
marked to in12.1.2 Purging and testing as in 12.2.2 shall be carried out with clean, oil-free dry air, nitrogen or carbon dioxide, except for those tests where the specific gas is prescribed.

units affected

shall be temporarily

they are not to be used.

11.4.4 When modifications are carried out to existing systems. mechanical disconnection at the nearest zone shut-off valve
shall be made.

12.1.3

Before any testing is carried out, every terminal unit in

A closed

valve

is not considered

adequate

a system under test shall be labelled to indicate that the system is under test and that it shall not be used.

mechanical

disconnection.

11.45

When

the appropriate

tests specified in clause 12 have

12.1.4

The

results of tests made

for certification

purposes

been successfully completed on the addition, the connection may be made to the existing system. The valve in 11.4.2 shall be opened tion. and further relevant tests completed on the addi-

shall be part of the permanent records of the hospital and shall show details of the services and areas tested.

12.2
11.4.6 When an addition has been completed and tested in accordance be removed. with clause 12, all labels as specified in 11.4.3 shall

Tests

to be carried

out
base block

122.1 Tests after installation of piping with of terminal unit fitted but before concealment The following tests shall be carried out:

11.5

"As-installed"

drawings

and maintenance

a) b)

leakage test; tests for cross-connection visual check that and obstruction; of pipelines complies

manuals
11.51 A separate set of "as-installed" mechanical drawings

which show the variations

of the pipeline system from the con-

c)

identification specified

tract drawings shall be maintained during construction, and shall be brought up to date as variations are made. These drawings shall include details which will enable

with the requirements

in clause 10.

buried or concealed

pipelines to be located.

12.2.2 Tests and procedures and before use of the system The following

after complete

installation

11.5.2

tests and procedures

shall be carried out: correct zoning and idencheck for identification

Complete

"as-installed"

drawings

specified

as

in a) tests and checks for leakage, tification of zone isolation valves of terminal units; b) tests for cross-connection, system performance;
C)

11.5.1 shall be presented to the owner of the pipeline system as a set of reproducible drawings, marked "as-installed", for inelusion as part of the permanent record of the pipeline system.

11.53 If a pipeline system is altered subsequent to the transfer of the drawings to the owner, the "as-installed" drawings as specified in 11.5.2 shall be brought up to date.

flow,

pressure

drop,

and

tests of pressure-relief functional

valves and safety valves;

11.5.4 Maintenance schedules, instruction manuals, recommended spare parts list and electrical diagrams for the complete installation shall be provided by the installer to the owner.

d) e) f)

test of all sources of supply; systems;

test of warning

purging and filling with specific gas; tests for cleanliness; tests for gas identities
may be required
if

12

Testing

and commissioning

g)
h)

NOTE systems

The aim of testing and commissioning of medical gas pipeline is to verify that all safety aspects and performance rem of the systems are met. An example of a Procedure for IS grven in annex C.

qurrements

testing and commissioning

NOTE - Further testing in accordance wrth 12.22 significant delay occurs before use of the system.

12.1

General

requirements

for

tests

12.3 123.1

Requirements Leakage

for

tests

listed

in 12.2.1

12.1.1

All tests after complete

installation

shall be carried out or by designated

or witnessed

by a responsible testing authority

qualified persons who shall certify the results of the tests to the owner or client.

There shall be no pressure drop within a 24 h period except for pressure changes due to temperature vatiatrons (see annex B).

17

IS 12827 : 1989 ISO7388:1987

when tested at a minimum pressure of 1,5 times operating pressure for medical gas pipelines and 500 kPa for vacuum pipelines.
NOTE - With large volume systems, it may be preferable to test small

12.4.2 12.4.2.1

Cross-connection, Cross-connection

flow b&

pressure drop ..

sectionsof the system individually. 12.3.2 Cross-connection and obstruction

There shall be no connections between pipelines for different gases and vacuum. If this test is combined with the gas identity test; the specific gas shall be used. WARNING - Serious consequences for patient safety could result if this test is not carried out completely and correctly. , 12.4.2.2 Flow and pressure drop

There shall be no cross-connection or obstruction.

12.4 Requirements

for tests

listed

in 12.2.2

12.4.1 Leakage, correct zoning and identification of shut-off valves; check for identification of terminal units 12.4.1.1 Leakage from total compressed medical gas systems

The pipeline pressure drop shall not exceed the values in table 1 when the system is tested at its designed flow and measured at each terminal unit.

, I

12.4.3 After a 24 h period under test at nominal operating pressure, a pressure drop may be observed in the system. The pressure drop shall not exceed the value calculated from the formula

Pressure-relief

valves and -safety valves

Where type-tested pressure-relief and -safety valves are installed, a special valve test is not required. 12.4.3.1 Pressure-relief valves

Ap = 7

48n

The performance of pressure-relief valves shall be in accordance with 5.1.8. where Ap n is the gauge pressure drop, over 24 h, in kilopascals; is the number of terminal units; 12.4.3.2 Pressure-safety valves

The performance of pressure-safety valves shall be in accordance with 5.1.9. 12.4.4 Functional tests of sources of supply

V is the volumetric capacity, in litres, of the pipeline system.
NOTES 1 The formula is based on a maximum permissible leakage of 0.48 l/24 h per terminal unit. 2 With large volume systems, it may be preferable to tast small sections of the system individually.

The source of supply shall be tested for normal and emergency operating conditions according to the manufacturer's manuals and specifications which are required by 11.5.4. 12.4.5 Warning systems

12.4.1.2

Leakage from total vacuum systems

The performance of warning systems shall be tested in all operating and emergency conditions. 12.4.6 Purging and filling with specific gas for compressed medical gases Each distribution system shall be purged with its specific gas for a sufficient number of times to displace the test gas. Each terminal unit shall be purged to ensure that no pockets of test gas remain. 12.4.7 Cleanliness

With the system at nominal operating vacuum and with the source isolated, the pressure in the pipeline shall not exceed IO kPa after 1 h. 12.4.1.3 gases With the system upstream of the closed valve under test at nominal operating pressure, the downstream line depressurized and all downstream terminal units closed, there shall be no pressure increase downstream from the valve, or leak to the environment, over a period of 15 min. 12.4.1.4 Check for correct zoning and identification of shutoff valves A check shall be made that each shut-off valve is properly identified and controls only those terminal units intended by the design. Leakage from shut-off valves for compressed medical

The pipeline shall be tested for contamination after purging and filling with its specific gas as specified in 12.4.6. 12.4.7.1 Particulate matter

All terminal units shall be tested for the absence of visible par-

ticulate matter.

18

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

NOTES 1 This test mav be combined with the purging procedure specified in 12.4.6. 2 When tested as described in C.6.1, there should be no particulate matter visible in good light to an ooerator with normal vision.

A device for the measurement of oxygen concentration at each terminal unit shall be used. [The nominal measurements will be 100 % (V/V) for oxygen terminal units; 21 % (WV) for medical air terminal units; 50 % (VI V) for oxygen/nitrous oxide mixture terminal units; and 0 % ( V/ VI for nitrous oxide, helium, nitrogen and carbon dioxide terminal units.]
NOTES ' This test will not give a positive indication of nitrous oxide, helium, nitrogen and carbon dioxide pipelines. 2 Attention is drawn to national regulations governing the purity of compressed medical gases.

12.4.7.2

Oil

Selected terminal units shall be tested for oil contamination by the absence of odour or taste. The oil level shall not exceed 0,5 mg/m? 12.4.7.3 Water vapour

In air pipelines supplied from compressors, the dew point measured at selected terminal units shall not exceed'+ 5 "C at pipeline pressure (see 11.1.12). 12.4.7.4 Carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide

12.6 Minimum systems

requirements

for certification

of

12.51 Before a medical gas pipeline system is used, a responsible testing authority shall certify in writing that all tests and procedures in 12.4 have been completed and that all systems comply with the requirements.
NOTE - The testing authority should certify that all drawings and manuals, as required in 11.5, have been supplied to the owner or client.

Air pipelines using compressors as a source shall be tested for carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. The levels shall not exceed 5 ppm (if/ VI for carbon monoxide and 1 000 ppm (V/ VI for carbon dioxide.

12.4.8

Gas identity

12.5.2 Certificates shall be dated and signed by the responsible te$ing authority, the representative of the owner and the representative of the installer. 12.5.3 When all tests have been completed satisfactorily, all construction labels which have been fixed to terminal units shall be removed prior to handover.

A gas identity check shall be carried out on each terminal unit after purging with its specific gas.
NOTE - This may be carried out during the cross-connection test specified in l&42?

19

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

Annex Preferred

A OT materials
1

uses and restrictions

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.

A.1

Materials
and restrictions with regard to the requirements for materials and jointing techniques. for joining copper pipe (for nitrous

This annex gives recommendations

Table 5 covers jointing methods only for pipes and fittings and states that brazing is recommended oxide for example) but that welding copper pipes is permitted, but not in common use.

A.2
NOTE -

Metals
Table 3 refers to metals for use up to 1 400 kPa only.

Table 3 Type of material Aluminium wrought and cast alloys Copper, pure

Preferred

uses end restrictions
Restrictions on use

for metals
Use preferred for

Not suitable for gases containing moisture Application limited for oxidizing gases

Joints and seals, valve bodies Pipelines, joints and seals Metallic joints, filters and sieves, valve bodies and fittings, terminal units

I I

Copper-zinc alloys (brass types), copper-nickel zinc alloys, copper-tin alloys Mild steel, cast steel, cast iron

I
Not permitted for oxygen if the gas velocity is higher than 25 m/s up to a pressure of 4000 kPa

1
A.3

Valve bodies and fittings

Stainless steel (alloy similar to, or higher than, Cr-Ni-17/7)

Pipelines, springs, bodies and fittings

filters,

sieves,

valve

I Monel metal
NOTE Copper is the material normally used for pipelines.

Valve bodies and fittings, pressure `gauge operating tubes

Non-metals
Table 4 Type of mdterial (chemical name! Abbreviation CR IIR PE PA PVC PTFE PCTFE

Applicaiions

for non-metals
Air Nitrous oxide Inert gases. nitrogen, carbon dioxide and vacuum

T

Oxygen

Oxygen mixture5

1

Chloroprene rubber Isobutene-isoprene rubber Polyethylene' Polyamide Polyvinyl chloride Polytetrafluoroethylene Polychlorotrifluoroethylene Copolymer of herafluoropropylene `and vinylidenefluoride

I

-I

+ denotes "recommended", 0 denotes "permitted", see notb 2 NOTES 1 Certain non-metallic materials give off noxious or toxic vapours at elevated temperatures.

2 Non-metallic materials exist in various qualities. All non-metallic materials, even PTFE and PCTFE, can be hazardous in some situations (e.g. at cylinder pressure); therefore ask the producer of the material for the field of application with respect to gas, pressure, velocity, etc., and if necessary test before specifying.

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

A.4

Jointing

methods

Table 5 -

Jointing

methods

Types of joints Welding Brazing

Application

I
I I
I.

Pipe materiallr Stainless steel
+21

Copper Cl + + __-0 0

Soldering sockets, fittings, butt-soldering Flanaed types

0 +

Mechanical joints

Screw connections Compression `pipe fittings

+
+ +

+

Sealing materials for mechanical joints

Aluminium flat sealino washer Other metallic sealing Metal-impregnated sealing Non-metallic sealing

+ +
+
3)

I I

+ +
+ 31

I I
1

+

denotes "recommended", 0 denotes "permitted", but not in common use.

II Pipe specifications should be in accordance with IS0 6Sfor steel and IS0 274 for copper or national standards. For vacuum systems, plastic pipe may be used and appropriate jointing techniques applied, for example welding, cementing. 2) 3) Pressure-velocity limitations, see table 3, or national standards where they exist. Oxygen-proof sealing materials should be approved by the respective national authorities where these exist.

21

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1967

Annex Temperature

6 relationships
1

and pressure

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.

25

20

1

15

5

5

IO

I
Exatnpk:

20

25
600
Gauge pressure,

800
kPa

1000

1 200

1 400

1600

The pressure

of a system

previoudy

at 1 400 kPa will fall to 1 350 kPa with

a 10 OC fall in temperature

Figure

5 -

Relationship

between

temperature

and pressure

at typical

pipeline

pressures

22

1s 12827 Is0 7390

: 1989 : 1987

Annex A procedure for testing

C medical gas pipeline systems

and commissioning

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.)

CO

Introduction

It is also advisable to check the cleanliness of the pipeline during these tests by suitable observation. C. 1.2.1 General conditions

This testing procedure is given as an example of how the specification of clause 12 may be verified. Other procedures may be devised which validly test this specification. In this procedure the given sequence of tests is important and should be followed.

All pipeline systems should be at atmospheric pressure. A single pressure source should be used and connected to only one system at a time.

Cl Tests base block Cl.1

after installation of piping with of terminal unit fitted (see 12.3)

The system under test should remain pressurized at working pressure throughout the test. At least one base block on all other systems should be open to the atmosphere. All zone isolation valves on all systems should be open during all tests. C.1.2.2 Procedure

Leakage tact

This t&may be carried out on sub-sections of the pipeline, provided that no part of the system is omitted. More than one pipeline may be tested at the same time. C.l.l.l General conditions

The section to be tested should be completely installed and fixed to the wall. The base blocks of all terminal units should be fitted and blanked. Other devices such as pressure gauges and pressure switches need not be fitted. All connection sockets for such devices should be blanked. A test pressure gauge should be connected to the section under test. The section under test should be isolated from the remainder of the system. C.1.1.2 Procedure

Test each terminal unit on the system under test as follows: a) open the base block to its maximum;

bl permit the test gas to flow for approximately 1 min and check flow and cleanliness; c) re-blank the base block;

d) remove pressure source after the last opening has been closed again and leave the connection point open; e) connect the pressure source to the next gas system and test in accordance with procedures a) to d).
NOTE - After completion of all tests, re-blank all terminal uni! base blocks. It is advantageous to leave the piping systems under pressure after these tests are completed. If this is not done, and there is a lapse of time, a retest for leakage should be carried out before final installation of the terminal unit valves.

Fill the section(s) to be tested with test gas at a pressure of 1,5 times operating pressure for compressed medical gases and !%I .kPa for vacuum. Disconnect and remove the gas supply. Note the pressure shown on the gauge initially and again after 24 h. Note the temperature at the beginning and end of the test. C.l .I .3 Results

C.1.2.3 Test results There should be an adequate flow of test gas from every base block on the system under test and no flow from those base blocks left open on other systems. The test gas should be observed to be free from particulate matter (see C.6.1).
NOTES 1 If the flow is too low, there is an obstruction in the piping system which should be remedied. 2 If there is no flow from a terminal unit, that terminal unit is wronqlv connected or totally obstructed. This situation should be investigated and rectified and the terminal unit retested. 3 If there is flow from the open base block on a system not under test, that system is cross-connected with the one under test. This should be investigated, rectified and retested.

No pressure drop should occur except for pressure changes due to temperature variations. (See annex B.)

C.1.2

Tests for cross-connection

and obstruction

These tests should be carried out on one pipeline at a time, and if possible on the completed system.

23

IS 12827 iSO 7396

: 1989 : 1987

C.1.3
C.1.3.1

Identification

of pipelines

C.2.2 Tests pipelines C.2.2.1

and checks

for leakage

on vacuum

General conditions General conditions
test described in C.l .l should have been com-

All pipeline systems being checked should be completed to identifiable points, e.g. valve box, terminal unit, source equipment.

The leakage

pleted satisfactorily. All terminal unit valves and other devices such as pressure

C.1.3.2

Procedure has been correctly placed to tees and where pipelines

gauges and relief valves should have been installed. Visually inspect that the identification on all pipelines, especially adjacent pass through walls and partitions. The vacuum under test. source should be connected to the system(s)

Ensure that the gas name, symbol and colour are correct and that identification is firmly attached. If the inspection involves isolation valves, terminal units and

A test pressure under test.

gauge

should

be connected

to be section(s)

source equipment, ensure that the gas identity on such equipment matches that on the pipelines.

C.2.2.2

Procedure

, ":
C.1.3.3
The

Evacuate the system(s) to nominal operating vacuum and maintain the source in use until the system(s) is (are) dried out. With the system at nominal source. Note operating vacuum, isolate the vacuum initially and the pressure shown on the gauge

Test results
of all pipelines should be as specified in

identification

after 1 h.

clause 10. C.2.2.3

Test results
should be as specified in

C.2

Tests

after

completion

of the installation

Any reduction in the level of vacuum
12.4.1.2.

C.2.1 Tests and checks for leakage compressed medical gas pipelines
NOTE -

on C.2.3 Correct zoning, tightness identification of shut-off valves and

All systems may be t&ted at the same time.

C.2.1 .I

General conditions
in C.l.l should have been com-

These tests may be carried out on more than one system at a

time. Valve
The leakage test described pleted satisfactorily. All terminal systems.

tightness

tests

are

not

necessary

on

vacuum

unit valves and other

devices

such as pressure

C.2.3.1

General conditions
completed

gauges and relief valves should have been installed. A pressure source should be connected test at a convenient A test pressure under test. C.2.3.2.1 C.2.1.2 Fill the pressure. Disconnect and remove the gas supply Procedure system(s) to be tested with test gas at operating C.2.3.2.3 of the most minal On all systems, depressurize the line downstream remote valve from the source, by opening a terThe system should be at operating pressure. point. be connected to the section(s) C.2.3.2 to the system(s) under The tests specified in C.2.1 should have been satisfactorily and all terminal unit valves closed.

gauge should

Procedure

C.2.3.2.2

Close all zone isolation

valves.

unit valve.

Note the pressure shown on the gauge initially and again after 24 h.

C.2.3.2.4 15 min.

Close

the

terminal

unit

valve

and

reopen

after

C.2.1.3

Test results
in 12.4.1 .I

C.2.3.2.5 the source C.2.3.2.4.

On each system, of supply

open valves

in sequsnce

towards and

repeating

procedures

C.2.3.2.3

Any pressure drop should be as specified

24

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

C.2.3.2.6 Check all valves, in both open and closed positions, for leakage into the environment.

C.2.4.2.4
which

Depressurize/release

vacuum

from

the

system

has been tested.

C.2.3.2.7

After

procedures

C.2.3.2.1

to

C.2.3.2.6,

check

C.2.4.2.5
-

Procedures

C.2.4.2.1

to

C.2.4.2.4

should

be

areas served by each valve and its identification.

repeated for each service, ensuring all terminal units are tested see C.2.4.2.2.

C.2.3.3

Test results
medical gas pipelines, downstream no pressure increase

C.2.4.2.6 tunction

During the preceding of each terminal unit.

tests, check the mechanical

On compressed should occur test.

in the pipeline

of the valve under

C.2.4.3

Test

results

Each valve should serve only the area(s) intended by the system design, and be so identified. Valves should not leak into the environment.

The pressure drop indicated at each terminal unit should be within the limit shown in table 1, at its specified flow. Test gas should flow/vacuum unit on any other system. The mechanical action of each terminal unit should be satisfacshould engage easily, lock firmly and should be created from each ter-

minal unit on the system under test, but not from any terminal

Tests for cross-connection, identification, flow, pressure drop and mechanical function of terminal units
C.2.4 Total system flow and pressure drop tests (see C.2.5) carried out in association In no circumstances with these tests. may be

tory. The test probes disengage easily. Identification

should be on each terminal attached.

unit and be clearly

visible and permanently

should these tests be carried out on more C.2.5

than one system at a time.

Performance

tests

of the pipeline

system

C.2.4.1

General

conditions pressure.

These tests should be carried out on one system at a time, but may be carried out in association with the tests in C.2.4.

All pipeline systems should be at atmospheric

C.2.5.1

General r Dnditions

All zone isolation valves on all systems should be open during all tests. A single pressure source should be used and connected to only one system at a time; in the case of vacuum systems, this should be the vacuum The system operating source. remain pressurized the test. at nominal

All zone isolation valves on all systems should be open. Connect a supply of test gas at the source of the system to be tested, of sufficient capacity to meet the total design flow of the system.

under test should

C.2.5.2

Procedure

pressure/vacuum

throughout

A sufficient number of special test probes should be inserted into selected terminal units throughout the system under test C.2.4.2

Procedure

to provide system.

a total flow equal to the total design flow of the

C.2.4.2.1

Pressurize/evacuate

the

system

to be tested

at

Pressurize/evacuate operating

and

maintain

the system

under

test

at

nominal operating

pressure/va,uum.

pressure/vacuum.

Observe and record the system pressure at selected points. C.2.4.2.2 Using special gas test probes inserted into each terminal unit on all systems, check that all terminal units of the system under test are pressurized/evacuated, terminal units on other and correctly should be C.2.5.3
this test, all terminal units should be checked by to

Depressurize

the system and repeat the test for each service.

identified. No pressurized.
NOTE During

systems

Test results
to

means of special gas-specific probes the gas for which they are intended.

to ensure that they correspond

The pressure drop at each of the points measured according C.2.5.2 should not exceed the values given in table 1.

C.2.4.2.3

Observe the flow and pressure drop.

NOTE If the pressure drop exceeds the values in table 1 at any pn~ni. it will mean either the pipes are too small for the total design flow, or a branch or a mairl pipe is partially blocked

25

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

C.3 Tests of relief valves, safety valves and supply plant
C.3.1 Valve tests
be carried out on one valve at a

It should be confirmed that the specification of the manufacturer or supplier is in accordance with the design specification. Compressor during which table. plant should be pressure-tested minor leaks, detectable for a period of 1 h are accepby bubbles,

These tests should preferably time.

C.4
C.3.1 .l

Warning

system tests
at a time,

General conditions

These tests should be carried out for one function and on one system at a time.

All relief valves and safety valves should be fitted. All pressure-relief and -safety type-tested valves. valves should be tested except

C.4.1

General

conditions

All alarms should be installed and in operation.

C.3.1.2

Procedure
in which the valves to be tested

Isolate a section of pipework are located. Pressurize the pipework suitable pipework. capacity.

C.4.2

Procedure

section with test gas using a source of increase the pressure in the

Gradually

All alarm sensors should be shown to operate with an appropriate change in the local system condition (for example pressure, moisture content, liquid level, system change-over).

Note the pressure at which the valves lift. Reduce the pressure to normal operating pressure and note the
pressure at which the valves close.

Note the settings at which alarm sensors switch on and off. Observe resetting all alarm functions, of the auditory such as lights, auditory signal,

signal and lamp test. system will operate from the standby

C.3.1.3

Test results

Check that the warning power source.

The pressures at which the relief valves operate should be in accordance with 5.1.8.

C-4.3
The pressures at which the safety valves operate should be in

Results
at the specified

accordance with 5.1.9.
Ail valves should reseal at above maximum operating pressure.

All alarms listed in 6.2 and 6.3 should operate conditions. All alarm functions power sources. should operate

under normal and standby

C.3.2 C.3.2.1

Supply

plant

tests

General conditions
and connected to normal

C.5 Filling with specific gas for compressed medical gas systems
All systems may be filled with their specific gases at the same time.

All supply plant should be installed and standby power supplies.

C.3.2.2

Procedure C.5.1 General
The

conditions
tests should have been satisfactorily

All pipework

joints in the plant installation

should be tested for C.5.1.1 completed. previous

leakage at normal operating All functions and operating

pressure/vacuum. parameters of each item of supply with the specification of

plant should be tested in accordance the manufacturer. The plant should be shown supply.

C.5.1.2 on the standby power C.5.1.3

All sources

of test gas should

have

been

discon-

nected and removed. to operate

Each

pipeline

system

shouiil

be connected

to its

C.3.2.3

Results
with the specification of the

supply system.

The test results should conform manufacturer

C.5.1.4 pressure.

Each

pipeline

system

should

bo

at

atmospheric

or supplier of the system.

26

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

C.5.2
C.5.2.1

Procedure
Open all zone valves.

Test each pipeline system at selected terminal droplets and water content.

units for water

C.5.2.2

Fill each pipeline

system

to the operating

pressure

Medical air pipelines using compressors as a source should be tested for carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide concentration.

with its specific gas from the supply source. C.6.2.3 C.5.2.3 With the supply source closed, release the pressure in It is advisable to vent oxygen and nitrous oxide There should be no taste or odour of oil. NOTE - This is equivalent to an oil contamination of less than 0.5 mg/ms. and C.5.2.3 at least three times. There should be no water droplets and the dewpoint exceed + 5 OC at pipeline pressure. The carbon monoxide should not Test results

each system.

outside the building.

C.5.2.4

Repeat

C.5.2.2

C.5.2.5

Open each terminal

unit in turn at least once whilst

the system is under pressure and connected to the supply source. This procedure should eliminate pockets of test gas.

level should not exceed 5 ppm ( V/ V).

The carbon dioxide level should not exceed 1 Ooo ppm ( V/ VI. C.5.2.6 Leave each system under operating pressure with the source connected.

C.6 ,Tests for cleanliness medical gas systems

for compressed

C.7 Test for gas identity medical gas systems
All systems should preferably

for compressed

be tested at the same time.

C.6.1

Particulate

matter

C.7.1

General

These tests should be carried out at all terminal units and may be combined with the filling procedure given in C.5.2.5.

All pipeline systems should have been filled with the specific gas at operating pressure according to the preceding clause. During testing, ment. do not connect the system to medical equip-

C.6.1 .I

General

conditions pressure and con-

The pipeline system should be at operating nected to the supply source.

C.7.2
C.6.1.2 Procedure

Procedure
units should be tested with an oxygen concentrathe oxygen concentration of

All terminals Insert a full-bore probe into each terminal unit and hold a target distance from the terof white paper or cloth at an appropriate minal unit for 10 s.

tion tester suitable for measuring the specific gas.

C6.1.3

Test

results matter visible in good light to an

C.7.3

Test results
terminal

There should be no particulate operator with normal vision.

The nominal oxygen concentration at the appropriate units should be as given in table 6.

C.6.2

Contamination
units on

Table

6 -

Test for gas identitv

-

Nominal

readings

These tests should be carried out at selected terminal each compressed gas pipeline.

Specific

gas

Oxygen concentration % (V/VI 100 21 0 0 0 0 According to the mixture specification

C.6.2.1

General

conditions pressure and con-

02 Air NZO N2 CO2 He units for oil conOxygen mixture

The pipeline system should be at operating nected to the supply source.

C.6.2.2

Procedure

Test each pipeline system at selected terminal tamination by the absence of odour or taste.

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

Annex Recommended

D for the organization

minimum requirements of maintenance

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.)

D.l

General
approach to the maintenance of a non-flammable

0.2.3

Safe practices
for maintenance should include proper com-

A systematic

The procedures munications

medical gas pipeline system is essential. NOTE - This annex provides information that should be used when setting up a maintenance programme, but does not include actual maintenance tasks or frequencies.

and documented operation

control of the work. involves shutting down parts of a

If a maintenance pipeline system, a)

the shut-down

should

be fully

coordinated

with

the

clinical staff in the areas affected;

D.2 D.2.1

Organization Staff

b)

any valve(s)

and terminal

unit(s)

affected

should

be

marked to warn against their use. If a maintenance Only qualified commissioning staff, familiar with the functioning of the equiptesting and to al b) to ensure safe working to reduce contamination; to purge the system to clear any contamination. conditions; system, ment and with the proper practices for installation, supervise and to carry out maintenance work. operation involves breaking into a pipeline

further action should be taken

of medical gas pipelines should be appointed

D.2.2

Maintenance

programme
should be established which in-

c)

A maintenance cludes specified This programme instructions. Particular a) b) c) d) e)

programme maintenance

tasks and their frequency. as a minimum, the manufac-

D-3

Documentation
documentation system should be set up which inup to date when required, and

should include,

A permanent

turer's recommendations

concerning

service and maintenance

cludes the documents be reviewed

as specified in 11.5 and this documenta-

tion system should be brought once a year.

attention

should be paid to of the system and its components;

performance leakage;

The results of all tests and observations the documentation system.

should be recorded

in

D.4
wear and tear;

Spare

parts
in

The owner should ensure that spare parts as recommended contamination preventive ;

the list supplied by the installer (see 11.5.4) are readily available.

maintenance.

D.5
A procedure defective or replacement. should be instituted for the immediate suspect equipment and its prompt reporting of repair or

Retesting

and recommissioning
activity the appropriate tests in ac-

Following cordance

any maintenance

with clause 12 should be carried out.

26

IS 12827 IS0 7396

: 1989 : 1987

Annex E Schematic representation of sources of supply systems

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.)

Figures 6 to 13 are examples of supply systems which will provide safe and continuing service for patient care. Other system arrangements (designs) that meet the intent of the text of this International Standard and specific requirements of particular hospitals may be appropriate.
NOTES 1 2 3 The locationof the emergencymaintenanceinlet, where shown, is optional. In figures 6, 7, 6 and 11, dupiexing of the line pressure regulators and safety/relief valves is shown; this duplexing is optional. Other optional components on the figures are so marked.

29

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 ?396 : 1987

!`-'
I .

.p..-.-.
-`-! PressureSource of supply Reserve pressure regulator Pipeline distribution system

Cylinder pressure alarm

!"h7! !
'

pressure manifold

& Non-return valve (or shut-off valve)

I
i

Flexible connection

ii_ L_
-

Cylinders .-.W.

k

Cylinder valve Reserve supply (optional) !--`-`-`-'

J
Shut-off valve

I

Safety/relief device (optional) Pressure-safety valve

Duplexing (optional)

-

Shut-off

valve

I

i

Operating

pressure regulator

shut-off

valve)

Cvlinders (No. 1 bank)

Cylinders (No. 2 bank

t

Figure

6 -

Tipical

supply

system

with

gas cylinders

30

IS0

IS 12827 : 1989 7396 : 1987

r

.~.~.-.-,~.~.
1
f I
Pressuresafety valve

! I

Fll;fwelpressu~e
Hirgh pressure

&
0 Non-return Flexible Filter

1 43 1
Cylinder pressure alarm switch

;

mrld

s
Cylinders

valve (or shut-off

valve)

connection Shut-off valve

Safety/relief

device

`I

Reserve supply

loptional)

Line pressure regulator

I

Low and high pressure emergency alarm switch .-.

PA L-t t

alarm swatch

Emergency/maintenance

inlet

Bleeder valve

Operating

selector

Nonreturn Flexible Cylinder

valve connection valve

for shut-off

valve

~~
Lrquid

tllYll
Safety/relief device (optional) Liquid

Figure 7 -

Typical supply system with cryogenic

cylinders

31

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7396 : 1987

Non-return Flexible

valve

(or shut-off

valve)

connection shut-off valve 4

Safety/relief

device

Source

of supply

I ' I

t
Pipeline distribution system

Cylinders Reserve

L

.-.-.

supply

(optional;

see 5.3.1)

Y.-.-.-f

-l
/Duplexing (optional) Pressuresafety valve 1 Low and high pressure emergency

Reserve supply Pressurerelief valve

operating

alarm

I
I I

I-Shut-off Non-return valve Operating pressure regulator Shut-off Bursting disc valve

I

, I, -.-.
1

I I I

! ! I . Emergency/maintenance
inlet

IL .-.-. _-I
Llqurd

I

r
I

Liquid

I

Liquid level alarm switch

L-_--1 I

Operating suPPlY

I---.-.-._.

i

Alternative reserve supply (optional; see 5.3.1)

I
J

I

Figure

8 -

Typical

supply

system

with

stationary

cryogenic

vessels

,

IS 12827 IS0 7396

: 1989 : 1987

Filter

Muffler.

Precsure

I

1

NorI-return

Filter Inlet

Muffler

Shut-off valve Non-return valve connection After-cooler loptional)

L

&
f
Dew point alarm switch l-l (optional) Filter Dr!W:

Y

Drain

L_

--pa-_-

1
Drain

Separator

T Regulator (optional)

/~!?-~~-~~~

Shut-off

valve

Connect& point for permitted non-medical uses (see annex G t

Shut-off Separator

v:jlve

Bactenal

fllter (optional)

. I
i

r5
Test point location is optlonal

I

i

Figure

9

- Typical

duplex

medical

a:r

compressor

systetn

with

receiver

33

IS 12827 IS0 7396

: 1989 : 1987

Source of supply R_

Pipeline distribution system

I
(optional) ILZrilter,l

I

1-i

Shut-off valve

ri
-

DrainZ!e tr'

I
I

anur-orr valve Duplexing (optional) .-. -. Shut-off valve Drainage trap

-t
Shut-off valve Bacterial filter

`t
/ 9

4

l_ozumalarm

I

I

I I

I I

I
Pressure gauge (

I > I I

I
I
Reservoir

I
I I ,

I

Drain n

L
Non-return valve Non-return valve

Exhaust

Exhaust Muffler loptional)

P

Vacuum ,

Vacuum pump

Drain fif required)

Drain lif required)

Figure

10 -

Typical

medical

vacuum

supply

system

with

reservoir

34

IS 12827 IS0 7396

: 1989

: 1987

Pressuresafety valve

Flexible

connection

Safety/relief

device

Shut-off

valve

Reserve

supply

Pipeline

distribution

`die:al air cylinders

Analyserk) --cnrrterls~ #CL-. __.
1-1

and

Pressure alarm Valve controlled K-3

I-A

' ml'
I

Pressurerelief valve

Il

Duolexino foptionali

I I
I
I

Low and high pressure emergency alarm switch

I-

Y

14
Operating pressure regulator

1

I

Pressr_Ire gauge

Emergencv/mainte&ce

From central SUPPlY

Figure

11 -

Typical

proportioning

system

of oxygen

and nitrogen

mixture

35 -

IS 12827:19Ei:) ISO7396:1987

Pipeline _

distribution system ._ ~__ __~~~_.~_.__ e distribution (at nominal Pressure

___~~

~

line pressure) alarm Termindl

I

Riser shut off valves

Fiqure

12 -- Typical

system with control equipment withit) pipclme (double-stage pressure distribution system)

distribution

system

36

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7398 : 1987

`\

\\

\

\ \ \
I
I

I
I

1)

Except where a separate firebreak wall exists with a minimum height of 2.5 m.

Figure

13 -

Recommended

minimum

distances

for the siting

of stationary

cryogenic

oxygen

vessels

37

IS 12827; 1989 IS0 7396, : 1987

Annex Recommendations
(This annex forms

F procedures

for emergency
an integral

part of the standard.)

F.l F.l.l

General

F.4 F.4.1

Remedial

actions
failure of supply initiated to should be the

The cause of the emergency and action

Emergencies can arise which may result in the sudden cessation of the gas supply to one or more clinical areas. Should such failures occur, it is vital that procedures action on persons and have been

investigated immediately fault or damage.

remedy

set up which ~~

can ensure

immediate

F.4.2

Such

investigations

may show

that other

areas of the

communication

of the problem

to those

hospital, not initially affected, may need to be isolated to carry out repairs. In this case, communication and conservation procedures should be instituted in these areas before the gas supply to another system or area. shutting off

areas affected

;
of supplies;

-

conservation remedial

actions.

F.4.3
method F.1.2 tions National should or local regulations with. relating for fire precaube complied

Remedial of control,

work should

be carried

out under an effective

see clause 0.

F.5 F.2 F.2.1
areas

Training
The staff responsible should be properly trained in the

Communication F.5.1
use of medical gases and pipeline systems and be fully familiar with their hospital pipeline layout and the location of all zone isolation valves.

Communication procedures should be set up to ensure that any emergency arising is notified immediately to all clinical likely to be affected and to all staff involved actions. in the maintenance F.2.2 Such of gas supplies communication and in remedial should include

F.5.2
the nature details of of the emerge'ncy; the gas conservation procedures to be

Emergency

procedures

should

be

initiated

at

least

twice a year as an exercise, and any action noted and followed up.

problem

or re-training

F-5.3

Actual

emergency taken

situations to improve

should

be evaluated

and

applied

;
of the emergency; to be taken.

appropriate

action

procedures

and training.

-

likely duration remedial

actions

F.6 F.2.3,
Experienced persons should be nominated in each area to coordtnate and c'ommunicate actions. Persons

Nominated
should

staff
nominated to attend, operate

be specifically

and maintain plant. They should be appropriately trained and qualified in the handling of cylinders and gas supply plants.

F.3 F.3.1
dinator

Conservation
On receiving system(s) an

of supplies
emergency notification, the coor-

F.7 F.7.1

Reserve

supplies
that gas reserves of supply In cylinders not to

in each clinical

area should involved

reduce

the use of gas from and bring It is recommended connected

the pipeline

to the level required

into use their own

reserves.

normally should pipeline check plant inlets, on reserves of

to a source

are held in addition

F.3.2 available

The

staff

responsible into emergency

reserves connected to a source of supply. The capacity of such unconnected reserves should be calculated to take into account the normal daily usage of the gas, the normal supply arrangements and the emergency procedures which will be taken In the event of a plant or gas supply failure.

and bring manifolds,

use as necessary,

and cylinders or at points

on reserve use.

F.3.3

If necessary,

additional

supplies

of

gas

should to meet

be the

F.7.2
manifold cylinders

ordered from suppliers or from other expected duration of the emergency.

hospitals

Sufficient cylinders equal to the bank may be held in each manifold may be held in an adjacent cylinder

capacity of one room. Additional store.

38

IS 12827 : 1989 IS0 7398 : 1987

F.7.3

Critical

care

areas

may

require

their

own

cylinder

F.8.2

Cylinder

storage

areas should

be well ventilated

and

reserves to minimize any delay in maintaining

gas supplies in an

the cylinders should be stored in accordance

with the supplier's

emergency (see 5.1.3). If cylinders with attached regulators are used for this purpose, the regulator outlet should be gasspecific for connection to a low-pressure flexible connecting assembly (see 3.221.

recommendations. Full and empty cylinders should be segregated and the respective storage areas should be labelled.

F.8.3

Access

to cylinder manifold

rooms and storage emergency

areas exits

F.8
F.8.1

Safety
Suitable handling facilities (e.g. purpose-designed of cylinders.

should

be level and kept clear, Emergency

in particular

from these rooms and areas should be kept free of obstructions at 611 times. exits should lead into the open air or trolleys) should be provided for the movement other safe location.

39

IS12127:1989 ISO7396:1987

Annex Requirements system

G air

to be complied with when extending a compressed to applications net directly related to patient care
(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.)

G.l Arrangements shall be made to prevent back flow of air, preferably by operating the extenaicn pipaline at a lower pressure than that in the line for patient care use.

G.3 The maximum flow into the extension the design requirements. G.4 The extension shall be connected

shall be limited to

to the main system at

the source as shown in figure 9. G.2 An alarm pipeline system shall operate the nominal care. if the pressure operating in the extension exceeds pressure of NOTE - In addition to the above requirements, arrangements should be made for the maintenance of the extension as part of the total medical compressed air system.

the system used for patient

40

IS 12827 IS0 7396

: 1989 : 1987

Annex Oxygen concentrator
(This annex

H swing adsorber (WA)]

[pressure
an integral

does not form

part of the standard.)

H.l

General

H.3.5 ensure

The plant should that product

be provided

with

filters

necessary

to

gas is free of contaminants.

The development of PSA plant has not vet been completed. This annex therefore is not comprehensive and is only provided to give preliminary guidance on the type of equipment and safety precautions envisaged as a basis for future development (see note 2 in 5.4).

H.3.6 with

The plant should include pressure regulators complete safety valves and shut-off valves, in parallel for purposes.

maintenance

H.3.7

A PSA plant should

also include

a reserve supply

whrch

H.2
A PSA

Description
plant is designed to supply a hospital pipeline system

should be permanently connected and which should operate automatically if the oxygen concentration falls below the
minimum permitted value or if the supply fails.

and comprises compressor(s), separate medical compressed unit(s), supply reservoir(s) clean, and dry, oil-free oxygen

as appropriate, or uses a air source, nitrogen adsorber equipment necessary to not H.3.8 capacity mand The reserve PSA supply plant. should The taking have the designed capacity the average flow of the demixture of concentration of the volumetric into account

associated

less than 90 % (V/V), generated from balance is mainly argon and nitrogen. include (see 5.4). oxygen analyserfs), recorder

atmospheric air. The The system should and a reserve supply

reserve should

be specified,

and availability

of the gas concerned.

H.3.9

The

oxygen

concentration

should

be analysed

and

monitored continuously by at least one instrument and should be recorded. The analyser should be capable of independently

H.3
H.3.1 average

Requirements
A PSA calculated plant should be of such a capacity system that the

and automatically the event

isolating

the PSA plant from

the pipeline

in

of a malfunction.

demand

for the pipeline

can be conH.3.10 equipment and standby All electrical should supply supplies. wiring should of the PSA plant and associated to the relevant IEC Publications. to both the normal be connected conform

tinuously supplied. The PSA plant should include two or more compressors or utilize medical air from a pipeline.

The electrical H.3.2 pressors flues, charges, The ambient should vacuum etc. from air inlet all internal for a PSA combustion extract plant utilizing comH.3.11 tilated should should H.3.3 Compressor(s) may be of any type provided that they are capable of meeting the operational requirements of the system.

be located system

in a position discharges,

where

there is minimal engine exhausts, disThe PSA plant and clean location be provided with should drainage be installed facilities. in a well lit, venThe location gases from ventilation with ample accessibility. of the vented

contamination

Special precautions

be taken to ensure the removal

the area of the plant and its safe dispersal to the atmosphere. The plant should be located separately from other medical gas sources
NOTE

except

air compressor
sound

units and vacuum
pressure

plant.

~ The A-weighted plant level This may

level ansing from the opera room will often situations exceed and ap be in some

H.3.4 designed, rent vessels.

Any national

receiver(s) pressure

associated and tested vessels

with

the plant for unfired

should

be

tion

of PSA

measured

wrthin

the plant

manufactured

in accordance

with the curpressure

85 dB.

be unacceptable

codes

proprrate action should be taken. Any vrbratron tn the plant should reduced by the installation of flexible connections.

41

Bureau

of Indian

Standards institution established under the Bureau activities of lndian Standards Act, 1986 to

BIS is a statutory promote certification Copyright

harmonious

development

of the

of standardization,

marking

and quality

of goods and attending

to connected

matters in the country.

No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Revision of Indian Enquiries relating to copyright Standards periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Indian Standards

are reviewed

Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in are issued from time to time. possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving Dot : No. the following I3 reference :

MHD

( 2164 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 I3 76

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices ; : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

( 331 01 I3 31 75 37 86 62

Eastern ; 1 /14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445446, Sector 36-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113

2 I843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD. BANGALORE. FARIDABAD.

(East)

BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAH. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. :
Printed at Printograph, Delhi, In%

JAI'PUR. KANPUR.

