Wdta Ah IS 11480 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ma Vertes Tat ch mA Wary eh fee 
na Hen — fates 


(TECH TAU ) 


Domestic Grillers for use with 


Liquefied Petroleum Gases — 
Specification 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 27.060.10 


© BIS 2023 


aredta Are Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WA, 9 SEEL ME HHL AMT, Ay Reet - 110002 
ee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 7 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee, MED 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1985. Since then many suggestions were received for improvement and with 
a result Amendment | was issued and incorporated with this revision. The standard is being revised again to keep 
pace with latest technological development and International practices. Also, in this revision the standard has 
been brought into latest style and format of Indian Standards, and references to Indian Standard, wherever 
applicable have been updated. BIS certification marking clause has been modified to align with the revised 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016. 


This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on various domestic and commercial gas-burning appliances 
(pressure type), used with LPG. General requirements of these equipment are covered in IS 5116 which is a 
necessary adjunct to this standard. Should, however, any deviation exists between the requirements given in 
IS 5116 and those of this standard, provisions of the latter shall apply. 


This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on various domestic and commercial gas burning appliances 
(pressure type) used with Liquefied Petroleum Gases (LPG). IS 5116 is a necessary adjunct to this standard. Should, 
however, any deviation exist between the requirements given in IS 5116 and those of this standard, provisions of 
the latter shall apply. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a. test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded-off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11480 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


DOMESTIC GRILLERS FOR USE WITH 
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies construction, operation, 
safety requirements, and tests for domestic grillers 
with or without boiling burners for burning gases at 
a rate not exceeding 1 000 g/h, intended for use with 
liquefied petroleum gases at 2.942 KN/m? (30 
gf/cm?) gas inlet pressure. 


1.2 Requirements for controls or accessories given in 
this standard relate to those fitted as part of, or 
supplied with, particular appliances; they do not 
necessarily provide a complete specification for 
controls intended for general use and tested 
separately. 


1.3 For convenience, this standard has been divided 
into three sections as follows: 


Section 1 Construction 
Section 2 Performance 
Section 3 General 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below. In case the standards are to be 
referred in this clause they are to be listed as follows: 


IS No. Title 


1483 : Specification for white bread (third 
1988 revision) 


4246: Domestic gas stoves for use with 
2002 liquefied petroleum gases — 
Specification (fifth revision) 


5116 Domestic and commercial equipment 

2020 for use with LPG — General 
requirements (fourth revision) 

6480 Glossary of terms relating to domestic 

1988 and commercial gas-burning 


appliances (first revision) 


SECTION 1 CONSTRUCTION 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the relevant 
definitions given in IS 6480 shall apply. In addition, 
the definition given in 3.2 shall also apply. 


3.2 Grill Area — The area over which 75 percent of 
the browning is uniform. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 In addition to the relevant requirements given in 
4 of Section 1 of IS 5116, the requirements given in 
4.2, shall apply. 


4.2 No pressure regulator shall be included as a part 
of the griller. 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 In addition to the relevant requirements given in 
5 of Section 1 of IS 5116, the requirements given in 
5.2 to 5.4 shall apply. 


5.2 Material for griller burner where food is placed 
under it shall be of non-corrosive material, shall have 
melting point above 800 °C, and treated to withstand 
corrosion during normal use. 


5.3 Grill trays and grid shall be made of non- 
corrosive material or appropriately treated to resist 
corrosion. 


5.4 Glass for grill door if provided shall be heat 
resistant. 


6 DESIGN FOR MAINTENANCE 


6.1 In addition to the relevant requirements given in 6 
of Section 1 of IS 5116, the requirements given in 6.1 
to 6.8 shall apply. 


6.2 Burner and burner parts of same capacity in the 
same model shall be replaceable without affecting 
performance. 


IS 11480 : 2023 


6.3 Parts which are intended to be removable by the 
user shall be easy to replace correctly and difficult 
to assemble incorrectly. 


6.4 All nuts, bolts, and fittings having spanner flats 
shall be capable of being moved by suitable spanner 
or be readily accessible to an adjustable spanner. 


6.5 All controls and any other moving parts shall 
operate freely at the highest working temperature 
obtainable on the appliance. 


6.6 The appliance shall be free from sharp edges that 
are liable to damage clothing or cause injuries. 


6.7 The parts of the burner shall not get disconnected 
during operation of the appliance. 


6.8 Burner parts shall be so designed and located 
that in normal use spillage of food shall not cause 
internal fouling of mixing tube and or blockage of 
injector jet. 


7 RIGIDITY AND STABILITY 


7.1 The grill shall be so designed that when 
assembled correctly and resting on a firm-level 
foundation, it shall be in level and rigid, and if 
subjected to vibration, shall not rattle. 


7.2 The grill shall be so designed that it cannot be 
inadvertently overturned. 


8 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


8.1 In addition to the relevant requirements given in 
7 of Section 1 of IS 5116 the requirements given in 
8.2 to 8.3 shall apply. 


8.2 All components made of materials susceptible to 
corrosion shall be given a _ corrosion-resistant 
protective finish appropriate to the conditions of use. 
The protective coating for external surfaces shall be 
resistant to temperatures up to 150 °C. 


8.3 Plastic components that are liable to heating 
such as tap handles, pushbuttons, etc, shall not show 
signs of deterioration when tested in accordance 
with the method given in Annex A. 


9 GAS TAPS 
The relevant requirements given in 8 of Section 1 
of IS 5116 shall apply. 


10 INJECTOR JETS 
The relevant requirements given in 9 of Section 
1 of IS 5116 shall apply. 


11 BURNERS 
The relevant requirements given in 10 of Section 
1 of IS 5116 shall apply. 


12 BURNER SUPPORT 


Burner support or any accessory, if provided, shall 
not interfere in the functioning of the burner and or 
burner ports. 


13 DRIP TRAYS 


13.1 Every grill shall be equipped with a drip tray or 
other adequate means to catch water or other 
substances falling or dripping through openings in 
grates. 


13.2 Drip trays or other means provided to serve the 
same suction shall be constructed of a corrosion- 
resistant material or have a corrosion-resisting 
finish. 


13.3 Drip trays, when provided, shall have no sharp 
edges or corners. They shall be easily removable 
without tools when hot and easily accessible for 
cleaning. 


14 GRILL DESIGN 


14.1 There shall be adequate clearance between the 
grill and the tray beneath it to allow for satisfactory 
grilling and the insertion of a pie dish having 
dimension covered in Fig. 1. 


14.2 The height of the grill pan grid shall be 
adjustable to two or more positions. 


14.3 The size of the pie dish may be as agreed to 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


IS 11480 : 2023 


270 


All dimensions in millimeters. 


Fic. 1 PIE DISH 


15 GAS SOUNDNESS 


The relevant requirements given in 16 of IS 5116 
shall apply. 


16 STRENGTH AND RIGIDITY 


When tested as specified in Annex B, the vertical 
resultant deflection of the top surface measured at the 
centre of length of the body, shall not exceed 4 mm 
and the distance between the opposite sides 
(lengthwise and widthwise) shall not change by more 
than 5 mm. 


SECTION 2 PERFORMANCE 
17 GENERAL CONDITIONS OF TEST 


The relevant requirements given in 18 of Section 2 
of IS 5116 shall apply. 


18 GAS CONSUMPTION 


18.1 In addition to the relevant requirements given in 
20 of Section 2 of IS 5116 the requirements given in 
18.2 shall apply. 


18.2 When the gas consumption of burner is reduced 
to simmer the flame shall not extinguish, blow off, 
strike back or form soot when tested with 
commercial LPG (marketed in 11 kg to 15 kg LPG 
capacity cylinders) at 2.942 kN/m? (30 gf/cm?) gas 
inlet pressure. 


19 IGNITION AND FLAME STABILITY 


19.1 In addition to the relevant requirements given in 


21 of IS 5116 the requirements given in 19.2 and 19.3 
shall apply. 


19.2 There shall be easy and safe access for lighting 
and re-lighting each burner by a match stick and it 
shall be easy to see that the burner is lighted. Where 
the burner is lighted by automatic ignition or battery 
or flint operated or by a pilot flame it shall not be 
possible for gas to be admitted to the main burner 
without being smoothly ignited by a pilot flame. 
Each burner should be at room temperature at the 
start of each test and should be tested in turn. 


19.3 If the flame is applied to any of the burner ports 
when the gas is flowing, flame travel shall be 
complete. This applies for all pressures from 2.452 
kN/m? to 3.432 kN/m? (25 gf/cm? to 35 gf/cm°) taps 
being fully open, and without a pan over the burner. 


20 NOISE CONTROL 


The ignition of the burner flames, their operation, 
and turning OFF shall not give rise to undue or 
excessive noise during all the operation tests. 


21 FLASHBACK 

There shall be no flashback when griller is switched 
off after it has remained lighted in full 'ON' position 
for a period of 30 minutes at a nominal pressure of 
25 gf/cm? to 35 gf/cm?. 

22 RESISTANCE TO DRAUGHT 


There shall be no extinction of flame on any of the 
burners operating at maximum consumption when 


IS 11480 : 2023 


the appliance is placed in a general (not localized) 
current of air with a velocity of 2 m/s as measured 
with a rotating vane anemometer. The location of the 
appliance relative to neighboring walls and the 
direction of the draught shall be varied to correspond 
to likely conditions of appliance installations when 
door opens. This applies for all pressure from 
2.452 kN/m? to 3.432 kN/m? (25 gf/cm? to 35 
gf/cm?). 


23 PERFORMANCE TEST 


23.1 When tested as described in Annex C the total 
time taken to toast three successive loads including 
times of loading and unloading shall not exceed 11.5 
minutes. For this test, Test Gas A (mixture of normal 
and iso-butane) or its substitute as obtained by the 
method given in 23.2 shall be used. 


23.2 Where analyzed test gas is not available, a 
useful substitute for Test Gas A shall be obtained 
from bottles of LP Gas (preferably commercial 
butane). The first two-thirds of each bottle shall be 
allowed to evaporate (to waste or in vapour 
withdrawal use) and the remaining one-third shall be 
used for testes after ensuring that the vapour pressure 
of the LPG contents so obtained at the temperature 
of 37.8 °C is between 3.5 kgf/cm? + 0.5 kgf/cm. The 
use of last one/two kg of gas shall be avoided as this 
may contain heavy ends. 


23.2 Formation of Soot 


During normal operation, the flames shall not deposit 
soot in sufficient quantities to affect the appearance 
or performance of the appliance. When the 
performance testing is completed the appliance shall 
be examined for evidence of sooting. 


23.3 Tests for Individual Features 


Where the manufacturer claims that a griller is 
suitable for a specified type of cooking, appropriate 
tests shall be agreed to between the manufacturer and 
the testing authority. 


24 COMBUSTION 


When tested according to the details laid down in 
Annex D, on no account the carbon monoxide/carbon 
dioxide ratio of exhaust gases of any appliance 
operating at any consumption at which the flame is 
stable at gas inlet pressure from 2.452 kN/m? to 
3.432 kN/m? (25 gf/cm? to 35 gf/cm?) shall exceed 
0.02. The carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide 
contents of the products of combustion shall be 
determined by the 


methods capable of accuracy of 0.001 percent and 
0.5 percent respectively of the volume of the 
sample. This test need not be performed on burners 
with a gas rate of less than 20 l/h at 2.942 kN/m? 
(30 gf/cm?) gas inlet pressure. 


25 FIRE HAZARDS AND LIMITING 
TEMPERATURES 


25.1 Floor, Wall and Ceiling Temperatures 


Appliances installed on or near walls and floor as 
intended for normal use shall not give rise in 
operation to wall, floor or ceiling temperature in 
excess of 65 °C above the room temperature after 
2 hours operation. This requirement shall be tested 
by the method given in Annex E. 


25.2 Surface Temperatures 


When operated as described in 25.1, no portion of the 
surface of the appliance, other than a working 
surface, likely to be accidentally touched shall 
exceed 120 °C (working surfaces include pan 
supports and grill covers). 


25.2.1 Surfaces which in normal use have to be 
touched for short periods (for example, tap handles), 
shall not have a temperature exceeding 60 °C. 


25.2.2 The temperature of synthetic rubber 
diaphragm in gas carrying components shall not 
exceed 60 °C. 


26 THERMAL EFFICIENCY OF BOILING 
BURNERS 


The requirements given in 26 and Annex F of 
IS 4246 shall apply. 


27 CLASSIFICATION OF TESTS 


Type tests — The following shall constitute type 
tests: 


a) Gas consumption (see 18); 

b) Resistance to draught (see 22); 

c) Combustion (see 24); 

d) Fire hazard and limiting temperatures (see 
25); 

e) Toasting performance (see 23); 

f) Strength of appliance (see 16); 

g) Flash back test for materials of burners (see 

5.2 and Annex C of IS 5116); and 

Thermal efficiency of boiling burners (see 

26). 


h 


wm 


28 ROUTINE TESTS 
The following shall be carried out as routine tests: 


a) Gas soundness (see 15); 

b) Ignition and flame stability (see 19); 
c) Noise control (see 20); 

d) Flashback (see 21); and 

e) Formation of soot (see 23.2). 


SECTION 3 GENERAL 
29 INSTRUCTIONS 


The appliance shall be accompanied by an 
instruction card giving the following information: 


a) Brief instructions for installation and 
regulation which includes piping and sitting 
of terminals, if any; 

b) Rating of the burner in g/h (l/h) (with 
commercial butane); 

c) Instructions for the correct operation of the 
appliance; and 

d) Name of the parts. 


30 MARKING 


30.1 Each appliance shall be legibly and indelibly 


IS 11480 : 2023 
marked with the following: 


a) Manufacturer's name, initials, or registered 
trade-mark; 

b) Total gas consumption in g/h (l/h); 

c) Rating of the burners in g/h (l/b) ; 

d) Grill area; 

e) Any special instructions for safe use of the 
appliance; 

f) For use with LPG at 2.942 kN/m? (30 
gf/cm?); and 

g) Country of origin. 


30.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The Grillers may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


30.2.1 The product(s) conforming to the 
requirements of this standard may be certified as per 
the conformity assessment schemes under the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and the Rules and Regulations framed 
thereunder, and the products may be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


31 PACKING 


The griller shall be packed as agreed between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer. 


IS 11480 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 8.3) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR PLASTICS COMPONENTS 


A-1 METHOD 


A-1.1 The test shall be made in a dry products free 
healing cabinet. Where the plastics are integral with, 
pushed on, or secured to another component, the 
stressed condition shall either be simulated or, where 
practicable, the plastics part shall be assembled to the 
mating component. 


A-1.2 Visually inspect the component to establish its 


initial condition. Place the stressed component in the 
cabinet for a continuous period of 48 h at a 
temperature of 60 °C, after which inspect it again. 


A-1.3 If during the final examination it is observed 
that the plastics part has sustained any fissures, 
distortion, blemishes, or discoloration it shall be 
deemed to have failed. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 16) 
STRENGTH AND RIGIDITY TEST 


B-1 PROCEDURE 
B-1.1 Test Procedure 


The rubber support (grommet), if any, shall be 
removed and replaced with identical metal supports. 
The pan supports and the boiling burners shall be 
removed and the distance between the sides of the 
appliance body being tested shall be measured. A 
reference reading at the top surface of the body at 
the centre of the length shall be taken. A load of 
500 newton (50 kg) shall be applied if the appliance 
comprises of griller only or a griller and two boiling 
burners with centre to centre distance of two boiling 


burners up to and including 400 mm. A load of 
750 newtons (75 kg) shall be applied to the griller 
with centre to centre distance between 2 boiling 
burners is more than 400 mm. The load shall be 
applied without impact to a strip of steel having 
20 mm thickness, 100 mm width, and as long as the 
width of the appliance. This strip shall be placed in 
the centre of the top surface of the appliance and its 
length parallel to the front. The load shall be 
maintained for 5 minutes after which the 
measurement for deflection at top surface of body 
(at the centre of the length just in front of the strip) 
shall be taken with the load in position. 


ANNEX C 
[Clause 23.1 and 27 (g)] 


METHOD FOR TOASTING PERFORMANCE TEST 


C-1 PROCEDURE 


C-1.1 Machine-made white bread conforming to IS 
1483 or any other good quality bread, one-day old, 
shall be cut into slices 12 mm thick and crusts shall 
be removed to not less than 6 mm from each edge. 


C-1.2 The grill shall be arranged in the 
recommended position and completely covered with 
slices of bread; if parts of slices are to be used, they 
shall be placed at the centre rather than of the outside 
of the grid. Three such loads shall be prepared and 
the meter read. The first load shall be placed centrally 
under the grill. The gas shall be lighted and a 


stopwatch started. The pan shall be withdrawn as 
soon as any part of the load is well browned, but 
before burning commences. 


C-1.3 During the next 25 seconds the slices shall be 
turned over on the grill grid ensuring that the outer 
edges are placed over the edges of the grill grid. Any 
loss of area due to shrinkage shall be accounted for 
by space between the slices. 


C-1.4 The grill pan shall be reinserted at the end of 
25 seconds and the other side toasted. After a 
15 second interval, a load shall be changed and a 
second load shall be toasted in the same way, and 


then a third load. At the end of the third load the gas 
shall be turned ‘OFF’ the watch stopped and the 
meter read 


C-1.5 The area in square centimeters over which the 
bread is browned (it usually approximates to a circle 
or rectangle) shall be determined. This shall be clone 
for both sides of all three loads keeping the outer 
edges of the bread always to the edges of the grid. 


IS 11480 : 2023 


shall be not less than 200 cm’. There shall be no 
marked inequality of browning on the surface of the 
toast. 


C-2 GAS CONSUMPTION 
When tested as indicated in C-1, the gas 


consumption shall not exceed the value given by the 
following formula: 


P=0.9A + 315 
C-1.6 Toasted Area where 
P = permitted consumption of gas in 
Except for small appliances of grill grid area less kilocalories, and 
than 325 cm? and table appliances the toasted area A = toasted area in square centimeters. 
ANNEX D 
(Clause 24) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF CARBON MONOXIDE/CARBON DIOXIDE RATIO 


D-1 PROCEDURES 


The relevant requirements given in 19 of Section 2 
of IS 5116 shall apply. In addition, however, a 
collecting hood suitable for the burners under 
examination shall be obtained. The hood shall be so 
designed that while not interfering in any way with 
the normal combustion of the burner, it collects a 
fairly high proportion of the products of combustion. 
Also, it shall be such that the sample collected 
represents the whole of the combustion gases and not 
those from one particular point. A suitable collecting 
hood for boiling burners is shown in Fig. 2. For 
grillers, a special sampling hood is shown in Fig. 3. 


When using this hood, the damper provided shall be 
set or additional flue pipe added so that spillage of 
the flue gases around the skirt is just prevented. With 
the sampling hood in position over the burner under 
investigation, Test Gas A (mixture of normal and iso- 
butane) at inlet pressure of 2.452 kN/m? (25 gf/cm?) 
shall be admitted and the burner operated for a few 
minutes before sampling is commenced. The reason 
for this being that during the first few minutes the 
burner is warming up and the proportion of carbon 
monoxide may be high. However, this is not 
dangerous provided the burner works satisfactorily 
after heating up. 


IS 11480 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 25.1) 


METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF FLOOR WALL AND CEILING TEMPERATURES 


E-1 APPARATUS 


E-1.1 The apparatus shall consist of a wooden floor 
with side and back walls (see Fig. 4). The floor shall 
be approximately 5 cm thick and consist of a 2.5 cm 
layer of pine below a 2.5 cm layer of any timber with 
natural colour nearing white or off-white finished in 


Dia 125 


DAMPER REGULATOR 
WITH FRICTION SPRING 


8 OIA SAMPLING TUSE 


STEAM VENT 


ANNULAR RING 


DIA 10 TUBES 


SKIRT 


clear varnish with a thickness of building paper 
between them. Both the side and back walls shall be 
of 2.5 cm pine and painted dull black. The apparatus 
shall be large enough to accommodate almost any 
appliance, and the side wall shall be detachable so 
that measurement can be made, if necessary, against 
both sides of the appliance. 


All dimensions in millimeters. 


FIG. 2 HOOD FOR BOILING BURNERS 


175 DIA 


REGULATOR WITH 
FRICTION SPRING 


8 DIA SAMPLING TUBE 


ANNULAR BAFFLE 


All dimensions in millimeters. 


FIG. 3 HOOD FOR GRILLERS 


IS 11480 : 2023 


IS 11480 : 2023 


FACE OF WALL 


FIG. 4 APPARATUS FOR MEASURING FLOOR, WALL AND 
CEILING TEMPERATURES 


E-1.2 Thermocouples shall be embedded in each 
panel at 15 cm intervals and in such a way that the 
junctions are fixed in position 2 mm from the wood 
surface. They shall be conveniently inserted in holes 
of 8 mm diameter with a thermojunction bent at a 
right angle and sealed in position with insulating 
cement. It shall be necessary to arrange for 
successive readings to be made from each 
thermojunction. A convenient method of doing this 
is to connect all terminals of one sign to a single 
terminal and each terminal of the opposite sign to a 
separate terminal of a switchboard. Readings of the 
emf generated at the thermojunction shall be made 
by means of a suitable instrument, preferably 
potentiometer. 


E-2 PROCEDURE 


E-2.1 Before commencing tests with a new apparatus 
dry it out thoroughly either by previous test or by 
heating it for 24 hours with an appliance in position 
and operating at maximum gas rate in order to dry 
out the wood and secure reproducible results. The 
procedure is not necessary in subsequent tests. 


E-2.2 Floor and Wall Temperatures 


Arrange the appliance under examination so that it is 
as close as possible to the side and back walls of the 
apparatus described in E-1.1, taking note of the 
manufacturer's installation instructions. Light all the 
burners and place an 18 cm diameter vessel (with lid) 
containing about 2 kg water on each top burner. As 
soon as the water in the vessel boils, reduce the gas 
rate so that it is just kept boiling. Measure the floor 
and wall temperatures at the junctions most affected 
by the heat of the appliance after two hours of 
operation and at any intermediate times from the 
initial lighting if it is considered that certain local 
temperatures have then reached at maximum. 


E-2.3 Ceiling Temperature 


Raise the back panel and use the side panel as 
‘ceiling’ resting on the top edge of the raised back 
panel and support at front edge by convenient stand. 
Operate the appliance as described in E-2.2 and 
record the temperature on the ceiling panel supported 
one metre above the top of the appliance. 


IS 11480 : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances Sectional Committee, MED 23 


Organization 


L.P.G. Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 
Agnisumukh, Bengaluru 


BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Private 
Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Delton Industries, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (Stores), 
Kanpur 


Gorani Industries Limited, Indore 


Goyal Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 
Indian Oil Corporation (Marketing), Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


L.P.G. Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 


Ariston Thermo India Private Limited, Pune 


Rama Domestic Appliances, New Delhi 


Shri Krishna Test House, New Delhi 


Sunflame Enterprises Private Limited, Faridabad 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ASHISH BERA (Chairperson) 
SHRI HARI RAO 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
SHRI HARI BABU BANOTH 

SHRI MOHIT RANE (Alternate) 


MS PRAVATANALINI SAMAL 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. C. NANGIA 
SHRI VIVEK NANGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI H. H. P. TIWARI 


SHRI ANIL GORANI 


SHRI AJAY GOYAL 
SHRI NEERAJ GOYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH G. KHADE 
SHRI SUBRAMANI SIVA SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR ARYA 
SHRI MUTHU KUMAR 
SHRI J. SHYAM SWAROOP 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR 
SHRI ANUPE FRANCIS (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. DEODHAR 
SHRI SURENDRA PRATAP 
SHRI ABHIJIT BANSHELKIKAR 
SHRI MAHESH BHANGALE (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJEET SINGH KOHLI 
SHRI MANMOHAN KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL TALWAR 


SHRI K. L. Verma 
SHRI SANDEEP JUNEJA (Alternate) 


IS 11480 : 2023 


Organization 


Superflame Enterprises Private Limited, Faridabad 

Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 

In Personal Capacity (S-139, Greater Kailash-I, 1“ 
and 2”! Floor, New Delhi — 110048) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI VIKRAM VERMA 


SHRI A. A. TAMBOLI 
SHRI V. N. PUJARI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. GUPTA 
SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 


DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SANDEEP KESHAV 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 23 (19485). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


