IS 16018 : 2012 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


NA HAF 


qà ad ay MP — areata 
ain rato — Re 


Indian Standard 


WHEELED FIRE EXTINGUISHERS — PERFORMANCE 
AND CONSTRUCTION — SPECIFICATION 


ICS 13.220.10 


© BIS 2012 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


April 2012 Price Group 8 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fire Fighting 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


This standard has been formulated with a view to guide the industries to manufacture and as well as to users for 
procuring various types of wheeled extinguishers which are capable of giving satisfactory performance. This 
standard is based on ISO 11601: 1999 ‘Wheeled fire extinguishers — Performance and construction’. While 
formulating this standard some variances have been made with respect to minimum total mass of fully charged 
extinguishers, performance test temperatures and nominal charge (capacity) of the extinguishers, keeping in view 
prevalent/established Indian practices, local conditions and user convenience and safety including ease of handling 
and operation. 


The details with regard to maintenance are given in IS 2190 : 2010 ‘Code of practice for selection, installation 
and maintenance of first-aid fire extinguishers’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


Indian Standard 


WHEELED FIRE EXTINGUISHERS — PERFORMANCE 
AND CONSTRUCTION — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the principal requirements 
intended to ensure the safety, reliability and 
performance of wheeled fire extinguishers. 


1.2 It is applicable to wheeled fire extinguishers with 
a total mass (when fully charged) of greater than 17 kg 
but not more than 450 kg. 


NOTE — Fire extinguisher of 450 kg weight shall be without 
trolley and trailer. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 


3400 (Part 1) : 


Title 
Method of test for vulcanized 


1987 rubbers: Part | Tensile stress-strain 
properties (second revision) 
4308 : 2003 Dry chemical powder for fighting B 
and C class fires — Specification 
(second revision) 
4861 : 1984 Specification for dry powder for 


4989 (Part 4) : 


2003 


4989 : 2006 


6910 : 1985 


7285 : 1988 


11864 : 1986 


fighting fires in burning metals (first 
revision) 

Specification for multipurpose 
aqueous film forming foam liquid 
concentrate for extinguishing 
hydrocarbon and polar solvent fires 
Foam concentrate for producing 
mechanical foam for fire fighting — 
Specification (third revision) 
Method of testing corrosion 
resistance of electroplated and 
anodized aluminium coatings by 
acetic acid salt spray (AAS) test 
Specification for seamless steel 
cylinders for permanent and high 
pressure liquefiable gases 
Recommended construction practice 
of apparatus for spray cabinet for 
various salt spray tests 


IS No. Title 
14609 : 1999 Dry chemical powder for fighting 
ABC class fires — Specification 
Carbon dioxide as fire extinguishing 
media for fire protection — 
Specification 
Gaseous fire extinguishing systems 
— General requirements 
Refillable transportable seamless 
aluminium alloy gas cylinders — 
Specification 
Portable fire extinguishers — 
Performance and construction — 
Specification 


15222 : 2002 


15493 : 2004 


15660 : 2006 


15683 : 2006 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Batch — Group of the same products made on the 
same production line using the same lot of materials 
during one production shift is called batch. 


3.2 Body — The metal shell of an extinguisher 
designed to contain the extinguishing media including 
any skirt is termed as body. 


3.3 Bulk Range — Bulk range is the discharge range 
of an extinguisher when 50 percent of its extinguishing 
medium has been expelled with the discharge valve 
fully open. 


3.4 Burst Pressure (PB) — For low-pressure wheeled 
fire extinguishers, burst pressure (PB) is equal to 2.7 
times the maximum service pressure (PMS), 5 times 
the service pressure (PS), or 5.5 MPa, whichever 
produces the highest pressure. 


3.5 Charge of Extinguisher — Charge of extinguisher 
is the mass or volume of extinguishing medium 
contained in the extinguisher. 


NOTE — It is expressed in volume (litre) for water-based 
extinguishers and in mass (kilogram) for other extinguishers. 


3.6 Classification of Fires 


3.6.1 Class A — Fires involving solid materials, usually 
of an organic nature, in which combustion normally 
takes place with the formation of glowing embers have 
been classified as Class A fires. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


3.6.2 Class B — Fires involving liquids or liquefiable 
solids have been classified as Class B fires. 


3.6.3 Class C — Fires involving gases have been 
classified as Class C fires. 


3.6.4 Class D — Fires involving metals have been 
classified as Class D fires. 


3.7 Clean Agent — Clean agent is an electrically non- 
conductive gaseous or vapourizing liquid fire- 
extinguishing medium that does not leave a residue 
upon evaporation. 


3.8 Closure — Closure is a component, other than a 
safety device or pressure indicator, subject to the 
internal pressure and used to close off and seal the body. 


3.9 Complete Discharge — Point in the discharge of 
an extinguisher when the internal pressure has 
equalized with the external pressure with the control 
valve being kept fully open, is termed as complete 
discharge. 


3.10 Effective Discharge Time — Effective discharge 
time is the time from the commencement of discharge 
of the extinguishing medium at the nozzle to the gas 
point of the discharge stream with the control valve 
fully open. 


3.11 Extinguisher — Extinguisher is an appliance 
containing an extinguishing medium which may be 
discharged and directed onto a fire by the action of 
internal pressure. 


NOTE — Discharge may be achieved by: (a) stored pressure 
(constant pressurization of the extinguishing media container); 
or (b) cartridge, or cylinder-operated device (pressurization at 
the time of use by the release of a pressurizing gas stored in a 
separate high-pressure cartridge or container). 


3.12 Extinguishing Medium — Extinguishing 
medium is the substance contained in the extinguisher 
which causes extinction of the fire. 


3.13 Fill Density — Fill density is the mass, in 
kilograms, of extinguishing medium/litre of container 
volume, as fitted for use, complete with valve and 
internal fittings. 


3.14 Gas Point — Gas point is the point where the 
medium discharge changes from pre-dominantly 
medium to pre-dominantly expellant gas. 


3.15 Lowest Observable Adverse Effect Level 
(LOAEL) — Lowest observable adverse effect level 
is the lowest concentration at which an adverse 
physiological or toxicological effect has been observed. 


3.16 Maximum Service Pressure (PMS) — It is the 
equilibrium pressure developed in a normally charged 


and pressurized extinguisher which is conditioned 


+5 
at 50 0 °C for at least 18 h. 


3.17 Propellant — Propellant is a non-flammable 
compressed gas used to expel the extinguishing 
medium. 


3.18 Rechargeable Extinguisher — Rechargeable 
extinguisher is an extinguisher designed and intended 
to be recharged after use. 


3.19 Service Pressure (PS) — It is the equilibrium 
pressure developed in a normally charged and 
pressurized extinguisher at 27 + 2°C for at least 18 h. 


3.20 Test Pressure (PE) — For low pressure wheeled 
extinguishers, test pressure (PE) is equal to 1.43 times 
the maximum service pressure (PMS), 2.5 times the 
service pressure (PS), or 2.0 MPa, whichever produces 
the highest pressure. 


3.21 Wheeled Fire Extinguisher — Wheeled fire 
extinguisher is an appliance on wheels having a total 
mass of more than 17 kg but not greater than 450 kg 
(with all accessories), which is designed to be operated 
and transported to the fire by one person. 


4 TYPES OF WHEELED FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 


4.1 Wheeled fire extinguishers are described by the 
type of extinguishing medium which they contain. At 
present, the types of wheeled fire extinguishers are as 
follows: 


a) Water-based; 

b) Powder; 

c) Carbon dioxide; and 
d) Clean agent. 


NOTE —The manufacture and use of clean agents is regulated 
by the Montreal Protocol or by national regulations. 


4.2 Water-based wheeled fire extinguishers may 
contain plain water, or water with additives such as 
wetting agents, viscosity-increasing agents, flame- 
retardant, or foaming agents, etc. 

NOTE — At present there is no standard covering additives 


added to water to produce anti-freeze, wetting or other special 
characteristics. 


4.3 Powders may be of ‘BC’ or ‘ABC’ types, or may 
be specially prepared for Class D fires. 


4.4 Wheeled fire extinguishers may have two 
extinguisher bodies per axle. Each extinguisher body 
may contain the same or a different extinguishing 
medium provided they are compatible with each other. 


5 EXTINGUISHING MEDIA, PROPELLANTS 
AND FILL DENSITIES 

5.1 Extinguishing Media 

5.1.1 Carbon Dioxide 


Carbon dioxide used in wheeled fire extinguishers shall 
comply with IS 15222. 


5.1.2 Clean Agents 


Clean agents used in wheeled fire extinguishers shall 
comply with IS 15493 or certificate of supplier. 


NOTE — The manufacture and use of clean agents is regulated 
by the Montreal Protocol or by national regulations. 


5.1.3 Powder 


Powder used in wheeled fire extinguishers shall comply 
with IS 4308 or IS 4861 or IS 14609. 


5.1.4 Foam Concentrates 


Foam concentrates used in wheeled fire extinguishers 
shall comply with IS 4989 or IS 4989 (Part 4). 


5.2 Propellants 


The propellant for stored-pressure and cartridge- 
operated wheeled fire extinguishers shall be air, argon, 
carbon dioxide, helium, nitrogen or mixtures of these 
gases having a maximum dew point of — 55°C. 


EXCEPTION — The propellant for stored- 
pressure water-based wheeled fire extinguishers 
need not meet the dew point requirement. 


5.3 Fill Density 


The fill density for carbon dioxide wheeled fire 
extinguishers shall not exceed 0.75 kg/l. 


The fill density for clean-agent wheeled fire 
extinguishers shall not exceed the values given in 
relevant standards. 


NOTE — These fill densities may be modified subject to 
national pressure vessel regulations. 


5.4 Filling Tolerance 


The actual charge of a wheeled fire extinguisher shall 
be the nominal charge within the following limits: 


a) Water-Based Extinguishers — 2 percent by 


volume; 


b) Powder Extinguishers — + 2 per cent by mass; 
and 


c) CO, and Clean Agent Extinguishers — 


k percent by volume. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


5.5 Charges 
5.5.1 Nominal Charge 


The following are the recommended charges for 
wheeled fire extinguishers: 


a) Water-based extinguishers — 20, 45, 60 and 
125 litre; 


b) Powder-based extinguishers — 25, 50 and 
75 kg; 

c) Clean agent extinguishers — 10, 20, 30 and 
50 kg; and 


d) CO, based extinguishers — 4.5, 6.5, 9, 22.5 
and 45 kg. 


5.5.2 Gross Mass 


The gross mass of a wheeled fire extinguisher shall not 
exceed 450 kg. 


6 PERFORMANCE 


6.1 Operating Temperatures 


Wheeled fire extinguishers shall be capable of operating 
reliably within one of the following temperature ranges: 


a) +5°C to +55°C 
b) —5°C to +55°C 
c) —10°C to +55°C 


On specific requirements, extinguishers may be 
manufactured which are capable of operating reliably 
Within one of the following temperature ranges: 


a) —20°C to +55°C 
b) —30°C to +55°C 
c) —40°C to +55°C 
d) -55°C to +55°C 


The temperature range selected from the above ranges 
shall be marked on the extinguisher (see 9.2.5). 


6.2 Effective Discharge Time and Bulk Range of 
Discharge 


6.2.1 Effective Discharge Time 


6.2.1.1 The effective discharge time of water-based 
wheeled fire extinguishers shall be not less than 40 s 
and not more than 210 s. 


6.2.1.2 The effective discharge time of wheeled fire 
extinguishers with a Class A rating, except water-based 
types, shall be not less than 30 s. 


6.2.1.3 The effective discharge time of wheeled fire 
extinguishers other than water-based types shall be not 
less than 20 s. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


6.2.2 Bulk Range 


6.2.2.1 The bulk range throw of wheeled fire 
extinguishers with a Class A rating shall be not less 
than 6 m when tested in accordance with 6.2.2.2. 


EXCEPTION — For water-based wheeled fire 
extinguishers fitted with a spray nozzle, the bulk 
range may be reduced to 3 m. 


6.2.2.2 Condition the extinguisher for not less than 18 h 
at a temperature of 27 + 2°C and place it in its normal 
operating position with the discharge nozzle held 
horizontally at a height of 1 m. 


Fully discharge the extinguisher with the control valve 
fully open within 5 min of conditioning. 


Record the bulk range throw at the time corresponding 
to 50 percent of the effective discharge time. 
NOTE — If the range of effective discharge is difficult to 
determine visually, supplementary means, such as collection 
boxes for water, foam or powder extinguishers or condensing 


plates for carbon dioxide and clean agent extinguishers may 
be used. 


6.3 Resistance to Temperature Changes 
6.3.1 Requirements 


Wheeled fire extinguishers shall be able to operate at 
temperatures between the minimum marked on the 
extinguisher (see 6.1) and + 55°C. 


After the test described in 6.3.2, they shall satisfy the 
following requirements: 


a) Extinguisher shall operate as intended; 

b) Discharge shall commence within 5 s of the 
opening of the control valve; and 

c) Not more than 10 percent of the initial charge 
of medium shall remain within the 
extinguisher after complete discharge. 


6.3.2 Test Procedure 


Subject four extinguishers to the temperature cycles 
defined in Table 1, two extinguishers to each cycle. 


Operate the extinguisher with the control valve fully 
open within 5 min of its removal from the conditioning 
chamber. 


If it is not possible to operate the extinguisher within 
5 min after its removal from the conditioning chamber, 
suitable means, such as insulation, shall be used to 
maintain the extinguisher at the conditioning 
temperature until discharge. 


6.4 Retention of Charge 


6.4.1 Wheeled fire extinguishers and gas cartridges or 
cylinders shall be designed so as to permit their charge 
to be checked at regular intervals when they are installed. 


The charge of the following types of wheeled fire 
extinguishers shall be measured by weighing: 


a) All types of gas cartridges for wheeled fire 
extinguishers; 

b) Carbon dioxide wheeled fire extinguishers; 
and 


c) Stored-pressure wheeled fire extinguishers of 
various types including some clean agents in 
which a loss of 1 percent of total charged 
extinguisher mass is accompanied by a 
pressure loss of not more than 10 percent of 
the service pressure at 27 + 2°C. 


6.4.2 The charge of stored-pressure wheeled fire 
extinguishers of types not covered by 6.4.1 (b) 
and 6.4.1 (c) and non-liquefied gas containers fitted 
with a gauge shall be checked by direct measurement 
of internal pressure at 27 + 2°C. For this purpose, the 
extinguisher shall be fitted with a pressure gauge ported 
into the extinguisher body. 


If a connection is provided to which an independent 
pressure-measuring appliance can be attached for 
checking the pressure gauge, the connection shall be 
equipped with a pressure retaining cap. 


6.5 Intermittent Discharge Test 


6.5.1 A wheeled fire extinguisher conditioned at 


Table 1 Temperature Cycles 
(Clause 6.3.2) 


SI No. Duration, h Cycle No. 1 
a) (2) (3) 


Cycle No. 2 
(4) 


i) 24+ 1 Store at minimum storage and use temperature 
0 ° 
at _5°C 
ii) 2441 Store at 27 + 2 °C 
iii) 24+1 Store at 55 + 5 °C 


Store at 55 + 5 °C 


Store at 27 + 2 °C 


Le 0 
Store at minimum storage and use temperature at 2 °C 


NOTE — The stored temperatures refer to the ambient temperature within the conditioning chamber. 


27 + 2°C and at 55 + 5°C shall operate in such a manner 
that not more than 1 s elapses from the time the control 
valve is operated until the extinguishing medium starts 
to discharge and shall cease the discharge of medium 
within 1 s after closing the control valve. Not more 
than 10 percent of the initial charge shall remain within 
the extinguisher after complete discharge. 


6.5.2 The test shall be conducted following conditioning 
at each of the temperatures specified in 6.5.1 for at least 
18 h. The extinguisher shall be operated intermittently 
by opening and closing the control valve in cycles of 5 
s open and 5 s closed until the end of discharge. 


6.6 Resistance to Corrosion 
6.6.1 External Corrosion Test 


Wheeled fire extinguishers shall be subjected to a salt 
spray test for a period of 240 h and then shall be washed 
carefully to remove any salt deposits. For external 
corrosion test, salt spray test apparatus covered in 
IS 11864 shall be used. The test solution shall be 
prepared by dissolving 50 + 5 g of sodium chloride in 
1 litre of water as given in IS 6910. 


Two samples shall be tested, either two of the same 
size or one sample each of two different sizes from the 
same family. 


The operating forces, or energy if applicable, shall 
comply with the method of operation specified in 8.14. 


The pressure gauge on stored pressure extinguishers 
shall remain water-tight and functional (see 8.16.7). 


There shall be no corrosion of the metal of the 
extinguisher likely to impair its operation or safety. 
Discolouration or superficial corrosion of non-ferrous 
materials is acceptable but galvanic corrosion between 
dissimilar metals is not permitted. 


NOTES 


1 Test samples employing smaller extinguisher bodies may be 
used for this test provided they are fabricated using the same 
material and processes and have the same protective coatings 
or corrosion protection system. 


2 The length of the discharge hose assembly may be reduced 
to 1.4 m for this test. 


6.6.2 Internal Corrosion Test for Water and Foam Type 
Extinguishers 


A wheeled fire extinguisher, charged in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s instructions, shall be subjected 
eight times to the temperature cycle defined in Table 2. 


The temperatures in Table 2 refer to the ambient 
temperature of the conditioning chamber. A liquid bath 
shall not be used. The duration of any one complete 
cycle shall not exceed 120 h. 


On completion of the eight temperature cycles, the body 


IS 16018 : 2012 


shall be cut into two sections in a manner sufficient to 
permit internal examination. Detachment of any 
protective coating local to the plane of section shall be 
disregarded. There shall be no visible signs of corrosion 
of the metal, nor detachment, cracking or bubbling of 
any protective coating. There shall be no visible change 
in the colour of the extinguishing media other than that 
resulting from the thermal cycling. 


Allowance should be made for a change in colour that 
occurs naturally due to the temperature changes. It is 
recommended that two samples of the extinguishing 
medium be stored in closed glass containers and 
subjected to the same cycles as the extinguishers in 
order to establish reference samples. 


NOTE — Test samples employing smaller extinguisher bodies 
may be used for this test provided they are fabricated using 
the same material and processes and have the same protective 
coatings or corrosion protection system. 


Table 2 Temperature Cycles 


SI Stage Duration Temperature 
No. h °C 

d) (2) (3) (4) 

i) 1 24+1 D 

ii) 2 2 24 27+2 

iii) 3 24+ 1 55+5 

iv) 4 >24 27+2 


D Lowest temperature marked on extinguisher, + 2°C (see 6.1). 


6.7 Durability Test 


6.7.1 After being subjected to the series of tests 
described in 6.7.2 to 6.7.4, a fully charged wheeled 
fire extinguisher shall comply with the following: 


a) Not less than 85 percent (by mass) of the rated 
capacity of the extinguishing medium shall 
be discharged as intended; 


b) Wheels, axles, and carriage assembly shall not 
be damaged to the extent of impairing mobility; 


c) No weld shall be broken; and 
d) Dip tube shall not become dislodged. 


6.7.2 Evaluate the durability by, 


a) pushing or pulling the fire extinguisher for 
8 km at the rate of 8 km/h to 13 km/h over 
a rough surface; 


b) dropping the fire extinguisher three times onto 


a concrete surface from a 300 mm high 


platform so as to land on the wheels; 


c) pulling the fire extinguisher at a speed of 
8 km/h and allowing one wheel or wheels to 
strike a vertical wall of concrete, steel, or 
brick; and 


IS 16018 : 2012 


d) pushing the fire extinguisher over so that it 
lands on the bumper or towing handle. 


NOTES 


1 A surface of crushed stone, nominal size of 18 mm or 
equivalent is considered to be a rough surface. 


2 The test shall be only for trailer mounted fire extinguishers 
and not for the trolley mounted fire extinguishers. 


6.7.3 Drop the nozzle of a wheeled extinguisher, as 
attached to the hose, three times onto a concrete surface 


from a height of 90 2 mm. The assembly shall be 


dropped in a random manner so that no effort is made 
to cause any part of the nozzle, such as the tip or handle, 
to initially strike the concrete surface. 


6.7.4 A wheeled fire extinguisher, when placed in its 
intended storage position on a flat concrete surface, 
shall be self-supporting, stable, able to return to the 
storage position when displaced from the vertical by 
10°, and operable. 


6.8 Electrical Conductivity of Extinguisher Discharge 
6.8.1 Requirement 


Water-based wheeled fire extinguishers that are marked 
as being suitable for use on fires involving energized 
electrical equipment shall not pass a current of more 
than 0.5 mA when tested as described in 6.8.2. 


6.8.2 Procedure 


Hang a metal plate, of dimensions 1m +25 mm x 1m + 
25 mm, vertically from insulating supports. Connect 
the plate to a transformer so that an alternating voltage 
of 36 + 3.6 kV is established between the plate and 
earth. The impedance of the circuit should be such that 
when a voltage equal to 10 percent of the normal 
primary voltage is applied to the primary, and the 
secondary is short-circuited, the current in the 
secondary is not less than 0.1mA. 


Mount the extinguisher on an insulating support with 
the nozzle fixed | m from the centre of the plate, at 
right angles to it and directed towards it. Connect the 
extinguisher to earth. In the case of an extinguisher with 
a hose connect it to earth by connection at the nozzle 
or, in the case of an extinguisher not fitted with a hose, 
by connection at the handle. 


Measure any current flowing between the extinguisher 
and earth when the plate is live and the extinguisher 
discharging. 


7 FIRE PERFORMANCE TESTS 


7.1 Suitably for the Various Classes of Fire 
7.1.1 Class A 


The rating of wheeled fire extinguishers recommended 


as suitable for Class A fires shall be determined using 
the method of 7.2. The rating shall be that of the 
maximum size of fire extinguished under the test 
conditions. 


7.1.2 Class B 


The rating of wheeled fire extinguishers recommended 
as suitable for Class B fires shall be determined using 
the method of 7.3. The rating shall be that of the 
maximum size of fire extinguished under the test 
conditions. 


7.1.3 Class C 


There are no test requirements for the performance of 
extinguishers against Class C fires included in this 
standard. Suitably for use against Class C fires may be 
claimed for Class AB or Class B powder extinguishers 
only. 


7.1.4 Class D 


Wheeled extinguishers recommended as suitable for 
Class D fires shall comply with 7.4. 


NOTE — Extinguishers suitable to Class D fires are not usually 
also suitable for use on fires of other classes. Specialized media 
and applicators are typically used. 


7.2 Class A Fire Test 


Wheeled fire extinguisher intended for use on Class A 
fires shall be tested for a minimum Class A fire rating 
of 4A using the Class A rating system specified in 
IS 15683 for portable fire extinguishers. 


7.3 Class B and Class C Fire Tests 


Wheeled fire extinguisher intended for use on Class B 
fires shall be tested for a Class B fire rating system 
specified in IS 15683 for portable fire extinguishers. 


NOTE — A method of rating wheeled extinguishers for Class B 
ratings greater than 144B based upon discharge characteristics 
and fire tests not exceeding 144B is under development at ISO 
level. 


7.4 Class D Fire Test 


Fires should be extinguished using a portable 
extinguisher in accordance with IS 15683. 


There are no numerical components for Class D ratings. 
The type of combustible metal for which the 
extinguisher is applicable and the area, depth and other 
characteristics of the fire which may be controlled and 
extinguished shall be summarized on the extinguisher 
nameplate and described in the manufacturer’s 
installation instructions. 


Since wheeled fire extinguishers have a greater charge, 
they may be classified for use on a proportionally larger 
quantity and/or surface area of Class D combustible 
metals without repeating the Class D fire tests. 


8 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 


8.1 General Requirements 


8.1.1 The test shall be made on a minimum of three 
extinguisher bodies. For stored-pressure extinguishers, 
the pressure is determined immediately after 
conditioning each extinguisher at 55 + 5°C for 18 h. 
The highest of the pressures is the maximum service 
pressure (PMS). For cartridge or cylinder-operated 
extinguishers, after conditioning at 55 + 5°C for 18 h, 
the cartridge of cylinder shall be immediately activated, 
and the highest pressure recorded as the maximum 
service pressure (PMS). 


8.1.2 It shall be verified that, during the temperature 
conditioning specified in 8.1.1, there is no leakage from 
the extinguisher, gas cartridge or cylinder. 


8.1.3 The manufacturer shall take the necessary steps 
to ensure that welds show continuous penetration with 
no deviation in the weld. Welds and brazed joints shall 
be free from defects which are prejudicial to the safe 
use of the cylinder or cartridge. All welders, welding 
operators and welding procedures shall be qualified 
and certified by an independent third party recognized 
by national authorities. 


8.1.4 Parts attached to the body of the cylinder shall 
be manufactured and fitted in a way that minimizes 
concentrations of stress and corrosion risks. In the case 
of welded and brazed parts, the metal shall be 
compatible with the cylinder material. 


8.1.5 The cylinder manufacturer shall obtain the works 
certificate for the cast analysis of material supplied and 
shall keep this available for inspection. 


8.1.6 Consideration shall be given to avoid the 
possibility of cross threading plastic components in 
contact with metallic parts. Such consideration shall 
include the use of coarse threads, etc. 


8.2 High Pressure Cylinders 


Wheeled fire extinguishers or propellant gas cartridges 
and cylinders having a service pressure (PS) greater 
than 2.5 MPa shall be fitted with cylinders, valves and 
pressure gauges which are designed, tested and marked 
in accordance with national regulations. 


8.3 Low Pressure Cylinders 


These requirements apply to wheeled fire extinguisher 
bodies having a service pressure (PS) not exceeding 
2.5 MPa at 27 + 2°C. 


8.3.1 Burst Test 


8.3.1.1 The cylinder shall be filled with a suitable liquid 
and the pressure shall be increased at a rate not 
exceeding 2.0 + 0.2 MPa/min. The minimum bursting 


IS 16018 : 2012 


pressure (PB) shall be 2.7 times the maximum service 
pressure (PMS), or 5 times the service pressure (PS), 
whichever produces the highest test pressure, but in 
no case less than 5.5 MPa. 


8.3.1.2 The bursting test shall not cease the cylinder to 
fragment. 


8.3.1.3 The break shall not show any sign of brittleness, 
that is the edges of the break shall not be radial but shall 
be slanting in respect of a diametrical plane and shall 
exhibit a reduction in area over their entire thickness. 


8.3.1.4 The break shall not show any characterized 
defect in the metal. 


8.3.1.5 The break shall not occur in a weld at a pressure 
less than 8 MPa. 


8.3.1.6 During the burst test, no parts shall be ejected 
from the extinguisher. 


8.3.2 Deformation Test 


There shall be no permanent expansion in excess of 
10 percent of the total expansion when a previously 
untested cylinder is subjected to the test pressure (PE), 
applied for 30 s. For cylinders which have been 
subjected to the test pressure (PE), the test pressure 
shall be increased by 10 percent. 


NOTE — An acceptable test apparatus is the water jacket test. 
Other appropriate test methods are also acceptable. 


8.3.3 Pressure Cycling Test 


A minimum of two cylinders of each size and type 
shall sustain, without rupture, 1 000 cycles from zero 
to the test pressure (PE) and back to zero at the rate of 
6 cycles/min. At the conclusion of testing, the cylinder 
shall be subjected to the burst test as specified in 8.3.1. 


8.4 Steel Cylinders 


8.4.1 Welded Low Carbon Steel 


8.4.1.1 The cylinder material shall be capable of being 
welded and shall contain a maximum of 0.25 percent 
carbon, 0.05 percent sulphur and 0.05 percent 
phosphorus. 


8.4.1.2 Filler material shall be compatible with the steel 
to give welds with properties equivalent to those 
specified for the base sheet. 


8.4.2 Stainless Steel Cylinders 


8.4.2.1 Stainless steel domes and bottoms shall be 
drawn from fully annealed stock. 


8.4.2.2 Only austenitic stainless steel having a 
maximum carbon content of 0.03 percent shall be used. 


8.4.3 For carbon dioxide extinguishers, in case of steel 
body, it shall conform to IS 7285. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


8.5 Aluminium Cylinders 


Aluminium cylinders shall be of a seamless construction 
conforming to IS 15660. 


8.6 Minimum Wall Thickness 


Cylinders shall have a minimum measured wall thickness 
greater than the minimum wall thickness given by the 
following formula, but in no case less than 2.0 mm: 


, - DPE) 
+ 


where 


t = minimum thickness, in mm; 
D = external diameter of the cylinder or, for non- 


cylindrical bodies, the greatest external 
diagonal of the cylinders; 


PE =cylinder test pressure, in MPa; and 


S = 80 percent of the minimum yield strength of 
the material specified by the manufacturer, 
in N/mm’. 


8.7 Caps, Valves and Closures 


8.7.1 Wheeled fire extinguisher cylinder caps, valves 
and closures shall be designed to provide release of 
pressure before complete disengagement. 


8.7.2 All threaded connections shall have at least four 
full threads of engagement and be required to relieve 
pressure with a least two full threads of engagement. 


8.7.3 The inside diameter of a fill opening for a wheeled 
extinguisher shall be not less than 50 mm for powder 
types and 19 mm for other types. 


Exceptionally, the size of the fill opening may be 
reduced to 25 mm for powder extinguishers having a 
charge not exceeding 100 kg. 


8.7.4 A wheeled extinguisher collar with external 
threads shall have sufficient height so that the cap or 
valve does not contact the dome or bottom with the 
gasket removed. 


8.7.5 Unless an internal pressure relief is provided, a 
cap, valve or closure shall withstand the burst test 
pressure specified for the cylinder for 1 min without 
rupture. 


8.7.6 The edges and surfaces of a wheeled fire 
extinguisher shall not be sufficiently sharp to constitute 
arisk of injury to persons during intended use or while 
performing maintenance. 

8.8 Safety and Anti-overfill Devices 

8.8.1 Safety Devices 


8.8.1.1 High pressure cylinders and cartridges shall be 


provided with a safety device in accordance with 
national regulations. 


8.8.1.2 There are no compulsory safety devices required 
on low pressure cylinders. However, if such a device is 
used, it shall be appropriately sized and positioned. The 
operating pressure of the device shall not exceed the 
test pressure (PE) nor be less than the maximum service 
pressure (PMS). 


8.8.2 Anti-overfill Devices 


A water-based wheeled fire extinguisher shall be 
provided with a device to insure that extinguisher 
cannot be over filled. As an alternative, the extinguisher 
body may be marked with the words ‘FILL MARK’ or 
‘FULL to indicate the maximum liquid level. 


8.9 Manufacturing Tests 
8.9.1 Low Pressure Cylinders 


8.9.1.1 At least one cylinder from each batch of 500 or 
less shall be subjected to the deformation and burst 
tests. At the option of the manufacturer, the deformation 
and burst test may be conducted on the same cylinder. 
If the test results are not acceptable, five additional 
cylinders shall be randomly selected from the same 
batch and the test repeated. If one of the cylinders does 
not pass the test, the batch is rejected and made 
unserviceable. 


NOTE — As an alternative, non-destructive tests such as 
X-raying or ultrasonic devices may be substituted for the burst 
test, if it can be demonstrated that they provide an equivalent 
level of assurance that the cylinders comply with the burst test 
requirements. 


8.9.1.2 Each cylinder shall be subjected to the test 
pressure (PE), for at least 30 s, without leakage, failure 
or visible deformation. 


8.9.2 Leakage Tests 


8.9.2.1 Each stored-pressure and carbon dioxide 
wheeled fire extinguisher and gas cartridge and cylinder 
shall be subjected to a leakage test and shall comply 
with the following requirements: 


a) For stored-pressure wheeled fire extinguishers 
and cylinders filled with a pressure gauge as 
specified in 6.4.2, the rate of leakage shall not 
exceed a rate of loss of pressurizing content 
equivalent to 5 percent per annum of the 
service pressure; and 

b) For gas cartridges and cylinders, carbon 
dioxide and stored-pressure type wheeled 
extinguishers specified in 6.4.1, the rate of 
leakage shall not exceed a rate equivalent to a 
5 percent loss of content per annum. 


8.9.2.2 When put under pressure with the control valve 
closed, wheeled fire extinguishers shall not show a loss 


of pressure greater than 10 percent of the service 
pressure within 15 min. This requirement also applies 
to hoses fitted with a control valve which are put under 
pressure only when used. 


8.10 Requirements for Plastic Components 
8.10.1 General Requirements 


8.10.1.1 Plastics components of wheeled fire 
extinguishers shall comply with the following 
requirements. The test and conformity checks shall be 
carried out on components which correspond to the 
mass produced components with respect to the material 
used, the form and the method of manufacture. 


8.10.1.2 It is recommended that the plastic used shall 
be identifiable at all times. Any change in the material, 
the form, or the method of manufacture requires a new 
test. For small components, manufacturer’s certificate 
shall be maintained. 


8.10.1.3 It is necessary to have access to data supplied 
by the manufacturer relating both to the material itself 
and the manufacturing procedures. 


8.10.1.4 To verify the attachment of plastic parts 
following the air oven ageing, ultraviolet light exposure 
and impact resistance tests, the plastic part(s) shall be 
attached to an extinguisher and the assembly then 
subjected to the appropriate test(s). 


8.10.2 Requirements for Normally Pressurized 
Components 


8.10.2.1 Burst strength 


8.10.2.1.1 Burst tests at three temperatures shall be 
conducted as described below: 


At least three components shall be burst tested using 
an appropriate liquid at temperatures of 27+2°C, 
the minimum temperature marked on the extinguisher 
(see 6.1) + 5°C, and at 55 + 3°C. The rate of increase 
in pressure shall be 2.0 + 0.2 MPa/min. 


8.10.2.1.2 The bursting pressure before and after the 
ageing and ultraviolet light exposure test shall be at 
least equal to the minimum burst pressure (PB). 


8.10.2.2 Air-oven ageing 


8.10.2.2.1 At least three components shall be subjected 
at an accelerated ageing in an oven at 100 + 3 C for 
180 days (4 320 h). 


8.10.2.2.2 Following the exposure, the components 
shall then be conditioned for 5 h at 27 + 2°C and 
subsequently inspected for cracking. No cracking shall 
be permitted. 


8.10.2.2.3 The components shall then be burst tested 
at 27 + 2°C using a suitable liquid at a rate of pressure 


IS 16018 : 2012 


increase of 2.0 + 0.2 MPa/min. The bursting pressure 
(PB), shall be at least equal to that specified for the 
extinguisher. 


8.10.3 Ultraviolet Light Exposure 


8.10.3.1 For external components, at least six samples 
shall be subjected for 500 h to an artificial weathering 
test in accordance with 8.10.3.3 and then conditioned 
for 5 h at 27 + 2°C. The samples shall then be inspected 
for cracking. No cracking shall be permitted. 


8.10.3.2 The components shall then be burst tested at 
27 + 2°C using a suitable liquid at a rate of pressure 
increase of 2.0 + 0.2 MPa/min. The bursting pressure 
(PB), shall be at least equal to that specified for the 
extinguisher. 


8.10.3.3 The ultraviolet light is to be obtained from 
two stationary enclosed carbon-arc lamps. The arc of 
each lamp shall be formed between two vertical carbon 
electrodes, 12.7 mm in diameter, located at the centre 
of a revolvable vertical metal cylinder, 787 mm in 
diameter and 450 mm in height. Each arc shall be 
enclosed with a clear borosilicate glass globe. The 
samples are to be mounted vertically on the inside of 
the revolvable cylinder continuously revolved around 
the stationary lamps at | rev/min. A system of nozzles 
shall be provided so that each sample, in turn, is sprayed 
with water as the cylinder revolves. During each 
operating cycle (total of 20 min) each sample shall be 
exposed to the light and water spray for 3 min and to 
the light only for 17 min. The air temperature within 
the revolving cylinder of the apparatus during operation 
shall be 63 + 3°C. 


8.10.4 Normally Non-pressurized Components 


8.10.4.1 Plastic wheeled fire extinguisher components 
which are only subject to pressure upon extinguisher 
operation shall be subjected to the burst, air oven ageing 
and impact resistance tests. The air oven exposure is 
either 100 + 3°C for 70 days (1 680 h) or 87 + 3°C for 
180 days (4 320 h) at the manufacturer’s choice. 


8.10.4.2 External plastic components shall comply with 
the ultraviolet light test specified in 8.10.3. 


8.10.5 Exposure to Extinguishing Agent Test 


8.10.5.1 Polymeric dip tubes that have been in contact 
with the extinguishing medium with which they are to 
be used for 210 days (5 040 h) at 90 + 3°C shall perform 
as intended when installed in test extinguishers. Ring 
samples cut from the tube, and completely immersed 
or buried in the medium with which they are to be used 
for 210 days (5 040 h) at 90 + 3°C, shall not exhibit 
degradation in excess of 40 percent of the original 
tensile or ring crushing strength values. 


8.10.5.2 Complete dip tubes shall be placed in contact 


IS 16018 : 2012 


with the medium with which they are to be used, and 
ring samples, 12.7 mm wide, cut from unaged dip tubes 
shall be totally buried or immersed in the medium. The 
samples shall not touch each other or the container 
holding the samples. The container of medium, with 
the samples in place, shall be placed in a preheated 
oven at 90 + 3° C for 210 days (5 040 h). After the test 
exposure, the samples shall be allowed to cool in air at 
27+2°C for at least 18 h before any tests or dimensional 
measurements are conducted. The ring samples shall 
then be subjected to a crush test between two parallel 
flat plates using a testing machine capable of applying 
a compressive load at a uniform rate of 5 mm/min and 
the load versus the deflection shall be recorded. If the 
nature of the material is such that meaningful test results 
cannot be obtained, other tests, such as tensile tests, 
may be conducted. 


8.11 Discharge Assembly 


8.11.1 Wheeled fire extinguishers shall be equipped 
with a hose at least 4.0 m long and a shut-off nozzle at 
the end of the hose to permit intermittent operation. 


However, the minimum length of the discharge hose 
may be reduced to 1.5 m for wheeled extinguishers 
having a charge of extinguishing medium not exceeding 
25 kg or 25 litre. 


8.11.2 The hose and coupling system shall function 
throughout the operating temperature range, and 
coupling systems shall be designed and fitted in such a 
way that they cannot damage the hose. 


8.11.3 The burst pressure of the hose assembly shall be 
equal to or greater than the appropriate value given below. 
The test pressure shall be established by increasing the 
pressure to the minimum allowable burst pressure in a 
time not less than 30 s, maintaining that pressure for a 
further 30 s during which failure shall not occur and then 
increasing the pressure until the point of failure. 


a) For all types except carbon dioxide wheeled 
extinguishers, the burst pressure shall be 


1) three times the pressure developed in the 
extinguisher at 55°C, the test being 
carried out at 27 + 2 C; and 

2) twice the pressure developed in the 


extinguisher at 55°C, the test being 
carried out at 55 + 5°C. 
For carbon dioxide extinguishers, the burst 
pressure shall be 


b) 


1) 1.5 times the pressure developed in the 
extinguisher at 55°C, the test being 
carried out at 27 + 2°C; and 

2) 1.25 times the pressure developed in the 


extinguisher at 55°C, the test being 
carried out at 55 + 5°C. 


8.12 Control Valve 


Wheeled fire extinguishers shall be fitted with a 
controllable valve at the discharge end of the hose 
assembly to permit discontinuance of the discharge of 
the extinguishing medium at any given time. 
Furthermore, the valve shall be satisfactorily resistant 
to leakage following cessation of the discharge. The 
requirement shall be verified by the following test: 


8.12.1 Operate the wheeled fire extinguisher for a 
period equal to half the time for total discharge and 
then close the valve. 


In the case of a wheeled fire extinguisher with a gas 
cartridge, two situations may arise: 


a) If the extinguisher is fitted with a 
pressurization device independent of the 
device which opens the controllable valve, the 
pressurization of the extinguisher shall take 
place 3 min before the controllable valve is 
opened; and 

b) Ifa single action pressurizes the extinguisher 
and releases the first emission of gas, the 
extinguisher is initially to be pressurized. 
After 3 min, the controllable valve shall be 


opened. 


The internal pressure or, in certain cases, the mass, 
shall be measured within 10 s of the controllable valve 
having been closed and again after a duration of 5 min, 
the controllable valve having remained closed for that 
period. 


The second value of pressure or mass shall not be less 
than 75 percent of the first measured value. The test 
shall be carried out at 27 + 2°C. 


8.13 Horn for Carbon Dioxide Extinguisher 


8.13.1 The horn of a carbon dioxide wheeled fire 
extinguisher shall be fitted with a handle to protect the 
hand of the operator against cooling during use. 


8.13.2 The horn connection shall be made in such a 
manner as to prevent loosening or detachment. 


If the connection is a screw thread, then it shall be 
secured against loosening by either mechanical means 
or a suitable adhesive. 


When security is provided by mechanical means such 
as lock nuts, lock washers, spring washers, etc, the 
torque to loosen the assembly shall be equal to or 
greater than 20 Nm. When adhesives are used, the 
torque to loosen the assembly shall be equal to or 
greater than 10 Nm. 


8.13.3 The discharge horn shall be subjected to the 
following test: 


a) Condition the horn at a temperature of 
55 + 3°C for 18 h; 

b) Attach the horn to a fully charged extinguisher; 

c) Discharge the extinguisher with the control 
valve fully opened; 

d) Subject the horn for 5 min to a static load of 
25 kg, using a circular contact surface of 
50 mm diameter, applied to the extremity of 
the horn; and 

e) Check that the horn does not show any defect. 


8.14 Method of Operation 


8.14.1 Operate the wheeled extinguisher by piercing, 
opening and/or breaking a sealing device, and release 
its contents. It shall not be necessary for any movement 
of the actuating mechanism to be repeated or to invert 
the extinguisher to initiate discharge of the extinguisher. 
The force or energy necessary to operate the 
extinguisher shall not exceed the values specified in 
Table 3 for temperatures up to 55°C. 


Table 3 Operating Force or Energy 


SI Type of Device Maximum Required for 
No. Operation 
Force (N) Energy (J) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Operating lever 300 — 
ii) Squeeze grip lever 300 — 
iii) Strike knob — 3 
iv) Valve wheel 120. — 


8.14.2 The force, which shall be measured using a 
dynamometer, shall be applied statically and 
perpendicularly at the normal location where force is 
applied to operate the extinguisher. 


8.14.3 The energy of 3 J is obtained with a cylindrical 
steel weight with flat faces measuring 75 mm in 
diameter and weighing 4 kg. It shall be placed inside 
of a structure which will allow it to free fall vertically 
from a height of 75 mm. The impact shall be applied 
in the normal direction used to operate the 
extinguisher. 


8.15 Safety Locking Devices 


The operating mechanism of a wheeled fire extinguisher 
shall be provided with a safety locking device to prevent 
inadvertent operation. The release of the safety device 
shall involve an operation distinct from that of the 
operation mechanism and shall require a force not less 
than 20 N nor more than 100 N. It shall be possible to 
determine visually whether the extinguisher may have 
been operated. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


8.16 Pressure Gauges for Low Pressure Extinguishers 
8.16.1 General 


8.16.1.1 A wheeled fire extinguisher of the stored 
pressure type (except carbon dioxide) employing a 
single chamber for both the extinguishing media and 
the expellant gas shall be equipped with a pressure 
gauge to show the amount of pressure in the chamber 
whether the valve is opened or closed. 


8.16.1.2 The operable pressure range of the gauge shall 
reflect the operating temperature pressure relationship 
of the wheeled fire extinguisher (see 6.1). 


8.16.1.3 The pressure gauge face shall indicate the 
appropriate units for which the gauge is calibrated, such 
as bars, or kilopascals, or any combination of pressure 
units. 


8.16.1.4 The maximum indicated gauge pressure shall 
be between 150 percent and 250 percent of the service 
pressure (PS) but not less than 120 percent of the 
maximum service pressure (PMS). The gauge dial shall 
indicate, in green, the operable pressure range of the 
extinguisher. The zero, charging and maximum 
indicated gauge pressures shall be shown in numerals 
and with marks. The background of the gauge face 
above a horizontal line through the lowest required 
markings shall be red. The arc of the dial from the zero 
pressure point to the lower end of the operable range 
shall read ‘Recharge’. The arc of the dial from the 
higher end of the operable range to the maximum 
indicated pressure shall read ‘Overcharged’. All 
numerals, letters and characters in the recharge, 
operable and overcharge portions of the dial shall be 
white. Pointers shall be yellow, and the tip of the pointer 
shall end in the arc of the pressure indicating dots, and 
shall have a maximum tip radius of 0.25 mm. The 
minimum length of the pointer, from the centre point 
of the dial to the tip, shall be 9.5 mm measured at the 
zero pressure point. 


The length of the pointer from the point of rotation of 
the pointer to the tip, measured at the zero pressure 
point, shall be at least 9 mm. The length of the arc from 
zero pressure to the indicated service pressure (PS) shall 
be at least 12 mm. 


8.16.1.5 The mark used to indicate the service pressure 
(PS) shall be not less than 0.6 mm and not more than 
1.0 mm wide. 


8.16.1.6 The pressure gauge face shall be marked to 
indicate the appropriate extinguishing media with which 
it can be used. 


Pressure gauge markings shall be subjected to 
ultraviolet light testing as specified in 8.10.3. There 


IS 16018 : 2012 


shall be no significant deterioration of the legibility, 
such as darkening, fogging or fading, upon completion 
of the testing. 


8.16.1.7 The pressure gauge shall be marked with the 
gauge manufacturer’s identifying mark. The pressure 
gauge shall also be marked according to the following, 
if applicable, using a line extending as wide as, and of 
the same stroke thickness as, the manufacturer’s 
identifying mark, 


a) to indicate galvanic compatibility with 
aluminium valve bodies: a horizontal line 
above the manufacturer’s identifying mark; 
b) to indicate galvanic compatibility with brass 
valve bodies: a horizontal line below the 
manufacturer’s identifying mark; and 

c) to indicate galvanic compatibility with 
aluminium and brass valve bodies: a line 
above and a line below the manufacturer’s 


identifying mark. 
8.16.2 Pressure Gauge Calibration Test 


8.16.2.1 The error of a pressure gauge at the indicated 
service pressure (PS) shall not exceed +4 percent of 
the service pressure. The error at the upper and lower 
limits of the operable range shall not exceed +4 percent 
of the service pressure for power and water based 
extinguisher gauges and +8 percent of the charging 
pressure for clean agent extinguisher gauges. At the 
zero pressure mark, the error shall not exceed 


+12 percent of the service pressure (PS). At the 


maximum indicated pressure, the error shall not exceed 
+15 percent of the service pressure (PS). 


8.16.2.2 The pressure gauge shall be installed on a 
deadweight gauge tester or a piping apparatus with a 
master gauge having an accuracy of not less than 
0.25 percent. The pressurizing medium may be oil, 
water, nitrogen or air, but all tests on a given type of 
gauge shall be conducted using the same medium. The 
pressure shall be applied to the gauge under test in 
uniform increments until the upper limit of the gauge 
is reached. The pressure shall then be reduced in the 
same increments until the zero point is reached. The 
pressure applied, the gauge or indicator reading, and 
net error shall be recorded for each increment under 
both the increasing and decreasing pressure conditions. 


8.16.3 Pressure Gauge Burst Strength Test 


8.16.3.1 A pressure gauge shall withstand, for 1 min, a 
pressure of six times the indicated service pressure, 
(PS), but not less than 5.5 MPa, without rupture. In 
addition, if the bourdon tube or pressure-retaining 
assembly bursts at a pressure less than eight times the 
indicated service pressure (PS), no parts of the gauge 
shall be thrown. 


8.16.3.2 A sample gauge is to be attached to a 
hydraulic pressure pump after all air has been excluded 
from the test system. The sample shall be placed in a 
test cage and the pressure applied at a rate of 
approximately 2.0 MPa/min until the required test 
pressure is reached. The pressure shall be held at this 
point for 1 min, then increased until rupture occurs, 
or eight times the indicated service pressure is 
reached, whichever occurs first. 


8.16.4 Pressure Gauge Overpressure Test 


8.16.4.1 The difference in readings of indicated service 
pressure before and after a pressure gauge is subjected 
for 3 h to a pressure of 110 percent of the indicated 
gauge capacity shall not exceed +4 percent of the 
service pressure (PS). 


8.16.4.2 Sample pressure gauges shall be subjected to 
the required test pressure for 3 h. The pressure shall 
then be released and the gauges allowed to stand at 
zero pressure for 1 h. The gauges shall then be subjected 
to the calibration test specified in 8.16.2. 


8.16.5 Pressure Gauge Impulse Test 


8.16.5.1 The difference in readings of indicated service 
pressure (PS), before and after a pressure gauge is 
subjected to 1 000 cycles of pressure impulse, shall 
not exceed + 4 percent of the service pressure (PS). 


8.16.5.2 Sample pressure gauges shall be attached to a 
regulated source of pressure, either air, nitrogen or 
water. The pressure shall then be varied from 0 percent 
to 125 percent of the indicated service pressure, or from 
0 percent to 60 percent of the gauge capacity, whichever 
is the higher, and then back to 0 at a rate of six complete 
cycles each minute. The samples shall then be subjected 
to the calibration test specified in 8.16.2. 


8.16.6 Pressure Gauge Relief Test 


8.16.6.1 A pressure gauge shall have a pressure relief 
that will vent in the event of a leak of a pressurized 
component. This pressure relief shall function at a 
pressure of 345 kPa or less within 18 h. The minimum 
flow capacity of the pressure relief shall be 1 litre/h. 


8.16.6.2 This test shall be conducted on pressure gauges 
with the bourdon tube or other pressurized component 
cut completely through. The gauge shall be immersed 
under water with the gauge inlet connected to a 
regulated source of air or nitrogen. The supply pressure 
shall be maintained at 345 kPa until the pressure relief 
functions, or for 18 h, whichever is the shorter. The 
flow rate shall be measured with an inverted water 
column or other equivalent means. 


8.16.7 Pressure Gauge Water Resistance Test 


A pressure gauge shall remain watertight after being 
immersed in 0.3 m of water for 2 h, and after 


being subjected to the external corrosion test specified 
in 6.6.1. 


8.16.8 Pressure Gauge Leakage Test 


8.16.8.1 A pressure gauge shall not leak at a rate in 
excess of 1 x 10% cm?/s when the gauge or indicator 
(including a pin-type indicator) is exposed to a pressure 
equivalent to the service pressure (PS) of the 
extinguisher at 27 + 2°C. 


8.16.8.2 A leak detector apparatus and leak standard 
shall be used to verify compliance with the requirements 
specified in 8.13.8.1. The leak detection apparatus shall 
be capable of signalling, and the leak standard capable 
of generating, a leakage rate of 1 x 10° cm*/s . 


8.16.8.3 Twelve sample gauges shall be individually 
pressurized to a pressure equivalent to the service 
pressure (PS) of the extinguisher. Each sample gauge 
or indicator, other than a pin-type indicator, shall then 
be subjected to a leak test by checking all pressurized 
components for leakage in order to verify compliance 
with the requirements of 8.16.8.1. 


8.16.9 Pressure Gauge Plastics Components 


Plastic components of pressure gauges shall meet the 
requirements of 8.10 except burst test. 


8.17 Dip Tubes and Filters for Water Based 
Extinguishers 


8.17.1 The dip tube of water-based extinguishers shall 
be of materials resistant to the extinguishing medium. 


8.17.2 The discharge of the extinguishing agent shall 
be through a filter which is positioned upstream of the 
smallest section of the discharge passage. Each orifice 
of the filter shall have an area less than that of the 
smallest cross-section of the discharge passage. The 
total area of the combined filter orifices shall be at least 
equal to five times the smallest section of the discharge 
passage. 


8.18 Carriage Assembly 
8.18.1 Carriage 


The carriage assembly of a wheeled fire extinguisher 
shall be designed to carry all structural loads, that is, 
the agent tank and hose-retaining unit shall carry no 
structural load. The carriage shall be designed to protect 
the tank, hose-retaining units and all other components 
from damage should the unit be toppled from the 
upright position in any direction. 


EXCEPTION — Low pressure extinguisher 
medium tanks are permitted to carry structural 
loads. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


8.18.2 Mobility 


The carriage assembly of a wheeled fire extinguisher 
shall be designed so that one man can easily push or 
pull the extinguisher over level surfaces and grades up 
to 2 percent. If intended to be stored in the upright 
position, the carriage shall stand in the upright position 
with the tyres off the ground. The force, applied at the 
handle, required to tilt the extinguisher from the vertical 
storage position to the towing position shall not exceed 
400 N. The force, applied at the handle, required to lift 
the extinguisher from the reclined storage position, shall 
not exceed 400 N. The force required to support the 
handle when it is 80 + 5 cm from the ground shall not 
exceed 150 N. 


8.18.3 Hose Retaining Unit 


A receptacle or holding device shall be furnished to 
securely retain the hose assembly and nozzle. The 
design shall facilitate rapid deployment at the scene of 
an emergency with the fewest number of operations. 
The hose shall be stored in such a manner that it will 
release easily, without kinking, when it is pulled from 
the stored position when the extinguisher is in the 
upright or reclined position. 


8.19 Gasket and O-rings 


8.19.1 Tensile Strength, Elongation, Maximum Set and 
Hardness 


Any elastomer (rubber facing, O-ring or ‘vulcanized 
in place’ seat) used to provide a seating surface shall 
have the following properties when tested in accordance 
with IS 3400 (Part 1): 


a) As received: 
1) Minimum tensile strength — 3.4 MPa for 
silicone rubber (having polyorganosiloxane 
as its characteristic constituent), 6.9 MPa 
for fluorocarbons, and 8.3 MPa for other 
elastomers; 
2) Minimum ultimate elongation — 
100 percent for silicone rubber and 
150 percent for other elastomers; and 
3) Maximum set of 5.0 mm when 25 mm 
marks are stretched to 50 mm for silicone 
rubber, and 62.5 mm for other elastomers, 


held for 2 min then measured 2 min after 


release. 
b) At 96h in oxygen at 70°C and at 2.1 MPa, 
1) Minimum percent of original tensile 
strength — 70 percent; and 
2) Minimum percent of original elongation 


— 70 percent. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


The size and shape of a rubber part will determine which 
of the tests specified can be conducted. In general a part 
larger than 25 mm diameter shall be subjected to all tests. 
For a circular cross-section O-ring smaller than 25 mm 
but larger than 12.5 mm, the elongation test shall be 
omitted. For a circular cross-section O-ring smaller than 
12.5 mm, the elongation and tensile strength tests shall 
be omitted. For an O-ring less than 25 mm in diameter 
with a generally square shaped cross-section, the tensile 
strength and elongation tests shall be omitted. If the size 
of the part precludes accurate testing, larger samples of 
similar parts made of the same compound shall be 
subjected to those tests omitted on the parts. 


8.19.2 Compression Set 


A sample of a rubber or rubber like part shall have a 
compression set not greater than 25 percent of its 
original thickness after being compressed by one-third 
of its original thickness. 


The compression set test shall be conducted on button 
samples compressed to two-thirds of their original 
thickness for 24 h at the minimum storage and use 
temperature at 27 + 2°C and 55 + 3°C. 


9 COLOUR AND MARKING 
9.1 Colour 


The recommended colour for wheeled fire extinguisher 
bodies is red. 


9.2 Marking 


9.2.1 The operating, recharging and inspection and 
maintenance instructions for wheeled fire extinguishers 
shall be in the form of an etched or embossed metal 
nameplate or band, or a pressure sensitive nameplate 
attached to the side of the extinguisher body. The 
marking shall identify the extinguisher as to type of 
media, the manufacturer’s name and model number, 
and shall include the rating and classification of the 
fire extinguisher (see Fig.1). 


9.2.2 Each extinguisher shall have a serial number. 


9.2.3 The year of manufacture, or the last two digits of 
the calendar year, and the factory test pressure shall be 
permanently marked on the extinguisher body or a non- 
transferable nameplate. Extinguishers manufactured in 
the last three months of a calendar year may be marked 
with the following year as the date of manufacture, fire 
extinguishers manufactured in the first 3 months of a 
calendar year may be marked with the previous year as 
the date of manufacture. 


9.2.4 If a manufacturer produces wheeled fire 
extinguisher at more than one factory, each extinguisher 
shall have a distinctive marking to identify it as the 
product of a particular factory. 


9.2.5 The marking shall include a reference to the range 
of temperatures at which the extinguisher is usable such 
as: 


“Acceptable for use at temperatures from 
tete ’ or the equivalent (see 6.1). 


9.2.6 The statement ‘Recharge immediately after any 
use’ or the equivalent shall be included as part of the 
marking. 


9.2.7 Each gas cartridge or cylinder shall be 
permanently marked with its empty mass, full mass and 
mass below which it shall be replaced or recharged, 
the manufacturer’s name or symbol and the type of 
propellant. 


EXCEPTION — Non-liquefied compressed gas 
cartridges or cylinders may utilize a pressure gauge 
and be marked with the minimum pressure below 
which it shall be replaced or recharged, the 
manufacturer’s name or symbol and the type of 
propellant. 


9.2.8 The above information may be placed on the 
cartridge in the form of a decalcomania transfer, if the 
cartridge is mounted on the outside of the extinguisher 
medium chamber. If the cartridge is mounted inside 
the extinguisher body, the information shall be stenciled 
or stamped on the cartridge. 


9.2.9 The marking on each wheeled fire extinguisher 
shall include its gross mass or minimum and maximum 
gross mass, which may be expressed by a tolerance. 
The gross mass shall include the mass of the charged 
extinguisher and discharge assembly. 


9.2.10 BIS Certification Marking 


The wheeled fire extinguishers may also be marked 
with the Standard Mark. 


9.2.10.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which the license for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


9.3 Operating Instructions 


9.3.1 For the purpose of applying the requirements of 
this clause, the operating instructions are defined as 
those necessary to accomplish the intended discharge 
of the extinguishing medium. 


9.3.2 The operating instructions shall face outwards 
and cover not more than a 120° arc on the extinguisher 
body. The marking required by 9.2.3 and 9.4 shall 
together occupy a minimum area of 100 cm?. 


IS 16018 : 2012 


Class À Class B 
Ordinary solid material fires Flammable liquid fires 


Class C 
Gas and vapour fires 


Fire involving energized 
electrical conductors 


Class D 
Combustibles metal fires 


Fic. 1 CLASSIFICATION OF FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 


15 


IS 16018 : 2012 


9.3.3 The operating instructions shall be arranged as 
follows: 


a) The word ‘INSTRUCTIONS’ shall be at the 
top of the nameplate. The minimum letter 
height shall be 6.0 mm. As an option, the 
words ‘EXTINGUISHER’ or ‘FIRE 
EXTINGUISHER’ may be added to the word 
‘INSTRUCTIONS’. 


The operating instructions shall be in the form 
of numerically sequenced pictographs. A 
single pictograph may include two 
instructions. 


b) 


c) A sequence of pictographs shall illustrate, with 
pictures, the recommended actions necessary 
for the intended operation of the extinguisher. 
Words may be added as an option. The 
sequence shall be as follows: 

1) Preparing the extinguisher by disengaging 
the safety locking device and removing 
the hose; 

2) Aiming the extinguisher at the base of the 
fire, including the recommended distance 
from the fire at which to begin discharge; 
3) Taking whatever action is necessary to 
initiate operation of the extinguisher; and 
4) Describing the intended method of 
applying the extinguishing medium on the 
fire. 


EXCEPTION — A wheeled fire extinguisher 
rated for Class D fires only need not have 
pictographic operating instructions. 


9.3.4 The height of the words when used in the 
pictographs shall be at least 5 mm. 


9.4 Warning Markings 


Clean-agent wheeled fire extinguishers shall contain 
the following warning or equivalent as part of the 
operating instructions. 


WARNING — The concentrated agent when 
applied to the fire can produce toxic by-products. 
Avoid inhalation of these materials by evacuating 
and ventilating the area. 


NOTE — XXX is the volume, in cubic metre, corresponding 
to the LOAEL value of the clean agent at 55°C multiplied by 
the nominal charge of the extinguisher. 


9.5 Use-Code Symbols 


9.5.1 Use-code symbols shall be positioned directly 
below the operating instructions. A written description 
for each code symbol may be included as part of the 
code. The description should be readable. 


9.5.2 The use-code symbols shall have dimensions not 
less than 16 mm x 16 mm excluding the borders. 


9.5.3 Except for wheeled extinguishers classified for 
use on Class D hazards, code symbols shall be placed 
on the extinguisher for those types of fires for which 
the extinguisher is classified. Those classes of fires for 
which the extinguisher is not intended for use because 
of potential injury to the operator shall be identified by 
a red diagonal slash from the top left corner to the 
bottom right corner of the use-code symbol. 


9.5.4 The manufacturer’s name or trade name may be 
placed below the use-code symbols, but shall not 
contain any other information that would distract 
attention from the operating instructions, such as an 
address or telephone number. 


9.6 Recharging Instructions 


The recharging instruction on a wheeled fire 
extinguisher shall state the intended mass and 
extinguishing medium that shall be used in recharging, 
the intended expellant gas pressure, or the use of a 
correct and fully charged gas cartridge or cylinder. 
Reference shall be made to the manufacturer’s servicing 
instructions for the intended equipment and the 
technique to be used in recharging the extinguisher. 
Only the manufacturer’s replacement parts shall be used 
for the recharging of the extinguisher. In lieu of detailed 
recharge instructions, the user may be instructed to 
return the extinguisher to the dealer or manufacturer 
for recharging, using the following words of the 
equivalent: 


‘Return to an authorized recharger for recharging 
in accordance with Service Manual No. 


9.7 Inspection Instructions 


The inspection instructions shall state that the wheeled 
fire extinguisher is to be periodically checked by a 
trained person to ensure that, 


a) seals and tamper indicator are not broken or 
missing; 

b) itis full (by weighing or lifting); 

c) itis not obviously damaged, corroded, leaking 
or has a clogged nozzle; and 

d) the pressure gauge or indicator is in the 
operable range or position. 

10 MANUALS 


10.1 User Manual 


A user manual shall be provided with each wheeled 
fire extinguisher. This manual shall contain the 
necessary instructions, warnings and cautions for the 


intended installation, operation and inspection of the 
extinguisher. The manual shall also have reference of 
the manufacturer’s service manual for maintenance and 
recharging of the extinguisher. 


10.2 Service Manual 


The manufacturer shall prepare a service manual for 
each model extinguisher. It shall be made available 
upon request and shall, 


a) contain necessary instructions, warnings and 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


IS 16018 : 2012 


cautions, a description of servicing equipment, 
and a description of recommended procedures 
for intended servicing; 

b) provide a list of part numbers of all 
replaceable parts; and 

c) indicate that the pressure gauge attached to 
the extinguisher shall not be used to 
determine when the intended charging 
pressure has been reached, and a pressure 
regulator shall be used if the pressure source 
is a tank of high pressure gas. 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


Organization 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Aerostar Helmets Limited, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 
Airport Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bombay Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


Brijbasi Hitech Udyog Ltd, New Delhi 


Building Fire Research Centre, Mysore 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire and Explosive Environment Safety (DIFR), Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corp Ltd, Chennai 
Chhatariya Rubber & Chemicals Industries, Mumbai 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Pune 


Council of Architecture, New Delhi 
Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 


Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Goa 
Electricity Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum, New Delhi 


Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


F. M. Engineering International India Branch, Bangalore 


17 


Representative(s) 


SHRI OM PRAKASH (Chairman) 
Suri D. K. Sunamı (Alternate) 


SHRI KULIIT S. ARORA 
SHRI D. BALACHANDRAN 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
SHRI R. BANERJEE (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH C. AGGARWAL 
Suri RAJESH K. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr N. SURESH 
Suri Y. M. MANJUNATH (Alternate) 


Dr M. P. SINGH 
SHRI SUNIL SHARMA (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (ELECT) DR 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P&A) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Dr K. C. Wapuwa (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. HEPAT 


SHRI S. A. HAVELIVALA 
Suri H. A. CHHATARIYA (Alternate) 


CoL L. K. SHARMA 
CoL ALoK SAHAI (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
Suri G. P. Misura (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


SHRI PYARE LAL 
Suri K. S. Yapay (Alternate) 


SHRI NARESH KAUL 
SHRI R. B. BHUTDA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM KALBAG 


IS 16018 : 2012 


Organisation 
Fire & Emergency Services, J&K, Srinagar 
Fire Protection Association of India, Mumbai 
GAIL (India Limited), New Delhi 


Gunnebo Steelage Industries Ltd, Chennai 


H. D. Fire Protect Co, Thane 


In Time Fire Appliances, Mumbai 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services, Bangalore 


K. V. Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


National Fire Service College, Nagpur 
National Thermal Power Corporation, New Delhi 


Newage Industries, Fire Protection Engineers, Surendranagar 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 
Prakash Suraksha Devices, Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Jamnagar 


RESQ Technologies, Ahmedabad 
S&P Safety Products Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Safex Fire Services Limited, Mumbai 


Shah Bhogilal Jethalal & Bros, Ahmedabad 


State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Steel Authority of India, Bokaro 


Surex Production and Sales Private Limited, Kolkata 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services Department, Chennai 


Tariff Advisory Committee, Mumbai 


The National Institute of Engineering, Mysore 


TYCO Thermal Controls India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


UL India Pvt Limited, Bangalore 


Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Lucknow 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata 


Zenith Fire Services (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


18 


Representative(s) 
Dr G. A. Buat 
PRESIDENT 
Suri S. P. GARG 


Suri P. M. SANJAY 
Suri DINESH BABBAR (Alternate) 


SHRI Harish N. DHARAMSHI 
Suet K. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH SHAH 
Suri T. K. KUMAR 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI B. G. CHANGAPPA 
Suri B. K. HAMPAGOL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH H. SABADRA 
Suri Upay K. SHROFF (Alternate) 


Suri M. V. DESHMUKH 
Suri S. S. Warick (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
SHRI D. K. SURYANARAYAN 


SHRI ASHOK M. SHAH 
Suri SHETUL A. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NANDY 


SHRI PRAMOD PRAKASH 
SHRI AMOD PRAKASH (Alternate) 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


Suri Ronit V. SHAH 
SHRI TUNIR CHAKRABARTI 


Suri JITENDRA SHAH 
SHRI SANDIP SHAH (Alternate) 


Sarı MUKESH M. SHAH 
SHRI ABHAY D. PURANDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. GAHLAUT 


SHRI SHYAM NARAYAN 
Suri A. RAUTELA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


SHRI S. VIJAYASEKAR 
SHRIMATI N. Prrya (Alternate) 


SHRI D .K. PODDAR 
SHRI AMIT Sana (Alternate) 
Dr N. SURESH 
SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 
SHRI VINAYAK JOGLEKAR (Alternate) 


DR PRAVINRAY GANDHI 
Suri V. JAGDIsH (Alternate) 


Suri D. G. P. KARSOLIA 
SHRI PRANVENDRA KUMAR Roa (Alternate) 


Suri D. P. Biswas 
Suri G. K. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


Suri B. C. SHAH 
Suri D. C. SHAH (Alternate) 


Organisation 
In personal capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, New Delhi 110016) 
In personal capacity (P/4 Belgacuta Villa, Kolkata 700037) 


In personal capacity (C-127, Kendriya Vihar, Sector-51, 
Noida 201307) 


In personal capacity (Delhi Fire Service, Connaught Circus, 
New Delhi 110001) 


In personal capacity (G-03, HIMAVAN II, 41/3, 2nd Main, 
Coconut Gardens, Nagarbhavi Main Road, Bangalore 560072) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16018 : 2012 


Representative(s) 
Suri S. K. DHERI 
Suri S. N. KUNDU 


SHRI H. S. KAPARWAN 


Suri R. C. SHARMA 


Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


Suri A. K. Saini, Scientist ‘F’ & Head (Civ Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. CHATURVEDI 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civ Engg), BIS 


19 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (7574). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 60 3843 
60 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


