( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Basic Standards

on Electronics

and Telecommunication

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 01

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (First Revision) which is identical with IEC Pub QC 001001 (1998) `IEC Quality assessment system for electronic components (IECQ) - Basic rules' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The revision has been undertaken in order to align Indian Standard with the latest International Standard as under IEC quality assessment system for electronic components (IECQC), it is obligatory for each member country to adopt IECQC standards as their national standards without any change. The text of the IEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International `Indian Standard'. Only the English standard. language Standard'appear referring to this standard, they should be read-as

text in the International

Standard

has been retained

while adopting

it in this

CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard, places the following: International the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their respective

Standard

Corresponding

Indian Standard

Degree of Equivalence Identical

IS0 9000 systems

Series on quality

IS/IS0

9000 Series on quality

systems

IS0 10011 Series on guidelines for auditing quality systems

IS/IS0 quality

10011 Series on guidelines systems

for auditing

Ii0

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of following documents referred in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: a) b) c) Rules of procedure Relevant ISO/IEC of the IEC and the ISO/IEC Guides, and of the System and which are approved by the Conformity directives,

Basic rules which define the priciniples Assessment Board (CAB).

IS QC 001001 : 2000

IEC QC 001001 (1998)

Indian Standard IEC QUALITY ASSESSMENT SYSTEM FOR ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS (IECQ) BASIC RULES ( First Revision )
Title
The title of the System is "IEC Quality Assessment System for Electronic Components", hereinafter referred to as "the System". The abbreviated title is "IECQ".

2

Object

Taking into account the object of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) as given in Article 2 of the Statutes, the particular object of the System, operated in conformity with the Statutes and under the authority of the IEC, is to facilitate international trade in electronic components of assessed quality, in accordance with the principle of reciprocity*. The object is achieved by the definition and implementation of quality assessment procedures in such a manner that components, released as conforming with the requirements of an applicable specification, are acceptable to all participants. In this System an applicable standard or specification denotes a standard or specification which is in accordance with clause 12. This System provides procedures for the quality assessment of components but does not necessarily give assurance of compliance with safety requirements of equipment using those components.

3

Field of application

The System is applicable to all electronic components and related materials and processes for ~whichquality assessment is required in specifications approved for use in the System.

4

Governing documents

The documents which state the Rules of the System and which govern the organization of its work are as follows: a) b) the Statutes of the IEC; the Rules of Procedure of the IEC and the ISO/IEC Directives, unless otherwise specified;
NOTE The Certification Management Committee recognizes that the IEC technical committees, upon which it depends for IEC specifications, are governed in all their work by the Rules of Procedure of the IEC and the ISOAEC Directives. * See annex C 1

IS QC 001001 : 2000 IEC QC 001001 (1998)

4 d)

IS0 9000, Quality systems, and related standards; IS0 10011, Guidelines for auditing quality systems; relevant ISO/IEC Guides; the Basic Rules which define the principles of the System and which are approved by the Conformity Assessment Board (CAB); the Rules of Procedure which define the working procedures of the System at both the international and national levels. The Rules of Procedure are decided upon and amended by the Certification Management Committee (CMC), in accordance with the voting procedure described in 14.2, in agreement with the Inspectorate Co-ordination Committee (ICC) on matters which concern the latter. They shall not be in conflict with the documents referred to in a) and f). Amendments to the Rules of Procedure for the System shall be reported to the CAB; documents prepared by the ICC on procedures to ensure the uniform application of the Rules of the System and equivalence of national procedures, which shall be approved in accordance with the voting procedure described in 14.2 and shall become part of the Rules of Procedure.

e>
9 9)

h)

5

Means of attainment

The object of the System is attained by a) the creation of suitable international and national bodies for the management and co-ordinatinn of the System, the promotion of the preparation and of the use of IEC standards which contain requirements necessary for the operation of the System, and the preparation and implementation of Rules of Procedure for the System which govern the following:

b)

c)

1) 2)
3)

the responsibilities, policies and organization of the CMC; the responsibilities, policies and organization of the ICC; the responsibilities of National Certification Bodies (NCBs), Institutions(NAls) and National Management Institutions (NMls); the approval of National Supervising Inspectorates (NSls); the approval of independent testing laboratories; the approval of manufacturers, including their testing laboratories; the approval of distributors as regards their ability to supply components of assessed quality according to the System; National Authorized

4) 5) 6) 7)

2

IS QC

001001: 2030

IEC QC OOlOOl(1998)

8) 9)
10)

the approval of specialist contractors; the approval of related materials and processes; the detailed procedures for the quality assessment and release of components and for the grant of an attestation of conformity, such as a Mark or Certificate, to components, materials or part finished components which are made, inspected, released and delivered in accordance with the System.

6

National organization

6.1 The national organization established to co-ordinate the activity for the quality assessment of electronic components, materials and processes in a participating country in the System shall be the National Committee of the IEC or a body recognized by the National Committee of the IEC. It shall, in principle, have the following functions to be fulfilled: 6.1.1 For all participating countries

a)

the management of the operation of the system at the national level and the responsibility for the national representation of its country in the System. These functions shall be performed by an NAI authorized by responsible national organizations (government, trade associations, standards organizations, etc.); the preparation and issue of national standards and other documents associated with the System. This function may be performed by a National Standards Organization (NSO). and additionally, for certifying countries System. This function shall be

b)
6.1.2

a) b)

the full responsibility for certification nationally under the performed by an NC6 as designated in the national rules;

the surveillance of all procedures for quality assessment necessary for the System and for the supervision of the attestation of conformity. These functions shall be performed in its country by an NSI which may also assumme, under the conditions specified in the Rules of Procedure, similar responsibilities of the application of the System to materials, processes and to components partially or wholly manufactured in countries not having an NSI; the responsibility for calibration. This function may be calibration services, which may be in other participating laboratories shall refer for the periodic verification comparison with reference standards having a known standards. performed by one or more recognized countries, to which the NSI and testing of their measurement standards by relationship to national or international

c>

6.1.3 The organizations performing the functions described in 8.1.1 and 6.1.2 may operate individually or jointly, provided that they comply with the requirements of the relevant ISO/IEC Guides and that there is no conflict of interest or loss of impartiality in the performance of these functions.

3

IS QC

001001:

2000

IEC QC ~001001 (1998)

6.2 An NCB, upon the recommendation of an NSI, shall have the authority to declare that the quality systems of manufacturers, distributors, specialist contractors and independent testing laboratories have been assessed, for the purpose of the System, and it has been shown that they comply with the requirements of the Rules of Procedure of the IECQ as well as with IS0 9001, IS0 9002 or ISO/IEC Guide 25 as appropriate (see 13.2).
NOTE Demonstration of compliance with the IS0 9000 series or ISOAEC Guide 25 does not necessarily ensure compliance with all the relevant requirements of the IECQ with regards to approval of manufacturers, distributors, specialist contractors and independent testing laboratories. Manufacturers, distributors, specialist contractors and independent testing laboratories shall also demonstrate that they fulfil the quality assessment requirements of IECQ relating to the components and processes covered.

6.3 In countries where there is no IEC National Committee or where the National Committee wishes neither to assume the function of an NAI nor to recognize another body as an NAI, the Rules of Procedure shall define the procedure to be followed. 6.4 The functions described above shall be carried out in accordance with the national rules which shall implement the Rules of the System, and may be carried out by already existing bodies, or bodies especially set up for the purpose of the System. The national rules of the different countries shall be easily comparable and ensure fhe uniform application of the Rules of the System.

7

International

organization

7.1 The overall responsibility for the functioning of the System is vested in the CMC, which is a committee of the IEC and operates under the authority of the CAB. 7.2 The composition of the CMC is as follows: participating country consisting of not more
I

4
b)
c)

a delegation from each appointed by its NAI; a Chairman; a Vice-Chairman; a Treasurer; a representative appointed

than

two delegates

d) e) fI 9) h)

by the ICC;

the General Secretary of the IEC; a Secretary; past Chairmen, as may be decided by the CMC. to advise it

7.3 The CMC may establish working groups, with clearly defined terms of reference, on matters related to the management of the System. 7.4 The CMC shall reference. establish an ICC and shall clearly define its composition

and terms

of

The ICC shall be responsible concerning quality assessment. Rules of Procedure.

for supervising the uniform application of the Rules of Procedure The relationship between the CMC and the ICC is governed by the

4

IS QC 001001 : 2000 IEC QC 001001 (1998) 8

Officers and administration

8.1 The Chairman is appointed for a period of three years by the CAB, on a nomination by the CMC, with the possibility of re-appointment for one further period of three years. Further reappointments for three years are permitted, but only if there are no other nominations. During his term of office, the Chairman shall not act as a national delegate to the CMC. The Vice-Chairman is appointed for a period of three years by the CAB, on a nomination by 8.2 the CMC, with the possibility of re-appointment for one further period of three years. Further reappointments for three years are permitted, but only if there are no other nominations. The ViceChairman may at the same time be a national delegate to the CMC, except when he takes the chair at a meeting. 8.3 The Treasurer is appointed for a period of three years by the CAB, on a nomination by the CMC, with the possibility of re-appointment for one further period of three years. Further reappointments for three years are permitted, but only if there are no other nominations. The Treasurer may at the same time be a national delegate to the CMC. 8.4 The Chairman, Vice-Chairman, been appointed by the CAB. or Treasurer may continue to serve until a successor has

8.5 The Secretariat shall be located at the Central Office of the IEC or in a participating country. In the second case, the CMC shall decide on the degree of administrative support that should be provided by the Central Office. 8.6 The Secretary is appointed for a period of five years by the CAB, on nomination by the CMC. He is eligible for re-appointment without restriction. The Secretary shall not act as a national delegate to the CMC. 8.7 The Secretary shall be responsible for the execution of those duties prescribed in these Basic Rules and in the Rules of Procedure. The Secretary shall carry out the instructions of the CMC and of its Chairman.

9

Report to the Conformity Assessment Board

The CMC shall submit an annual report to the CAB.

10

Requirements

for participation
of the IEC desiring to participate in the System shall satisfy the

10.1 Any National Committee following requirements: 10.1.1 It shall have established,

or recognized,

an NAI and an NSO. documents which are

10.1.2 It shall agree to implement necessary nationally.

the Rules of the System and to publish

10.1.3 It shall agree to recognize without discrimination the approvals of manufacturers (including their testing laboratories), specialist contractors, distributors and independent testing laboratories, the approval of components, and the validity of the quality conformance inspection of components and materials released in accordance with the System by other participants. 10.1.4 It shall agree to meet the financial obligations 5 of clause 16.

IS QC 001001 : 2000 IEC QC 001001 (1998)

Any National Committee which has satisfied the requirements of 10.1.1 and agreed to satisfy the requirements of 10.1.2, 10.1.3 and 10.1.4 shall, on request to the CMC, be admitted as a participating country of the System. 10.3 Participating countries are represented inthe CMC as described in 7.2a). procedure shall satisfy the

10.2

10.4 Any participating following requirements: 10.4.1

country desiring to make use of the certification

It shall have an NCB according to 6.1.2a). It may

10.4.2 It shall have an NSI according to 6.1.2b) approved under the Rules of the System. also delegate this responsibility to the approved NSI of another participating country. 10.4.3 It shall have established or recognized the calibration service referred to in 6.1.2~)

10.5 Any other countries, groups of manufacturers, or individual manufacturers, not represented by an IEC -National Committee, or whose IEC National Committee does not desire to participate, shall satisfy the requirements set forth in the Rules of Procedure governing access to the System by manufacturers, specialist contractors, distributors, and independent testing laboratories in nonparticipating countries. 10.6 In special circumstances by the CMC. not otherwise covered by these rules, the matter shall be dealt with

11
1 I .I

Legal provisions
International level

11 .I .I The CMC does not engage in trade, is non-profit making and does not take -part in any other economic pursuit on its own behalf. It has no marketing function or price-regulating function. It expends its means only on achieving the object of clause 2. The decisions 11 .I .2 of the CMC are made voluntarily on the basis of the prescribed voting procedures.

The seat of the System shall Abethe same as that of the IEC.

The laws of the country in which the IEC has its seat shall apply in any or all cases not specifically provided for in these Basic Rules. 11.2 National level the laws of the relevant countries shallapply.

For the national organizations

Nothing found in these Basic Rules or in the Rules of Procedure shall violate, or cause any acts which violate, the laws of a country in which the System operates. It is left to the NAI in each participating country, or to the NMI, in the establishment of the national rules implementing the System, to provide the necessary legal protection against the violation of any law.

6

IS QC 001001 : 2000 IEC QC 001001 (1998)

11.3

Legal protection

The granting of certification of conformity shall not transfer to the CMC or to the IEC any of the legal responsibilities incumbent, under the national or international law, on the manufacturer, specialist contractor or distributor of the product so certified. 11.4 Exclusion of liability and

The national organizations acting on behalf of the CMC shall ado so on their own responsibility shall take all possible steps to exclude any liability from falling on the CMC or on-the IEC. 11.5 Exoneration

In the case that the CMC or the IEC is held legally responsible, under national or international law, for any action. taken by a national organization acting on behalf of the CMC, then the national organization involved shall undertake to exonerate fully the CMC and the IEC from such liabilities.

12

Standards and specifications

12.1 The System is based on the use of standards which include the necessary provisions for quality assessment. These standards shall have been prepared by a technical committee of the IEC or by an organization-having a standards-making function which has been recognized by the CMC. NOTE An example of such an organization The CMC shall have the authority technical committee or recognized System. is the CENELEC Electronic Components Committee (CECC)

to exclude any standards which have been prepared by an JEC organization but which are considered to be inappropriate to the

These IEC standards shall be implemented, when needed, in the national standards of the participating countries on electronic components to be approved within the System. For this purpose, the participating countries may re-write them if necessary in accordance with the rules of their national system, but without altering the technical content. 12.2 However, in the absence of an applicable standard, as defined in 12.1, use can be made provisionally of other documents which shall be submitted by an NAI to the CMC. If these documents do not conform to the requirements of the System, they shall not be used for the purposes of approval. If the provisional documents are other than detail specifications or their contents are broader than those of a detail specification, the CMC shall be requested togive approval priorto their use within the System. The Rules of Procedure shall define the time period for action. The relevant IEC technical committee shall then be requested to prepare as quickly as possible an IEC standard to cover the scope of the provisional documents in accordance with the normal IEC rules and procedures. A ~provisional specification may be used for a maximum period of three years to grant component approvals and, in any case, shall not be used for this purpose after the issue of an applicable IEC standard. In the event that an applicable IEC standard has not been issued by the end of the three-year period, the CMC shall examine the reasons for the delay and may extend the usage period. The attention of the proper IEC governing body shall be called to the need for technical committee action.

7

IS QC 001001 : 2000 IEC QC 001001 (1998)

12.3 The documents mentioned in 12.1 and 12.2 shall include guidelines for writing detail specifications, for example blank detail specifications, and, wherever practicable, should include detail specifications. In the absence of applicable detail specifications, the necessary prepared by the parties involved in accordance with the Rules specifications. The NAI shall ensure that there is proper compliance detail specifications shall be of the System for preparing

with the Rules of the System.

13

Quality assessment
of the of an

13.1 Assurance that components, materials and/or processes conform to the requirements applicable specification is given by an attestation of conformity granted under the supervision NSI, in accordance with the Rules of the System. Where use is made of provisional specifications certificate and, if-possible, in the marking. (see 12.2) this fact shall be indicated

clearly on the

13.2 The Rules of Procedure shall prescribe the requirements for approval of the following quality elements of the System and shall make use of the requirements and/or recommendations stated in the appropriate documents of the IS0 9000 series and in the recommendations of the appropriate ISO/IEC Guides as indicated below:

a) b)

the approval of NSls; the approval of independent the approval of manufacturers testing laboratories (ISOIIEC Guide 25); including their laboratories, and,

a

(IS0 9001 or IS0 9002)

1)
2)

the responsibilities of the Designated Management Representative (DMR); the procedures for the quality assessment and release of components and the grant ~ofan attestation of conformity to components which are made, inspected, released and delivered in accordance with these rules; contractors (IS0 9001 or IS0 9002);

d) e) 9 9)

the approval of specialist the approval of distributors

(IS0 9002)

the reporting of test results (ISO/IEC Guide 25); the standards or specifications to be used under the System.

~13.3 The NSls approved under the System shall make appropriate arrangements to maintain the required uniformity of application of quality assessment procedures. The details of these arrangements are indicated in the Rules of Procedure. 13.4 Complaints regarding the quality of components which arise between a manufacturer and user (or buyer and seller) within a country are to be settled in accordance with the relevant procedures established within that country. The CMC shall approve a procedure for examining complaints and shall itself be responsible for examining appeals referred to it where more than one country is involved.

a

IS QC 001001: 2000 EC QC OOlOOl(1998)

14

Voting
within

14.1 A decision by vote of the NAls, in accordance with 14.2 or 14.3, shall be implemented the System. Each NAI shall have one vote only. The rest of the CMC has no vote. 14.2 Decisions affecting the Basic Rules or Rules of Procedure shall be taken in accordance "Four Months' Vote".

with a

A Four Months' Vote implies that the proposal to be put to the vote shall be circulated by the Secretary to all th.e NAls. The NAls shall be requested to reply within four months of the date of dispatch of the communication asking for the vote upon proposal, stating whether or not they are in favour of the proposal which has been submitted to them. The proposal is adopted unless one-fifth or more of the NAls have cast a negative vote, except that when a vote is on a document in accordance with 4 h) the decision concerning the result of the voting shallbe taken by the Chairman of the CMC after consultation with the Chairman of the ICC. A Report on the Voting shall be circulated taken. giving the decision of the Chairman on the action to be

14.3 Other decisions, including those affecting documents from IEC technical committees, proposals for Officers, the creation of working groups and financial matters, are normally taken during a meeting of the CMC. However, if the~chairman so decides, or if any delegation so requests, the decision shall be submitted to a vote by correspondence. Decisions on matters voted upon during a meeting shall be positive if approved by a simple majority of those delegations voting. The Vice-Chairman has no vote by virtue of his position but, if he is the sole delegate of a member, he may vote on behalf of the participating country even though he may be acting as Chairman. Decisions on matters voted upon by correspondence shall, unless otherwise provided for in the Rules of Procedure, be positive if approved by a simple majority of those NAls voting. A vote by correspondence is terminated when all NAls have voted or three months after circulation of the voting document, whichever is the shorter. In both cases, where the votes are equally divided, the Chairman taken. 14.4 The decisions of the CMCshall be communicated shall decide on the action to be

to the NAls.

15

Termination

of participation

15.1 A participating country wishing to withdraw from membership of the System shall give at least one calendar year's notice. This participating country shall pay its annual dues for the calendar year following the year during which the notice was given, unless notice of withdrawal is received up to and including 30th June, in which case the participating country shall only be required to pay the current year's dues. 15.2 Participation may be suspended or cancelled by decision of the CAB, acting on the recommendation of the CMC, if a participating country is considered not to be adhering to the governing documents of the System. Before any such action is taken, the participating country concerned has the right to a hearing before the CAB, except when the suspension is because of nonpayment of dues. Dues shall not be refunded on suspension or cancellation of participation.

9

IS .QC 001001: 2000 IEC QC OOlOOl(1998)

15.3 The position of NMls nor~ofmanufacturers, specialist contractors, distributors and independent testing laboratories in non-participating countries with regard to termination of participation is the same as that of participating countries described in 15.1 and 15.2 above.

16. 16.1 16.2
16.3

Finance
The System is self-financed and non-profit making. The financial administration of the System is the responsibility of the CMC. The financial year of the System is the calendar year.

16.4 The System shall derive its income from annual dues paid by its participating countries to the Secretariat, and from any other sources as approved by the CMC. The annual dues shall be determined by the CMC. 16.5 The draft annual budget of the CMC, including the proposed dues, shall be prepared by the Treasurer in conjunction with the Secretary. The draft annual budget, together with the proposed dues, shall be circulated to the participating countries by 1st July of the preceding budget year and then agreed on by the CMC. This procedure shall be completed by 1st December of each year, -and may be carried out by correspondence. Following this agreement, the budget shall be submitted to the CAB for approval. 16.6 Participating countries shall pay their~annual dues to the Secretariat before the end of June of the current year. 16.7 Each year, not later than 1st April, the Secretary shall send to the participating countries the accounts of the System for the preceding year, duly ratified by a professional auditor and signed by the Treasurer of the~CMC. After agreement by the CMC, the accounts shall be submitted to the CAB for approval. 16.8 Any participating country whose -dues for a given calendar year have not been paid by 31st December of that year shall have its participation suspended as from 1st January of the following year. During this suspension it has no right to send a delegation to the CMC or to receive documents or publications of the CMC, or to vote. The right to make use of the certification procedure is also withdrawn.

17

Amendments

to the Basic Rules

17.1 Suggested amendments to the Basic Rules shall be communicated in writing to the Secretary, who shall send copies of them to the NAls of the participating countries at least three months prior to the meeting of the CMC at which the proposed amendments shall be considered. In addition, the Secretary shall send copies of those proposed amendments concerning quality assessment aspects to the ICC for examination and comment. 17.2 If approved by the CMC, in accordance with 14.2, the proposed amendments shall be submitted to the CAB for approval.

10

IS QC

001001: 2000

IEC QC OOlOOl(1998)

18

Dissolution of the System

The dissolution of the System may be proposed by the CMC subsequent to a meeting called especially for this purpose. If the~proposal is adopted in accordance with 14.2, it shall be submitted to the CAB for approval. In the case of dissolution, the CAB shall settle the disposal of remaining property and funds after the settlement of all liabilities.

11

IS QC

001001:

2000

IEC QC OOlOOl(1998)

Annex A (normative) Terms and definitions
The following
Quality

definitions

Assessment

System

apply in the context of the Basic Rules and Rules of Procedure for Electronic Components.

of the IEC

A.1 quality assessment the totality~of measures carried out consistently and systematically conforms with the requirements of a stated specification

in order to ensure that a product

A.2 participating country a country in which the National Committee of the IEC, or a body recognized by the National Committee of the IEC, has been admitted into the System through having met the participation requirements
NOTE This term includes all categories of participation outlined in 10.1 to 10.4 of the Basic Rules

A.3 specification a detailed statement of a set of requirements to be satisfied by a product, a material or a process, indicating, whenever appropriate, the procedure by means of which it may be determined whether the requirements are satisfied A.4 standard document, established by consensus and approved by a recognized body, that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for activities or their results, aimed at the achievement ~ofthe optimum degree of order in a given context [ISOIIEC Guide 2: 1996, definition
3.21 results of science, technology and experience. and

NOTE Standards should be based on the consolidated aimed at the promotion of optimum community benefits.

A.5 applicable standard, or applicable specification a standard, or specification, applicable to a component, group of components, material, or process and which has been written in accordance with the Rules of the System, or such reference standards, or specifications, as have been adopted for use within the System A.6 provisional specification a specification or part thereof, allowed for use temporarily applicable specification

under the System in the absence

of an

A.7 detail specification a document which gives directly, or by making reference to other documents, all information necessary to completely describe a given component, range of components or material and to ensure conformance thereof with the requirements for quality assessment 12

IS QC

001001:

2000

IEC QC OOlOOl(1998) A.6 distributor an organization contractually authorized by one or more manufacturers completely finished components from these manufacturers

to store,

repack

and sell

A.9 independent testing laboratory an organization wishing to make its services available to other organizations within the System, which has the facilities and capability to carry out tests and measurements on electronic components or materials in accordance with their specification(s) and which is independent of a manufacturers production department A.10 manufacturer of an electronic component an organization, situated at a stated location or stated locations, that carries out or controls such stages in the manufacture, inspection, handling and storage of an electronic component that enables it to accept responsibility for the quality assessment of that component A.11 Designated Management Representative (DMR) a person, acceptable to the National Supervising Inspectorate (NSI), who is a member of the organization (manufacturer, distributor, independent testing laboratory, specialist contractor) concerned and who is responsible for the quality system of that organization. This person is the normal means of communication between the NSI and the organization A.12 approval of manufacturer a decision by the National Certification Body (NCB) that a manufacturer has the organization and the facilities to assure the production and supply of components in accordance with the requirements of the System, and that the manufacturer meets the requirements of the System A.13 approval of distributor a decision by the NCB that a distributor has the organization the~supply of components in accordance with the requirements A.14 specialist contractor a contractor providing components industry

and the facilities of the System

necessary

to assure

a specialist

process

capability

or technical

service

to the

electronic

A.15 approval of independent testing laboratory a decision by fhe NCB that a testing laboratory is capable of carrying out its function under the System and is free from any influence which would prevent it from acting in an impartial manner A.16 inspection (of components and materials) the process of selecting samples from an inspection lot; measuring, examining, testing or otherwise comparing each specimen of these samples with the requirements of the applicable specification; deciding whether the sample complies with the applicable specification and what subsequent action shall be taken with regard to the inspection lot

13

IS

QC

001001

IEC QC 001001

: 2000 (1998)

A.17 quakity conformance inspection an inspection carried out by or on behalf of the manufacturer under the surveillance of an NSI on the

components and materials he manufactures, in order to establish that their quality is being maintained in accordance with the requirements of the applicable specification A.18
release

a decision, taken in accordance with the Rules of the System, that an inspection lot has successfully passed all the relevant requirements of the applicable specification(s)
A.19 ~measurement standard an instrument, a device, or a material of known characteristics integrity of measuring equipment or measuring methods

used to establish

and maintain

the

NOTE Measurement standards are classified in different levels, for example, reference, transfer.

14

IS QC 001001 : 2000 IEC QC 001001 (1998)

Annex B (informative) -Index to terms
This index lists the terms defined in annex A, together with those used and explained sufficiently in the Basic Rules of the IEC Quality Assessment System for Electronic Components. Term Definition, or subclause of the Basic Rules

applicable standard, or applicable specification approval of distributor approval of independent testing laboratory approval of manufacturer Basic Rules calibration service Certification Management Committee (CMC) certification of conformity conformance inspection, quality contractor, specialist Designated Management Representative (DMR) detail specification distributor distributor, approval of Four Months' Vote independent testing laboratory independent testing laboratory, approval of inspection (of components and materials) inspection, quality conformance Inspectorate Co-ordination Committee (ICC) manufacturer of an electronic component manufacturer, approval of measurement standard ~NationalAuthorized Institution (NAI) -National Certification Body (NCB) National Standards Organization (NSO) National Supervising Inspectorate (NSI)

A.5 A.13 A.15 A.12

49
6.1.2~) 7.1 5c)lO) A.17 A.14 A.11 A.7 A.% A.13 14.2 A.9 A.15 A.16 A.17 7.4 A.10 A.12 A.19 6.l.la) 6.1.2a) 6.1.lb) 6.1.2b)

15

IS QC 001001 : 2000 IEC QC 001001 (1998)

Term
participating country provisional specification quality conformance quality assessment release specialist contractor specification specification, applicable specification, detail specification, provisional standard standard, applicable standard, measurement System testing laboratory, testing laboratory, independent independent, inspection

Definition, or subclause of the Basic Rules
A.2 ~A.6 A.47 A.1 A.18 A.14 A.3 A.5 A.7 A.6 A.4 : A.5 A.19 1 A.9 A.15 14.3

approval of

vote during a meeting or by correspondence

16

IS QC 001001: 2000 IEC QC 001001,(1998)

Annex C

(normative)
Principles of reciprocity c.1 General

Reciprocity is usually the result of a bilateral agreement. However, it may be multilateral, in which case the agreement will be applicable to all participants without distinction. Such an agreement allows a participant to identify the applicable procedures -of the other participants and will avoid the imposition of supplementary procedures which would otherwise have been necessary. The degree of reciprocity is therefore defined by an agreement that involves rights and obligations. Before such an agreement can be concluded, a number of economic, administrative and regulatory conditions have to be met. Reciprocity results in equality of rights and obligations between participants. procedure will be decided for settling any disputes that ~might arise. Within the IECQ, the ICC is the body responsible for the implementation, reciprocity in the field of certification -of electronic components. It presupposes that a

on behalf of the CMC, of

c.2

Reciprocity in the approval of electronic components

and materials

Electronic components and materials which have been granted -approval and which have been subjected to quality conformance inspection under the surveillance of an approved NSI in accordance with the Rules of the System and subsequently released for delivery are equally acceptable within the participating countries of the System without discrimination.

c.3

Certificates (and Marks) of Conformity
in order to indicate to the required by the Rules of the

The Certificates (and/or Marks) of Conformity have been instituted customer that the components have been subjected to the disciplines System. Reciprocity with respect to the Certificates and Marks of Conformity corresponding approvals and quality conformance inspection. NOTE The Mark of Conformity,
participating countries when available, of the System. will be international

implies the recognition

of the

and receive the same recognition

in all

c.4

Reciprocity

in the recognition of NSls

This implies the acceptance by all other organizations within the System of any action taken by an NSI in the performance of its surveillance of manufacturers, distributors, specialist contractors, and independent testing laboratories for the approval of electronic components and materials under the Rules of the System. .

17

IS QC 001001: 2000 IEC QC OOlOOl(l998)

C.5

Reciprocity in the recognition of testing laboratories

This implies that the results of testing performed for the purposes of the System by a testing laboratory approved in accordance with the Rules of the System and under the surveillance of an NSI are accepted by all other organizations within the System. NOTE A testing laboratory, for the purposes of the System, may be an independent testing laboratory or that of an approved manufacturer.

18

