IS 15086( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 ) ( Superseding IS 4004: 1985)

Indian Standard SURGE ARRESTERS
PART 5 SELECTION AND APPLICATION RECOMMENDATIONS

ICS

29.120 .50;29.240.10

Q BIS 2001

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFARMARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI 110002 December 2001 Price Group 13

Surge Arrestors Sectional Committee, ET 30

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 5 ) which is identical with IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 ) `Surge arresters -- Part 5 : Selection and application recommendations' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Surge Arrestors Sectional Committee and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. The text of IEC Standards has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviation. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standards' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'; and b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as a decimal marker. With the publication of this standard, IS 4004: 1985 `Application guide for non-linear resister type surge arresters for alternating current systems ( first revision )' shall be treated as withdrawn. CROSS REFERENCES In this adopted Indian Standard, references appear to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Incf'ianStandards, which are to be substituted in their respective places are listed below along with their degree of equivalence: International Standard 60071-1 : 1993 Insulation coordination -- Part 1 : Definitions, principles and rules Corresponding Indian Standard IS 2165 ( Part 1 ) : 1977 Insulation coordination : Part 1 Phase to earth insulation coordination principles and rules ( second revision ) IS 2165 ( Part 2 ) :1983 Insulation coordination: Part 2 Phase to phase insulation coordination principles and rules 60071-2: 1996 Insulation coordination -- Part 2: Application guide 60099-1 : 1991 Surge arresters -- Part 1 : Non-linear resistor type gapped arresters for ac systems 60099-3: 1990 Surge arresters -- Part 3: Artificial pollution testing of surge arresters 60099-4: 1991 Surge arresters -- Part 4: Metal oxide surge arresters without gaps for ac systems IS 3716: 1978 Application guide for insulation coordination ( first revision ) IS 15086 ( Part 1 ) : 2001/lEC 60091-1 : 1991 Surge arresters : Part 1 Non-linear resistor type gapped arresters for a.c. systems Nil Degree of Equivalence Equivalent

do

do Identical

IS 3070 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 Lightning for alternating arresters current systems: Part 3 Metal oxide surgearresters without gaps for ac systems

Equivalent

( Continued on third.cover )

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

Indian Standard SURGE ARRESTERS
PART 5 SELECTION AND APPLICATION
1.1

RECOMMENDATIONS

Scope

This part of IEC 99 provides recommendations for the selection and application of surge arresters to be used in three-phase systems with nominal voltages above 1 kV. It applies to non-linear resistor type gapped surge arresters as defined in IEC 99-1 and to gapless metal-oxide surge arresters as defined in IEC 99-4. 1.2 Normative

referemes

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of IEC 99. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All normative documents are subject to revisbn, and parties to agreements based on this pan of IEC 99 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IEC 71-1:1993, IEC 71-2:1976, Insulation co-ordination - Part 1: Definitions, principles and rules

Insulation co-ordination - Part 2: Application guide

NOTE - The third edition of this standard is preaentiy under revision.

IEC 99-1:1991,

Surge arresters - Part 1: Non-1inear resistor type gapped surge arresters

for a.c. systems
IEC 99-3:1990,

Surge arresters - Part 3: Artificial pollution testing of surge arresters

NOTE - This Technical Report applies to gapped surge arresters acoording to IEC 99-1.

IEC 99-4:1991,

Surge arresters - Part 4: Metal-oxide surge arresters without gaps for a.c.

systems
IEC 507: 1991, Artificial pollution tests on high-voltage insulators to be used on a.c. systems IEC 815:1986,

Guide for the selection of insulators in respect of polluted conditions
for the application of surge arresters

1.3 General principles

IEC 71-1 specifies withstand voltages for two ranges of highest voltages for equipment: range I: above 1 kV to 245 kV included range II: above 245 kV

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 ) For range I systems containing overhead lines, the main rksk to equipment arises from induced and direct lightning strokes to the connected overhead lines. In cable systems not connected to overhead lines, overyoltages due to faults or switching operations are most likely to occur. In rare cases, however, lightning induced overvoltages may also be generated. In systems of range II, in addition to range I factors, switching Ovewoltages become important, increasing with higher system voltages. Overvoltage may cause flashovers and serious damage to the equipment and thereby jeopardize the supply of power to users. It is essential to prevent this by the proper co-ordination of surge arresters with the insulation. it is, therefore, recommended to use surge arresters if there are possibilities of iightning overvoltages or high switching overvoltage which may be dangerous to the equipment.

These surge arresters shouid constitute a reiiabie part of the system. They are designed to withstand the voltages and the resulting currents through them with a sufficiently high reliability taking into account poiiution and other site matters. In each system such voitage stresses are (see IEC 71-1): operating voltage; temporary overvoltage; siow-front overvoitages; fast-front overvoltages; are of particular importance for ar-

where the siow-front overvoltages due to switching resters protecting range 11equipment.

As a general principle, the best protection of equipment and high surge arrester rated voltages are contradicting requirements. Thus the selection of an adequate arrester constitutes an optimization process, which has to consider a great number of system and equipment parameters. Gapless metai-oxide surge arresters are of particular advantage for earthed neutral systems, because they offer better protection against slow-front overvoltages. This arrester type is today widely installed in these systems and the application of arresters for such systems tends to concentrate on metal-oxide surge arresters. In some isolated or resonant earthed neutral systems, where earth fault temporary overvoitages may have long durations, gapped surge arresters may offer advantages, if protective ieveis are required to be low. While being the surge arrester traditionally used in ail voltage ranges, the consideration of gapped arresters may be adequate for systems of range I, especially in the lower voltage range.

1.4

General procedure

for the selection

of surge atre!Wets

The following iterative procedure, shown in the flow diagram of t~gure 1, is recommended for the selection of surge arresters: determine the continuous operating highest system operating voltage; determine ovewoltages; the rated voltage voitage of the arrester with respect with respect to the to the

of the

arrester

temporary

2

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

EziiEl-

`EiEzF----------1

m

"Q
Pressuredial Obas

I I I I I 1

I I

surge #restw
I

------ ------ --F I
1

1

i I
I

f
I I I I I I I I

mm
I t
I

I

Eii5iiF
I

1

I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I I

Proapaotivasbwfmnt ovawoltage

P

epresentativaimpinging lightningovervoltage

II

station
layout

ConductorIangth batwean arrestar and proteotadobjaot

I

~(

I t I I f I I I I I I I I I

A
I

I

L
Co-ordination lightningimpulse wittrstandwIltaga 1 +

1 Y

I I ;
I I 4 ------------

I I I I I

Co-ordination switohii impulaa withstandvoltage

I

EiiiEEd~
No -----" e

`
Aooaptabla

I I i

-----

No ---------:

Yfs ArresterSaIectad

Figure 1- Flow diagram for the selection of surge arresters
3

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 [EC 60099-5 (1996 )

estimate through the the nominal class of the

the magnitude and probability of the expected lightning discharge currents arrester, determine the transmission line discharge requirements and select discharge current, the high current impulse value and the line discharge arrester;

NOTE - If high current impulse velues different from the standardized values are necessary (see IEC 99-4, table 6, note), these values should be selected according to the lightning discharge current.

select the pressure current;

relief class of the arrester with respect to the expected

fault

select a surge arrester that fulfils the above requirement; determine the lightning and switching impulse protection characteristics of the arrester; locate the arrester as close as possible to the apparatus to be protected; - determine the co-ordination switching impulse withstand voltage of the protected equipment taking into account the representative slow-front overvoltages and system layout; determine the co-ordination lightning impulse withstand voltage considering:

. the representative impinging lightning overvoltage surge as determined by the lightning performance of the overhead line connected to the arrester and the acceptable failure rate of the protected equipment; . . the substation layout; the distance between surge arrester and protected equipment;

determine the rated insulation level of the equipment from IEC 71-1; if a lower rated insulation level of the equipment is desired, then a lower continuous operating voltage, a lower rated voltage, a higher nominal discharge current, a higher line discharge class, a different arrester design or a reduced distance between arrester and protected object should be investigated.
NOTE - A lower continuous operating voltage or a lower rated voltage may reduce the service reliability of the arresters.

Details of this iterative procedure are given in sections 2,3 and 4 of this document. 1.5 Polluted housing arrester withstand

Pollution on the arrester housing may cause sparkover or temperature increase of grading components in gapped arresters and high temperature increase of the varistors in metal-oxide arresters, To prevent arrester failures in poiluted areas, arresters abie to withstand the relevant polluted conditions have to be chosen. Although not explicitly specified in IEC 99-1 and IEC 99-4, arresters used in normal operating conditions should withstand the medium pollution stresses according to pollution level II of IEC 71-2. If the arrester installation area is subjected to a higher pollution, the surge arrester performance may be adversely affected. If arresters of inadequate design are used in heavy (pollution Ievei Ill) or very heavy (pollution level IV) polluted areas, periodic cleaning or greasing may be effective in preventing the events stated above. When live washing of arresters is intended, arresters designed for such service conditions are required.

4

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

Section 2: Non-linear resistor type gapped surge arresters according to IEC-99-1

2.1 2.1.1

Characteristic General

data of gapped surge arresters

Basic characteristics of surge arresters with series spark qaps are their rated voltage, their sparkover voltages, their nominal discharge curr&ts and their residual voltages-at these currents. The protective performance is characterized by ;;~e sparkover voltages for front-of-wave, lightning impulse and, when applicable, switching impulses; and is also characterized by the residual voltages at nominal discharge current and, when applicable, at switching impu Ise currents. For a given rated voltage, different types of arresters and, therefore, different protection levels exist. Additional characteristics of an arrester to be considered are continuous operating voltage, long duration discharge class, pressure relief class, pollution withstand capability, live washing capability and special mechanical properties. 2.1.2 Rated vo/tage

The maximum permissible r.m.s. value of the power frequency voltage between the arrester terminals, at which it is designed to operate correctly as established in the operating duty test. The rated voltage is used as a reference parameter for the specification of operating characteristics.
NOTE - Some types of arresters to be used in range H are designed to reseal at power frequency voltages higher than the rated voltage. This voltage is generally called the `temporary overvoltage reseal voltage". Since IEC 99-1 does not specify tests to assure the correct operation of such arresters, test details and application should be agreed between user and manufacturer.

In some cases, e.g. for the pollution test according to IEC 99-3, the maximum r.m.s. value of Dower freauency voltacae which can be applied continuous between the arrester terminals should be know;. For arresters to be used in range I-according to IEC 71-1, this voltage may be equal to the rated voltage of the arrester. For arresters to be used in range II it is usually lower. As IEC 99-1 does not specify tests to assure this voltage, the applicable value should be obtained from the manufacturer.

2.1.3

Protective levels

The lightning impulse protective level of the surge arrester is the maximum of the following values: the standard lightning impulse sparkover voltage; the residual voltage at nominal discharge current.
NOTE - When considering the protection of equipment from fast front overvoltage it is assumed that the withstand strength of the oil-immersed insulation in the transformers is at least 15 % above its full lightning impulse withstand strength for voltage durations shorter than 3 p.s. Therefore, the maximum voltages specified in IEC 99-1, table 8, for the front-of-wave sparkover are 15 % higher than those for the standard lightning impulse. Other types of insulation as in instrument transformers, cables or gas insulated substations (GIS) may have different withstand characteristics and the front-of-wave sparkover voltage may need special consideration.

5

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

The switching impulse protective level is applicable to the protection of equipment from slow-front overvoltages. It is the maximum of the switching impulse sparkover voltage and the switching impulse residual voltage.
NOTE - When the switching impulse sparkover characteristic of an arrester type is not known, only approximate information about this is obtained from the power frequency sparkover voltage.

2.1.4

Nominai discmrge

current

The peak value of a discharge current having a 8/20 shape, which is used to classify an arrester. It is also the discharge current which is used to initiate the follow current in the operating duty test and to establish the protective level of the arrester for lightning overvoitages. 2.1.5 Long duration discharge class

A number related to the energy absorption capability of an arrester to discharge long lines. Increasing class numbers (see IEC 99-1, table 5) indicate increasing system voltages and line length and decreasing surge impedance and overvoltage factors.

2.1.6

Pressure re/ief class

A number related to the capability of an arrester to withstand internal fault currents after a failure without violent shattering of t+e housing. Reference is made to clause 8.7 of IEC 99-1. 2.1.7 Po//ution withstand characteristics

For arresters to be used in polluted areas according to IEC 71-2, pollution levels Ill and IV, a pollution test according to IEC 99-3 is necessary. From this test, information about the sparkover performance is obtained. The flashover performance of the housing can be checked in accordance with IEC 507. 2.1.8 Live washing characteristics

Application of live washing may require a special arrester design and suitable tests have to be defined. In the design of the washing equipment, care should be taken on the following points:

water with an adequate resistivity must be used; the pressure and the nozzle configuration should be arranged so that the arrester in its whole length and circumference is wetted as uniformly and simultaneously as possible. For this it is necessary to consider the maximum permissible wind speed.

6

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ] :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1 996 )

2.2 2.2.1

Selection

of gapped surge arresters

phase-to-earth

Rated voltage

It has been common practice to select an arrester to withstand the stresses due to the temporary overvoltages resulting from an earth fault on one phase causing a voltage rise on unfaulted phases at a time when an arrester operation occurs on one of these phases. Other causes of temporary ovewoltages have to be considered and the voltage rating of the arrester should be chosen on the basis of the highest of these ovewoltage conditions. In some cases it may be necessary to consider temporary overvoltages arising from the simultaneous occurrence of different phenomena such as sudden loss of load together with an earth fault, taking into account their probability of occurrence.

The following causes for temporary overvoitages

should always be considered:

-

Earth faults:

These ovewoltages occur in a large part of the system. Guidance for the determination of temporary ovewoltage amplitudes is given in annex A. The duration of the overvoltage corresponds to the duration of the fault (until fau!t ~k?aring). In earthed neutral systems it is generally less than 1 s. In resonant earthea rieutral systems with fault clearing it is generally less than 10 s. In systems without earth fault clearing the duration may be several hours. . Load rejections:

After disconnection of loads, the voltage rises at the source side of the operating circuit breaker. The amplitude of the overvoltage depends on the disconnected load characteristics and on the short-circuit power of the feeding substation. The temporary ovewoltages have particularly high amplitudes after full load rejection at generator transformers depending on magnetizing and overspeed conditions. The amplitude of load rejec!;on overvoltages is usually not constant during its duration. Accurate calculations have to consider many parameters. As a guidance, the following typical values may be used: In moderately extended systems, a full load rejection can give rise to phase-to-earth ovewoltages with amplitude usually below 1,2 p.u. The ovewoltage duration depends on the operation of voltage-control equipment and may be up to several minutes. In extended systems, after a full load rejection, the phase-to-earth ovewoltages may reach 1,5 p.u. or even more when Ferranti or resonance effects occur. Their duration may be in the order of some seconds. For load rejection of generator transformers the temporary overvoltages may reach amplitudes up to 1,4 p.u. for turbo generators and up to 1,5 p.u. for hydro generators. The duration is approximately 3 s. When the time dependence of the amplitudes is known, a suitable representation of the overvoltage is the maximum amplitude, with a duration equal to the time while the amplitudes exceed 90 0/0 of this value.

7

IS 15086

( Part 5 ) :2001
(1996
)

IEC 60099-5

In some systems the following causes of temporary overvoltages resonance systems; -

need consideration: between

effects, e.g. when charging long unloaded lines or resonances

voltage rise along long lines (Ferranti effect); harmonic overvoltage, e.g. when switching transformers;

backfeed through interconnected transformer windings, e.g. dual transformer station with common secondary bus during fault clearing or single-phase switched three-phase transformer with an unbalanced secondary load. Temporary overvoltages due to ferro-resonances arrester selection, but should be eliminated. should not form the basis for the surge

Combination of causes such as earth faults and load rejection may result in higher temporary overvoltage values than those from the single events. When such combinations are considered sufficiently probable, the overvoltages for each cause have to be compounded, taking into account the actual system configuration.
NOTES The selection of the arrester rated voltage corresponding to the highest system temporary 1 overvoltage is based on the assumption that the highest system voltage is not exceeded under normal operating conditions. If abnormal system voltages are likely to occur, thereby increasing the probability of arrester operations during such conditions, it may be necessary to use an arrester with a higher rated voltage than that recommended above. 2 Operating voltages with frequencies other than 50 Hz or 60 Hz may require special consideration in the manufacture or application of surge arresters and should be a subject of discussion between manufacturer and user.

Arresters for isolated or resonant earthed neutral systems without automatic earth fault clearing should be able to withstand the rated voltage continuously due to the possible long duration of the temporary overvoltage. Arresters for systems with automatic earth fault clearing need only withstand the maximum phase-to-earth system voltage. This reduced value can be obtained from the manufacturer.

2.2.2 2.2.2.1

Nominal discharge current Factors influencing the lightning discharge currents

As a general rule, arrester currents due to lightning strokes are less than the stroke current. In the case of direct strokes to lines, traveling waves propagate in opposite directions from the point of impact. Flashover of line insulation provides a parallel path to ground, which diverts a portion of the stroke current. In the case of strokes to more than one conductor, or flashovers between conductors, two or more surge arresters may operate and share the current. Only in the case of a direct stroke very near to the terminal of the arrester, where no flashover occurs before arrester operation, is the arrester called upon to discharge most of the lightning stroke current. The probability of such an occurrence can be significantly reduced by pro,per shielding., Information concerning lightning surge parameters can be obtained from general statistical data or from local statistical data. The relationship between lightning surges and surge arresters discharge currents may be obtained from traveling wave calculations. 8

IS 15086

IEC 60099-5

( Part 5 ) :2001 ( 1996 )

Overhead lines may be protected against direct lightning strokes to the conductors by the use of shield (overhead ground) wires, which are positioned to intercept lightning strokes and to direct the stroke current to ground via metallic tower or pole structures. Where wood-pole structures are used, low-impedance conductors are used to connect the shield wires to ground.

Almost all direct strokes to line conductors are eliminated by the use of shield wires. When such a direct stroke (shielding failure) does occur, line flashover is almost certain in range I. The number of shielding failures and their severity can be controlled by number and location of the shield wires. When a lightning stroke terminates on a shield wire, the stroke current is diverted to ground through the structure-connecting conductors. The impedance of the current path, including the ground surge impedance, results in a voltage at the top of the line structure. A portion of this voltage is coupled to the phase conductors. The difference between the phase conductor potential and structure top potential is impressed directly across line insulation and may result in flashover. This type of flashover is called a back-f lashover. The rate of occurrence of back-f lashovers is controlled by selection of a proper insulation level, by keeping the structure ground resistance to an acceptably low value by providing adequate clearance from conductor to structure, conductor to shield wire and conductor to conductor and by optimizing tower geometry.

Procedures analogous to those used for shielding lines may also be used for shielding stations. Shielding methods include overhead ground wires, metallic masts, and lightning rods supported from the station structure. These methods may be used in many combinations.

In installations not shielded against direct lightning strokes, for example at distribution transformers or cable junctions on wood-pole lines, both the insulation and the arrester can be subjected to direct strokes producing extremely high discharge currents. In general the lightning current and a representative discharge current shall be based on their probability of occurrence.

The purpose of shielding in station applications is to reduce the risk of insulation failure to an acceptable level. In certain applications this may be achieved by shielding the station alone. In other cases it may be necessary to shield all incoming lines to the station. Shielding of the lines for a relatively short distance from the station affords the same benefits for station protection as complete line shielding.

With well-designed shielding, insulation, and grounding systems, the probability of direct strokes to phase conductors is reduced to a low level and the voltages across insulation in the event of strokes to the shielding system are reduced below flashover levels. As a result, arrester discharge currents are reduced, thereby permitting the arrester to provide better protection to equipment insulation and reducing arrester duty.

9

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )

2.2.2.2

Selection of the nominal discharge current

As a general rule, the nominal discharge current of an arrester is selected after considering: the importance and degree of protection desired. Basing protection levels on higher current magnitudes and rates-of-rise increases the reliability of protection; the number of lines connected during arrester operation. Owing to reflections of traveling waves, the discharge current of the arrester is affected by the parallelconnected surge impedance of lines and cables; - the line insulation. The prospective lightning discharge currents increase with higher line insulations (e.g. fully insulated wood-poles), unless the stroke occurs so close to the arrester that the impedance and insulation of the line cannot influence the surge. When arresters are used in a station to which wood-pole lines with unearthed crossarms or insulator pins are connected, then at least one pole, preferably the last one in this line, should have earthed crossarms or pins, with low earthing impedance. in case of high earthing impedances several poles within a distance of about five spans from the station should be earthed; - the probability of occurrence of the higher stroke currents. The magnitude of lightning currents varies over a wide range of values. Lines in areas of high lightning ground flash density have an increased chance of being struck by lightning with high current magnitudes; line performance and lightning environment. Lightning discharge currents and ratesof-rise are functions of the back-f lashover and shielding failure rates of the lines (or flashover rates of unshielded lines) which are within some limiting distance from the station. Higher (lower) failure rates increase (decrease) the probable lightning discharge current magnitude and rate-of-rise.

For the standard nominal discharge currents according to IEC 99-1, experience indicates that a satisfactory degree of protection is achieved if the following recommendations are observed. Range I (above 1 kV to 245 kV): 5 kA or 10 kA In systems in range I of IEC 71-1 where the line distances between arresters are small (below 5 km), surge arresters at distribution transformers with a nominal discharge current of 5 kA have proven sufficiently reliable, even when the transformers are connected to wood-pole lines with unearthed cross-arms. In systems with highest voltages of 72,5 kV and below, surge arresters with a nominal discharge current of 5 kA may be sufficient for areas with low ground flash density and effectively shielded incoming overhead-lines with low tower footing impedances. Arresters with a nominal discharge current of 10 kA may be preferable for important installations (need for the best protection) particularly in areas with high lightning flash density or high earth resistances.

10

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

In systems with highest voltages above 72,5 kV, surge arresters with a nominal discharge current of 10 kA are generally recommended. Range II: (above 245 kV): 10 kA or 20 kA with a nominal

For systems with highest voltages of 420 kV and below, surge arresters discharge current of 10 kA ar@generally sufficient.

For systems with highest voltages above 420 kV, 20 kA arresters may be required.

2.2.3

Long duration discharge capability

In installations where long lines or cables or high capacitances are connected, the arrester must be capable of withstanding the discharge current and energy due to switching overvoltage. For heavy duty 10 kA arresters, therefore, test data have been specified for various ranges of system voltages (see 8.5.3 of IEC 99-l), which represent typical energy dissipation through arresters in the system concerned. Heavy duty arresters are generally used for equipment of range II. For equipment of range L heavy duty arresters are used in case of important stations, in case of required low protective levels or in case of long overhead lines, cables or capacitor banks connected to the busbar. For other cases, e.g. where incoming lines are relatively short (less than 100 km), 10 kA light duty arresters or 5 kA arresters are generally used.

2.2.3.1

Heavy duty arresters

The test requirements shown in table 5 of IEC 99-1 are based on the duty involved in discharging transmission lines and on an arrester rating equal to 1,4 times the highest system voltage phase-to-earth. Normally, the long duration discharge class is based on the corresponding system voltage, see table 1. However, where line characteristics vary appreciably from those in table 1, the energy dissipated in the arrester during service conditions has to be compared with that in the test according to table 1. In such cases, a study of the particular circumstances is recommended.

Table 1- Relationship between iong duration discharge Ciass and transmission iine characteristics (see tabie C.1 of iEC 99-1)
Approximaterange of highestsystem voltages kV UP to 245 Approximate line length km 300 Approximate line surge impedanm Q 450 Approximate overvoltage factor (p.u.)' 3,0

Longduration discharge class

1 2

3 4 5

up to300 up to420 up to 525 lJfIto 765

300 360 420
4s0

400 350 325
300

2,6 2,6 2,4
2,2

" The base for the par unitvalues is the peak value of the highestsystemvoltagephase-to-earth.

11

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

2.2.3.2

Light duty 10 kA and 5 kA arresters is made

For light duty 10 kA and for 5 kA arresters, no differentiation of system voltages but only one test current with rectangular wave shape is specified. 2.2.4

Pressure relief class

In case of internal failure of a surge arrester, the fault current through the arrester should not cause violent shattering of the arrester housing. Therefore the fault current withstand of the arrester should be equal to or greater than the maximum fault current through the arrester at the installation point of the arrester. If higher values than those listed in table 7 of IEC 99-1 are required, consult the manufacturer. the user should

Section 3: Gapless metal-oxide surge arresters according to IEC 99-4
3.1 3.1.1 Characteristic General data of gapless metal-oxide surge arresters

Basic characteristics of metal-oxide surge arresters are the continuous operating voltage, the rated voltage, the nominal discharge current and the residual voltages at nominal discharge current, at switching impulse current and at steep front current.

For given continuous operating and rated voltages, different types of arresters, fore different protection levels, exist.

and there-

Further characteristics which have to be considered in a particular application are line discharge class, pressure relief class, pollution withstand capability, live washing capability and special mechanical properties.

3.1.2

Continuous operating

voltage

The continuous operating voltage is the maximum permissible value of a sinusoidal power frequency voltage, which may be continuously applied between the arrester terminals.

The continuous operating voltage of the complete arrester may be lower per section than that used in the operating duty test, for the ageing procedure, and for verifying thermal stability. The lower continuous operating voltage may be due to the pollution strength of the arrester housing or to large non-linearities in the voltage distribution along the varistor stack due to less effective grading caused by proximity effects of other objects.

12

IS 15086

( Part 5 ) :2001
( 1996 )

IEC 60099-5

3.1.3

Rated vo/tage

The rated voltage is the maximum power frequency voltage that is applied in the operating duty test for 10 s (see clause 2.8 of IEC 99-4). It is, furthermore, the reference parameter to establish the power frequency voltage versus time characteristic of the arrester, and for defining the test requirements for the line discharge test.

3.1.4

Nominal discharge current

The nominal discharge current is used for the surge arrester classification. It is the main parameter for the protective characteristics and the energy absorption capability of the arrester. 3.1.5 Protective levels

The lightning impulse protective level of an arrester is the maximum residual voltage at nominal discharge current. It is applicable to the protection of equipment from fast-front overvoltages. The switching impulse protective level is the maximum residual voltage at the specified switching impulse currents. It is applicable to the protection of equipment from slow-front overvoltages. For the protection performance of metal-oxide surge arresters for fast-front overvoitages the time delay in the conduction mechanism of the varistors as tested in the steep current impulse test has to be considered [2]*.

NOTE - In the first edition of IEC 99-4:1991, the necessary test procedure for a reliable determination of the residual voltage at steep current impulse has been incompletely specified. More precise specification of test conditions is under consideration which will take care of inductance effects and the intrinsic material time delay.

3.1.6

Line discharge class

A number related to the energy absorption capability of 10 kA and 20 kA arresters for the discharge of long lines. Five classes exist according to IEC 99-4, table 4, with an increasing number indicating increased energy absorption capability. For arresters with line discharge class 2 and above, the resulting discharge current is used in the operating duty test to verify thermal stability after energy absorption. System events causing arrester currents with different shapes may be evaluated by comparison with energy and current of an equivalent line discharge.

3.1.7

Pressure relief class

A number related to the capability of an arrester to withstand internal fault currents without violent shattering of the housing. (Reference is made to clause 5.11 of IEC 99-4 and clause 8.7 of IEC 99-l.)

,

Numbers in brackets refer to annex C: Bibliography.

13

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )

3.1.8

Pollution withstand characteristics

The pollution withstand capability of the arrester concerns three aspects: a) the arrester housing has to withstand the pollution stresses without flashover. This can be verified according tol EC 507 or is assured by a design according to IEC 815; b) the arrester has to withstand the possible temperature increase due to the changes in voltage distribution caused by the pollution activity on the surface of the housing. Consideration should be given to the pollution level and the frequency and amplitude of overvoltages caused by faults and reclosing operations during polluted conditions. Suitable test procedures are under consideration; c) the arrester has to withstand internal partial discharges, caused by disturbed voltage grading on the housing due to pollution, without damage to the varistors or to the internal mounting elements. Possible test procedures are under consideration.

3.1.9

Live washing characteristics

When live washing of the arrester is foreseen, assurance is required that the arrester housing will not flash over and that the temperature increase of the varistprs remains within the specified maximum temperature. Suitable test procedures have to be defined.

3.2 3.2.1

Selection

of gapiess

metai-oxide

surge arresters phase-to-earth

Continuous operating voltage

The basic requirement is that the peak of the continuous operating voitage of the surge arrester must be higher than the peak of the operating voitage. The peak of the operating voltage is determined by the power frequency voitage corresponding to the highest voitage of the system and by possibie voltage harmonics. in usuai systems, the increase of the peak voltage by harmonics can be taken into account by a safety factor of 1,05 to the power frequency voitage. As a general ruie, the continuous operating voitage should be: in systems with automatic earth fault clearing, equai to or higher than the peak divided by =; automatic earth fauit

value of the highest operating voitage phase-to-earth

in resonant earthed or isolated neutrai systems without clearing, equai to or higher than the highest operating voitage.

NOTE - For these systems the safety factor of 1,05 has been considered to be covered by the power frequency voltage versus time characteristic of the arrester taking into account the limited duration of the earth fault in these systems.

If the highest operating voitage at the arrester iocation is not accurately known, it shouid be replaced by the highest voitage of the' system or by the highest voitage for equipment.

If the arrester is installed closer to live or earthed objects than recommended by the manufacturer, it has to be investigated whether the voitage distribution along the arrester is sufficiently linear for the selected continuous operating voltage. 14

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

3.2.2

Rated voltage

The rated voltage of the arrester is selected based on the temporary ovewoltages in the system at the arrester location, considering their amplitudes as well as their durations. The basic requirement is that the power frequency voltage versus time characteristic of the arrester should be higher than the temporary overvoltage amplitude versus duration characteristic of the system. Pollution withstand capability and live washing capability should be considered when appropriate.

The following causes of temporary ovewoltages Earth fault overvoltages

should always be considered:

These ovewoltages occur in a large part of the system. Guidance for the determination of temporary ovewoltage amplitudes is given in annex A. The duration of the ovewoltage corresponds to the duration of the fault (until fault clearing). In earthed neutral systems it is generally less than 1 s. In resonant earthed neutral systems with fault clearing it is generally less than 10 s. In systems without earth fault clearing the duration may be several hours. Load rejections

After disconnection of loads the voltage rises at the source side of the operating circuit breaker. The amplitude of the overvoltage depends on the disconnected load and on the short-circuit power of the feeding substation. The temporary ovewoltages have particularly high amplitudes after full load rejection at generator transformers dependThe amplitude of load rejection ing on magnetizing and overspeed conditions. ovewoltages is usually not constant during its duration. Accurate calculations have to consider many parameters. As a guidance the following typical values of such overvoltages maybe used [1]

In moderately extended systems, a full load rejection can give rise to phase-to-earth ovewoltages with amplitude usually below 1,2 p.u. The ovewoltage duration depends on the operation of voltage-control equipment and may be up to several minutes. In extended systems, after a full load rejection, the phase-to-earth ovewoltages may reach 1,5 p.u. or even more when Ferranti or resonance effects occur. Their duration may be in the order of some seconds. For load rejection of generator transformers the temporary ovewoltages may reach amplitudes up to 1,4 p.u. for turbo generators and up to 1,5 p.u. for hydro generators. The duration is approximately 3 s.
When the time dependence of the amplitudes is known, a suitable

ovewoltage is the maximum amplitude, amplitudes exceed 90 `/. of this value.

with a duration

representation of the equal to the time while the

In some systems the following causes of temporary overvoltages resonance systems; -

need consideration: between

effects, e.g. when charging long unloaded lines or resonances

voltage rise along long lines (Ferranti effect);

15

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996)
harmonic overvoltages, e.g.

when switching transformers;

backfeed through interconnected transformer windings, e.g. dual transformer station with common secondary bus during fault clearing or single-phase switched three-phase transformer with an unbalanced secondary load.

Temporary overvoltages due to ferro-resonances arrester selection and should be eliminated. Sequences
fault, need

should not form the basis for the surge

of causes for temporary
consideration, when

overvoltages,
overvoltages

e.g. load rejection
have

both

comparable

cases, however, the amount of rejected load dependent arrester location has to be carefully examined.

caused by an earth severity. In such on the fault location and the

Combination of causes such as earth faults and load rejection may result in higher temporary overvoltage values than those from the single events. When such combinations are considered sufficiently probable, the overvoltage for each cause have to be compounded taking into account the actual system configuration. The power frequency voltage versus time characteristic of the arrester should exceed the temporary overvoltage ampljtude versus duration of the system. As an approximation, amplitude and duration of temporary overvoltages, the duration of which is between 0,1 s and 100 s, can be converted to an equivalent amplitude, Ueq, with a duration of 10 s (corresponding to the duration of the rated voltage in the operating duty test):

(1)
where

u,
~

is the amplitude of the temporary overvoltage; is the duration of the temporary overvoltage in s;

u~~ is the amplitude of the equivalent 10s temporary overvoltage; and
is the exponent describing the power frequency voltage versus time characteristic of the arrester. For m different arrester designs the exponent varies between 0,022 and 0,01S and an average value of 0,02 may be used.

The rated voltage of the arrester should be equal to or higher than the highest equivalent temporary overvoltage obtained.
NOTES

1 In some applications a safety margin is applied between maximum equivalent temporary ovewoltage and rated voltage in order to cover possible inaccuracies in the determination of the overvoltage. Usual values of such margins are between 5 % and 15 %.
When protective levels lower than that of the adopted arrester design are desired, rated voltages 2 below the equivalent 10 s temporary overvoltages may be selected, provided the arrester is able to absorb the energy caused by system events. In this case energy absorption calculations should be carried out simulating the system events. Besides careful system representations the production dispersion of the voltage-current characteristic of the arrester should be considered. In some cases, the rated voltage of the arrester is also selected considering the energy absorption 3 during the transmission line discharge with the disadvantage of a higher protective level of the arrester.

16

IS 15086 (Part5) IEC 60099-5(1996)

:2001

3.2.3 3.2.3.1

Nominal discharge current and line discharge class General

In IEC 99-4 the energy absorption capability of the arrester is linked to the nominal discharge current. If the high current impulse value is not chosen from table 6 of IEC 99-4 (as is allowed according to note 1 to the table), the energy absorption capability of the arrester is related to the nominal discharge current and to the high current impulse. Furthermore, the energy absorption of the arrester, due to a system transient overvoltage stress, depends on the residual voltage-current characteristic of the arrester and thus on the nominal discharge current. Nominal discharge current and line discharge class, therefore, are determined in an iterative process.

3.2.3.2
The

Nominal discharge current
discharge arrester, current for which is selected protection according of equipment to the lightning discharge current

nominal the

through

The same considerations as for the gapped arrester in 2.2.2 apply. As a general rule, the following values are suitable depending on the expected lightning discharge current:
is desired.

Range I: (above 1 kV to 245 kV): 5 kA or 10 kA In systems in range I of IEC 71-1 where the line distances between arresters are small (below 5 km), surge arresters at distribution transformers with a nominal discharge current of 5 kA have proven sufficiently reliable, even when the transformers are connected to wood-pole lines with unearthed cross-arms. In systems with highest voltages of 72,5 kV and below, surge arresters with a nominal discharge current of 5 kA may be sufficient for areas with low ground flash density and effectively shielded incoming overhead-lines with low tower footing impedances. Arresters with a nominal discharge current of 10 kA may be preferable for important" installations (need for the best protection) particularly in areas with high lightning flash density or high earth resistances. In systems with highest voltages above 72,5 kV, surge arresters with a nominal discharge current of 10 kA are generally recommended. Range II (above 245 kV): 10 kA or 20 kA For systems with highest voltages of 420 kV and below, surge arresters discharge current of 10 kA are generally sufficient.
For systems with highest

with a nominal

voltages above 420 kV, 20 kA arresters may be required.

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 ) 3.2.3.3

Energy absorption capability

Metal-oxide surge arresters must be able to absorb the energy due to transient overvoitages in the system. Severe transient overvoltages are those arising from: closing or reclosing long lines; disconnection of capacitor banks or cables with restriking circuit breakers; with high insulation level or back-

lightning strokes to overhead line condwtors flashovers close to the arrester location.

With known protection levels of the arrester, the energy to be absorbed by the arrester can be estimated using the formulae below [3, 4]: closing and reclosing of lines

w = 2up~ (Ue - Up*) +where W is the energy absorption;

(2)

UPS is the switching impulse protection level of the arrester; UO is the overvoltage amplitude, e.g. estimated according to IEC 71-2; z Tw is the surge impedance of the line; is the travel time along the line equal to length divided by wave velocity of the line;

-

capacitor or cable switching

w=~ z
where

C[ (3UO)*- (dTur)z ]

(3)

c u,

is the capacitance of the bank or the cable; is the rated voltage of the arrester (r.m.s. value).

UO is the phase-to-earth operating voltage peak

The energy may be shared with other arresters should be studied. lightning

on the same phase. Degree of sharing

w . [2uf - n/Upl(1 + In (2 Uf/ up,)] &
where in is the natural logarithm;

(4)

up, is the lightning impulse protection level of the arrester; u, is the negative flashover voltage of the line insulation; is the Jine surge impedance; z
N q is the number of lines connected to the arrester; is the equivalent duration of the current of a lightning flash including first and subsequent strokes. Typical value 3.104 s.

If the distances
divided because

between
of current

stations
sharing.

in distribution

systems

are small, the energy can be

NOTE - The formula has been derived from an integration of an exponentially decreasing overvoltage.

18

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 ) In some cases events other than those mentioned may result in a large energy absorption by the gapless arrester. A typical example is the operation of current limiting fuses in an unusual application, e.g. if the fuse rating is much higher than required for the system application, or if arresters with very low protective level are installed.

In the operating duty test (clause 7.5 in IEC 99-4) the arrester has to absorb the following energy prior to the application of the rated voltage: 5 kA and 10 kA, line discharge class 1 arresters

These arresters are subjected to a high current impulse operating duty test. The energy produced by the high current impulse can be estimated by [3]: W= LJal T
where L/a is the residual voltage at this high current impulse. If this is not known, it may be estimated as 1,5 times the residual voltage at nominal discharge current; 1 T is the amplitude of the specified high current impulse; is the effective time of the high current impulse = 6,5 MS;

(5)

-

10 kA, line discharge class 2 or above, and 20 kA arresters.

These arresters are subjected to a switching surge operating duty test. The absorbed energy per impulse is given in annex E of IEC 99-4. The energy absorption capability of the arrester is equal to or larger than twice this value. For a more accurate determination of the energy absorption, detailed should be carried out considering all parameters of the ovewoltages.
If the energy absorption required for sewice is higher than the bility of the selected arrester proven by the operating duty test, a current or a higher line discharge class or a higher high current selected. Alternatively, the rated voltage of the arrester may adequate protection is achieved.

digital

studies

energy absoqXion capahigher nominal discharge impulse value should be be increased, provided

3.2.4

Pressure relief class

in case of internal failure of a surge arrester, the fault current through the arrester should not cause violent shattering of the arrester housing. Therefore the fault current withstand of the arrester should be equal to or greater than the maximum fault current through the arrester at the installation point of the arrester.
If higher values than those listed in table 7 of IEC 99-1 and clause 5.11 of IEC 99-4 are required, the user should consult the manufacturer.

19

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )

Section
4.1 Prlnclple of Insulation

4:

Application of arresters

co-ordination

The principie of insulation co-ordination according to iEC 71-1 and iEC 71-2 requires the determination of the rated withstand voitages in four steps: a) Representative b) Co-ordination overvoltage at the equipment.

withstand voitage of the equipment during its service iife.

c) Required withstand voitage of the equipment at standard test conditions. This may differ from the co-ordination withstand voitage due to insulation ageing or due to production and assembiy dispersion. These differences are compensated by a safety factor of 1,15, For installation at aititudes up to 1 000 m, this factor aiso covers the necessary atmospheric correction for the external insulation. d) Rated withstand voitage. This recognizes the possibie different shapes of required and rated withstand vaiues and inciudes the seiection from tabies of standardized vaiues. 4.2 Protection from siow-front overvoitages

Protection from siow-front overvoitages is of high importance in range II. in range I, the standard insulation ievei of the equipment is usuaiiy so high tl.at protection from siow-front overvoitages is not generaiiy necessary (exceptions are rotating machines, see ciause 5.3). The representative overvoltage at the equipment protected by arresters is equai to the switching impuise protection ievei, because, with the exception of transmission iines, traveling wave effects can be negiected and the voitage at the equipment is equal to that at the arrester. Metal-oxide arresters without gaps are suitabie to protect against siow-front overvoitages in systems with moderate temporary overvoltages, whereas gapped arresters operate at siow-front overvoitages oniy after sparkover of the series gap. As a generai ruie, it can be assumed that with metai-oxide arresters, a imitation of the phase-to-earth overvoltage amplitudes (peak vaiue) to approximateiy twice the arrester rated voitage (r.m.s. vaiue) is possibie. The protective ievei of gapped arresters is substantially higher. This means that metai-oxide surge arresters are suitabie for iimiting siow-front overvoitages due to iine energization and re-energization and switching of inductive and capacitive currents, but not in generai overvoitages caused by earth fauits and fauit ciearing, as the expected amplitudes of the iatter are too iow. Overvoltage originating from iine energization and re-energization give currents of about 0,5 kA to 2 kA through the arresters. in this current range the knowiedge of the exact current amplitude is not so important due to the extreme non-iinearity of the metai-oxide materiai. The infiuence on the current front times can be ignored for siow-front overvoitages. Furthermore, separation effects within substations can be negiected. Uistant overhead line insulation, however, may be stressed by' overvoitages substantially higher than the protective level.

20

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 ) Surge arresters are usually installed phase-to-earth and, if metal-oxide arresters are used to limit slow-front overvoltage to a low level, the phase-to-phase overvoltages will reach about twice the protection level of the arrester phase-to-earth, irrespective of the transformer neutral treatment. The phase-to-phase overvoltage will consist of two phase-toearth components with the most frequent subdivision 1:1. If lower phase-to-phase protective levels are required, additional arresters phase-to-phase are needed, The assumed maximum value of the representative phase-to-earth the protection level of the surge arrester. For the phase-to-phase up to twice this value without phase-to-phase arresters. overvoltage overvoltage, is equal to it can be

In the case of surge arrester protection against switching overvoltages, a severe skewing in the statistical distribution of overvoltages takes place. This skew is more pronounced the lower the protection level, as compared to the amplitudes of the prospective slow-front overvoltages. In these situations, small variations of the insulation withstand have a large this effect, it is proposed to determine the deterimpact on the risk-of-failure [2], TO cover ministic co-ordination factor dependent on the relation of the surge arrester protective level to the 2 % value of the prospective overvoltage.

--

ups
u e2

<

(),7

KCd = 1,1

(6)

u
0,7< +
e2

u SI,2
. .

KCd = 1,24 -0,2

*

u e2

(7)

u
1,2< ~

Kcd = 1,0

(8)

u e2

and the co-ordination

switching impulse withstand voltage as (9)

`CW

=

`cd " `p~

where UP, is the switching impulse protective level of the arrester; UC2 is the 2 % value of the prospective slow. front overvoltage amplitude to earth;

u~Wis the co-ordination switching impulse withstand voltage of the equipment;
Kod is the deterministic co-ordination factor. NOTE - The factor 1,0 to 1,1 takes into account the high frequency of overvoltage with amplitudes equal to the protection level due to the truncation of the overvoltage distribution by the arrester. This frequenoy is higher, the lower the protective level. Due to the uncertainties in the equipment withstand, the margin between the withstand voltage and the protective level should increase with increasing overvoltage frequency to maintain a given risk level [2].

21

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 ) 4.3 4.3.1 ProtectIon General from lightning overvoitages

Due to the high rate-of-rise of iightning overvoitages, travailing wave effects between arrester and equipment cannot be negiected. As a generai ruie, the voitage at the protected equipment is higher than the arrester residual voitage (see 4.3.2). Therefore, it is aiways good practice to reduce conductor separation distance between arrester and major equipment to a minimum. However, it is sometimes possibie to protect more than one piece of equipment with a singie arrester installation provided that rates of rise can be iimited as in the case where both the station and overhead feeder iines are effectively shieided.

A major factor in locating arresters within a station is the iine and station shieiding. it is usuaiiy feasibie to provide shieiding for the substation even though the associated iines are unshielded. Station shieiding reduces the probability of high voitages and steep wave fronts within the station resuiting from high-current iightning strokes, However, it shouid be recognized that the majority of strokes wiii be to the iines, which wiii create surges that travel aiong the iine and into the station. if the iines are shieided, the surges entering the station are iess severe than those from unshielded iines. Consequently, the magnitude of the arrester currents is iower, resuiting in iower arrester residuai voitage and better protection of the equipment.

Unshielded installations are subjected to the highest iightning currents and voitage rates of rise. The very minimum possibie separation is recommended for installations where compiete shieiding is not used.

In shielded installations with a singie unshielded incoming overhead iine, the arrester should be located as near as possibie to the terminais of the equipment (usuaiiy a transformer) to be protected, When severai unshielded incoming overhead iines meet in the station, the incoming overvoltage ampiitude and steepness are reduced by division but their frequency of occurrence is increased. However, consideration shouid be given to the case when one or more of the iines are switched out of service and the probability of such contingencies during iightning storms shouid be considered, When one or more circuit breakers or disconnecting switches are open in such a station, the corresponding iine entrances or certain parts of the station may be ieft without protection from the arresters at the transformers. Lightning flashover of a de-energized iine is uniikeiy to cause damage to line insulation, but insulation in other equipment such as circuit breakers, voitage transformers and current transformers connected on the iine side might be damaged, if such cases are recognized to require additional protection, arresters can be instaiied at the respective line entrances,

Incoming voltages from shielded iines are iower in ampiitude and steepness than from unshielded lines. in many cases, this wiii permit some separation between the arresters and the insulation to be protected. With a single shieided incoming overhead iine, one set of arresters may be located at a point that provides protection to aii equipment but gives preference to the transformer. The method in 4.3,2, can be used to determine the maximum separation distance between the arrester and the transformer.

22

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )

At stations with multiple shielded incoming overhead lines (associated with large installations with transformers, switchgear and measuring equipment), arresters are not always placed at the terminals of every transformer. The methods described in 4.3.2 can be used to estimate maximum separation distances. More jmportant installations may justify a detailed transient study. Such studies and interpretation of their results are outside the scope of this standard.

Two alternatives exist in the application protection of equipment:

of surge arresters

for the lightning

ovewoltage

- determine the necessary co-ordination lightning impulse withstand voltage for given arrester protection level and separation distance. The rated lightning impulse withstand voltage is then obtained by multiplying the obtained value by the factor of 1,15 (see clause 4.1); - determine the protective zone of the arrester which is the maximum separation distance for which the insulation co-ordination requirements are fulfilled, for given arrester protective level and co-ordination withstand voltage. This is obtained by dividing the rated lightning impulse withstand voltage of the equipment by 1,15 (see clause 4.1 ). In principle, both alternatives require the determination of the actual overvoltage shape at the protected equipment and its withstand voltage associated with this shape. As a sufficiently adequate simplification, however, it can be assumed that this requirement is covered under the following conditions: for gapped surge arresters: is compared with the chopped lightning impulse

the front-of-wave sparkover voltage withstand voltage of the equipment; andlor

the lightning impulse sparkover voltage and the residual voltage at nominal discharge current (8/20) are compared with the lightning impulse withstand voltage of the equipment. For oil-paper insulated transformers, both alternatives give approximately the same result. Furthermore, for large transformers the input capacitance reduces the rate-ofrise of the impinging overvoltage. Therefore, the consideration of the front-of-wave sparkover may be omitted, If the equipment at the line entrance of the substation has chopped lightning impulse withstand strength less than 15 YO above full impulse, then consideration of the front-ofwave sparkover voltage may be necessary. For gas insuiated substations the transmitted and reflected waves within the substation cause a decrease of the rate-of-rise of the impinging surge causing sparkover of the arrester at voltages iower than the front-of-wave sparkover voltage. As a simplification, therefore, the effects of the front-of-wave sparkover of the arrester may be neglected or, alternatively, travailing wave calculations may be performed.

23

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1 996 )

-

for gapless metal-oxide

surge arresters:

the residual voltages at nominal discharge current and/or at steep current impulse are compared with the lightning impulse withstand voltage of the equipment. The representative lightning overvoltage for which protection is desired usually cause currents through the arrester which have front times closer to 1 ps than to 8 ps. The use of the residual voltage at steep current impulse, therefore, may be justified which would result into approximately 570 higher overvoltage than those using the residual voltage at nominal discharge current, Comparison calculations have shown that this effect is similar to that of the front-of-wave sparkover of gapped silicon carbide arresters and the same considerations apply.
NOTE - For air insulation, these procedures may result in a too conservative result owing to the delay in the insulation flashover, which is usually expressed as voltage-time curves. More accurate results may be obtained from traveling wave calculations, in which this flashover delay is taken into account. Similar considerations apply to other insulations for which the breakdown behaviour is known.

4.3.2 4.3.2.1

Simplified method for lightning protection Protection of open air equipment

Experience with existing substation equipment has shown that, if the influencing factors given in 4.3.1 are taken into account, the co-ordination lightning impulse withstand voltage can be determined from empirical formula (1O) which considers the fundamental characteristics of lightning overvoltage behaviour in stations (see IEC 71-2).

24

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )
\ \
d

u

d,

4

T

t-'

Figure 2a - Installations

without earth-mat (distribution

syatams)

A

d,

T
d2
f I / I I

IL
I 1

Earth mat

Figure 2b - Inatallationa

with earth mat (aubatationa)

Figure 2- Schematic diagram for the surge arrester connection to the protected object
where
d

is the distance between the high-voltage terminal of the protected equipment and the connection point of the arrester high-voltaga conductor; is the length of the arrester high-voltaga conductor; is the length of the arrester earth conductor; is the length of the arrester; is the earthing impedance; is the protected object; is the impinging overvoltage surge.

d, d2 dA

Ze
T

u

25

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )

A Ucw=upl+--x N

ft L~P+ Lf

(lo)

where Lf = Ra / r is the length of the overhead line in front of the station, which gives a rate of li~htning events equal to the acceptable failure rate. The right fraction multiplied by AIN is proportional to tha steepness of the representative impinging surge. Note that in formulas (10), (11) and (12) consistent units must be used;

UC, is the co-ordination lightning impulse withstand voltage; A is the voltage according to table 2 desorlbing the lightning performance of the overhead line connected to the station;

UPI is the lightning impulse protection level of the surge arrester; N L, is the number of lines connected to the substation (N= 1 or N = 2); is the total length d + d, + d2 + dA , figure 2:

L,P is the span length; Lf is the overhead line section with outaga rate equal to acceptable failure rate;

Ra is the acceptable failure rate (number of failures per unit time) for the protected equipment; r is the overhead line outage rate (number of outages per unit time and unit length) per year for a design corresponding to the first kilometer in front of the station. If N = 2, the rates have to be added.

Usual acceptable failure rates of the protected equipment are, as stated in IEC 71-2, between 0,1 % per year and 0,4 % per year. A typical value of 0,25 Y. per year is used in the examples of table 3. For distribution lines the outage rates are usually large compared to the acceptable failure rates, i.e. the overhead line length Lf is small and can be neglected. Formula (1 O) is then simplified to:

uw=upl+~x

N

-- LSp

ft

(11)

Induced lightning overvoltages need to be considered in distribution systems, where the equipment is not protected against direct lightning strokes to the conductors or against back-f lashovers. (Detailed recommendations are under consideration within CIGRE.)

NOTE - Formula (1 O) describes the P.U. voltage drop depending on the lightning performance of the overhead line connected to the equipment, on the substation layout and on the adopted acceptable failure rate of the equipment. Using the existing knowledgeof the lightning Performanceof overhead lines and of corona damping effects, the constant A has been determinedto obtain agreement between the withstand voltages calculated with formula (1O) and the service experience obtained with protective zones used for a long time (see table 3). The formula may not be used to determine overvoltage amplitudes for a specific lightning event on the overhead line.

26

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 ) When the rated Ilghtnlng impulse withstand voltage of the equipment protective zone of the arrester can be estimated from formula (12): is selected, the

01
UN --
1,15
where Lp is the protective zone;

- up,

(L~p+LJ

(12)

UN is the rated lightning impulse withstand voltage (see clause 4.1).

Formula (12) Indicates that for a given substation the protective zone increases with: increasing difference between rated withstand voitage and protective ievei;

- decreasing outage rate of the overhead iine in front of the station, thus demonstrating the effect of improved shieiding by earth wires and reduced tower footing impedance; increasing acceptable faiiure rates, which means that the equipment protective range stiii maybe protected, however with a higher faiiure rate. outside the

Tabie 3 shows exampies for calculated protective zones, in which the underlined ranges are those generaily adopted. The protective zones 160 m and 180 m are supported by experience with iine entrance equipment protected by the arrester at the transformer, when perfect shielding of the overhead iine in front of th-e station is provided.

Tabie 2- Factor A In formulas (10) to (12) for various overhead iines
A

w
Distribution lines (phase-to-phase flashovers) - with earthed cross-arms (flashover to earth at low voltage) - wood-pole lines (flashover to earth at high voltage) Transmission lines (single-phase flashover to earth) - single conductor - double conductor bundle - four conductor bundle - six and eight conductor bundle 900 2700

4 Scro 7000 11000 17000

NOTE - The voltages A for distribution lines are lower than that for the single conductor transmission line, because in distribution lines phase-to-phase flashovers or multiple phase-to-earth flashovers occur, thus leading to current sharing, and in case of earthed cross-arms, to a limitation of the incoming surge amplitude.

27

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) : 200~ IEC 60099-5 (1996 ) Table 3-

Examples for protective zones calculated by formula 10 for open alr substations
Protective zoneLp

System Proteotlon Withstand voltage voltage level rated coordination kV 24 123 420 kV 60 350 900 kV 125 650 t 425 kV 109 478 1239

Span

A

r-0,1"

r- 0,5"

r=2*

r=6*

N-2

N-l

N-2

N=l

N-2

N-2

m 100 200 300 400

kV 2700 Soo 4500 11000 -- -- m m -- a & -- -- 46 56 2,4 10,4 12,0 16 4,8 20,8 a a m m -- �

q

Dimensionsin 1 per 100 km and year.

4.3.2.2

Protection of gas insu/ated substations

(GIS)

GIS are, in general, better protected than open-air substations because they have surge impedances much lower than that of overhead lines. A generally valid recommendation for the estimation of the improvement obtained for GIS as compared to open-air substations cannot be made. However, the use of the formula given above for the open-air substation results in conservative estimates of the co-ordination lightning impulse withstand voltage or of the protective range and a reduotion of the constant A to half the value shown in table 2 is suitable.

As a general rule, surge arresters have to be installed at the line entrance to protect the GIS, even when the line circuit breaker is open. Additional surge arresters at the transformers may be necessary, either when the separation distances to the line entrance arresters are too long, or when high overvoltages at the transformer are expected during conditions when the line entrance arresters are disconnected. Arresters installed at suitable locations inside the GIS may also be necessary for extended GIS. Improved fast-front overvoltage protection is obtained by installation of the line entrance arrester inside the GIS which eliminates the effects of the outdoor arrester leads. Although this arrester would be more expensive than an outdoor arrester, additional arresters may be superfluous and this may be the more economic solution.

When

the protective

ranges

indicate

that additional

arresters

should

be installed

within

the

GIS, the approximation should be performed.

formula

should

not be used, but traveling

wave calculations

Surge arrester protection for very-fast-front overvoltages within GIS is usually not possible due to the very high frequencies involved and to the delay in the conduction mechanism of metal-oxide arresters. Gapped arresters will not operate.

28

IS 15086 (Part 5):2001 IEC 60099-5(1996)

4.3.2.3

Protection of cable-connected

substations

Similar to GIS, cable-connected protected than open-air stations, be given.

substations are - for the same dimensions - better but here also no generally valid recommendation can

Surge arresters should be installed at the overhead line-cable terminal to protect the cable entrance. The separation distance effects can be conservatively estimated as with open-air substations. When more than one line remains connected to the substation through cables during lightning, the arresters are sufficient to protect the substation. If it is likely that cables connected to the substation are in open-end conditions during lightning, and if the cable length exceeds a value of approximately five times the value calculated with formula (12), additional arresters are recommended at the open end. This also applies to the open end of cables which are connected to the overhead line through a substation.

4.3.2.4

Protection of cables

Cables connected between two overhead lines should be protected by surge arresters at both terminals, if the cable length exceeds five times the value determined according to formula (12). The arrester connections to the cable terminals should follow this formula.

For cables 72,5 kV and above, the use of shield wires on the overhead line close to the cable (about three spans) and low footing impedances for the towers at the cable terminals are recommended.

Section 5: Surge arresters for special
5.1 5.1.1 Surge arresters for transformer General neutrals

application

One of the most widely used special applications of arresters is for the protection of transformer neutrals. Each unearthed neutral brought out through a bushing should be protected against lightning and switching overvoltages by an arrester. The neutral insulation may be overstressed in case of incoming multiphase lightning overvoltages, or in case of switching overvoltages due to asymmetrical faults in the power systems,

Furthermore, in case of resonant earthed neutral systems, high switching overvoltage may arise in the transformer neutral and across the winding when a double phase-to-earth fault is interrupted, and the circuit left connected to the transformer line side has a small capacitance to earth. energy absorption capability of neutral arresters should be at least the same as required for the phase-to-earth arresters or higher.
The line discharge

The residual voltage at a discharge current of 1 kA can be used for the determination of the protection level of the arrester, since high current values do not occur. For neutral arresters, the protection ratio may be considerably smaller due to the small rate of voltage rise. 29

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) : 2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 ) 5.1.2 Surge arresters for fu//y hsu/atecf transformer
of fully same power insulated protection frequency transformer level voltage as the neutrals neutral

rteutra/s
can and be achieved the by rated using arresters of of the

Protection having the the lower

phase-to-earth

arresters earth,

or lower.

Because

between

voltage

can be a lower value. A rated voltage of at least 609'0 of the rated voltage neutral arrester necessary for the phase-to-earth arresters is recommended. Two kinds of arresters are used: either the same design as for the arresters voltage; or phase-to-earth, but with reduced rated

special arresters with reduced protection levels.

During abnormal system conditions, or during intermittent earth faults, overvoltages of long duration and amplitude high enough to cause successive arrester operation with consequent damage of the phase arresters may occur, In such cases, it is beneficial to co-ordinate the arresters so that the neutral arrester operates prior to the phase-to-earth arresters. A high energy neutral arrester may withstand the stresses and prevent damage of the phase-to-earth arresters. A switching impulse protection level of the neutral arrester of about 45 YO of the switching impulse protection level necessary for the phase-to-eatih arresters is recommended.

5.1.3

Surge arresters for neutrals of transformers

with non-uniform

insulation

Transformers with the dielectric strength graded from the phase terminal to the neutral are commonly applied in earthed neutral systems. if the transformer neutral is not directly earthed to limit the short-circuit currents in the system, it should be protected by an arrester with characteristics seiected according to the system conditions and the withstand voltage of the neutral using the same selection methods used for the phase-to-earth arresters. 5.2 Surge arresters between phases

Considerable overvoltages between the phase terminais of transformers or reactors may occur when a reactor or a reactive loaded transformer is switched off. The withstand voltage of the reactor or the transformer between phases may be exceeded without operation of the phase-to-earth arresters. If such switching operations are expected, surge arresters should be appiied between phases in addition to those applied phase-to-earth. The phase-to-phase arresters should have a continuous operating voltage equal to or higher than 1,05 times the highest system voltage. For metai-oxide surge arresters this covers temporary overvottages up to 1,25 times the highest system voltage. For higher temporary overvoltages a value for the rated voltage has to be specified. For gapped arresters the selection of a rated voltage value is necessary to cover temporary overvoltage. In the case of transformers with a delta-connected low-voltage winding, arresters between phases may be necessary on the Iow-voitage side to limit inductively transferred overvoltages. These arresters can also protect the high-voltage side of the transformer by absorbing the magnetic energy when switching off transformers. Furnace transformers may require arresters connected phase-to-earth. For these arresters, the arrester characteristics should be defined. between phases in addition to those special requirements are necessary and

30

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

5.3

Surge arresters for rotating machines

Though a recommendation for insulation co-ordination for rotating machines has not been established, surge arresters are used to protect generators and motors against overvoltage.

Special arresters are often used for this application and the requirements have to be defined by agreement between manufacturer and user. In particular, for generator arresters attention should be paid to their pressure relief performance, since short-circuit currents may be appreciably higher than those in iEC 99-1 or iEC 99-4.

For machines which are connected to overhead iines either directly or through short cables, capacitors (0,1 to 0,3 yF) and arresters shouid be instailed between phase and earth as close as possibie to the machine terminais to extend the overvoltage front to approximately 10 ps or more, and to provide additional protection. in addition, a second set of arresters on the overhead iines in front of the machine station or at an overhead line-cable junction point may be appiied.

NOTE - Besides limiting the overvoltage entering the machine station, the arresters on the overhead line cause lower discharge currents through the arresters at the machine. The resulting lower residual voltages of these machine arresters provide an additional protection of the machine.

The

characteristics with

of the surge strength the

arresters

are selected or the vaiue

according

to section

2 or section

3

and the impulse is compared

of the insulation

recommended

by the manufacturer

between protective

ievei of the arrester. Generaiiy, protection ievels and withstand voitages are achievable.

only smaii

margins

Machines connected to overhead iines through transformers may not require arrester protection in addition to the transformer protection, if the machine is connected by sufficiently iong cabies, or if capacitors of the vaiues mentioned above are instalied. if a breaker is installed between the transformer and the rotating machine, the capacitors should be instaiied at the transformer terminais (generator winding).

For machines by additional machine side iow protection arresters) and

connected to star-deita transformers, improved protection can be achieved phase-to-phase arresters. Arresters instailed at the machine or at the of the transformer are not subjected to high lightning currents. Therefore, ieveis can be achieved with iow sparkover voitages (in case of gapped iow residuai voitages at discharge currents of 500 A or iess.

Large turbogenerators have low surge impedances and singie-phase enclosed busbars and short circuits between phases must be avoided. Surge arresters should not be instailed phase-to-phase. Sufficient protection may be achieved by the arresters at the transformer high-voltage side.

31

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 ) 5.4 Further special applications of surge arresters

Selection and installation of surge arresters for protection of the following apparatus are to be adapted to the special requirements of the equipment as determined between user and manufacturer of the apparatus to be protected: - Cable sheaths should be earthed at both terminals. If this is not possible for singlephase cables due to the reduction of the cable load capability, the unearthed cable sheath end should be protected by surge arresters. The rated voltage of these arresters should be higher than the induced sheath-to-earth voltage at maximum fault current. This covers the required continuous operating voltage. The nominal discharge current should be the same as that of the phase-to-earth arresters at the cable terminals. The protection level should be as low as possible, because the withstand strength of the sheath during its service life Is not well defined and is not assured by any standardized test; special transformers, formers; series reactors, capacitors; resonant circuits; a.c. traction systems; overhead lines. e.g. series windings of autotransformers and converter trans-

e.g. current

limiting

reactors,

high frequency

reactors

and series

5.5

Surge arresters for abnormal service conditions

For abnormal service conditions mentioned in annex A of IEC 99-1 or in annex A of IEC 99-4, special considerations in the design or in the application of surge arresters are needed and should be called to the attention of the manufacturer. Examples for such conditions are: altitudes above 1 000 m; temperatures outside the range -40 "C to 40 "C;

live washing of surge arresters; high wind forces; earthquakes; limitation of clearances to conducting surfaces.

32

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )

Section 6: Monitoring (supervision)
6.1 General

Different systems are used to monitor surge arrester operation or possible deterioration in systems of 72,5 kV and above. If surge counters or monitoring spark gaps are installed, the arrester base and the conductor between the arrester and this monitoring instrument should be insulated against earth due to the voltage drop across the monitoring instrument and along the connection lead, especially when the instrument is not installed adjacent to the arrester. The connection lead should not considerably lengthen the earth connection of the arrester and its cross-section should not be less than that for usual earthing connections. In systems lower than 72,5 kV, examination arrester conditions. 6.2 Discharge counters of some arresters in service is used to verify

Discharge counters should be installed so that they can be read from ground level. Discharge counters usually operate at impulse currents above a certain amplitude and duration. Some counters require power follow current and may, therefore, not count short discharge currents through metal-oxide arresters. If the interval between discharges is very short (below 50 ins), discharge counters may not count every operation. Discharge counters have the advantage that they can be read with the arrester energized. Discharge counters generally give no information on the current amplitudes.

6.3

Monitoring

spark gaps

The monitoring spark gaps provide some indication of the number of operations, the amplitude and the duration of the discharge current. They can only be examined when the arrester is de-energized. Special experience is necessary to properly interpret the marks on the gap. Monitoring spark gaps are usually checked when there is reason to believe that arrester operations have occurred.

6.4

Device for monitoring the continuous

current voltage can be measured by a properly the measured value is not superposed by pollution. Therefore, readings should be current is diverted by special measures.

The current through the arrester at operating connected instrument. Care must be taken that a current on the porcelain surface caused by taken only when the surface is dry or the surface

When the current through metal-oxide arresters at operating voltage is measured to obtain information about possible varistor degradation, the resistive component of the current should be isolated to achieve sufficient sensitivity. Voltage reference is needed to measure this resistive component or the corresponding power losses with sufficient should be accuracy. Furthermore, the ambient temperature during the measurement observed and recorded.
NOTE - The measurement of the total current through the arrester is less expensive but less sensitive and often not meaningful.

33

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ('1996 )

Annex A
(informative)

Determination

of temporary overvoltages due to earth faults

The earth fault factor k is the ratio of the highest r.m.s. phase-to-earth power frequency voltage on a sound phase at a particular location during a fault to earth (affecting one or more phases at any point) to the r.m.s. phase-to-earth power frequency voltage which should be obtained without the fault (see 3.17 of IEC 71-l).

The earth fault factor is calculated using the complex impedances Z,, Z2 and Z. of the positive, negative and zero sequence systems, taking into account the fault resistance R. The following applies:

z, =Z2= Z. = R.

RI

+ jX1:

resistance and reactance of positive and negative sequence system; and reactance of zero sequence SyStem.

+ jXo:

resistance

The earth fault factors are calculated for the location of the fault.
NOTE - It should be observed that in extended resonant earthed networks the earth fault factor may be higher at other locations than the fault. Figure A.1 shows the overall situation, when

RI << X1 and R = 0,

The range of high values for XO/X1, positive and/or negative, apply to resonant earthed or isolated neutral systems. The range of low values of positive XO/X1 are valid for earthed neutral systems. The range of low values of negative XO/X1, shown hatched, application due to resonant conditions. is not suitable for practical

For earthed neutral systems, figures A,2 through A.5 show the earth fault factors families of curves applicable to particular values of R,/Xl. The curves are valid for fault resistance values giving the highest earth fault factors.

as

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 6009!3-5 ( 1996 ) 2,5

2,0

--.

A
I

3 =0
1,0

0,5

0
-100

1

1

I

1

b

-10-8-6-4-202 �-~ X@(,

4

6

8

10

100

Figure

A.1 - Earth fault factor k on a base of XO/X1 ,for R1/X1 = R=O

35

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )

8 7

xl

3 2 . 0 ..."

0

1

2

3

4
>

5

6

7

8

--

Xo -- xl

The curves are divided into regions following methods of presentation:

representing

the most critical

conditions

by the

maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the phase which leads the faulted phase;
..........................,

fault on

maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the phase which lags the faulted phase; maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the unfaulted phases.

fault on

--------

--------

----

fault on

Figure A.2 - Relationship between RO/X1and XO/X1 for constant values of earth fault factor k where RI = O

36

IS 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 (1996 )

8

7 6 5 xl 4 3 / / ` d I I = lkl-41 ." ." ." . `----.* -- .." /

7

~ 7.
k= 1,2
. .."
91-

q.

`-

-1k = 1.5
1

~ ..* q. .. q "-" """"" 9 1
I

o' 0

1

I

I

\ .i . .." .
I

q ."
1 1.
q

q
xl

1

w *.-

1

I

I

!

1

2

3 ------#Q

4

5

6

7

8

The curves are divided into regions following methods of presentation:

representing

the most critical

conditions

by the

maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the phase which leads the faulted phase;
.................. .........

fault on

maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the phase which lags the faulted phase; maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the unfaulted phases,

fault on

--------

.- .-,---

----

fault on

Figure A.3 - Relatlonshlp between RO/X1and XO/X1for constant values of earth fault factor k where RI = 0,5 Xl

37

Is 15086 ( Part 5 ) :2001 IEC 60099-5 ( 1996 )

8 7 -- 6 5
x,

4

.

.."

1 0 o
1

." .., ." ..* .." ,. q .* .* qO ..< .*.. q *" ..9 q. d
q

.. ....... ...?

2

3

4 >~
xl

5

6

7

8

The cuwes are divided into regions following methods of presentation:

representing

the most critical

conditions

bv the
.

maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the phase which leads the faulted phase; . .. .. .. ... ....... . ..... .... maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the phase which lags the faulted phase; maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the unfaulted phases.

fault on

fault on

--------

--------

----

fault on

Figure A.4 - Relatlonshlp between RO/X1and XO/X1for constant values of earth fault factor k where I?l = X1

38

IS 15086 (Part 5):2001 IEC 60099-5(1996 )
.. .
q  q    



I
   &

5 {' -.9. 4 I 3 `" 2 1 o 0 1 2 r
q Oe -

I .] k=l.2

.

. . :
q q

9, [" "; .
q q

q

q

." ,

. ." ." ."

. .." ."

."

..' ." .. .. . ." . . .' ." .** d .." ." .. ,."" ." ."" ." ." q .* ." q ." ."" .. ." q. ." ..* . ." .~ .-- k=l,6 ~ ... .. ." ..O ....." ..q .".-" ."* ..... /. .*4 .. ..*""" ." q *. q * ....*" q .* q.` ..
q q

I

q

3 4*55 xl

6

7

8

The curves are divided into regions representing the most critical conditions by the following methods of presentation: maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the phase which leads the faulted phase; . . . . *.*.**..* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the phase which lags the faulted phase; maximum voltage occurs during a phase-to-earth the unfaulted phases. fault on

fault on

. . . . . . . . . ---------

.-

fault on

Figure A.5 - Relatlonshlp

between Ro/X1 and XO/X,for constantvalues of earttt fault factor k where RI = 2X,

39

IS 15086 (Part 5):2001 IEC 60099-5(1996)

Annex
(informative)

B

Current practice

For the power supply systems within some countries the application of this standard may result in tables of consistently used surge arrester characteristics. For the use of this standard within such countries, tables containing these characteristics may be added to this annex B, without deviating from the standard.

40

IS 15086 (Part 5):2001 IEC 60099-5(1996)

Annex C
(informative)

Bibliography

[1]

J. E/ovaara, K. Foremann, A. Schei, 0. V&/cker: "Metal-oxide surge arresters In a.c. systems. Part 3: Temporary overvoltage and their stresses on metal-oxide surge arresters". ELECTRA 128 (1989) 114...125
A.R. Hiieman, J. Roguin, K.-i-i. Week: "Metal-oxide surge arresters in a.c. systems. Part 5: Protection performance of metal-oxide surge arresters". ELECTRA 133 (1990) 132...144 L. Stenstr6m.' "Metal-oxide surge arresters in a.c. systems. Part 6: Selection of metaloxide surge arresters from the standards". ELECTRA 133 (1990) 146,,, 165 A. Schei, A. Ekstr&n: `Stresses on metal-oxide systems by temporary and transient overvoltage CIGRE 1986, Rapport 33-13 surge arresters in HVAC and HVDC and related tests".

[2]

[3]

[4]

41

( Continued

from second cover)

International Standard 60507:1991 Artificial pollution tests on high voltage insulators to be used on ac systems 60815:1986 Guide for the selection of insulators in respect of polluted
conditions

Corresponding Indian Standard IS 8704:
systems (

Degree of Equivalence
on Equivalent

1995 Artificial first revision )
in

pollution

high voltage insulators to be used on a.c.

IS 13134:1992
insulators conditions

Guide for selection of respect of pollution

do

For the purpose of deciding whether, a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960

`Rules for rounding

retained in the rounding
Standard.

of numerical values ( revised)'. The number of significant places off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. it in this Indian

Only the English text of the International Standard has been retained while adopting

Bureau

of lndian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright

of lndian

Standards

Act,

1986 to promote
of goods and

marking and quality certification

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from DOC : No.
Amendments
ET 30 ( 5127 ).

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern: 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA700 054 Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBA1400093 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561
{ 3378626,3379120

603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH.PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRWANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

