**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11431 (1985) : Code of practice for the packaging of 
electrical indicating and recording instruments [TED 24: 
Transport Packages] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11431 - 1385 

Indian Standard <™> 

CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR THE PACKAGING OF 

ELECTRICAL INDICATING AND 

RECORDING INSTRUMENTS 



UDC 62W98 GOG 7C : 621:317 722 




® Copyright 1966 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAS BHAVAN. $ BAHADUR SHAH ZAP A3 MARG 

G r 1 Mmh L9BG 



IS : 11431 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR THE PACKAGING OF 

ELECTRICAL INDICATING AND 

RECORDING INSTRUMENTS 

Packaging of Engineering Goods Sectional Committee, MCPD 19 

Chairman Representing 

Gapt P. K. Sen The Shipping Corporation of India Limited, Bombay 

Members 
Shri R. P. Agarwai, The Association of Small Tool Mfrs, Madras 

Shri R. J. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. G. Deshmtjkh Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shri P. L. Nagarsekar ( Alternate ) 
ShriD. P. Ghosh Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri Nirmal Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri Guruswamy Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Capt A. W. Kirtikar The Scindia Steam Navigation Company Limited, 

Bombay 
Shri T. M. Obhan Indian Federation of Transport Operator's, Bombay 

Shri Harkirat Singh Kohli 
( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. PalhaK Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 

Shri S. C. Goel ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. ParaHJape Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri M. M. Piplani The Shipping Corporation of India Limited, Bombay 

Shri V. P. Punj Engineering Export Promotion Council, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Saxena Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New Delhi 

Shri P. X). Shah Federation of Corrugated Box Manufacturers of 

India, Bombay 
Shri Sheeloo Ajmers ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. L. Raina, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. P. Abbey 
Joint Director ( MPCD ), ISI 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11431 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR THE PACKAGING OF 

ELECTRICAL INDICATING AND 

RECORDING INSTRUMENTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 11 October 1985, after the draft finalized by the Packaging of 
Engineering Goods Sectional Committee had Tseen approved by the 
Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 
0.2 Electrical indicating and recording instruments are very sensitive 
instruments and built with great accuracy to perform the intended 
functions. The rigours of transportation are likely to have adverse 
effects on the delicate components of the instruments and as such a suit- 
able mode of packing, cushioning, and packaging for transport would 
be necessary for the manufacturers as well as users of the instruments. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
DEF 159 Packaging of electrical indicating instruments, issued by 
the Ministry of Defence, UK. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code of practice lays down requirements for the packaging of 
electrical instruments for their safe transportation and handling by rail, 
road and sea. 

1,1.1 The instruments covered under this standard shall generally 
have the dimensions covered in IS : 2419-1979*. 

2. PRE-PACKING REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTRUMENTS 

2.1 All instruments shall be clean and free from dust, dirt and corrosion, 
and the terminals shall be shorted. 

Note — it is recommended to short the terminals on permanent magnet moving 
coil instruments since the current induced in the moving coil by its movement acts 
as a damping force. Shorting the terminals on moving iron or electrodynamic 
instruments does not serve any useful purpose. 



♦Dimensions for panel mounted indicating and recording electrical instruments {first 

inn \ - 



revision ) . 



IS : 11431 - 1985 



2.2 The individual instruments shall be enclosed in a polyethylene 
envelope or film to keep out moisture, dust, etc. 

3. PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 The complete package shall consist of primary package, cushioning 
and the transport packaging. 

3.2 Materials — The packaging materials recommended to be used are 
as given in Table 1. 



TABLE 1 PACKAGING MATERIALS 



Sl Function 
No. 
i) Wrapping 



«) 



Inside packing: 

a) Cushioning materials 



b) Rust prevention 

c) Moisture absorbent 

Outside packing 



Material 




Reference to 
Indian Stand abd 


Kraft paper 
Waxed paper 
Polyethylene film 




IS : 1397-1967 1 
IS : 3962-1967 2 
IS-: 2508- 1984 3 


Polyurethane foam 

Expanded polystyrene ( only 
for thermal conductivity re- 
quirements ) 


IS : 8255-1976* 
IS:4671-1968 5 


Note — For selection of other 
cushioning materials, the 
guidelines given in IS : 10106 
( Part 3/Sec 1 )-1984 6 should 
be followed. 

Grease 

Silica gel 


IS : 3401-1979 7 


Fibreboard boxes 

Wooden packing cases 
Battened plywood cases 
Box strappings 
Sealing tapes 




IS: 2771 (Part 1 )- 

1977 s 
IS: 2771 ( Part 2 )- 

1975 9 
IS : 1503-1979 10 
IS : 2674-1980 11 
IS : 5872-1973 12 
IS : 2880-1978 13 or 
IS: 3676-1978" 



Specification for kraft paper ( first revision ) . 

specification for waxed paper for general packaging. 

specification for low density polyethylene films ( second revision ). 

specification for flexible load bearing polyurethane foam components for vehicles. 

Specification for expanded polystyrene for thermal insulation purposes. 

Specification for packaging code: Part 3 Ancillary materials, Section 1 Cushioning 
materials. 

'Specification for silica gel ( second revision ). 

Specification for fibreboard boxes: Part 1 Corrugated fibreboard boxes (first 
revision ). 

Specification for fibreboard boxes: Part 2 Solid fibreboard boxes (first revision ). 

"Specification for wooden packing cases ( second revision ). 

"Specification for plywood cases — battened construction (first revision ). 

"Specification for cold rolled steel strips ( box strappings ) (first revision ). 

^Specification for pressure sensitive adhesive cellulose tapes ( second revision ). 

"Specification for pressure sensitive adhesive PVC tapes (first revision ). 



IS 2 11431 - 1985 

3.2.1 The packaging material for export cargoes shall be checked for 
conformity to the regulations, if any, imposed by importing countries. 

3.3 Cushioning — The instruments shall be suitably cushioned and 
positioned in outer cases as under: 

a) The terminal shall be masked with a pad of suitable cushioning 
material. The pad shall extend 15 mm beyond the terminals 
and shall not exceed the barrel diameter. When the leads are 
provided the ends shall be masked with waxed paper; 

b) The instruments shall be enclosed in polyethylene film; and 

c) The instruments shall be suitably cushioned and positioned in 
boxes. The cushioning shall consist of the base fitting, the 
central fitting and the top fitting. The base and the top fittings 
shall be double the dimensions of the barrel of the instrument to 
be cushioned and shall be at least 40 mm thick. The central 
fittings shall consist of two pieces of double the dimensions of 
the barrel of the instrument and 50 and 100 mm thick with 
central cut-out to suit the contour of the fixing screws of the 
instruments. 

Note — The above cushioning procedure, though typical for round barrel 
instruments, is also applicable for instruments of other shapes with suitable 
modifications. 

3.4 Primary Package — The instruments shall then be wrapped with 
polyethylene film and the seams sealed with the pressure sensitive adhe- 
sive cellulose tape or pressure sensitive PVC tape. 

3.4.1 The packed instrument shall be placed in the packing boxes 
sealed for ease of handling and safe delivery. 

3.5 Transport Package — Each instrument pack or a number of 
primary packs shall be further packed in a transport package made of 
fibreboard ( corrugated or solid ) or wood. While selecting the package 
design it shall be ensured that no load is transmitted directly on to the 
primary packs while stacking those packages during transportation. The 
package design shall also ensure that it can withstand all the transit 
hazards. 

3.5.1 Each transport package shall be properly closed, sealed by 
tensional strapping and marked with the number and details of the 
instruments in it. 



