( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS :11692 - 1986

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TESTS FOR ELECTRO-SLAG REMELTING FURNACES
Industrial
Chairman
SHRI Y. P. VATSA

Electroheating Equipment Committee, ETDC 61
The General Calcutta

Sectional
dompany of India,

Representing
Electric

Members
SHRI T. MUKHERJEE(

Shri Y. P. Vatsa ) Wester Work Projects Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. A. ADVANI SHRI L. C. CHANDI ( Alternate ) Steel Furnace Association of India, New Delhi SHRI S. N. AGARWAL M. N. Dastur and Company (P) Ltd. Calcutta SHRI S. K. BHATTACHARJI SHRI T. K. GHOSH ( Alternate ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara SHRI J. K. BHATTACHARYA SHRI P. P. GOMES ( Alternate 1 The Tata Iron and Steel Company Ltd, SHRI A. K. BISWAS Jamshedpur SHRI K. G. PAI ( AIternate ) Engineering Projects ( Jndia ) Ltd, New Delhi SHRI KAUSHAL GOEL SHRI M. M. PRASAD ( Alternate ) Khandelwal Tubes, Bombay SHRI P. R. GUPTA SHRI S. R. BH~GAL ( Alternate ) Graphite India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. K. JAIN SHRI J. K. AGARWAL ( Alternate ) Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants SHRZ 0. N. KRISHNAN ( India ) Ltd, Ranchi Bharat Steel Tubes, Gannaur ( Sonepat ) SHRI V~NAY K&AR SHRI P. K. SINGLA ( Alternate ) Pioneer Electric Furnace Manufacturers, SHRI N. Y. MEHTA Vadodara SHRI B. K. SHUKLA ( AIternote ) Machine Building Plant Heavy SHRI P. K. MUKHOPADHYAY Heavy Engineering Corporation, Ranchti Directorate General Ordnanace Factory, SHRI M. K. NAIR Ministry of Defence, Calcutta Alloy Steel Plant, Durgapur SHRI Y. N. PANDEY Indian Furnace Company Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. A. PATIL SHRI M. PURANDHAR I Alternate )

Alternate

to

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1986
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of &he publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright urlder the said Act.

'k3:11692 -1986 (Continued
from page 1 ) Members Representing
Kirl$car Electric Mysore Company Ltd ( Unit IV ),

&RI G. MOHAN RAO

L SHRI S. V. KRISHNA RAO

SHRI S. S. HEMACHANDER( ,4Zternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Secunderabad SHRI B. PATHIRAJ ( Alternate ) Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. R. K. N. SASTRI SHRI M. P. SASTRY ( Alternate ) General of Supplies and Disposals, Directorate SHRI M. SHANKRALINGAM New Delhi SHRI J. S. PASSI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI J. M. UDIA New Delhi Director General, iSI (Ex-officio Member ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech )

Secretary
SHRI H. S. SWAMI Joint Director ( Elbc tech ), IS1

IS : 11692- 1986,

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TESTS FOR ELECTRO-SLAG REMELTING FURNACES

0,

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution

on 26 June 1986, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Electrohsating Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 The objective of this standard is to specify the methods of tests for electro-slag remelting furnaces, to permit the determination of essential parameters and technical characteristics of electro-heating installations. 0.3 This specification does not contain a mandatory list of tests and is not restrictive. Tests may be selected from the proposed list of tests, as required, for the characterization and evaluation of a furnace. If necessary, additional tests may be carried out, in agreement between the manufacturer and the user. 0.4 In preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from IEC Dot : 27 ( Central Office ) 60 `Test methods for electro slag by the International Electrotechnical remelting furnaces', issued Commission (IEC ). 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard applies to electroheating installations for the remelting of metals through direct resistance heating of a conductive slag.

*Rules for rounding off numerical
.

values ( revised )+

3

IS : 11692 - 1986 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions, in addition to those given in IS : 1885 ( Part Sl/Sec 1 and 2 )-1979*, shall apply. 2.1 Electra-Slag Remelting Furnace - Melting furnace in which the charge, normally a consumable electrode, is melted by resistance heating of an electrically conductive molten slag. The slag is contained in a mould ( crucible 1. 2.2 Electroheating Installation with Electra-Slag Remelting Furnace Complete assembly of an electroheating device and the electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for operation and utilization of an electro-slag remelting furnace. The electrical equipment comprises, in particular, the conductors and switchgear in the power, control, and regulating circuits, and the melting powersupply(ies), when the device has its own melting power supply(ies). 2.3 Power of an Electroheating Installation ( Apparent Power, S, in kVA or Active Power, P , in kW ) - The electric power measured at the input of the supply line. 2.4 Power-Factor of an Electrohcating Installation ( cos 0 ) - The ratio of the active power to the apparent power, measured at the input of the supply line. 2.5 Specific Energy Consumption e ( kWh/kg ) - Ratio of the total amount of electric energy ( kWh ) measured at the input of the supply line, which is consumed by an electroheating installation for melting the charge in normal operating conditions agreed upon between the manufacturer and the user, to the weight of the ingot manufactured ( kg 1. 2.6 Mould ( Crucible ) of an Electra-Slag Remelting Furnace - Nonconsumable container which shapes the ingot to be produced by the electro-slag refining process and which contains the molten slag. 2.7 Secondary Electrical Circuit of an Electra-Slag Remelting Furnace Electrical circuit which is closed by the melting power supply and includes the following: a) Output terminals of melting power supply; b) High current feeder ( busbars and/or cables ); c) Bus switches, if required;
*Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 51 Industrial Section 1 General terms. Section 2 Resistance heating. electroheating.

4

IS :11692 -1986

d) Electrode clamping;
4 Electrode stub; f) Consumable electrode; g) Conductive molten slag ( not included in the short circuit tests )I h) Remelted ingot; and j) Base plate ( depending on system connections ). 2.8 Electra-Slag Furnace Electrode(s) ( Consumable Electrode ) - Solid part(s) in contact with the molten slag which carries the electrical current necessary for the melting operation and is constituted of the material necessary for the formation of the ingot.
2.9 On-load Voltage of an Electra-Slag Remelting Furnace - Voltage which can be measured between the base plate and the electrode clamping device(s) bringing the melting electrical current to the consumable electrode(s).

fn - Maximum

2.10 Furnace Rated Current, 1, ( rms Value, A ) at Nominal Frequency, current for continuous operation for which the furnace is designed. 2.11 Rated Values of a Furnace - The rated values of a furnace are They are rated furnace current, those for which the furnace is designed. I,, rated furnace power, Pn, and rated furnace frequency(ies),&. 2.12 Rated Frequency, fn ( Hz ) - If the furnace is built for a frequency range, fn is the value corresponding to the rated furnace current. 2.13 Continuous Operation of a Furnace - Operation during which the solid ingot `is produced and solidified, and the consumable electrode is progressively consumed during the whole process. 2.14 Steady-State of an Electra-Slag Remelting Furnace - State of a furnace in which, in continuous operation, electrical and thermal parameters have reached substantially constant values. 3. GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS in accordance with IS : 9021-1978*.

3.1 The tests shall be performed

3.2 The furnace shall be prepared for tests and put into operation at the purchaser's site in accordance with the service instructions and the requirements for safe working. 3.3 The mains supplying the furnace installation during ensure a symmetry of voltages between separate phases. *General test conditions for industrial electro-heating equipment. tests shall

1s~ 11692 - 1986 3.4 The mains supply voltage level at the transformer primary should be within If 5 percent of the reference voltage levels outside these limits may be admitted in tests, by agreement between the manufacturer and the user. In any case, the test results shall be converted to the reference rated voltage values. 4. TESTS 4.1 The following specified order: tests are recommended to be performed in the

a) Measurement b) 4 d) 4 f>

of open circuit secondary voltage of ac installations ( or of the open circuit dc voltage in dc installations ); Measurement of electrical parameters of secondary circuit of ac electroheating installations ( or parameters of the circuit of dc installations ); Measurement of active power, apparent power and power factor of the electroheating installations; Measurement of temperature of constituents which are submitted to magnetic field and radiation heating; Measurement of temperature rise of the coolant; and Measurement of energy consumption. of Open Circuit Secondary across Voltage the melting power supply

4.2 Measurement

4.2-l This test is carried out terminals ( see point B in Fig. 1 ). .I

FIG. 1 ELECTRO-SLAG REMELTING FURNACECIRCUIT
6

`IS : 11692 -`1986 4.2.2 If the installation is provided with a regulation system, the minimum and the maximum open circuit secondary voltages shall be measured. 4.3 Measurement of Electrical Parameters of Secondary Electroheating Installation 4.3.1 This test comprises circuit (see Fig. 1 ): the following quantities Circuit of the

in the secondary

a) Active power at the input of the melting power supply ( point A ), b) Voltage at the output of the melting power supply (point B), c) Voltage of the furnace (point C >, and d) Current carried by the secondary circuit. 4.3.2 This test shall be carried out with the. furnace equipped with the electrode(s) of the largest weight and length allowed by the designer. The electrical and magnetic properties of the electrode material have to be defined beforehand. The electrodes are brought into electrical contact with the base plate. The power supply is set at its minimum voltage. The voltage is progressively increased until the maximum current allowed by the designer is achieved. The short-circuit test may give rise to some difficulties and bring about damage of the base plate. In these conditions and in agreement between the manufacturer and the user, it may be substituted by tests allowing to verify that in normal operating conditions of the furnace, the maximum values of the secondary current and of the active power measured on the primary remain in the range admitted by the manuThe latter tests shall be made upon all settings of the supply facturer. agreed upon by the manufacturer and the user. 4.3.3 a) b) c) d) From the above measurements, the following Impedance of the secondary circuit, Resistance of the secondary circuit, Reactance of the secondary circuit, and Power factor of the secondary circuit. are calculated:

4.4 Measurement of Active Power, Reactive Power and Power Factor of an Electroheatiug Installation - The test comprises measurement at point A ( see Fig. 1 > of quantities defined in 2.3 and 2.4. The measurement of the active power is made by means of a wattmeter ( at least of class 1'5). The measurement of the reactive power is made by a varmeter ( at least of class 1'5 >. 7

iS:11692-1986
The measurements shall be carried out during continuous operation 1(see 2.13 ) of the furnace after steady state ( see 2.14 ) has been achieved. The power factor is calculated from the active or reactive power values measured as mentioned above or, when the measurement of the reactive power has not been made, from the active power value and the value of the apparent power calculated from the measured voltage and current values.
NOTE 1 - Attention should be paid to the fact that harmonics results of measurements.

might affect

the

NOTE 2 - The specific energy consumption of an electro-slag remelting furnace depends to a high degree on the slag quality, the fusion rate, etc. If it is to be measured, the test condition and procedure shall be agreed upon between the manufacturer and the user.

4.5 Measurement of Temperature of Components Subjected to Magnetic Field and Radiation Heating - This measurement will be carried out during continuous operation of the furnace after a steady-state has been achieved while the furnace is working at its rated current ( In ). 4.6 Measurement of Temperature Rise of the Coolant measurements shall be carried out during continuous furnace after a steady-state has been achieved. Circuit - These operation of the

