-. IS:1885(PartXI)-1966

Indian
PART XI

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

ELECTROTECHNICAL
ELECTRICAL

VOCABULARY
MEASUREMENTS

( Fourth l<c:prirlt NOVI~MISI~R 1981) )

UDC

001.4:621.317

@ ~oj>yt.ight 1967 BUREAU
MANAh:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

ISIAVAN, !) I~.AIIAI>UR SHAH %AI:I\R M.`\RG NEW DELHI 110002 May

Gr 9

1967

IS:ltMS(PartXI)-1966

Indian
PART XI
Electrotechnical
Chairman
SlfRr T.

Standard
VOCABULARY
MEASUREMENTS
Committee,
Refiresentirq

ELECTROTECHNICAL
ELECTRICAL
Standards

Sectional

ETDC

1

V. BALAKRISHNAN Members

Heavy Electricals ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal

SHRI S. K. BHATIA ( Altcrnafc to Shri T. V. Balakrishnan ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( DepartADDITIONAL CHIEP ENGINEER ment of Communications) DIRECTOR OF TELECRAPI~S (L) ( Alternate ) Association, Manufacturers' SIfRr V. W. CHEMBURKAR Indian Electrical Calcutta SHRI Y. P. KAUSHIK ( Alternate) DIRECTOR Electronics and Radar Development Establishment, Ministry of Defence, Bangalore SHRI G. D. JOOI.EKAR Primary Cells and Batteries Sectional Committee, ETDC 10, ISI; and Secondary Cells and Batteries Sectional Committee, ETDC 11, IS1 SWRIS. N. MUKIZRJ~ National Test House, Calcutta PROF R. C. NARAYANAN General Nomenclature and Symbols Subcommittee, ETDC 1 : 3, IS1 SHRI A. R. NARAYANA RAO Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI H. V. NARAYANA RAO Central Water & Power Commission ( Power Wing) SHRI S. N. VINZE ( Alternate ) SHRI U. K. PATWARDHAN Transformers Sectional Committee, ETDC 16, IS1 Institute SHRI R. RADHAKRISHNAN Central Electra-Chemical Research ( CSIR ), Karaikudi SHRI H. N. VENKOBARAO( Afternote ) SHRI V. V. RAO Department of Communications (Wireless Planning and Co-ordination Wing ) SIIRI U. S. SAVAKOOR Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Ministry of Supply, Technical Development & Materials Planning ) SHRI A. S. NACARKATTI ( Ahnate) SHRIA. P. SEETHAPATHY Switcheear and Controlnear Sectional Committee. E?DC 17, ISI; n&f Power Frequency and Voltages Subcommittee, ETDC 1 : 1, IS1 SHRI R. K. TANDAN National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI S. THIRUVENKATACHARI ElectrximI Equipment Sectional Committee, ETDC

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 1885 ( Part XX ) - 1966
( Continued from pap ;liembers Srlnl V.
VENUGOPALAN

1) Re/wsenting Insulators and Accessories Sectional Committee, ETDC 3, IS1 Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ETDC $5, ISI Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficioillember)

SHRI J. S. Z4\`ERI SHnt Y. S. \7~NK~rZsW.4nAN, Dirrctor ( Elec tech j ( Secrelq)

Electrical
Chairman

Instruments

and Meters Sectional

Committee,

ETDC

6

Indian Instifutc CHIEF ENGINEER, 1' &i `I-, JABALPUR DIREWOR OF TELHCRAPHS (L) ( .4lternute ) DIVISIONAL ENGINEER TELEon*rHs (P) (Alternate) SHRI S. K. RAW SIIR~ S. KANcAswAaru ( Alternate SIIRI AI. G. BHAT SUSHI N. N. CHAKRA~~RTY Srtnt I). I'. CHATTERJEE SIIRI I.. C. JAIN ( I-lltematc ) SHRI I'. .J. 1)AMANY

of Scirncc,

Bangalore ( Depart-

.hXTIONAY.

Dircctoratc General of Posts & Tclcgraphs ment of Communications)

\`oltas Ltd, Bombay ) Automatic Electric Private Ltd, Bombay Commerce & Industries Department, Government of West Bengal Central \Vater 8 Pol~cr Commission ( Power Wing ) The Bombay Electric taking, Bomba; Supply __ & Transport IJnder-

SIIRI ;\I. P. CHAwt.\ri ( A/ternnte ) SIIRI S. I)AlrCS Crompton Parkinson ( \Vorks ) Ltd, Bombay SIIHI .\. ~LIAJUWU~K ( Alternate ) `Il~c Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Srr~r .I. K. GHOSE Calcutta University of Roorkre, Roorkcc PROP C:. S. GHOSH SIIKI 1). N. GROVER Electronics Pr Radar Development Establishment, hlinistry of Defencr, Bangalore SHRI I~. BALARAMAsw.~HY( A~teruate ) Inspection \Ving, Directorate General of Supplies Stim D. `I'. GURSAHANI & Disposals i llinistry Of Supply, Technical Development & 11 at trials Planning ) SIIKI J. I,. CH~IABRA ( Alternatc ) SHRI JOSEPH LOPEZ The Meter Manufacturers' Association of India, Banaalore SIIRr T. K. SAHGAL ( .4&?6+2&) Research Designs 61 Standards Organization, SHRI S. K. KANJILAL Ministrv of Railwavs. , I Lucknow SHRI s. PADMANABH.4N ( Alternate ) Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, 1\Tew Delhi SHRI R. C. KHANNA WC CDR D. J. LAWYER Directorate of Technical Development & Production ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ) SQN LDR S. B. PURANIK ( Altewwtu ) ( Continwd on page 42 )

2

-

_._.

"^

.

.-

._.I -_-_.

._--._._

IS : 1885 ( Part XI ) - 1966

Indian
PART XI

Standard VOCABULARY
MEASUREMENTS

ELECTROTECHNICAL
ELECTRICAL

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part XI ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 19 December 1066, after the draft finalized by the Electrotechnical Standards Sectional Committee in consultation with the Electrical Instruments and Meters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 It has not been found possible to prepare the electrotechnical vocabulary as a complete volume which is, therefore, being issued in several parts, A list of other parts in this series is each having one or more sections. given on fourth cover page. 0.3 This standard follows, to a very large extent, the definitions contained in IEC Dot : l(2Oj ( Secretariat ) 1001 International electrotechnical vocabulary: Group' 20 Electrical measurements, Ed 3 issued by International This IEC document is the first revised draft Electrotechnical Commission. of IEC Pub 50(20) (1953) International electrotechnical vocabulary: Group 20 Scientific and industrial measuring instruments, Ed 2. 0.4 The definitidns contained in this standard ( Part XI ) have been drawn with the object of striking a correct balance between absolute precision and simplicity. The principal object of the standard ( Part XI ) is to provide definitions which are sufficiently clear so that each term is understood with the'same meaning by all the users and it does not, therefore, constitute a treatise on electrical measurement terminology. Thus, it may sometimes be felt that the definitions are not sufficiently precise, do not include all cases, do not take account of certain exceptions or are not identical with those which may be found in other publications designed with other objects and for other tvpes of readers. Such imperfectiobs, which will be eliminated as far as possible in later editions, are inevitable and should be accepted in the interest of simplicity and clarity.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This electrical standard ( Part XI ) covers definitions measurements. These terms are broadly in measuring techniques; of terms applicable classified as follows: to

a) Basic principles b) General terms;

3

IS : 1885 ( Part XI ) - 1966 c) d) e) f) g) Electrical ( electromechanical ) measuring instruments; Electrical compensators, measuring bridges and measuring Electrically measuring instruments; Accessories; and Constructional elements. and nuclear instrumentation

devices;

1.2 The terms relating to electronics covered in this standard ( Part XI ). 2. BASIC PRINCIPLES

are not

IN MEASURING

TECHNIQUES quantity is

2.1 Measuring - The activity by which the value of a physical determined by direct or indirect comparison.

2.2 Quantity to be Measured - The physical quantity the value of which is to be determined, for example, voltage, current, temperature, etc. 2.3 Object to be Measured - If the quantity to be measured is linked to an object it is called object to be measured, for example, lamp, battery, etc. 2.4 Measuring Unit Quantity chosen as unit for the measure. 2.5 Value - The number showing how many times the chosen measuring unit is contained in the quantity to be measured. 2.6 Measuring is done. Method The princip!es according to which measuring

2.7 Measuring Procedure - A collective term covering the apparatus employed, the activity of the operator and the measuring method. 2.8 Standards - Deposited or adequately protected models ( samples ) which lastingly incorporate or reliably reproduce one or more values or properties of one or more quantities. 2.9 International Standards - Standards which determine with international validity the units of individual physical quantities and which are kept by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures. 2.10 Index - Moving or fixed part of a measuring instrument ( pointer, light spot, liquid surface, recording pen, stylus or other means ) which makes it possible to read on the measuring instrument the value belonging to the For example, on a commercial scale the index quantity to be measured. ( pointer ) moves before the fixed indices in which the figures of the moving scale appear. 2.11 Scale - On an indicating instrument, the array of marks, together with any associated figuring with relation to which the position of the index is observed.
01

The series of marks and numbers from which is obtained index, the value of the measured quantity. 4

by aid of an

NOTE -

It is often called

`

Scale `.

2.13 Numbered Scale -A series of numbers placed on one or more planal or spatial surfaces from which is directly obtained in figures the value of the measured quantity, leaving the possibility to estimate the last number. 2.14 Digital Scale - A series of numbers placed on one or more planal or spatial surfaces where the numbers to be read suddenly change, leaving no possibility of estimation. 2.15 Scale Marks - The marks which enable the position of the moving element of an instrument to be identified. 2.16 Scale Numbering - Totality of the figures on the scale from which the value of the measured quantity is directly obtained in figures. 2.17 Division ( Scale Spacing ) - The distance between the centre lines of two adjacent scale marks. If the marks are placed along a curve the length of arc on a given radius is to be taken. 2.18 Scale Interval - The increment of the measured quantity corresponding to the scale spacing. 2.19 Scale Length - The length of the arc ( or the segment of a circle ) passing through the centre of the shortest markings on the graduated scale and in the case ofplatform scales passing through the base of these markings. 2.20 Linear Scale-An represents the same value. equally divided scale each division of which

2.21 Non-linear Scales - Scales, such as square law, logarithmic, reciprocal and others in which divisions having the same value are of unequal widths. 2.22 Indicating Range of the measured quantity. The full length of the scale in terms of the values

2.23 Effective ( Measuring ) Range - That portion of the scale over which the instrument, under reference conditions, meets the specified class accuracy. 2.24 Lower and Upper Measuring Limits ( Minimum and Maximum Scale Value ) - Lower and upper limits of the measuring range.
NOTEMeasuring limit, when used alone, means the upper measuring limit.

2.25 Starting Value - Lowest value of the quantity to be measured at which an integrating instrument, for example, anemometer or watt-hour meter starts, irrespective of the error committed at this value. 5

IS : 1885 ( Part XI ) - 1966 2.26 Reading-The numerical indication obtained on the scale at the index of the instrument while determining the value of the quantity to be measured with the instrument. 2.27 Scale Constant be multiplied to obtain Coefficient by which the reading in divisions shall the value of the measured quantity.

2.28 Measured Value - The product of the reading and the scale constant. It, nevertheless, contains the error of measurement.
NOTE is identical If the scale is numbered in units of the quantity with the measured value. to be measured the reading

.

2.29 Absolute Sensitivity - The ratio of the change in the reading to the The dimension of corresponding change in the quantity to be measured. sensitivity is always to be given. 2.30 Constant of a Galvanometer of the galvanometer.
KOTE This is sometimes called

-The

reciprocal

value of sensitivity

` Figure of Merit ' of the galvanometer.
to

2.31 Relative Sensitivity the corresponding relative

- The ratio of the change in the deflection change in the quantity to be measured.

2.32 Discrimination -.- Of a measuring instrument at any indicated value of the quantity to be measured means the smallest change in the quantity to be measured producing a perceptible change in the reading. 2.33 Repeatability - That property of a measuring instrument according to which the reading differs only within determined limits from each other while measuring the same quantity several times during a given period and with unchanged reference conditions. 2.34 Constancy - That property of a measuring instrument which gives for the same quantity to be measured, with unchanged reference conditions, for a longer measuring period the same value or a value with small changes around the reading. 2.35 Accuracy - Of a measuring `instrument means that under reference conditions the measured value of any given quantity differs from its true value by less than a given error. 2.36 Class of Quality-A cessories ) determined by class of measuring instruments prominent values characterizing ( or their acthe quality.

2.37 Accuracy Class - A classification of measuring instruments ( or their accessories ), the accuracy of which may be designated by the same number, this being the limit of error when the instrument is used under reference conditions. 2.33 Influence Quantity - One of the quantities which affect the indications of an instrument, but which is not the one measured by the instrument. 6

IS:1885(PartXI)-1966 For example, an influence frequency meter is voltage. quantity of a voltmeter is temperature; of a

2.39 Reference Conditions - These conditions under which t5e instrument ( or the accessory ) meets the requirements concerning intrinsic errors. These conditions determine for the influence quantities reference values or reference ranges. 2.40 Variation in Indication of the Measured Value indication due to the influence quantities when the measuring not used under reference conditions. Variation in instrument is

2.41 Rating ( in Terms of a Limiting Quantity )-The limiting values of a quantity, other than that measured, which permit the proper use of an For example, the current rating of a wattmeter, varmeter, instrument. watt-hour meter or phase meter is the stated value of the current which may be safely passed by the instrument. 2.42 Nominal Range of Use -The range of values which each of the influence quantities may assume when the instrument complies with certain conditions. 2.43 True Value -- `I'o ally physical quantity to be measured belongs, This is the true value of the according to a given interpretation, a value. quantity to be measured.
NOTE .- It is not possible to determine the true value by experiment. not interfere with its existence. Even this does

2.44 Exact Value sufficiently extended 2.45 Presumable

An approximation of the ` true value ' obtained by a series of measurements eliminating systematic errors. Value The mean of a series of measurements.

2.46 Error of the Standard - The value which should be embodied by the standard is called the nominal value. The value of the standard, as determined by measurements, generally differs from the nominal value The difference between the two even if reference conditions are observed. values obtained by deducting the nominal value from the measured value is the error of the standard. 2.47 Error of an Instrument - When measuring the known value of a physical quantity, the measured value given by a measuring instrument will generally differ from the known value even if reference conditions are present. The measured value minus the known value is the error of the instrument. 2.48 Scale Error - The error introduced marks not being placed at the right place. in the reading due to the scale

2.49 Reversing Difference - If the measured proached from lower value or from higher value, values is the reversing difference.
NOTE -The ` Reversing a measuring series. Difference

value differs when apthe difference of the two

' may be interpreted with respect to the mean of
7

IS : 1885 (Part

XI ) - 1966

2.50 Zero Variation - That part of the deflection of a measuring instrument with restoring torque which remains after the cause producing that deflection has disappeared. 2.51 Error of the Reading Device - Error due to faults in the pitch of the measuring spindle, clearances and staggering of indici and wrong displacement of the scales and form of indici. 2.52 Absolute Error ( of an Instrument ) - The quantity minus its true value expressed algebraically. 2.53 Relative of the quantity Error - The ratio of the absolute that is being measured. indicated value of a

error to the exact value

2.54 Errors Caused by ihe Quantity to be Measured - These errors are due to the quantity to be measured or to the object bearing upon it as its geometric dimensions or other characteristics are not distinct enough. The characteristics change, the material is oxidized or recrystallization takes place, etc. 2.55 Personal Error - Error due to physical or psychological momentary inattention or fatigue of the observer. 2.56 Visual Error Error due to differences qualities,

in the vision of the observer.

2.57 Error of Estimation - The error caused by the capacity of estimaThe same relative position of scale tion of different persons being different. and index is estimated in different ways. 2.58 Parallax Error - Error due to the direction index and the scale are in different planes. of observation if the

2.59 Systematic Error - The sign and magnitude of a part of the errors affecting the measured value remains unaltered. These errors are called systematic errors. 2.60 Correction opposite in sign. It is equal to the value of the systematic error but

2.61 Correction Factor - A factor by which it is necessary to multiply the indicated value in order to obtain the true value of the quantity to be measured. 2.62 Accidental Error - Errors disordered in their incidence and variable in magnitude, positive and negative values occuring in repeated measurements in no ascertainable sequence. 2.63 Gross Error - A large error due to strong influence of the ambiance or a great personal error which would considerably influence the measured value. 8

2.64 Determidion of Systematic Errors - That activity by tihich, Y in one or more points of the measuring range, the measured values obtained with a given instrument are compared with the measured values obtained with an instrument of higher precision or with an adequate standard. : 2.65 Series of Measurements - If, in order to determine the exact value of the quantity to be measured, it is measured `n' times or `n' objects of the same nominal quantity are measured once each, the totality of the values so obtained is called a series of measurements. 2.66 Mean of a Series of Measurements members of the series of measurement, that is: The arithmetic mean of the

X=

x,+x,+

... ... ...... +.m
I-

5 X`
0=

I

n

n

2.67 Variance ( $2) - The sum of the squares of the differences between ;t&rrnbers of the series and their arithmetic mean divided by ( n- 1 ), \ :
s2-

a-

l

x (%a-xp la=1

n

2.66 Standard

Deviation

Square root of the variance.

2.69 Characteristic Standard Deviation of a Measuring Method - If it is possible for the same person to make measurements with the same equipment it is preferable not to calculate the standard deviation individually for every series, but to base this calculation on a larger mass of data. Such a standard deviation suitable to be substituted is the characteristic standard deviation of a method. 2.70 Limits of Error - The values of accidental errors cannot be determined but it is possible to assess between which limits the error will remain with a given probability, a nearly normal distribution (being assumed. 2.71 Limit of Error of a Single Value - The characteristic dispersion s o a measuring method is determined by making sufficient measurements $x-r) a teries. If the measuring method is not altered the probability will be of 99.7 percent with t = 3, and of 95 percent with t = 2, and the true value (u) will differ from the measured value (x) by less than fts, that is: a=.Yfts 2.72 Result of a Meosdrement - The aim of every measurement is to determine the result of the measurement, this being the mean of the series of measurement amended by the correction and completed by thelimit of error. 2.73 Result of a Single Measurement - If the necessary correction E, and the limits of error of the meaauring method are known the result 9 1

Is:1885(Partxr)-1966
belonging to a single measurement
will

be:

X-x.-E,fts

2.74 Result of a Series of Measnrements -The mean (y) of the measured values is amended by the sum of systematic errors (E,) and completed by the limit of error: X=x-where n = the number of measurements taken ( this number is not identical with that of the measurements executed in order to determine s ), and s = the characteristic dispersion of the measuring method. 2.75 Uncertainty of the Result of a Measurement-The with f sign in the result of a measurement. member
E,ftZ dn

2.;6 Constant of a Meter - Coefficient giving the relation between energy nominally measured by a meter and the corresponding angular movement of the rotor. It is usually expressed as watt-hours per revolution ( Wh/rev ) or number of revolutions per kilowatt-hour ( rev/kWh ). 2.77 Multiplying Power ( of a Gdvanometer Shunt ) - A factor by which it is necessary to multiply the current passing through a galvanometer connected to a shunt in order to obtain the total current passing through the shunt and the galvanometer. 2.78 Mechanical Zero -That point on the scale at which the index stops when the moving element takes up its equilibrium position, the electrical parts of the instrument being de-energized. 2.79 Calibration - Determination of the relation between the reading of an instrument and the true value of the quantity to be measured. 2.86 Deflection-Deviation of a moving element with reference to a specified position. When no position is specified it is with reference to the zero of the scale. 2.81 Maximum Deflection deflection of a moving element. The maximum value of the instantaneou9

2.82 Restoring Torque -The torque which tends to bring the moving element back to the mechanical zero of the instrument. 2.83 Torsion Torque The torque produced by torsion.

2.84 Deflecting Torque ( Driving Torque ) - The torque produced by the quantity or quantities to be measured on the moving element. 10

I8rl888(P8rtxI)-ld

2.85 controIling torques.

Torque -

The resultant

of deflecting and restoring

2.88 Troque-Weight 2.87

Ratio ( of a Meter ) - The ratio between the driving torque for nominal power and the weight of the moving element.

QuaIity Factor (of a Meter) - The ratio between the torqueweight ratio and the angular velocity of the moving. element for nominal power. 2.88 Braking Torque ( of a Meter ) - A torque the value of which depends on the speed of the moving element and which opposes its motion.

2.89 Damping Torque the moving element.

A torque which tends to prevent oscillations of

2.88 Critical Resistance - The resistance of the circuit of a measuring instrument corresponding with critical damping.

2 91 Idiostatic Circuit ( Idiostatic Method ) - A method of using an electrometer which does not require an external supply source of current. 2.92 Hetellostatic Circuit ( Heterostatic Method ) - A method of using an electrometer which requires an external source giving a constant difference of potential. 2.93 Symmetrical Heterostatic Circuit-An arrangement of the quadrant electrometer in which the auxiliary potential difference is applied between two quadrants or two pairs of quadrants, the potential difference to be measured being applied between the needle and a point at the mean potential of the quadrants. - 2.94 As-~mmetrical Heterostatic Circuit -An arrangement of the quadrant slectrometer in which the auxiliary potential difference is applied between the needle and one quadrant or a pair of quadrants, the potential difference to be measured being applied between the two quadrants or pairs of quadrants. 2.95 Absolute Method of Measurement - A method in which the measurement of a.1 Liectrical or magnetic quantity is referred to length, mass and time by using theoretical or conventional relationships. 2.99 Nominal Circuit Voltage - The highest circuit voltage on which the instrument will be used and which may determine its insulation tests. 2.97 Dielectric Test Voltage on an instrument is made. The voltage at which the dielectric test

2.98 Rated Temperature-Rise Current of an Instrument-The current at which the instrument shall satisfy the conditions of temperaturerise. 11

1s:1885(PartxI)=1966 2.99 Temperature-Rise Voltage of au AuxWary Resistor (Capacitor ) ( Reactor ) - The voltage at which the resistor ( capacitor) (mctor ) complies with the temperature-rise conditions. 2.100 Interchangeable - Applied to accessories of two or more measuring instruments when they may be used in place of one another without affecting accuracy. 2.101 Dynamic Characteristicm of a Measuring Iimtnuncnt - Those characteristics which describe the dynamic behaviour of an instrument. 2.102 Ballistic ( Damping ) Factor of a Measuring Instrument The ratio between the first deflection and the permanent deflection when current impulses are passed through the instrument under specified conditions. 2.103 Response Time (of a Measuring Instrument) - The time taken by the moving element of an instrument to come to rest when current impulses are passed through the instrument under specified conditions. 2.104 Meter-Adjasting Devices - Devices which allow correct adjustment of a meter under given conditions. 2.105 Full Load Meter Adjustment - A device for regulating the speed of the moving element at nominal voltage, nominal current and, for alternative current, at nominal frequency and a power factor of unity. 2.106 Pqwer-Factor Adjastxuent for au Alternating Current Meter -A device for regulating the speed of the moving element for nominal values of voltage, current and frequency and for a phase difference between current and voltage. 2.107 Low-Load Adjastment - A device for varying the auxiliary torque intended to improve the shape of the meter error curve for small currents. 2.108 Stroboscopic Checking of a Meter ( Stroboscopic Calibrating of a Meter ) - A method of calibration based on stroboscopic observation of the moving, element ( disc ). 2.109 Effective Current Range of a Meter ( Accurate Current Range of a Meter.) - The range of current values between which the meter has the specified accuracy. 2.110 Limits of Effective Current Range -The values of current corresponding to upper and lower limits of the effective range. 2.111 Limits of Power Range for Accuracy power corresponding to the nominal voltage current range -for alternating current meters, polyphase meters, with voltages and currents 12 of a Meter - The values of and the limits of effective with unity power-factor; for in balance. .

IS:1885(PartXl)-1966 2.112 Starting Power of a Meter cause the moving element 2.113 Thermo-electric difference of temperature the same circuit. Effect between The lower limit of power which Will to make a complete revolution. An effect that an emf arises due to a two junctions of dissimilar materials in

2.114 Temperature Coefficient - The change in the magnitude of any property of a substance, such as its resistance, caused by the rise of 1 deg in temperature and expressed as a fraction of the magnitude at some definite temperature adopted as a standard. 2.115 Thermal Overload Capacity ( of a Meter ) - The the current continuously applied for maximum permissible rise and the rated current of a meter. ratio between temperature-

2.116 Overload Capacity of a Circuit-The ratio between the maximum current ( continuously applied ) which a circuit may withstand without damage and its normal current. 2.117 Null Method - A method of measurement in which, when adjustments are complete, no current is flowing in a certain measuring instrument ( for example, a galvanometer ) situated in a suitable part of the circuit. 2.118 Deflection MethodA method of measurement deflection of a measuring instrument is read. in which the

2.119 Oppositjon
emf or a potential nals of a variable

Method-A method of measurement in which an difference is connected in opposition to that at the termiresistor through which a current is flowing. Method-An
opposition method in which the resistor is a simple multiple of the voltage to

2.120 Potentiometer

numerical value of the variable be measured.

2.121 Reference Value - A single value of an influence quantity at which, within given tolerances, the instrument or the accessory complies with the requirements concerning intrinsic errors. 2.122 Reference Range-A range of values of an influence quantity within which the instrument or the accessory complies with the requirements concerning intrinsic error. 2.123 Type Tests - Tests carried out to prove conformity cation. These are intended to prove the general qualities given type of instrumeqt or meter. with the specifiand design of a to

2.124 Routine Tests - Tests carried out on each instrument or meter check requirements which are likely to vary during production. 2.125 Acceptance Tests - Tests carried out on samples lot for the purpose of acceptance of the lot. 13 taken

from the

3.GENERALTERMS' 3.1 Dtttctimg instrument - Apparatus intended to denote the existence, and sometimes the direction ofa phenomenon. 3.2 Measuring Instrument-An instrument giving the value of the quantity to be measured or the reading necessary to calculate it. 3.3 Indicating Instrument - An instrument which indicates, at any time, the instantaneous, effective, average or peak values of the quantity measured. 3.4 Recording Instrumtnt - An instrument which inscribes or records the instantaneous, effective, average or peak values of the quantity to be measured as a function of time or of another quantity. 3.5 Inaegrating Instrumegt ( Meter ) - An instrument which indicates, at any time, the integral of a quantity from a definite time and to the time when the reading is taken. 3.6 Electronic Instrument - An instrument in which measurement is made by means of an electronic device. 3.7 VO~UQXIITube Voltmeter-An instrument to measure voltages containing electronic amplifying elements. 3.8 oPciIIoscope - An electronic device containing a cathode-ray tube suitable for reproducing the curve representing the variation of a voltage or of a current as a function of time. It may also serve to show the Lissajous curves of two voltage curves. 3.9 Pointer Instrument-An instrument which gives the readings by the movement of pointer over a scale. 3.10 Projected-Scale Instrumtnt - An instrument in which the scale is projected on to a screen provided with a fixed pointer. 3.11 Shadpw Column Inatrnmtnt - An instrument in which the readings are given by a shadow column on an illuminated scale forming part of the instrument. 3.12 Direct-Reading Instrumtnt - An instrument giving, by a direct reading, a value equal or proportional to the quantity to be measured. instrument in which the reading is given 3.13 Mirror Instrument -An by the movement of a beam of light reflected from a mirror affixed to the moving element. 3.14 Light Spot Instrument - An instrument in which the indication is given by the movement of a light spot over a scale forming part of the instrument. 14

rsrl885(PartxI)-1966
3.15 hstxument for Absolute Measurement -

the constants may be deterniined by measurements mental quantities only.

Apparatus of which depending on fundainstrument using which

3.16 Electrically Measuring Instrument - An electrical means for measuring a non-electrical quantity.

3.17 Differential Measuring Instrument - An instrument measures the difference of two quantities of the same kind.

3.18 Aperiodic ( Over-Damped ) Instrument - An instrument the moving element of which reaches its equilibrium position without oscillations about it. 3.19 Damped Periodic ( Under-Damptd) Instrument - An instrument in which the moving element reaches its equilibrium position after a few oscillations about that position. 3.20 Critically Damped Instrument -An instrument the moving element of which just reaches its equilibrium position without overshoot. This is the limiting case of an aperiodic instrument. 3.21 Astatic Instrument - An instrument the moving element of which is astatic, that is, so constructed that it is unaffected by uniform electromagnetic fields. 3.22 Shunted Instrument and a separate shunt. A combination of a measuring instrument

3.23 Instrument with Contacts -An instrument in which the moving element closes or'opens contacts when it arrives at certain fixed or adjustable positions. 3.24 Suppressed Zero Instrument zera of which is beyond the scale limit.
-An

instrument the mechanical

3.25 Instrument with Locking Device-An instrument in which the moving element is locked in its position when a certain event has happened or at the end of a determined period after the current has begun to flol4.. 3.26 Instrument with Magnetic Screening-An instrument in which measuring system is surrounded by magnetic circuits, greatly reducing the influence of external magnetic fields. 3.27 Instrument with Electromagnetic Screening - An instrument provided with conducting screens which protect it from the influence of external electromagnetic fields. 3.28 Instrument with Electrostatic Screening-An instrument provided with screens which protect it from the influence of external electric fields. 15

IS:188s(PartxI)-1966 3.29 Standard Instrument - A measuring instrument of high precision used particularly for calibrating other measuring instruments. 3.30 Laboratory Instrument - A measuring instrument whose accuracy, generally, and condition of use are intermediate between those of a standard instrument and those of a precision instrument. 3.31 Precision Instrument generally portable. Instrument of intermediate accuracy,

3.32 Industrial Instruments - Instruments in general use which shall be of robust construction and easily read from a distance. instrument which measures or re3.33 Summ ation Instrument-An gisters the sum of the values assumed by quantities of the same kind in several circuits. 3.34 Prototype - One of the first instruments of a specified type which shall be used as a model for instruments of the same type to be manufactured later. 3.35 Pivoted Instrument - An instrument the moving element of which is supported by pivot(s) resting in jewel bearing(s). 3.36 Stressed Fibre Instrument - An instrument the moving element of which is supported by a stressed fibre. 3.37 Fibre Suspension Instrument ment of which is suspended on a fibre. An instrument the moving ele-

part of a measuring instrument through 3.38 Current Circuit -That which flows the current, one of the currents to be measured or a proportional current suIjplied by a current transformer or derived from a shunt. 3.39 Voltage Circuit - That part of a measuring instrument supplied by the voltage to be measured or a proportional voltage supplied by a transformer or a voltage reducer. 3.40 Direct Writing-Recording Instrument - A recording instrument in which the marking device is moved by the moving part of the measuring system. 3.41 Indirect Writing ( Relay-Type )-Recording Instrument - A recording instrument in which the ma&ing device is moved by a secondary driving force controlled by the measuring instrument. 3.42 Slow Response Recording Instrument - A recording instrument that reaches an indication of 90 percent of the final value in not less than 0.05 second. 3.43 X-Y Recording Instrument - A slow response recorder.which may plot a given variable against any other, including time `t', in Cartesian co-ordinates. 16

18:1885(PartXI)-1966 3.44 Pen Recording Instrument - A recording instrument in which the tracing on the chart is accomplished by means ofa pen fed with suitable ink.

3.45 Stylus Recording Iustrument -A recording instrument in which the inscription is effected by a stylus engraving, by locally evaporating a metallic product covering the chart or by any other means. 3.46 Continuous Line Recording Instrument - A recording instrument with pen or stylus in which the inscription is effected on a continuous line. 3.47 Dotted Line Recording Instrument - A recording instrument with pen or stylus in which the inscription is effected in a discontinuous manner by successive point impressions by means of a mechanism independent of the measuring element. 3.48 Roll ( Strip ) Chart - The chart passed over a suitable mechanism driven by a clock. It is either rewound by an automatic respooling device or is passed out through a slot into or from the rec,order case. 3.49 Drum Chart - The chart wrapped round a cylindrical drum which is driven by the clock, the record being completed in one revolution of the drum. 3.59 Disc ( Circular ) Chart-A clock, the record being completed 3.51 Chart-Mark-The quantity recorded. 3.52 Chart Scale-Length marks on the chart. disc of paper which is driven by the in one revolution of the chart. the value of the scale

line on the chart indicating
-

Direct

distance

between the extreme

3.53 Spring-Operated Chart-Driving Mechanism - Suitable means for winding, starting, stopping and regulating the clock, operated by a spring. 3.54 Synchronous Motor-Driven Clock - Suitable means for driving the chart-driving mechanism, using a synchronous motor. 3.55 Self-Starting Synchronous Motor-Driven Clock-Suitable means for driving the chart-driving mechanism, using a self-starting synchronous motor. 3.56 Electrically-Wound Spring-Operated Chart-Driving MechanSuitable means for winding, starting, stepping and reguIating the clock, operated by an electrically-wound spring.
ism 4. ELECTRICAL INSTRUMENTS 4.1 Electrical ( ELECTROMECHANICAL Instrument )

MEASURING

Measuring

an electrical quantity. 17

An instrument which measures

IS:1885(PartXI)-1966 4.2 Electrostatic Instrument depends on electrostatic forces. An instrument the operation of which

4.3 Permanent-Magnet Moving-Coil Instrument - An instrument which depends for its operation on the reaction between the magnetic field of a movable coil or coils produced by the current passing through it and the magnetic field of a fixed permanent magnet. 4.4 Moving-Iron Instrument - An instrument comprising a movable piece of iron which is actuated by a fixed coil carrying a current or by a fixed piece of iron magnetized by the current. It is sometimes called ` Ferromagnetic instrument `. 4.5 Permanent-Magpet Moving-Iron Instrument - An instrument comprising a movable piece of iron actuated by a fixed magnet and a fixed coil carrying a current. 4.6 Moving-Magnet InstrumentAn instrument in which one or several fixed coils carrying currents actuate a moving magnet or system of magnets. 4.7 Electrodynamic Instrument - An instrument which makes use of This the force exerted between fixed and moving coils carrying currents. term is generally reserved for instruments which do not incorporate ferromagnetic pieces placed across the lines of magnetic flux. 4.8 Ferrodynamic Instrument - An instrument in which electrodynamic effect is increased by the presence of ferromagnetic material. 4.9 Induction Instrument-An instrument which makes use of the effect of fixed inductive circuits on currents which they induce in moving conducting elements. 4.10 Rotating Field Instrument - An induction instrument in which the moving element is subjected to the action of several alternating fields which have phase differences between them so that the resulting magnetic field is a rotating field. 4.11 Thermal ( Electrothermic ) Instrument - An instrument operation of which depends upon the heating effect of a current. the

4.12 Hot-Wire Instrument - An instrument in which the expansion of a wire, directly or indirectly heated by a current, is transmitted to the moving element. 4.13 Bimetallic Instrument - An instrument in which the deformation of a bimetallic element, directly or indirectly heated by a current, is transmitted to the moving element. 4.14 Bolometric Instrument - An instrument depending for its action upon the variation in resistance of a conductor caused by the current to be measured. 18

IS:1885(PartXI)-1966 4.15 Thermocouple Instrument - An instrument in which the current to `be measured heats a thermocouple, the voltage ( electromotive force ) from which is generally measured by a permanent-magnet moving-coil instrument. 4.16 Rectifier Instrument - An instrument which is the combination of an instrument sensitive to direct current and a rectifying device whereby alternating currents ( voltages ) may be measured. 4 4.17 Vibrating Reed Instrument-An instrument in which metallic strips resonate under the action of a periodic current flowing through fixed coils which are sometimes combined with a magnet. 4.18 Magnetoscope - An instrument depending for its action on magnetic forces and intended to indicate the existence of a magnetic field. 4.19 Earphone -A simple telephone receiver which gives audible indication of the flow of a weak current of audible frequency. It is principally used as balance indicator in null methods. 4.20 Electroscope -An instrument depending for its action on e!ectrostatic forces and intended to indicate a potential difference or an electric charge. 4.21 Leaf Electroscope (with Leaves Made of Gold, Alumiaium, etc ) - An electroscope in which the detecting element is made of gold or aluminium leaf or foil. 4.22 Condenser Electroscope in order to increase its sensitivity. An electroscope fitted with a condenser

4.23 Spark Gap - A device comprising two electrodes, the distance between which may be adjusted, separated by a liquid or gaseous dielectric and so arranged that a spark is produced between them when the potential difference reaches a certain value. 4.24 Synchroscope - An instrument used to indicate the synchronism of two ac voltages or voltage systems, showing also the order of magnitude of the difference between their frequencies when they are not equal and the order of magnitude of their phase difference when their frequencies are equal. 4.25 Phase-Sequence Indicator - An instrument with which the phase sequence may be determined at the point where it has been connected in a polyphase circuit or system. 4.26 PoIarity Indicator - An instrument designed to indicate the polarity ofone conductor with reference to another. 4.27 Insulation insulation. Indicator Apparatus used to detect faults in electrical 19

IS : 1885 ( Part XI ) - 1966 Lightning Currents ( Magnetic 4.28 Magnetic Indicator for Link ) - Magnetic indicator consisting of a bundle of fine wires or sheets of special steel and indicating by changes in its magnetic characteristics the alJl>roximate strength of current due to a nearby lightning stroke. 4.29 Voltage Detector ( Voltage Indicator find out whether a conductor is live. 4.38 Magnetic Balance rotates round an horizontal A magnetometer axis. )An instrument element used to of which

the moving

4.31 Galvanometer - An instrument currents that are usually very small.

intended

for measuring

or detecting

4.32 Tangent Galvanometer -- A galvanometer with a moving magnet, so arranged that the tangent of the angle of deflection is proportional to the current to be measured. 4.33 Sine Galvanometer - A galvanometer arranged that the sine of the angle of deflection to be measured. with a moving magnet, so is proportional to the current

4.34 Moving-Magnet Galvanometer - A galvanometer in which the fixed part comprises one or more coils carrying current and the moving element one or more magnets. 4.35 Moving-Coil Galvanometer - A galvanometer in which the moving element comprising a coil moves in a constant magnetic field when a current flows through it. 4.36 Differential Galvanometer the difference of two currents. 4.37 Ballistic Galvanometer quantity of electricity by reading A galvanometer designed to measure a

A galvanometer designed to measure the amplitude of the first swing.

in which the moving 4.38 String Galvanometer - A galvanometer element is a string or thread stretched between the pole pieces of a magnet or an electromagnet. 4.39 Vibration Galvanometer - A galvanometer in which the natural period of vibration of the moving element may be adjusted so that it is equal to that of the current which is being measured or indicated. 4.40 Thermo-Galvanometer - An instrument in which heat produced by the current being measured acts on a thermocouple, producing a secondary It is also called current which is measured by a sensitive galvanometer. ` thermocouple galvanometer `. 4.41 Shielded Galvauometer - A galvanometer provided with a magnetic screen which protects it from the action of external magnetic fields.

18:1885(PartXI)-1966 4.42 Electrodynamic in which electrodynamic ( Kelvin ) Balance - An electrodynamometer forces are balanced by weight.

4.43 Ammeter ( Milliameter ) ( Microammeter ) - An instrument for measuring current, directly or indirectly, in amperes ( milliamperes ) ( microamperes ). 4.44 Voltmeter ( Millivoltmeter ) (Microvoltmeter ) - An instrument for measuring voltage directly or indirectly, in volts ( millivolts ) ( microvolts ) . 4.45 Peak Voltmeter -A voltmeter value of an alternating voltage. 4.46 Electrometer by electrostatic means. An instrument which measures the maximum difference

used to measure

potential

4.47 Quadrant Electrometer - An electrometer in which a needle or a flat moving element is deflected between fixed elements shaped like quadrants. 4.48 Multiple Electrometer - An electrometer in which several pairs of quadrants actuate several needles fixed to the same axis. 4.49 Vibrating Reed Electrometer - An instrument taking negligible current for measuring undirectional voltage which is converted into alternating voltage by means of a vibrating capacitor and subsequently amplitied. 4.59 Capillary Electrometer - An instrument differences in potential by making use of capillary for measuring action. small

4.51 Measuring Spark-Gap - A spark-gap, usually a sphere-gap, so arranged that it may be used for measuring peak voltages from the distance a spark jumps between its two electrodes. 4.52 Wattmeter ( Kilowattmeter ) ( Megawattmeter ) - An instrument for measuring, directly or indirectly, electric power in watts ( kilowatts ) ( megawatts ). 4.53 Varmeter for measuring, ( megavars ) . ( Kilovarmeter ) ( Megavarmeter ) - An instrument directly or indirectly, reactive power in vars ( kilovan ) ( Megavoltor indirectly,

4.54 Volt-Ampere Meter ( Kilovolt-Ampere Meter ) Ampere Meter ) - An instrument for measuring, directly apparent power in volt-amperes.

4.55 Teleammeter ( Televoltmeter ) ( Telewattmeter ) - An instrument with which it is possible to measure current ( voltage ) ( power ) in a circuit from a distance. 4.56 Ohmmeter ( Megohmmeter ) directly or indirectly, electrical resistance 21 An instrument for measuring, in ohms ( megohms ).

ISr1885(PartXI)-1966 4.57 Earth Resistance earth resistances. 4.56 Frequency Meter an alternating current. 4.59 Phase Meter-An between two alternating Meter -An instrument used for measuring

An instrument for measuring the frequency of instrument for measuring the difference of phase electric quantities of the same frequency. _4n instrument measuring the ratio of active

4.60 Power Factor Meter to apparent power.

4.61 FIux Meter - An instrument for measuring variations in magnetic flux and consisting of a moving-coil galvanometer, in which the controlling torque is negligible and the damping torque very large. 4.62 Magnetometer - An instrument intended to measure a magentic field or a magnetic moment by its action on a magnetized needle. 4.63 Permeameter -An instrument for characteristics of ferromagnetic substances. 4.64 Hysteresis teresis torque. Meter An instrument determining the magnetic hys-

designed for measuring

4.65 Electric Thermometer - An instrument for electrically temperatures composed of a probe and an electric instrument. 4.66 Thermocouple Thermometer - An electric uses a sensing element as thermocouple to which directly.

measuring

thermometer which heat is transmitted

4.67 Resistance Thermometer - An electric thermometer which uses a sensing element as resistance to which heat is transmitted directly, mainly by conduction. -A pyrometer using an optical device 4.68 Total Radiation Pyrometer to concentrate on a thermocouple the radiation from a specified area of the heat source of which the temperature is to be measured. 4.69 Disappearing Filament Pyrometer-A pyrometer in which the temperature of a heat source is measured by equalizing the brightness of an incandescent lamp filament with that of the image of the heat source focussed to coincide with the filament. 4.70 Electrical Torquemeter for measuring torque. 4.71 Ratio Meter cal quantities. An eIectrically measuring instrument

An instrument for measuring the ratio of two electri-

22

IS:lSS5(PartxI)-1966 4.72 Inductance Meter -An

instrument An instrument

for measuring for measuring

inductance capacitance

in in

henrys,

millihenrys,

etc.
Meter -

4.73 Capacitance farads, microfarads,

etc. the wave shape of and discharge of a

4.74 Ondograph - An instrument used to record voltage or current by means of the periodic charge capacitor.

intended to record 4.75 Oscillograph ( Oscilloscope ) - An instrument or indicate as a function of another quantity, generally time, the instantaneous values of a quantity, for example, current, voltage, etd ( see also 3.8 ). 4.76 Oscillograph with Bifilar Suspension - An oscillograph a moving element constructed on the same principle as a moving-coil nometer and consisting of two parallel strips. 4.77 Soft Iron Oscillograph - An oscillograph making of a coil on. a strip of soft iron controlled by a permanent 4.78 Hysteresiscope
-

having galva-

use of the action field. hysteresis curves.

An

instrument

which

traces

4.79 Klydonograph - An instrument in which a brush recorded on a photographic film for the purpose of detecting and obtaining information concerning their nature, direction magnitude. 4.80 Amplifying y;Eger amplitude
Vibrograph -

discharge is overvoltages and order of of to

than

the actual

A vibrograph which records curves vibrations and with a specified ratio

4.81 Recording Watt and Varmeter - A recording instrument inscribes on the same diagram active and reactive powers circuit.

which in a

4.82 Voltametei. ( Coulometer ) - An instrument used to measure the quantity of electricity by the quantity of material released electrochemically at an electrode. 4.83 Weight Voltameter - A voltameter in which electricity is determined by the weight of metal deposited. 4.84 Volume Voltameter - A voltameter in which tricity is determined by the volume of gas evolved. 4.85 Electrolytic Meter tricity by electrolytic means. A meter which registers the quantity of

the quantity the quantity

of elecof elec-

4.86 Ampere-hour ( Quantity ) Meter - An integrating which measures the quantity of electricity in ampere-hours.
23

instrument

IS:l885(PartXI)-1966 4.87 Watthour which measures ( Active-Energy ) Meter - An the electrical energy in watthours. integrating instrument integrating

4.88 Varhour ( Reactive Consumption ) Meter - An instrument which measures the reactive energy in varhours.

4.89 Volt-Ampere-Hour ( Apparent Energy ) Meter - An integrating instrument which measures apparent energy in volt-ampere-hours. 4.99 Motor motor. Meter-An integrating meter embodying some form of

4.91 Commutator Motor Meter - A meter in which a magnet a moving element provided with a commutator.

actuates

4.92 Thomson Meter - A meter in which driving torque is produced by the action of a series coil on a moving armature provided with a commutator and connected in shunt to the supply. 4.93 Induction-Type Meter -A meter in which fixed coils carrying currents act upon a conducting moving element, generally a disc, in which flow currents are induced by the coils. 4.94 Oscillating Meter-A meter which registers moving coil subjected to the action of a fixed coil. 4.95 Pendulum,Meter - An oscillating magnet is attached to a pendulum. the oscillation of a

meter in which a coil or a moving

4.96 Excess Meter - A meter which registers the excess energy ( quantity of electricity ) consumed in a circuit only when the power ( current ) exceeds a certain value. 4.97 Excess and Total Meter - A meter which registers the excess energy ( quantity of electricity ) consumed in a circuit only when the power ( current ) exceeds a certain value and also the total energy ( quantity of electricity ) consumed in a circuit. 4.98 Meter with Demand Indicator ( Maximum Demand Indicator ) -A meter carrying a pointer which indicates the highest value of the average power or current utilized during successive equal intervals of time. 4.99 Meter with Maximum Demand Recorder - A meter fitted with a recording arrangement which records the mean values of the power or current utilized during successive equal intervals of time. meter used 4.109 Summation Meter -A consumed in two or more separate circuits. 4.101 Hour Meter An instrument designed to register to measure the the total energy

time during

which electrical energy has been used. 24

IS:l88s(P8rtxr)-1966 4.102 Multi-rate Meter - A meter provided each becoming operative at times corresponding with a number of registers, to different rates of charge.

4.103 Prepayment ( Slot ) Meter - A meter which is a combination of an electricity meter and a coin-feed mechanism which interrupts the comumers' supply after a measured time or after delivery of an appropriate amount of eletcrical energy. 4.104 Transformer a power transformer in that transformer. Loss Meter - A meter installed on the load side of designed to measure the iron or copper-losses or both

4.105 Meter-Relay - A relay comprising the elements of a meter, except that the registering device is replaced by contacts or by a device which produces a controlling torque. 4.106 Impulse Meter-An instrument current impulses passing through a circuit. which registers the- number of

4.107 Impulse Recorder - A recording instrument which traces a curve the ordinates of which are proportional to the number of current impulses passing through a circuit during equal time intervals. 4.108 Restricted demand indicator, day only. Hour Maximum Demand so arranged that it operates Indicator - A- maximum during certain hours of the

4.103 Electromechanic Counter - Mechanically working clock type dial relay used to count electrical pulses, possibly combined with electronic accessories. 4.110 Tolerance Meter - Apparatus used to measure elctrical parameters, which generally directly indicates in percents the difference between the measured parameter and built-in or connected to standards. 4.111 Impedance Meter - Measuring apparatus used to measure complex resistances calibrated in resultant values of real and imaginary components. 5. ELECTRICAL MEASURING COMPENSATORS, DEVICES MEASURING BRIDGES AND

5.1 Electrical Measuring Device - An assembly of components ( for example, resistors, inductors, capacitors, together with measuring apparatus ) by means of which electrical or magnetic measurements may be made. 5.2 Resistor of its resistance. An assembly of conductors which is used specially because

5.3 Resistance ( Capacitance ) ( Inductance ) Box - An assembly of electrical resistors ( capacitors) ( inductors ) of known nominal values mountcd in a box. 25

5.4 Adjustable Redstance ( Capacitance ) ( Inductance ) Box with box containing an assembly of electrical resistors ( capacitors ) PlRgS -A
( inductors ) of known values connected and sockets, or disconnected by means of plugs

5.5 Adjustable Resistance ( Capacitance ) ( Inductance ) Box with Switches - A box containing an assembly of electrical resistors ( capacitors ) ( indicators ) of known nominal values connected or disconnected by means of a switch. 5.6 Decade Resistance (Capacitance) (Inductance ) Box -A box in which the resistors ( capacitors ) ( inductors ) of known nominal values are divided into groups tailed decades; in each decade the value of the resistance ( capacitance ) ( inductance ) is multiples or submultipIes of The quantity is 10 of the corresponding value in the adjoining decades. varied hymeans of elements ( brushses or plugs ) with which it is possible to regulate, in each decade, the grouping of components into circuits. 5.7 Decade Resistance ( Capacitance ) ( Inductance ) - A resistor ( capacitor ) ( inductor ) group of known nominal value varied in steps by plugs or switches from zero to 9 or 10 units, the basic value of which is a round value. 5.8 Decade Conductance Box - A box in which conductances of known nominal values are divided into groups called decades; in each decade the values of the conductances are multiples or submultiples of 10 of the corresponding values in the adjoining decades. 5.9 Double, Resistance Box -A box holding two identical sets of resistors of known nominal values arranged in such a way that it is possible to introduce simultaneously, in the same circuit or in two diflerent circuits, two resistors of equal vaiue. 5.18 Twin Resistance Box -A box containing two identical sets of resistors of known nominal value, so arranged that the sum uf the resistances in the two groups introduced into appropriate circuits remains constant. 5.11 Bridge - A measuring device consisting of at least four arms of groups of circuit elements ( resistors, inductors, capacitors, etc ), so connected as to form a quadripoie allowing the connection of a current source and of a measuring instrument. 5.12 Slide-Wire Bridge -A bridge in which one or two arms is ( are ) formed by a scaled wire along which a sliding contact may be continuously moved. 5.13 Post Office Box-An assembly of calibrated resistors mounted together in a box and forming three arms of Wheatstone bridge.

IS:l885(PartXI)-1966 5.14 Whcatstonre Bridge -

A bridge with four arms in which the arms

consist of resistors. 5.15 Double ( Kelvin ) Bridge - A measuring device intended to compare two resistors connected in series in a main circuit and comprising two arms, each of which consists of two adjustable resistors connected in series, one of them being connected across the neighbouring terminals and the other across the remote terminals of the resistors to be compared; the balance detecting inStrumcnt being connected across the points common to the two resistors of each arm. 5.16 Impedance Bridge -A used to measure impedances. device in which a bridge arrangement is

5.17 Scherlng Btidge - A device designed for measuring capacitances and the loss angle of insulating materials, and comprising capacitors and resistors in bridge connection. 5.18 Distortion Bridge-A device in which a bridge arrangement used to determine the degree of distortion of a wave. is

5.19 Potentiometer - A measuring device composed of calibrated resistors, of which one may be a calibrated wiie, and used to compare an unIt may be so arranged and known potential difference by a null method. marked that it is possible to read directly the value of the potential difference to be measured,or a decimal multiple of it. 5.28 Deflection poteutiometer - A potentiometer in which the null device is replaced by a measuring instrument on which may be read the last figures of the value of the potential difference which is to be measured. 5.21 Slide-Wire Potentiometer resistors and a calibrated wire. --- A potentiometer comprising calibrated comprising calibrated

5.22 Drum Potentiometer - A potentiometer resistors and a calibrated wire wound on a drum.

5.23 Test Desk -An assembly of apparatus in the general form of a table or desk and comprising measuring instruments, devices for reguiation of voltage, current and phase displacement, and other accessories required for convenient calibration of meters and instruments, or of instrument transformers. 5.24 Electrical Telemetering Device -- An electrically operated device, suitable for indicating or recording remotely the measured value. 5.25 Measuring Equipment-A box containing all instruments and accessorils necessary to a given measuring process, the necessary connections being pre-established. 27

1Sr1665(Partxx)-1966 6. ELECTRICALLY MEASURING INSTRUMRNTS

6.1 Cable Fault Locator-A measuring device to determine the distance between the site of fault occuring on a cable and the site of measuring. 6.2 Compass Magnetic -An instrument in which the .moving element consists of a magnet moving about an axis which is actuated by a magnetic field independent of the apparatus. 6.3 Dip Needle - A compass in which the magnet may move only in a vertical plane and which measures the magnetic inclination. 6.4 Declinometer - A compass in which the magnet may move only in a horizontal plane and which measures the magnetic declination. 6.5 Electrical Tachometer - An electrically measuring instrument for measuring the speed of rotation of a rotating body. 6.6 Electrical -Revolution Counter - An electrically measuring instrument used to count the number of revolutions made by a rotating body. 6.7 Electrical Seconds Counter - An electrically measuring instrument used to measure short periods of time in seconds and minutes. 6.8 Synchronous Timer motor. A seconds-counter driven by a synchronous instrument instrument instrument recording

6.9 Electrical Extensometer -An electrically measuring for measuring variation in the dimensions of a solid. 6.10 Electrical Tachograph - An electrically intended to record a speed as a function of time. 6.11 Liquid Level Indicator - An electrically for measuring the level of a liquid. 6.12 Liquid Level Recorder -- An electrically instrument which measures the level of a liquid. 7. ACCESSORIES measuring measuring measuring

7.1 Thermocouple ( General Definition ) - A pair of conductors of dissimilar materials joined at one end and intended to form part of an arrangement using the thermo-electric effect. 7.2 Thermal Convertor ( Electrically Heated Thermocouple ) A device comprising a thermocouple and a conductor which is heated by the current to be measured. 7.3 Thermopile - An arrangement connected in series. comprising several thermocouples

7.4 Thermometer Redstor - A sensing element used to measure tcmperatures, the variation of the resistance of which is known as a function of temperature. 7.5 Pyrometer (Thermometer) Probe-A sensing element of an electrically measuring thermometer ( thermocouple or thermometer resistor ) mounted on the required spot according to the needs of the measurement. 7.6 Pyrometer ( Thermometer ) Tube -A meter resistor fitted into a protective tube. thermocouple or thermo-

7.7 Bolometer - An instrument designed to measure temperature variation by the change in a metallic resistance comprising one of the arms of a Wheatstone bridge. 7.6 Hall Generator - A semiconductor used to perceive magnetic fields, the voltage between two appropriate points of which is a known function of the product of the magnetic field strength by the current passing in the semiconductor. 7.9 Bismuth Spiral -A sensing element which uses the variation of the electrical resistivity of bismuth with the strength of a magnetic field and is designed to measure fields strength. 7.10 Electrical Measuring Counter - A device producing another measurable, physical quantity proportional to the input in which at least one of the involved physical quantities is electrical. A device comprising resistors, capacitors or 7.11 Voltage Dividerinductors by means of which it is possible to obtain between two points a voltage proportional to the voltage to be measured. 7.12 Delay Cable ( Delay Line ) - A length of cable or equivalent used to delay the arrival of a transient phenomenon at a measuring instrument, generally an oscillograph. 7.13 Demand Attachment ( for a Meter ) - An attachment for a meter which indicates the highest value of the average power or current utilized during successive equal intervals of time. 7.14 Maximum Recording Attachment - A device designed for attachment to a meter and which draws a curve the ordinates of which are proportional to the average power in a circuit during'equal intervals of time. 7.15 Meter Chageover Clock - A clock which changes at predetermined times the interconnection between the moving element of a meter and the counting mechanism correspbnding, for example, to different tariffs. 7.16 Test Terminal Rex - A special terminal box which is placed beside a meter to facilitate the calibration of the latter without disturbing the 29

Istlsu(PartXI)-1886 operation of the installation in which it is included and for easy connection of test instruments. 7.17 Time Stitch - A device which closes or opens at predetermined times one or more electrical contacts. 7.18 St+ndard Cell - A primaty cell giving, with great constancy, an exactly determined dc voltage. Its best known form is the internationally used Weston cell. -A metal or metal-alloy resistor of high 7.19 stassdasd Rtdlstanct constancy incorporating the unity of electric resistance ( ohm ) or a value in an exactly determined ratio to it. 7.20 Instrument Leads - Conductors specially designed for connecting a measuring instrument and its accessories. 8. CONSTRUCTIONAL 8.1 Moving Element of which is observed. ELEMENTS The moving part of an instrument the deflection

8.2 Astatic Element - An element so constructed that it is unaffected _by symmetrical magnetic fields. 8.3 Termin al-That portion of a circuit or piece of apparatus which is intended for the reception of conductors by means of which it may be connected electrically to another circuit or piece of apparatus. 8.4 Spot Image projected on to a scale to act as an index. 8.5 Pointer - An index attached to the moving part of an instrument so that its deflection may be observed. 8.6 Dial A surface which carries the scale and numbers. active part of a measuring instrument 8.7 Measssring Element -The which includes all parts the interaction between which actuates the moving element. 8.8 Control Magnet - A magnet designed for adjusting thi: direction of the system of moving magnets in some galvanometers. 8.9 Braking Magnet ( of a Meter ) and produces the braking torque. A magnet which acts on the disc

8.10 Damping Magnet ( of a Measuring Instrument ) - A magnet which by acting on a suitable moving part, produces damping torque in the instrument. 8.11 Compensating Magnet -A magnet used with certain galvanometers, in order partially to compensate for the effect of the earth's field or of an external magnetic field. It sometimes also serves as a control magnet. 30

Is:188s(PartXT)-1966
8.12 Qpadrants

circle)

- Metal sectors ( generally `in the form ot- quarters of a forming part of certain measuring instruments.

8.13 S~spcnsion 8.14 Bmar

- A means of suspending the moving element of an instrument ( extended to include the supports carrying it ). Suspension - A means of suspending a body on two ,threads, wiry or strips, generally used to produce or measure a torque. 8.15 Shunt-A

resistor connected parallel with an instrument in order to reduce the current which passes through it. The resistance value may be 90 chosen that the reduction is in a known ratio.

Shunt -A multiple shunt composed of a number of resirtvrs connected in series in such a way that all its ranges have a common connection. This shunt has the property that the ratio of the multiplying powers of any two ranges is independent of the resistance of the instrument to which the shunt is connected. 8.16 Universal

8.17 Resonant Shunt-A shunt comprising an inductance and a capacitance in resonance for a given frequency. 8.18 Magnetic Shunt -A piece of iron designed to carry part of the flux of a magnet or electromagnet in- a measuring instrument in order to control its action. 8.19 Series Resistor ( Capacitor ) ( Reactor ) - A resistor ( capacitor ) ( reactor ) conriected in series with a voltmeter or the voltage circuit of a measuring instrument, especially to alter its voltage range. 8.20 Pivot - The end of the spindle of a moving element which rests on a jewel or other hard substance. 8.21 Meter Bottom Bearing-The element of a meter rests. support upon which the moving

8.22 Jewel Bearing -- A part with a small jewel at the end? designed as a support for the pivot of a moving element. 8.23 Stop --A part which limits the deflection of the moving element of a measuring instrument. 8.24 Terminal Box ( Terminal Plate ) - A support made of insulating mattrial on which all the terminals of an instrument or a part of them are grouped together. 8.25 Magnetic Screen ( Magnetic Shield ) - A screen or shield of feromagnetic material designed to protect the operating part of a measuring instrument from the effects of external magnetic fields. 31 .

screen - A conducting shield designed to protect the operating part of a measuring instrument against external alternating fields.
a.28 Electroma8netic
8.27 Electrostatic Screen ( Faraday we ) - An enclosure, composed of a metal sheet or wire netting with a.fine mesh, intended to protect an enclosed space from the efi'ects of external electric fields. 8.28 Meter Base-The back of the meter by which it is fixed and to which are attached the frame, the terminal plate and the cover. 8.88 Meter Frame ( Meter Support ) - That part to which are affixed the moving element, the counting mechanism and generally the brake magnet, sometimes the regulating devices. 8.38 Meter Cover -The enclosure on the front of the meter, including `transparent parts through which the movement of the disc may be seen and the counting `mechanism read. 8.31 Meter Case-The assembly of the base and the cover of a meter. 832 Register ( Counting Mechanism ) of a Meter - That part of the meterwhich registers the energy, or more generally the value, of the quantity measured by the meter. 8.55 Driving Element of an Induction Meter - .One of the working parts of the meter which produces a torque by its action on the moving element. It generally comprises an electromagnet with its control devices. 8.34 Meter Braking Element - That part of the meter which is intended to produce ,a braking torque by its action on the moving element. It comprises one or two magnets and their adjusting device. 8.35 Meter Terminal Cover - That part of the cover, or auxiliary cover, which covers the terminals, the ends of the wires or cables from the ap paratus connected to the meter. 8.38 Stroboscopic Meter disc - A disc having marks at equal distances on its periphery edge so that its movement may be observed stroboscopically.

IS:1885(PartXI)-1966 INDEX
NOTE-This index has been prepared index n'umbers refer to clause numbers. A Absolute error ( of an instrument ) 2.52 measurement, Instrument for 3.15 method of measurement 2.95 sensitivity 2.29 Acceptance tests 2.125 Accidental error 2.62 Accuracv 2.35 class 2.37 Accurate current .Jge of a meter 2.109 Adjustable canacitance box *with plugs 5.4 with switches 5.5 inductance box with plugs 5.4 with switches 5.5 resistance box with plugs 5.4 with switches 5.5 Adjustment Full load meter 2. i 05 Low-load 2.107 Power factor, for an ac meter 2.106 Ammeter 4.43 Ampere-hour meter $.86 Amplifying vibrograph 4.80 Aperiodic instrument 3.18 Apparent energy meter 4.89 Astatic element 8.2 instrument 3.21 Asymmetrical heterostatic circuit 2.94 B Balance, Magnetic 4.30 Base, Meter 8.28 Bearing, Jewel 8.22 Bifilar suspension 8.14 Bimetallic instrument 4.13 Bismuth spiral 7.9 Bolometer 7.7 Bolometric instrument 4.14 Box Post oflice 5.13 Terminal 8.24 *Rules for making alphabetical indexes. in accordance with IS: 1275-1958*. The

Braking magnet ( of a meter ) 8.9 torque ( of a meter ) 2.88 Bridge 5.11 Distortion 5.18 Double 5.15 Impedance 5.16 Kelvin 5.15 Schering 5.17 Slide-wire 5.12 Wheatstone 5.14 C Cable Delav 7.12 fault'locator 6.1 Case, Meter 8.31 Cage, Faraday 8.27 Calibration 2.79 Capacitance box 5.3 with plugs, Adjustable 5.4 with switches, Adjustable 5.5 Decade 5.7 Capacitor, Series 8.19 Capillary electrometer 4.50 Cell, Standard 7.18 Characteristic standard deviation of a mcrsuring method 2.69 Chart Circular 3.50 Disc 3.50 Drum 3.49 mark 3.51 Roll 3.48 scale-length 3.52 Strip 3.48 Circuit Current 3.38 Heterostatic 2.92 Asymmetrical 2.94 Symmetrical 2.93 Idiostatic 2.91 Overload capacity of a 2.116 Voltage 3.39 Class Accuracy 2.37 of quality 2.36

33

18,1885(PartxI)-1966
Synchronous motor-driven 3.54 Self-starting 3.55 Meter changeover 7.15 Coefficient. Temuerature 2.114 Commutator moior meter 4.9t Compass, magnetic 6.2 Compensating magnet 8.11 Condensor electroscope 4.22 Conditions, Reference 2.39 Conductance box, Decade 5.8 Constancy 2.34 Constant of a galvanomeler 2.30 of a meter 2.76 Scale 2.27 Continuous line recording instrument Control magnet 8.8 Controlling torque 2.85 Convertor, Thermal 7.2 Correction 2.60 factor 2.61 Coulometer 4..82 Counter, Electromechanic 4.109 Counting mechanism of a meter 8.32 Cover Meter 8.30 Meter terminal 8.35 Critical resistance 2.90 Critically damped instrument 3.20 Current circuit 3.38 D Damped periodic instrument 3.19 Damping factor of a measuring instrument 2.102 torque 2.89 magnet ( of a measuring instrument ) 8.10 Decade capacitance 5.7 hox 5.6 conductance box 5.8 inductance 5.7 box 5.6 resistance 5.7 box 5.6 Declinometer 6.4 Deflection Maximum 2.8 1 method 2.118 potentiometer 5.20 torque 2.34 Delay cable 7.12 line 7.12 Demand attachment ( of a meter ) 7.13
UOCK

3.46

Demand ( conLd ) ' indicator Maximum 4.98 Meter with 4.98 Restricted hour maximum 4.108 Desk, Test 5.23 Detecting instrument 3.1 Detector, Voltage 4.29 Determination of systematic errors 2.64 Deviation, Standard 2.68 Devices, Meter-adjusting 2.104 Dial 8.6 Dielectric test voltage 2.97 Differential galvanometer 4.36 measuring instrumenl 3.17 Digital scale 2.14 Dip needle 6.3 Direct reading instrument 3.12 writing-recording instrument 3.40 Disappearing filament pyrometer 4.69 Disc chart 3.50 Disc, Stroboscopic meter 8.36 Discrimination 2.32 Distortion bridge 5.18 Divider, Voltage 7.1 I Driving torque 2.84 Division 2.17 Dotted line recording instrument 3.47 Double bridge 5.15 resistance box 5.9 Driving element of an induction meter 8.33 Drum chart 3.49 potentiometer 5.22 Dynamic characteristics of a instrument 2.101 E Earphone 4.19 Earth resistance meter 4.57 Effective current range of a meter 2.109 range 2.23 Electric thermometer 4.65 Electrical extensometer 6.9 measuring device 5.1 counter 7.10 instrument 4.1 revolution counter 6.6 seconds counter 6.7 tachograph 6.10 tachometer 6.5 telemetering device 5.24 torque meter 4.70

34

IS:1885(PartXI)-1966
Electrically heated thermocouple 7.2 measuring instrument 3.16 wound spring-operated chart-driving mechanism 3.56 Electrodynamic balance 4.42 instrument 4.7 Electrolytic meter 4.85 Electromagnetic screen 8.26 Electromechanic counter 4.109 Electrometer 4.46 Capillary 4.50 Multiple 4.48 Quadrant 4.47 Vibrating reed 4.49 Electronic instrument 3.6 Electroscope 4.20 Condenser 4.22 Leaf 4.2 1 Electrostatic instrument 4.2 screen 8.27 Electrothermic instrument 4.11 Element Astatic 8.2 hleasuring 8.7 Meter braking 8.34 Moving 8.1 Equipment, Measuring 5.25 Error Absolute ( of an instrument ) 2.52 Accidenral 2.62 Cross 2.63 of an instrument 2.47 of estimation 2.57 of the reading device 2.51 of the standard 2.46 Parallax 2.58 Personal 2.55 Relative 2.53 Scale 2.48 Systematic 2.59 Visual 2.56 Errors caused by the quantity to be measured 2.54 Exact value 2.44 Excess and total meter 4.97 meter 4.96 Extensometer, Electrical 6.9 F Factor, Correction 2.61 Faraday cage 8.27 Ferrodynamic instrument 4.8 Fibrc suspension instrument 3.37 Flux meter 4.61 Frame, Meter 8.29 Frequency meter 4.58 Full load meter adjustment 2.105 G Galvanometer 4.31 Ballistic 4.37 Constant of a 2.30 Differential 4.36 Moving-coil 4.35 Moving-magnet 4.34 Shielded 4.41 Sine 4.33 String 4.38 Tangent 4.32 Therm0 4.40 Vibration 4.39 shunt, Multiplying Cap, Spark 4.23 Generator, Hall 7.8 Gross error 2.63 Ii Hall generator 7.8 Heterostatic circuit 2.92 Asymmetrical 2.94 Symmetrical 2.93 method 2.92 Hot wire instrument 4.12 Hour meter 4.101 Hysteresis meter 4.64 Hysteresiscope 4.78 I Jdiostatic circuit 2.91 method 2.91 Impedance bridge 5.16 meter 4.111 Impulse recorder 4.107 meter 4.106 Index 2.10 Indicating instrument 3.3 range 2.22 Indicator Insulation 4.27 Liquid level 6. I I Phase-sequence 4.25 Polarity 4.26 Voltage 4.29

power

of

a

2.77

35

IS:1885(PartXI)-1966
Inductance box 5.3 with plugs, Adjustable 5.4 with switches, Adjustable 5.5 Decade 5.7 box 5.6 meter 4.72 Induction instrument 4.9 type meter 4.93 Industrial instruments 3.32 Influence quantity 2.38 Instrument Absolute error of an 2.52 Aperiodic 3.18 Astatic 3.2 1 Bimetallic 4.13 Bolometric 4.14 Continuous line recording 3.46 Criticallv damoed 3.20 Damped periodic 3.19 Detecting 3.1 Differential measuring 3.17 Direct reading 3.12 writing-recording 3.40 Dotted line recording 3.47 Electrical measuring 4.1 Electrically measuring 3.16 Electrodynamic 4.7 Electronic 3.6 Electrostatic 4.2 Electrothermic 4.11 Ferrodynamic 4.8 Fibre suspension 3.37 for absolute measurement 3.15 Hot-wire 4.12 Indicating 3.3 Induction 4.9 Integrating 3.5 Laboratory 3.30 Leads 7.20 Light spot 3.14 Measuring 3.2 Mirror 3.13 Moving-iron 4.4 Moving-magnet 4.6 Over-damped 3.18 Permanent-magnetic moving-coil 4.3 moving-iron 4.5 Pivoted 3.35 Precision 3.3 1 Projected-scale 3.10 Recording 3.4 Rectifier 4.16 Rotating field `4.10 Shadow column 3.11

.
Instrument (co&f) Shunted 3.22 Standard 3.29 Stressed fibre 3.36 Summation 3.33 Suppressed zero 3.24 Thermal 4.11 Thermocouple 4.15 Under-damped 3.19 with contacts 3.23 with electromagnetic screening 3.27 with electrostatic screening 3.28 with locking device 3.25 with magnetic screening 3.26 Vibrating reed 4.17 X-Y recording 3.43 Instruments, Industrial 3.32 Insulation indicator 4.27 Integrating instrument 3.5 meter 3.5 Interchangeable 2.100 International standards 2.9 Interval, Scale 2.18 Jewel bearing 8.22

J

Kelvin balance 4.42 bridge 5.15 Kilovarmeter 4.53 Kilovolt-ampere meter 4.54 Kilowattmeter 4.52 Klydonograph 4.79 _ Laboratory instrumen~3.30 Leads, Instrument 7.20 Leaf electroscope ( with leaves made of gold, aluminium, etc ) 4.2 1 Length, Scale 2.19 Light spot instrument 3.14 Ligl&y8 currents, Magnetic indicator Limits of error 2.70 of a single value 2.7 1 Limiting quantity, Rating in terms of a 2.41 Limits of effective current range 2.110 power range for accuracy of a meter 2.111 Line, Delay 7.12 Linear scale 2.20 Link, Magnetic 4.28 Liquid level indicator 6.11 recorder 6.12 Locator, Cable fault 6.1 Low-load adjustment 2.107 Lower and upper measuring limita 2.24

K

36

IS:lW5(PartXI)-1966
M Magnetic Braking, of a meter 8.9 Compensating 8.11 Control 8.8 Damping, of an instrument 8.10 balance 4.30 compass 6.2 indicator for lightning current 4.28 link 4.28 screen 8.25 shield 8.25 shunt 8.18 Magnetometer 4.62 Magnetoscope 4.18 Mark, Chart 3.5 1 Marks, Scale 2.15 Maximum deflection 2.81 demand indicator Meter with 4.98 Restricted hour 4.108 demand recorder, Meter with 4.99 recording attachment 7.14 Mean of a series of Measurements 2.66 Measured value 2.28 Variation in indication of the 2.40 Measurement, Result of a 2.72 Measurements Mean of a series of 2.66 Series of 2.65 Measuring 2.1 Counter, Electrica! 7.10 device, Electrical 5.1 element 8.7 equipment 5.25 instrument 3.2 Ballistic factor of a 2.102 Damping factor of a 2.102 Damping magnet of a 8.10 Dynamic characterist.ics of a 2.101 Response time of a 2.103 limits, Lower and upper 2.24 method 2.6 Characteristic standard deviation 2.69 procedure 2.7 range 2.23 spark gap 4.5 1 unit 2.4 Mechanical zero 2.78 Megavolt-ampere meter 4.54 Megavarmeter 4.53 $:fzhmmeter 4.56 Active-energy 4.87 adjusting devices 2.104 Meter ( co&) Ampere-hour 4.86 Apparent energy 4.89 base 8.28 bottom bearing 8.2 1 braking element 8.34 Capacitance 4.73 case 8.31 changeover clock 7.15 Commutator motor 4.91 Constant of a 2.76 Counting mechanism of a 8.32 cover 8.30 Demand attachment for a 7.13 Earth resistance 4.57 Electrolytic 4.85 Excess 4.96 and total 4.97 Flux 4.61 frame 8.29 Frequency 4.58 Hour 4.101 Hysteresis 4.64 Impedance 4.111 Impulse 4.106 Inductance 4.72 Induction type 4.93 integrating 3.5 Kilovolt-ampere 4.54 Megavolt-ampere 4.54 Motor 4.90 Multi-rate 4.102 Oscillating 4.94 Pendulum 4.95 Phase 4.59 Power factor 4.60 Prepayment 4.103 Quantity 4.86 Ratio 4.71 Reactive consumption 4.88 Register of a 8.32 relay 4.105 Slot 4.103 Starting power of a 2.112 Stroboscopic calibrating of a 2.108 checking of a 2.108 Summation 4.100 support 8.29 terminal cover 8.35 Thomson 4.92 Tolerance 4.110 Transformer loss 4.104 Varhour 4.88 Volt-ampere 4.54 hour 4.89 Watthour 4.87 with demand indicator 4.98

of a

37

ISr1885(PartXI)-1966
with maximum demand ndicator 4.98 ccorder 4.99 Metr.od Deflection 2.118 Heterostatic 2.92 Idiostatic 2.91 Measuring 2.6 Null 2.117 of measurement, Absolute 2.95 Opposition 2.119 Potentiometer 2.120 Microammeter 4.43 Microvoltmeter 4.44 Milliammetcr 4.43 Millivoltmetcr 4.44 Minimum and maximum scale value 2.24 Mirror instrument 3.13 Motor meter 4.90 Moving-coil instrument, Permanent magnet 4.3 galvanomcter 4.35 Moving element 8.1 iron instrument 4.4 Permanent-magnet 4.5 magnet instrument 4.6 galvanometcr 4.34 Multinle electrometer 4.48 Multiplying power ( of a galvanometer shunt ) 2.77 Multi-rate meter 4.102 N Needle, Dip 6.3 Nominal circuit voltage 2.96 Nominal range of use 2.42 Non-linear scales 2.2 1 Null method 2.117 Numbered scale 2.13 Numbering, Scale 2.16 0 Object to be measured 2.3 Ohmmeter 4.56 Ondograph 4.74 Opposition method 2.119 Oscillating meter 4.94 Oscil!ograph 4.75 Soft iron 4.77 with bifilar suspension 4.76 Oscilloscope 3.8 Over-damped instrument 3.18

Meter ( contd )

Overload capacity of a circuit 2.116 Thermal ( of a meter ) 2.115 P Parallax error 2.58 Peak voltmeter 4.45 Pendulum meter 4.95 Pen recording instrument 3.44 Permanent-magnetic moving-coil instrument 4.3 moving-iron instrument 4.5 Pcrmeameter 4.63 Personal error 2.55 Phase meter 4.59 Phase-sequence indicator 4.25 Pivot 8.20 Pivoted instrument 3.35 Plate, Terminal 8.24 Pointer 8.5 instrument 3.9 Polarity indicator 4.26 Post oflice box 5.13 Potentiometer 5.19 Deflection 5.20 Drum 5.22 method 2.120 Slide-wire 5.2 1 Power factor adjustment for an ac mrtcr 2.106 meter 4.60 Precision instrument 3.31 Prepayment meter 4.103 Presumable value 2.45 Probe Pyrometer 7.5 Thermometer 7.5 Procedure, Measuring 2.7 Projected-scale instrument 3.10 Prototype 3.34 Pyrometer Disappearing filament 4.69 probe 7.5 Total radiation 4.68 tube 7.6

Q
Quadrant electrometer 4.47 Quadrants 8.12 Quality Class of 2.36 factor ( of a meter ) 2.87 Quantity` Influence 2.38 meter 4.86 to be measured 2.2

38

Is:1885(PartxI)-1966
R Range Effective 2.23 Indicating 2.22 Measuring 2.23 Reference 2.122 Rated temperature-rise current of an instrumrnt 2.98 Rating in terms of a limiting quantity 2.41 Ratio-meter 4.71 Reactive consumption meter 4.88 Reactor, Series 8.19 Reading 2.26 Recorder Impulse 4.107 Liquid level 6.12 Recording attachment, Maximum 7.14 Recording instrument Continuous line 3.46 Direct writing 3.46 Dotter1 line 3.47 Iudirect writing 3.41 Pen 3.44 Relay-type 3.41 Slow response 3.42 Stylus 3.45 X-Y 3.43 Recordine watt and varmeter 4.81 Hrctifirr instrument 4.16 Rrference conditions 2.39 range 2.122 value 2.121 Register of a meter 8.32 Relative error 2.53 wnsitivity 2.3 1 Relay, ~lrtrr 4.105 Relay-type recording instrument 3.41 Repeatability 2.33 Resistance box 5.3 Double 5.9 Twin 5.10 with plugs, Adjustable 5.4 with switches, Adjustable 5.5 Critical 2.90 Standard 7.19 thermometer 4,.67 Resistor 5.2 Series 8.19 Thermometer 7.4 Resonant shunt 8.17 R;";r3se time ( of a measuring instrument ) Resioring torque 2.82 Restricted hour maximum demand indicator 4.108 Result of a measurement 2.72 of a series of measurements 2.74 of a single measurement 2.73 Revolution counter, Electrical 6.6 Roll chart 3.48 Romting field instrument 4.10 Routine tests 2.124

Scale 2.11 constant 2.27 Digital 2.14 error 2.48 interval 2.18 length 2.19 Linear 2.20 marks 2.15 Numbered 2.13 numbering 2.16 spacing 2.17 with division 2. I 2 Scale-length C:' 1, xrt _I `2 X? Scales N;n-iii:rar 3.`) 1 _.. &he&!: hridgr 5.17 Screen Electromagnetic 8.26 Electrostatic 8.27 Magnetic 8.25 Seconds counter, Electrical 6.7 motor-driven Self-starting synchronous clock 3.55 Sensitivity Absolute 2.29 Relative 2.3 1 Series capacitor a. 19 reactor 8.19 resistor 8.19 Series of measurements 2.65 Mean of a 2.66 Result of a 2.74 Shadow column instrument 3.11 Shield, Magnetic 8.25 Shielded galvanometer 4.41 Shunt 8.15 Magnetic 8.18 Resonant 8.17 Universal 8.16 Shunted instrument 3.22 Sine galvanometer 4.33 Single measurement, Result of a 2.73 Slide-wire bridge 5.12 potentiometer 5.2 1

39

Is:1885(PartxI)-1966
Slot meter 4.103 Slow response recording instrument 3.42 Soft iron oscillograph 4.77 Spark gap 4.23 Measuring 4.51 S&al. Bismuth 7.9 s,ot 6.4 Spring-operated Chart-driving mechanism Starting power of a meter 2.112 ~~tin~dvalue 2.25 cell 7.18 deviation 2.68 instrument 3.29 resistance 7.19 Standards 2.8 International 2.9 Stop 8.23 Stressed fibre instrument 3.36 String galvanometer 4.38 Strip chart 3.48 Stroboscopic calibrating of a meter 2.108 checking of a meter 2.108 meter disc 8.36 Stylus recording instrument 3.45 Summation instrument 3.33 meter 4.100 Support, Meter 8.29 Suppressed zero instrument 3.24 Suspension 8.13 Bifilar 8.14 Switch, Time 7.17 Symmetrical heterostatic circuit 2.93 Synchronous motor-driven clock 3.54 timer 6.8 Synchroscope 4.24 Systematic error 2.59 T Tachograph, Electrical 6.10 Tachometer, Electrical 6.5 Tangent galvanometer 4.32 Telcammeter 4.55 Telemetering device, Electrical 5.24 Televoltmetcr 4.55 Te!ewattmcter 4.55 Temperature coefficient 2.114 Temperature-rise voltage of an auxiliary capacitor 2.99 reactor 2.99 resistor 2.99 Terminal box 8.24
3.53 -._-

Terminal ( confd ) Test 7.16 plate 8.24 Test desk 5.23 trrminal box 7.16 Tests Acceptance 2.125 Routine 2.124 Type 2.123 Test voltage, Dielectric 2.97 Thermal convertor 7.2 instrument 4.11 overhead capacity ( of a meter Thermocouple 7.1 Electrically heatrd 7.2 Instrument 4.15 thermometer 4.6G Thermo-electric efit~t 2.1 I3 Thermo-galvanomrtrr 4.40 Thermometer Electric 4.65 probe 7.5 Rcsistancr 4.G: Resistor 7.4 Thrrmocou~~lr 4.W tube 7.G Thermopile 7. ; Thomson mctcr 4.92 Time Responsr, of a mrnsuring 2.103 switch 7.17 Timer, Synchronous G.8 `Tolerance mrtcr 4.1 10 Contrc;ltina 2.11.j I&unpins 2.811 Defkcting 2.84 Drivin:$ 2.84 Restorm~ 2.82 Torsion i.83 Torouemeter. Etrctricnl

) 2.115

instrument

4.7fl

Torsion torque 2.83 Total meter, Excess and 4.97 radiation pyromrtrr 4.68 Transformer loss meter 4. t 04 True value 2.43 Tube Pyrometer 7.6 Thermometer 7.6 Twin resistance box 5. t 0 Type tests 2.123

40

u
Uncertainty of the result of a measurement 2.75 Under-damped instrument 3.19 Unit, Measuring 2.4 Universal shunt 8.16 Upper measuring limits, Lower and 2.24 V Vacuum tube voltmeter 3.7 Vaiue.2.5 Ixact 2.44 Measured 2.28 Presumable 2.45 Reference 2.12 I Starting 2.25 rue 2.43 arhour meter 4.88 i'ariance 2.67 `i-ariation in indication of the measured value 2.40 Zero 2.50 Varmeter 4.53 Recording wall and 4.81 \ ibrating rrrd clectromctrr 4.49 mstrumcnt 4.17 \,ibration galvanomrter 4.39 L'ibrograph. AmplifGng 4.811 \.icual error 2..56

Voltage circuit 3.39 detector 4.29 divider 7.11 indicator 4.29 Nominal circuit 2.96 Voltameter 4.82 Volume 4.84 Weight 4.83 Volt-ampere hour meter 4.89 Volt-ampere meter 4.54 Voltmeter 4.44 Peak 4.45 Vacuum tube 3.7 W Watthour meter 4.87 Wattmeter 4.52 Weight voltameter 4.83 Wheatstone bridge 5.14 x X-Y -Perording instrument Z 3.43

%cro

.Llechanical 2.78 variation 2.50

41

Gmtinwd

from page 2 ) Members Rcpresrnting

Standing Metric Committee, Department of Industry, Government of Rajasthan SHRI S. N. !bfUKERJI National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. K. MUKHERTEE I Alternate) Heaw Electricals I India 1 Ltd. Bhonal SHRI V. RADHAKRISHNA~ ' Federation of Electricity Undertakings of India, SHRI H. K. RAMASWAMY Bombay SHRI K. MATTFXAN ( Alternate) Jyoti Limited, Baroda SXR~ A. S. SHAH SHRI Y. P. KAUSHIK( Alternote ) Electronic Measuring Equipment Subcommittee, KUMARI B. H. SHANTA ETDC 24 : 2, IS1 Electricity Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh SHRI R. 6. SHARMA SHRl R K. TANDON (Altern&) , Central Scientific & Instruments Organization SHRI N. G. `SRIVATSAN ( CSIR), Chandigarh National Phvsical Laboratorv I CSIR ). New Delhi SHRI R. K. TANDAN Bajaj Elect&ah Ltd, Poona ' ' " &RI B.V. TOLANI SHRI L. J. JOSHI ( dltematc ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' & Dealers' DR G. R TOSHNIWAL Association, Bombay Radio & Electricals Manufacturing Co Ltd. Slam H. S. VISWESWARIAH Bangalore SHRI Y. S. VENKATESWARAN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Membn) Director ( Elec tech ) SHRI K. IV. fimn_m Secretary SHRI K. K. TANEJA Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

Panel for Terminology for Electrical Measurements. ETDC 6/P1
Concenw Pxop H. N. RAMACHANDRA RAO MmrbCTS Saw R. K. TANDAN Dn G. R. TO~H&IWAL National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Toahniwal Bma Private Ltd, Ajma Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

42

BUREAU
Heedquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Menak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 331 Of 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices) Regional Offictk Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : 1 /14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Telephone I 331 01 13 75 31 36 24 99

3 1641 21843 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 25 19 41 29 16 tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093

I

Branch Offices: #Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, I 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 2 63 49 $Peenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road ;i "4; !$ BANGALORE 560058 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 667 16 BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82183. Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 6 36 27 53/5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 23 1083 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HY DERABAD 500001 6 34 71 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 ( 6 98 32 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 I 21 68 76 21 82 92 Pattiputra Industrial Estate, PATNA BOO01 3 6 23 05 T.C. No, T4/1421. University P.O.. Palayam (6 21 04 TRIVANDRUM 695035 1621 17 (nspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24'35 PUNE 411005 *Sales Office in Calcutta is at 6 Chowringhrr Approach, P. 0. Princap 27 68 00 Street. Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 86 28 Bombay 400007 @ales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 gangslore 560002
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

