(Reaffirmed 2005)

IS: 5838-1970

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR ESTIMATION OF VITAMIN C IN FOODSTUFFS
Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee,
Chairman MAJ-C.EN M. S. BOP-.tBAI Represmting Directorate General, Armed Forces Medical Services, New Delhi

Al?DC 36

Afembers AGRICULTURAL INDIA
M.{ RKICTIKWI AD- Directorate Food, VISER TO TRIZ GOVERSStEXT or
of Wrl-krg &

Inspection( Ministry of
Development &

Agriculture, Community Co-operation ), Faridabad

SENIOR ~f.4RKETIw3 OFFICER f~KUIT PRODUCTS j ( A/femafe) Institute SHRT \. X. AXBLE

of Delhi

Agricultural

Research

Statistics,

New

%tR1 K. S. ~RISHNAN Drt K. ~AQCl?I

( Alternate)

Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of I-ieal~h, Family Planning, Works, Housing & Urban Development ) Analyst to the Gc,verrrmerst of Tamil Nadu," Madras pub~l$u:~t [O the Govemmetrt of West Bengal,

SrrrtI D. S. CHADRA ( ~l~emafe) Public SSIRI ~. BALASU BRA IWAXXAN
DR S. C. CNAXRABOBTY

DR (3.G. D.*s. Dn 1'. K. fl.+~r~ Drr P. K.
KV3~AL

Corporation of GaIcutta All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, Grdcutta Ministry of Food, .4griculture, Community Devek+ ment & Go-operation Defer-we Food Research Defence ), Mysore Laboratory ( Ministry of

D~ R. C. SINH.A ( Altcmute ) Drr Y. X. LA=3HMAN

DR H. LAXWR
SHEI ~. ~, `i

[>R N. .4. N. ~AO ( Mbxnafe ) National .iRAYANA ~HRI SL ZTMAS DE ( if/tSW@C )
hiEl?SiZE.S

Dairy Research Institute,

Karnal

SHRS D.
~R ~

kl!~x.+

sHrtl s. N. J[:TRA
\'. P,f IM,KKAR

Directorate of Sugar & Varsaspati ( Ministry. of Food, Agriculture, Qummuniiy Development & Co-operation ) Public .4nalvst to the Governrrzwrt of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Central Food I..aborat m-v, CaLt C. tta Corporation of Greater Bombay
( Crmtimed en page 2 )

j kt13NIr !l, <s, .~NALYST ( ~//&i7af~

INDIAN STANDARDS MAN~K EtHAV.AN , 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI

IN ST IT I3TION
SH.4H Z.4FAR MARC

Is:

5838-1970

Msmbers DB A. RAMACIIANDRA RAO DE T. N. RAMACEANDItA ILAO
SIMI C. T. DWARK~NATH COr, R. R. RAo LT-COL

Rqwwrtting Corporation of Madras
Research Institute Central Food Technological ( CSIR ), Mysore

(AIMaUj Quartermaster
( Altsrnutt )

General's Branch, Army Headquarcem Gover-

DB SHAM

P. ~ApUIt SINGH SEKHON

0.

SENXORCOMW~RCIALOFSTCER ( CATERING ) DR B. h'. SIKGH LT-CO~ O. N. TYAQ:
DR .4. G. AJWANI ~HRl P. C. VIN DR HARI BFZAGWAN, ( .Mtsmde)

Department of Health & Family Planning, nmentof Punjab Chief Catering Officer, Northern Railway Statistics Department, 1S1, New Delhi Health Department, Municipal Corporation

of Delhi

Goca-$2daExport Corporation, Director General, 1S1 ( Ex-@io
Sscr.4ary
SHR1 S. K.

New Delhi Member )

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food) Su~ 1S1

Assistant Director

( Agri & Food),

Vitamin Assay Subcommittee, AFDC 36:3
Conuswr DE T. A. V. SUBRAMANIA~ .W71zb!m DB N. B. DAS DE P. K. DATTA
SERI

Patel Chest Institute, Delhi Indian Agricultuml Research Institute, New DelKl AU India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, Calcutta voltas Ltd, Bombay National Chemical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Poona Public Analyst to the Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Central Drug Research Institute ( CSIR ), Lucknow Defence Food Research Labomtoy, Mysore National Dairy Research Institute ( Southern Regiona Station ), Bangalore Directorate of Sugar & VanaSIMti, New Delhi
( Ali.mat;

H. S. GuEuDAs SHBX \7. S. KRISBNAMAOEAR D. hfl~s+L SEBI
DR V. K. MOHAN RACI

Dn N. A. XITYAXANDA RAO SERX S. 5. .4BYA ( Alternate DR R. V. RAO S=l RUP KWHORE
SHBI D. VENKATAPPAIAE

)

2.

1s :583s - 1970

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR ESTIMATION OF VITAMIN C IN FOODSTUFFS
O. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 November 1970, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Gommittee had been approved by "the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Vitamins are required to be assessed in a large number of foodstuffs, such as dairy products, animal feeds, processed cereals and other foodstuffs, Moreover, different methods of vitamin assays are used in different laboratories. Therefore, with a view to establishing uniform procedures and also for facilitating a comparative study of results, 1S1 is bringing out a series of standards on vitamin assays. These would include chemical and microbiological methods, wherever applicable. 0.3 This standard covers two methods, namely, ?,6-dichlorophenol indopl]enol method and 2,4-dinitropheny lhydrazine method, commonly used for estimation of vita~in C in foods;ui%. The 2,4-din itrophenylhydrazine method is particularly suitable when the sample contains a very low amount of ascorbic acid. The method is not very specific in case of processed foods that contain high concentrations of cartmhydrates and have been heated. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from a number of books and publications. However, the methods included in this standard are predominantly those which have been tried in various laboratories in the wuntry. Thus the methods prescribed in this standard are mainly based on practical experience within the country. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS: 2- 1960*. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies methods for estimation of Vitamin C ( ascorbic acid ) in foodstuffs.
*Ruies for rounding off numercial values ( wniwd ).

3

IS: 5838-1970 2. QUALIT%' OF RE4GENTS 2.1 Unless s~ecilied otherwise. tn.we chemicals sh~l be employed in tests and distilled - water ( see IS: l@&1960* ) shall be used when the use of water as a reagent is intended.
` Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals h'oTE which aHect the red ts of analysis.

that

do not contain

impurities

3. PREPARATION

OF THE ASSAY SAMPLE

3.0 The technique used for pre~aring the material for the analysis is mostly common to every vitamin determination. It should be ensured that the sample taken for the assay is representative of the whole and any deteriora: tion of the vitamin to be examined is prevented. 3.1 Powders and liquids should be mixed thoroughly until homogeneity is achieved. Dry materials, such as bread: biscuits and grains, should be ground and mued thoroughly. 3.2 Wet or fresh material may be minced with a knife or scissors, or homogenized in a blender, if necessary, in the presence of the extracting advent. 4. 2,6-DICHLOROP~NOL INDOPHENOL METHOD , I+isscipIe -- The hydrogen atoms of the two enolic groups of ascorbic acid ( Vitamin C ) can be oxidized readily, as this compound is a strong reducing substance. Measurement of this reducing property of ascorbic acid under appropriate conditions is the basis of several methods for determining the quantity of ascorbic acid.
4,0

4.0.1 Of the various oxidation-reduction methods, those based upon the reduction of indophenol have been fou~d to be the most satisfactory y. The compound 2, 6-dichlorophenol indophenoi is blue in alkaline conditions It is reduced by ascorbic acid to a and pink in acidic conditions. leukoform. A dilute solution of the dye is added dropwise from a burette to an acid extract of vitamin source. A pink coiour that persists for 15 seconds after the addition of one drop of dye is the end point of the titration. Interfering reducing substances are phenols, sulphydryl compounds, thiosulphate, sulphkes, ferrous, cuprous and stannous ions. Interference from phenois and sulphydryl com?ounds is diminished bv carrying out the reduction below fiH value of 4, since most of the phenoli; at low PI+ and reduction by the compounds do not reduce indophenol sulphydryl group is so low that a correction can be obtained. Thlosuh phates, ferrous and cuprous compounds reduce indophenol and their presence in appreciable quantities lead to falsely Klgh values of ascorbic acid. .4not.her group of interfering substances in oxidation reduction methods are the compounds loosely classified together and called ` reductones'.
for water, distilled quaiit y ( rakd *Specification 4 ).

lSs SS38=1970
h'OTE 1 --Interference from sulphides, sulphitesartd thiol.compoundg mn be over. come by treatment with formaldehyde. In presence of these substances, the extract is rendered acidic 10 pH 06 and forrnaldehyd misadded. This wou]d rmct with ~11 su!phides, sulphites and thiol compounds Ieaving the ascorbic acid free. Then the titration in the usual method is carried out. ~TOTl: 2--In case of turbid or highly coloured solutions, carried out with the help ofa photo-electric colortineter.

the estimation

can be

4.1 Reagerats 4.1.1 Trichloroacctic Ao"d (TCA) TCAin 100ml of water. 4.1.2 bfetaphosphoric Acid--5prcent. Reagertt- 10 percent. Dissolve 10gof

4.L3 Standard Ascorbic Acid Solution-- Weigh approximately 100 mg of USP ascorbic acid reference standard or equivalent 1P Standard accurately to + 0'1 rng. Transfer it to a 100-ml glass-stoppered graduated flask, dissolve and dilute to the mark with the TCA (see 4.1.1) or rnetaphosphoric acid ( see 4.1.2). 4.1.4 Standard ]ndo~henol Solulion -- Dissolve 50 mg of ~~dim 2,6- dichlorobenzenone indophenol, that has been stored in a desiccator over soda lime, in .50 ml of water to which 42 mg of sodium bicarbonate has Shake vigorously and, when the indophenol has completely been added. dissolved, dilute it to 200 ml with water. Filter the solution through a fluted filter paper into an amber ghtss-stoppered bottle. Keep the bottle Decomposistoppered, out of direct suniight, and store in a refrigerator. tion products that make the end point `indistinct occur in some batches of dry indophenol and also develop with time in stock sohttion. Add 5 ml of the TCA reagent or metaphosphoric acid containing excess of ascorbic acid to 15 ml of the indophenol solution. If the reduced solution is not practically ccrlourless, dis~rd and prepare a new stock solution, If the dry indophenol dye is proved to be of a bad quality, obtain a new sample.

of indr@mol solution -- Stanhrdize he 4.1.4.1 Standardization phenol solutiort immediately after it has been prepared as follows:

indo.

Transfer three 2-ml aliquots of the standard ascorbic acid solution to each of the three 50-ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 5 ml of the Titrate rapidly with l+e ind~. TCA reagent or metaphosphoric acid. phenol solution from a 25-mi burette until light but distinct ro~+ink " ~ cokmr persists for at least five seconds. ( Each titration should require approximately 15 ml of indophenol solution and the titrations should three blank check within 0"05 mL ) In the same way, titrate of 7 ml of the TCA r-gent or metaphosphoric acid along composed with water, the volume of which is approximately equivalent to the volume of the indophenol soh.tt ion used in the direct titration, 5

1S:5838-1970 Calculate and express the concentration of theindophenol solution as milligrams of ascorbic acid equivalent to one millilitre of the indophenol solution. Standardize the indophenol solution daily with freshly prepared standard ascorbic acid solution. , 4.2 Procedure 4.2.1 Preparation of Sample -- Grind an accurately weighed sample (about 5 g) in a mortar with acid washed sand using TCA reagent or metaphosphoric acid and transfer into 100-ml graduated flask. Shake the mixture thoroughly and make up the volume to 100 ml with TCA reagent or metaphosphoric acid. Filter immediately through a fluted filter paper. The final concentration of ascorbic acid in the extract should be 10 to 15 Mg per ml. 4.2.2 Determination of Vitamin C ( Ascorbic Acid) -- Take 10 ml of the filtrate (see 4.2.1 ), and titrate rapidly with the indophenol solution. carry out a blank determination with 11 mI of the reagent along with water sufficient to make the volume of the mixture equivalent to 15 ml plus the volume of the indophenol solution required in the direct titration (see A1.4.1 ). 4.3 Calculation 4.3.1 Calculate the vitamin C content in the sample as follows: Vitamin C content, mg, A ~ B ~ ]000 per 100 g of the sample= J47 where A = volume in ml of the indophenol solution used for titration, B = weight in mg of the ascorbic acid equivalent to one millilitre of the indophenol solution, and JV = weight in g of the sample taken for the test. 5. 2,4-DINITROPHENYLHYDW~NE
5.o

METHOD

Principle -- The ascorbic acid is converted to dehydroascorbic acid by oxidizing agents, such as, activated charcoal, etc, and on treatment with 2,4-dinitropheny lllydrazine, a 2,4-dinitropheny lhydrazone is formed. This gives a reddish colour with 85 percent sulphuric acid and the intensity of the colour follows Beer's law. This method measures not only ascorbic acid but also dehydroascorbic acid (biologically active) and dikotogulonic acid (biologically inactive j.
which are formed by boiling sugars in a mildly alkaline NOTE -- Reductones, wluticm or by maintaining foods at 60 to 70"~,, would also react with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine. In case they are pr-nt, the formed hydrozones should be purified by chromatography on acid alumina.

6

IS: 5838-1970 5.1 Apparatus 5.1.1 Pllotoeiectric Calorimeter 5.2 Reagents
about 50.0 mg 5.2.1 S!andard .4scorbi[ .4rid Solulion -- \\'eigh accurately standard ascorbic acid and dissolve in the acid solution ttsed of reference for extraction. hlake the volume to 50 ml. One millilitre of this solution is diluted to !00 ml. T'his working standard solution will contain 10 ~g~ml.

5.2.2 Sulpkic Acid Solution -- 9 N. Add cautiously 250 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid ( sp gr 1"84) to 700-0 ml of distilled water kept in ice. When cool, dilute to 1 litre. 5.2.3 2,4-dinitrophenzihydrazine ( DXPH) -- Dissolve 2.0 g of 2, 4-dinitrophenylhydrazine in 100 ml of 9 N sulphuric acid and filter through filter paper. Keep under refrigeration when not in use. 5.2.4 Thiourea -- 10 percent. Dissolve 10 g of thiourea in 50 percent alcohol and make the volume to 100 ml with 50 percent alcohol. 5.2.5 Trichloroacefic Acid-- 6 percent and 4 percent. 5.2.6 A~-d Washed Animal Charcoal -- Place 200 g of animal charcoal in a flask and add 1 litre of 10 percent hydrochloric acid. Heat to boiling, then filter with suction. Remove the cake of animal charcoal to a large beaker and add one litre of distilled water, then stir and filter. Repeat this process until the filtrate is free from chloride ions (checked by silver nitrate test ), Dry the animal charcoal overnight in an oven at 115 to 120W.
large

5.2.7 Sulphuric Acid-- 85 percent. TO 100 ml of distilled water in a flask kept in cold, add 900 ml concentrated sulphuric acid ( sp gr 1'84; carefully with constant swirling. 5.3 Procedure s.3.1 Extraction of ttu Vitamin from the Material-- Grind a known quantity of the material in a mortar with acid washed sand using 6 percent trichloroacetic acid. Adjmt the amount of the extracting fluid S0 as to give a concentration of 5 to 10 ~g ascorbic acid per millilitre of the extract. If the amount of protein present in the material is small, use 4 percent TC.\ instead of 6 percent. The material may also be homogenized with 6 percent `1'CA using a homogenizing tube and rod. It is desirable to surround the homogenizer with ice. 5.3.2 Activa[ed Animal C'harcool Trcatrwtt -- To 25"0 ml of the extract add approximately 0"5 g of activated animal charcoal. Shake and allow to stand for 10 minutes. Filter through filter paper ( Whatman No. 42 or equivalent ).
7

1S:5838- 1970 5.3.3 Treatment of Charcoal Filtrate -- Place aliquots containing 5 to 50 Kg of ascorbic acid into test tubes, make the voiume in all the cases to 4"0 ml Add to each tube 0.05 ml of thiourea r~agent with the grinding medium. A tube containing 4"0 ml of the extracting and 1 ml of 2 percent DI?PH. medium serves as the reagent blank. Incubate for 3 h at 37GC. Place the tubes at the end of the incubation period in crushed ice and add 5"0 ml of 85 percent sulphuric acid drop by drop from a burette. Shake the tubes Allow the tubes to stand for 30 minutes at room temperature thoroughly. before reading the colour at 540 m~ adjusting the instrument to zero with the blank. 5.3.4 Treat a standard solution of ascorbic acid in the range of 5 to 50 microgram concentration in the same way as the experimental and take the readings with the standard. Compare the readings with the unknown and calculate the concentration of ascorbic acid in the aliquot ( see 5.3.3).
NOTE -- In case reductones and other interfering substances are present, the lryrfrozones formed after incubationare completelyextractedwith ethyl acetate and Columns of acid alumina are washed with ethyl acetate purified by chromatography. containing 2 percent ( t/r ) acetic acid. The ethyl acetate extract of the hydrozones The chromatogram is developed with ethyl is added to the alumina column. Unchanged 2,4-dinitropheny lhydrazine is first eluted. acetate acetic acid solvent, The osazone of dehydroascorbic acid is then eluted from column by ethyl acetate. Other hydrozones from interfering substances are firmly held on the column. The clut cd sol ution of osazone of dehvdroascor bic acid is then evaporated to dryness smder vacuum.. The osazones are dissolved in 1 ml ethyl acetate to which is added The concentration of dehydroascorbic acid 5 ml sulphuric acid (50 percent w/u). is determined from the absorption at 530 m~, and compared with standard solution Of ~ei:> droascorbic acid ( prepared from ascorbic acid ) and treated in the same way.

5.4 Calculation -- Calculate the quantity' of Vitamin C ( ascorbic acid) in i;: t=amount of sample taken (see 5.3.1 ) and express the results as ttg Of i :tmnin G ( ascorbic acid ) per gram of the food sample on dry basis ar
wet b~sis as the case may be.

8

