lS/lSO/lEC , Wdlf
*

17000:2004

J71d+

Yrll ~wlwf

--

WRWN ctmm@Mkm W
Indian Standard

n

CONFORMITY

ASSESSMENT -- VOCABULARY GENERAL PRINCIPLES

AND

ICS 01 .040,03; 03.120.20

,

. .

@ BIS 2006

.8,

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI 110002 Ju/y 2006 Price Group 7

National Mirror Committee

of CASCO, IRD 1

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with lSO/lEC 17000:2004 `Conformity assessment -- Vocabulary and generaI principles' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (lEC) jointly was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the National Mirror Committee of CASCO and approval of the Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards under Rule 8(3)C of B/S Ru/es, 1987. The text of lSO/lEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, use a point (,) as the deGimal marker.

the current practice is to

Only the English text has been retained while adopting it as an Indian Standard numbers given here are not the same as i~he International Standard.

and as such the page

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

Contents

Page

o
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

Introduction ................................................................................................................................ .................. ii Scope ................................................................................................................................ ............................ 1 Terms relating to conformity assessment in generai ............................................................................. 2 Basic terms .................................................................................................................................. ................, 3 Conformi~assessment terms reiating toseiection anddetermination (see Figure A.l) .................. 3

Conformity assessment terms reiating to review and attestation (see Figure A. 1) ............................ 4 Conformity assessment terms reiating to surveillance (see Figure Al) ............................................. 5 Terms reiating to conformity assessment and facilitation of trade ..................................................... 5

Annex A (informative) Principles of conformity assessment ....................................................................... 7 Annex B (informative) Reiated terms defined in other documents ............................................................. 12 .,.,................................................13 Bibliography ....................................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.,,,. ......................................$, AiphabetiGai index ................................................................!.................................................................. ........!14

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

0
0.1

Introduction
Terms and definitions applicable to conformity assessment

ISO and lSO/IEC Guides and, more recently, International Standards relating generically to conformity assessment activities such as testing, inspection and various forms of certification are prepared by working groups of the ISO Committee on conformity assessment (CASCO). For many years, ISO/lEC Guide 2, last revised in 1996, has included a core vocabulary for conformity assessment, built up from a small number of terms and definitions first compiled to facilitate communication and understanding about product certification based on standards for traditional manufactured goods. In 2000, CASCO decided to take conformity assessment terminology (Clauses 12 to 17) out of lSO/lEC Guide 2 and provide instead a self-contained vocabulary more readily applicable within the planned lSO/lEC 17000 series of standards and in the drafting or revision of related guides. CASCO Worldng Group 5, Definitions, has accordingly prepared this International Standard in consultation with other acthe CASCO working groups, as a consistent framework within which more specific concepts maybe defined appropriately and denoted by the most appropriate terms. Extra terms for concepts unique to particular activities within conformity assessment, such as accreditation, certification of persons and marks of conformity, are found in the International Standard or Guide related to that activity. Such concepts are not included in this International Standard. Until pre-existing CASCO publications are revised, the terminology used in those documents remains valid in its context; this International Standard is not intended to be applied retrospectively. Conformity assessment interacts with other fields such as management systems, metrology, standardization and statistics. This International Standard does not define the boundaries of conformity assessment. These remain elastic. 0.2 Terms and definitions applicable to trade policy

Clause 7 includes some terms and definitions, drawn mainly from the superseded clauses of lSO/lEC Guide 2, for several broader concepts. These are intended not only to standardize usage within the conformity assessment community, but also to help policy makers concerned with the facilitation of trade within regulatory and international treaty frameworks. 0.3 A functional approach

to conformity assessment

The terms and definitions specified in this International Standard, particularly under Clauses 4 and 5, reflect the adoption by CASCO in November 2001 of the functional approach recommended earlier that year in the final report of a CASCO - CEN/CENELEC TC 1 joint working group. To provide a better understanding of the defined concepts, their grouping and their relationships, a description of the functional approach is included in Annex A for information. 0.4 Selection of terms

and definitions

Some of the terms included in this International Standard relate to concepts it was considered essential to define. Others it was thought helpful to explain. Many of the general terms used to distinguish conformity assessment concepts are used in common language in a broader sense or with a wider range of meanings. Some also appear in other standard vocabularies with definitions specific to the relevant field of application. An alphabetical index lists the terms defined in this International Standard. Standards defining other relevant terms are given in Annex B with separate alphabetical lists. First are terms applicable to specific aspects of conformity assessment, as defined in other standards in the lSO/lEC 17000 series. Second are terms for which the definitions given in either the /nternationa/ vocabulary of basic and genera/terms in rnetdogy (VIM) or ISO 9000 are generally applicable in conformity assessment contexts. For the terms "procedure" and "product", both used extensively in other definitions, the ISO 9000:2000 definitions are reproduced in 3.2 and 3.3.

ii

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

0.5

Changes in terminology
changes in the terms or their definitions from the superseded clauses of

Attention is drawn to significant lSO/lEC Guide 2.

This International Standard does not include a definition of "conformity" on the grounds that it is not necessary to do so. "Conformity" does not feature in the definition of "conformity assessment". The concept of "conformity assessment" is concerned with "fulfillment of specified requirements", not with the wider concept of "conformity". A definition of the term "specified requirement" (3.1) is included. In English, the term "compliance" is used to distinguish the action of doing what is required (e.g. an organization "complies" by making something conform or by fulfilling a regulatory requirement). The ISO 9000 definition of "product" (3.3) includes services as a product category, so that it is no longer correct to refer to "products and services". Instead of "product, process or service", the generic expression used in lSO/lEC Guide 2 for the "subject of standardization", Note 2 to 2.1 introduces the expression "object of conformity assessment" as a means of referring to the product, process, system, person or body to which conformity assessment is applied. (The "subject" would more logically be the body doing the assessment.) Instead of "assurance of conformity", the term "attestation" (5.2) is used for the activity of conveying assurance through the issue of a "statement of conformity". The term `ac~reditatian" k now applicable only to attestation regarding a conformity assessment body. The definition in lSO/lEC Guide 2, by contrast, would have been equally applicable to the certification of persons, as specified in lSO/lEC 17024. Following this change, the terms "conformity assessment body" (2.5) and "accreditation body" (2.6) are defined separately. More specific terms relating to accreditation are defined in lSO/lEC 17011, To avoid ambiguity, the term "body" is used in this International Standard only when referring to conformity assessment bodies or accreditation bodies. Otherwise, the term "organization" is used in its general meaning, as in the ISO 9000 definition. The more specific lSO/lEC Guide 2 definition of an organization as a body based on membership is not applicable to the field of conformity assessment.

Ill

...

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

Indian Standard CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT -- VOCABULARY GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND

1
This

Scope
International Standard

their accreditation bodies, in both voluntary ahd regulatory environments. Standard does provide a vocabulary for all "of the concepts that may need to be used in describing particular conformity assessment activities. Terms and definitions are given only where the concept defined would not be understandable from the general language use of the term, or where an standard existing definition is not applicable.
not set out to

specifies

general

terms

and
This International

definitions relating to CQnfOrmity the including assessment, conformity accreditation of assessment bodies, and to the use of conformity assessment to facilitate trade. A description `of approach to the functional is assessment conformity included in Annex A, as a further aid to understanding among users of conformity assessment, conformity assessment bodies and

NOTE 1 The notes appended to certain definitions offer clarification or examples to facilitate understanding of the concepts described. In certain cases, the notes may differ in different languages for linguistic reasons, or
additional notes may be given.

NOTE 2 The terms and definitions are laid out in a systematic order, with an alphabetical index. A term in a definition or note that is defined in another entry is indicated By boldface followed by its entry number in parentheses. Such terms may be replaced by their complete definition.

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

2 Terms relating to conformity assessment in general
2.1 conformity assessment demonstration that specified requirements (3.1 ) relating to a product (3.3), process, system, person or body are fulfilled
NOTE 1 The subject field of conformity assessment includes activities defined elsewhere in this International Standard, such as testing (4.2), inspection (4.3) and certification (5.5), as well as the accreditation (5.6) of

2.4 third-party conformity assessment activity conformity assessment activity that is performed by a person or body that is independent of the person or organization that provides the object, and of user interests in that object
NOTE 1 Criteria for the independence of conforrn"~ assessment bodies and accreditation bodies are provided in the International Standards and Guides applicable to their activities (see Bibliography). NOTE 2 See Note to 2.2.

conformity assessment bodies (2.5).
NOTE 2

assessment" or "object"

expression "object of conformity is used in this International Standard to encompass any particular material, product, installation, process, system, person or body to which conformity assessment is applied. A service is covered by the definition of a product (see Note 1 to 3.3).

The

2.5 conformity assessment body body that performs conformity assessment services
NOTE An accreditation body (2.6) is not a conformity assessment body.

2.2 first-party conformity assessment activity conformity `assessment activity that is performed `by the person or organization that provides the object
NOTE The first-, semnd- and third-party descriptors used to characterize conformity assessment activities with respect to a given object are not to be cmfused with the legal identification of the relevant paties to a contract.

2.6 accreditation body authoritative body that performs accreditation

(5.6)

NOTE The authority of an accreditation body is generally derived from government.

2.7 conformity assessment system rules, procedures (3.2) and management carrying out conformMy assessment (2.1)

for

NOTE Conformity assessment systems may be operated at international, regional, national or sub-national level.

2.3 second-party activity
conformity

conformity assessment 2.8 conformity assessment scheme conformity assessment programme conformity assessment system (2.7) related to specified objects of conformity assessment, to which the same specified requirements (3.1 ), specific rules and procedures (3.2) apply
NOTE Conformity assessment schemes may be operated at international, regional, national or sub-national level.

assessment activity that is performed by a person or organization that has a user interest in the object NOTE 1 Persons or organizations performing secondparty conformity assessment activities include, for example, purchasers or users of products, or potential customem seeking to rely on a supplier's management system, or organizations representing those interests. NOTE 2 See"Note to 2.2.

2

lS/lSO/lEC
. 2.9 access access to a system or scheme opportunity for an applicant to obtain conformity assessment (2.1 ) under the rules of the system or scheme
3.2

17000:2004

procedure
specified way to carry out an activity or a process 3.4.5]

[ISO 9000:2000,

3.3 product result of a process [ISO 9000:2000, 3.4.2]

2.10
participant patilcipant in a system or scheme body that operates under the applicable rules without having the opportunity to take part in the management of the system or scheme

NOTE 1 Four generic product categories are noted in ISO 9000:2000 services (e.g. transport); software (e.g. computer program, dictionary); hardware (e.g. engine, mechanical partJ; processed materials (e.g. lubricant), Many products comprise elements belonging to different generic product categories. Whether the product is then called service, software, hardware or processed material depends on the dominant element, NOTE 2 The statement of conformity described in Note 1 to 5.2 can be regarded as a product of attestation (5.2).

2.11 member member of a system or scheme body that operates under the applicable rules and has the opportunity to take part in the management of the system or scheme

4 Conformity assessment terms relating to selection and determination (see Figure A.1 )
4.1 sampling
provision of a sample of the object of conformity assessment, according to a procedure (3.2)

4.2 testing

3

Basic terms

determination of one or more characteristics object of conformity assessment, according

of an to a

procedure (3.2) 3.1 specified requirement need or expectation that is stated
NOTE Specified requirements may be stated in nonmative documents such as regulations, standards and technical specifications. NOTE "Testing" typically applies to materials, products or processes,

3

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

4.3 inspection
of a product design, product (3.3), process or installation and determination of its conor, on the basis of formity with specific requirements examination professional judgement, with general requirements

5.2 attestation issue of a statement, based on a decision following review (5. 1), that fulfillment of specified requirements (3. 1) has been demonstrated
NOTE 1 The resulting statement, referred to in this International Standard as a `statement of confomnity", conveys the assurance that the specified requirements have been fulfilled. Such an assurance does not, of itself, afford contractual or other legal guarantees. NOTE 2 First-party and third-party attestation activities are distinguished by the terms 5.4 to 5.6. For second-party attestation, no special term is available,

NOTE Inspection of a process may include inspection of persons, facilities, technology and methodology.

4.4

audit systematic, independent, documented process for of fact or other obtaining records, statements relevant information and assessing them objectively to determine the extent to which specified requirements (3.1) are fulfilled NOTE Whilst "audit" applies to management systems, "assessment" applies to conformity assessment bodies as well as more generally.

5.3 scope of attestation
range or characteristics of objects of assessment covered by attestation (5.2) conformity

5.4 declaration first-party attestation (5.2) 4.5 peer assessment specified body against assessment of a requirements (3. 1) by representatives of other bodies in, or candidates for, an agreement group
(7.10)

5.5 certification third-party attestation (5.2) related to products, processes, systems or persons
NOTE 1 Certification of a management system is sometimes also called registration.

5 Conformity assessment terms relating to review and attestation (see Figure A.1 )

NOTE 2 Certification is applicable to all objects of conformity assessment except for conformity assessment bodies (2.5) themselves, to which accreditation (5.6) is applicable.

5.1 review verification of the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of selection and determination activities, and the results of these activities, with regard to fulfillment of specified requirements (3.1) by an object of conformity assessment

5.6 accreditation third-party attestation (5.2) related to a conformity assessment body (2.5) conveying formal demonstration of its competence to carry out specific conformity assessment tasks

4

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:

2004

6 Conformity assessment terms relating to surveillance (see Figure A. 1)

7 Terms relating to conformity assessment and facilitation of trade
NOTE The general expression "conformity assessment result" is used in 7.4 to 7.9 to mean the product (3.3) of any conformity assessment activity (e.g. a report or certificate) and may include a finding of nonconformity.

6.1 surveillance systematic iteration of conformity assessment activities as a basis for maintaining the validity of the statement of conformity

6.2 suspension temporary invalidation of the statement of conformity for all or part of the specified scope of attestation (5,3)

7.1 approval permission for a product (3.3) or process to be marketed or used for stated purposes or under stated conditions
NOTE Approval can be based on fulfillment of specified requirements (3. 1) or completion of specified procedures (3.2).

6.3
withdrawal revocation cancellation of the statement of conformity

7.2 designation governmental authorization of a conformity assessment body (2.5) to perform specified conformity assessment activities

6.4 appeal request by the provider of the object of conformity assessment to the conformity assessment body (2.5) or accreditation body (2.6) for reconsideration by that body of a decision it has made relating to that object

7.3 designating authority body established within government or empowered by government to designate conformity assessment bodies (2.5), suspend or withdraw their designation or remove their suspension from designation (7.2)

6.5 complaint
expression of dissatisfaction, other than appeal (6.4), by any person or organization to a conformity assessment body (2.5) or accreditation body (2.6), relating to the activities of that body, where a response is expected

7.4 equivalence equivalence of conformity assessment results sufficiency of different conformity assessment results to provide the same level of assurance of conformity with regard to the "same specified requirements (3.1)

5

lS/ISO/lEC

17000:2004

7.5 recognition recognition of conformity assessment results acknowledgement of the validity of a conformity assessment result provided by another person or body

7.10
agreement group bodies that are signatories to the agreement which an arrangement is based on

7.11 reciprocity relationship between two parties where both have the same rights and obligations towards each other NOTE 1 Reciprocity can exist within a multilateral arrangement comprising a network of bilateral reciprocal
relationships.

7.6 acceptance acceptance of conformity assessment resuits use of a conformity assessment result provided by another person or body

NOTE 2 Although rights and obligations are the same, opportunities emanating from them cm diffeE this can lead to unequal relationships between parties.

7.7 unilateral arrangement arrangement whereby one party recognizes or accepts the conformity assessment results of another party

7.12 equal treatment treatment accorded to products (3.3) or processes from one supplier that is no less favorable than that accorded to like products or processes from any other supplier, in a comparable situation

7.0 biiaterai arrangement arrangement whereby two parties recognize or accept each other's conform ity assessment results

7.13 nationai treatment treatment accorded to products (3.3) or processes originating in other countries that is no less favorable than that accorded to like products or processes of national origin, in a comparable situation

7.9 multilateral arrangement arrangement whereby more than two patiles recognize or accept one another's conformity assessment results

7.14 equai and nationai treatment treatment accorded to products (3.3) or processes originating in other countries that is no less favorable than that accorded to like products or processes of national origin, or originating in any other country, in a comparable situation

6

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:-2004

Annex A (informative) Principles
of

conformity

assessment

A.1

Functional

approach

A.1.l Conformity assessment is a series of three functions that satisfy a need or demand for specified that demonstration requirements are fulfilled: -- -- -- selection; determination; and
review and attestation.

and also to those bodies that perform conformity assessment services. For convenience within this International Standard, the expression "object of conformity is used to refer assessment"

A.I.5

Shape B

in

Figure A.1

represents output from a function and is also the input to the next function. The nature of the output

collectively to any or all of these entities.

varies, depending on the specific activities that have been undertaken.

Such demonstration can add substance or credibility to claims that specified requirements are fulfilled, giving users greater confidence in such claims. Standards are often used as the specified requirements since they represent a broad consensus of what is wanted in a given situation. As a result, conformity assessment is often viewed as a standardsrelated activity.

A.1,3 Each of the various kinds of users of conformity assessment has their own specific needs. As a result, there is much variety in the different types of conformity assessment performed. However, all types of conformity assessment follow the same general approach as shown in Figure A.1.

The solid arrows in FigA.1.6 ure A. 1 link the conformity assessment functions and their outputs/inputs. The broken arrows express the possible needs or demands for conformity assessment.

A.1.7 Conformity assessment actWities can be characterized as `first-party", `second-party" or "third-party". Generally, for each of these categories A.I.4 Shape A in Figure A.1 represents a conformity assessment function. The specific activities in each function can vary from one type of conformity assessment to another, based on the needs of users, the nature of the specified requirements and the object of conformity assessment involved. -- the conformity assessment activities are under the control or direction of the type of individual or body stated in the definition, and the critical decision on which attestation is based is made by the type of individual or body stated in the definition.

A.1.2 Conformity assessment may be applied to products (defined to include services), processes, systems and persons,

--

7

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

Need

todemonstratefutfilmentof sIMcMsd requirements

Selection

Informationon seledad

items *

Infon-n*n

Determination

on fulfifment of spedfiid requirements

Rwiew and attast%tion

Fulfihnentof specifiedrequirement demonstrated

s I I I 1

I

J

V
END Key

ml
D

shape P. shape B

Figure A.1 -- Functional approach to conformity assessment

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

A.2

Selection

A.2.I Selection involves planning and preparation activities in order to collect or produce all the information and input needed for the subsequent determination function. Selection activities vary widely in number and complexity. In some instances, very little selection activity may be needed.

A.2.2 Some consideration may need to be given to selection of the object of conformity assessment. Frequently, the object may be a large number of identical items; ongoing production; a continuous process or a system; or involve numerous locations. In such cases, consideration may need to be given to sampling, or selection of specimens to be used for determination activities. For example, the sampling plan for river water related to a demonstration that pollution requirements are fulfilled would be an example of a sizeable and significant sampling activity. However, occasionally the object may be the whole population, for instance when a single, individual product is the object of conformity assessment, Even in such cases, sampling may be necessary to select a part of the entire object that is representative of the whole (e.g. selection of critical parts of a bridge for a determination of material fatigue).

taken when applying the prerequirements existing to the specific object of conformity assessment. For example, caution might be needed when applying a standard written for metal pipes to plastic pipes. In some cases, only a very general set of requirements may exist which must be expanded for assessment to be meaningful or acceptable to the users. For example, a government regulator may require that products pose no unacceptable safety risks (the general requirement) and expect a certification body to establish specific requirements for individual certified products or types of products. Or, general management system requirements may need to be more focused when the management system addresses fulfillment of
specific service requirements.

that specified requirements are fulfilled will be effective. For example, the scope of testing to be covered by laboratory accreditation must be identified before appropriate determination activities can be performed. Or, a description of a service may be needed before performing appropriate determination activities. Also, a determination activity may be a review of information alone, and that information must be identified and collected. For example, a copy of a product's instructions for use or warning markings may be needed.

A.2.4 Selection may also include choice of the most appropriate procedures (for example, testing methods or inspection methods) to be used for determination activities. It is not uncommon that new or modified methods need to be developed to conduct determination activities. It may be necessary to select the proper locations and the proper conditions, or the individuals to perform the procedure.

A.2.6 In Figure A.1, all the information, samples (if sampling is used), decisions and other output from the selection function is on represented as "information selected items".

A.3 Determination
A.3.1 Determination activities are undertaken to develop complete information regarding fulfillment of the specified requirements by the object of conformity assessment or its sample. Some types of determination activities are defined in Clause 4.

A.2.3 It may also be necessary to consider the specified requirements. In many cases, a standard or other pre-existing requirements exist. However, care should be

A.2.5 Finally, additional information may be needed in order to perform determination activities properly so that the demonstration

A.3.2 The terms testing (4.2), inspection (4.3), audit (4.4), and peer assessment (4.5), which are defined as types of determination activities only, may be

IS/ISO/lEC

17000:2004

used with "system" or"scheme"to describe conformity assessment systems or schemes that include the type of determination activity indicated. Thus, a "peer assessment system" is a conformity assessment system that includes peer assessment as the determination activity.

A.4 Review and attestation

A.5 Need for surveillance

A.3.3 Various determination activities have no specific name or designation. An example is the examination or analysis of a design, or other descriptive information, in relation to specified requirements, Individual sub-fields of conformity assessment (e.g. testing, certification, accreditation) may have terms defined for determination activities that are unique to that sub-field. There is no generic term used in this international Standard or in practice to represent all determination activities.

A.4.1 Review (5.1) constitutes the final stage of checking before taking the important decision as to whether or not the object of conformity assessment has been reliably demonstrated to fulfil the specified requirements. Attests-. tion (5.2) results in a "statement" in a form that most readily reaches all of the potential users. "Statement of conformity" is a generic expression used to include all means of communicating that fulfillment of specified requirements has been demon~strated.

A.6.I Conformity assessment can end when attestation is performed. However, in some cases systematic iteration of the functions in Figure A.1 may be needed to maintain the validity of the statement resulting from attestation. The needs of users drive such activities. For example, an object of conformity assessment may change over time, which could affect its continuing fulfiiment of specified requirements. Or, users may demand ongoing demonstration that specified requirements are fulfilled; for example, when a product is produced continuously.

A.4.2 If fulfillment of the specified requirements has not been demonstrated, the finding of nonconformity may be reported.

A.3.4 Care should be taken to understand clearly the determination activities characterized as testing or inspection.

A.4.3 The terms declaration (5.4), certification (5.5) and accreditation (5.6), which are defined as types of attestation only, may be used with "system" or "scheme" to describe conformity assessment systems or schemes that include the type of attestation activity indicated as the final step. Thus, a "certification system" is a conformity assessment system that includes selection, determination, review and finally certification as the attestation activity.

A.5.2 The activities undertaken in surveillance are planned in order to satisfy the need to maintain the validity of an existing statement resulting from attestation. A complete repeat of the initial assessment is usually not necessary in every iteration of surveillance to satisfy this need. Thus, the activities in each function in Figure A.1 during surveillance may be reduced, or different from, the activities undertaken in the initial assessment.

A.3.5 In Figure A.1, all the output from the determination function is represented as "information on fulfillment of specified requirements". The output is a combination of all the information created through determination activity, as well as all the input to the determination function. The output is
usually structured to facilitate review and attestation activities.

A.4.4 In Figure A.1, all the output from the review and attestation function is represented as
"fulfillment of specified ments demonstrated". require-

A.5.3 Selection activities take place in both the initial assessment and in surveillance, Howdifferent choices ever, en~re[y
mi9ht be made in surveillance For example, a test for a product

10

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

may have been selected in the initial assessment. In surveillance, an inspection might be selected to determine that a sample of the product is the same as the sample originally tested. In fact, the choices in selection may change from time to time, based on information from previous iterations of surveillance and other inputs. Ongoing risk analysis or consideration of market feedback regarding actual fulfillment of specified requirements may be part of selection activities in surveillance.

object of conformity assessment may be selected for determination in surveillance; activities for example, only a portion of an accredited certification body may be audited during surveillance.

lance. In surveillance, a review of all the ,inputs and outputs in Figure A. 1 leads to a decision whether the statement resulting from attestation continues to be valid. In many cases, no special action is taken if the statement continues to be valid. In other cases, for example, if the scope of attestation has been extended, a new statement of conformity might be issued.

A.5.5 As noted above, the different choices in selection can lead to different determination activities for surveillance purposes. However, in both initial assessment and surveillance, the output from selection defines the determination activities and how they will be carried out.

A,5.4 Choices about the specified requirements can be different as well. For example, only a subset of the specified requirements might be selected in any given iteration of surveillance. Or, similarly, only a portion of the

A.5.7 If the decision is that the statement of conformity is no longer valid, appropriate activities are necessary to advise users; for example, that the scope of attestation has been reduced or that the statement has been suspended or withdrawn.

A.5.6 The review and attestation function is also used in both initial assessment and surveil-

11

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

Annex B (informative) Related terms defined in other documents

--

B.1 General terms given specific meanings in other
standards in the lSO/lEC 17000 series

B;l.2 General terms given specific meanings for the purposes of lSO/lEC 17024, relating to certification of persons

B.2 Terms defined in standards outside the lSO/IEC 17000 series
calibration
capability VIM

1s0 9000 1s0 9000 1s0 9000 Iso 9000 Iso 9000 Iso 9000 1s0 9000
VIM

competence evaluation examiner

characteristic

competence conformity
customer

6.1.1 Compound terms defined for the purposes of lSO/lEC 17011, relating to accreditation

qualification

document B.1.3 Compound terms defined for the purposes of lSO/lEC 17030, relating to marks of conformity information measurement
organization process specification issuer of a third-party mark of conformity owner of a third-party mark of conformity third-party mark of conformity supplier system validation verification

accreditation body logo accreditation certificate accreditation symbol extending accreditation reducing accreditation scope of accreditation suspending accreditation

1s0 9000 1s0 9000 1s0 9000

Iso 9000
1s0 9000 1s0 9000 Iso 9000

12

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

Bibliography

For conformity assessment systems based on determination activity

eral requirements accreditation bodies crediting conformity sessment bodies
Gen-

for acas-

conformity -- Part 1: Generel requirements

[1]

lSO/lEC

17020:1998,

eral criteria for the operation of various types of bodies performing inspection

[6]

lSO/lEC 17021 :--1), Conformity assessment -- Requirements for bodies providing audit and certification for management systems

For recognition and acceptance ~~s~~~rmi~ [11] assessment

[2]

lSO/lEC 17025:1999, General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories

[7]

[3]

lSO/IEC 17040:--1), Conformity assessment -- General requirements for peer assessment of conformity assessment bodies and accreditation bodies

lSO/lEC 17024:2003, Conformity assessment -- General requirements for bodies Opemfing CeftifiCaf/of'l ot persons

lSO/lEC Guide 68:2002, Arrangements for the recocmition and acceptance 0? conformity assessment results

For related terminology

[8]

lSO/lEC Guide 65:1996, General requirements for bodies operating pruduct certification systems

[12]

ISO 3534 (all parts), Statistics -- Vocabblaty and symbols ISO 9000:2000, Quality management systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary lSO/lEC Guide 2:2004, Standardization and rdated activities -- Genera/ vocabu/a~

[13]

[4]

1s0 19011:2002, Guidelines for quality andlor environmental management systems auditing

For statements of conformity

[14]

[9] For conformity assessment systems based on attestation activity [10] [5] lSO/lEC 17011:2004, Conformity assessment -- Gen-

lSO/lEC 17030:2003, Conformity assessment -- Genera/ requirements for thirdparty marks of conformity [15] lSO/lEC 17050-1:2004, Conformity assessment Suppliet's declaration

-- of

VIM, International vocabulary of basic and general terms in metrology, BIPM, IEC, IFCC, ISO, IUPAC, IUPAP and OIML

1)

To be published.

13

lS/lSO/lEC

17000:2004

Alphabetical

index

A

I
inspection 4.3

u
unilateral arrangement 7.7

acceptance 7.6 acceptance of conformity assessment results 7.6 access 2.9 access to a system or scheme accreditation 5.6 accreditation body 2.6 agreement group 7.10 appeal 6,4 approval 7.1 attestation 5,2 audit 4.4

2.9

M
member 2.11 member of a system or scheme 2.11 multilateral arrangement withdrawal 6.3

w

7.9

N national treatment 7.13

B
bilateral arrangement 7.8

P
participant 2.10 participant in a system or scheme 2.10 peer assessment 4.5 procedure 3,2 product 3.3

c
certification 5.5 complaint 6.5 conformity assessment 2.1 conformity assessment body conformity assessment programme 2.8 conformity assessment scheme 2.8 conformity assessment system 2.7

2.5

R
reciprocity 7.11 recognition 7.5 recognition of conformity assessment results 7.5 review 5.1 revocation 6.3

D
declaration 5.4 designating authority designation 7.2

7.3

s
sampling 4.1 scope of attestation 5.3 second-party conformity assessment activity 2.3 specified requirement 3.1 surveillance 6,1 suspension 6.2

E
equal and national treatment equal treatment 7.12 equivalence 7.4 equivalence of conformity assessment results 7.4 7.14

T F
first-party conformity assessment activity 2.2 testing 4.2 third-party conformity assessment activity 2,4

14

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of hdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright
BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any

form without the prior permission

in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course

of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards
are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision, Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. Amendments This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. IRD 1 (006).

Amendments Issued Since Publication
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 9402 website: Www.bis.org.in Telephones 23230131,23233375,2323 Regional Central

Offices:
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/1 4 C. LT. Scheme Vll M, V.I.F! Road, Kankurgachi

Telephones
23237617 {, 23233841

Eastern

KOLKATA 700054
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 .{ 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 r 28329295,28327858 ~ 28327891,28327892
COIMBATORE. LUCKNOW. F~lDABAD. NAGPUR.

Southern

: C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUMBAI 400093
Branches: AHMEDABAD. GHAZIABAD. PARWANOO. BANGALORE. GUWAHATI. PATNA. PUNE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR.

KANPUR.

RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Preae, Delhi

