:.

IS : 6070 - 1983 ( Reaffirmed 1995 )

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAILER FIRE PUMPS, PORTABLE PUMPS, WATER TENDERS AND MOTOR FIRE ENGINES (

First Revision )
First Reprint JULY 1997

UDC

614.846.32

: 629.114.77

0 Copyright

1983

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN STANDARDS
NEW DELHI 110002

13lIAVAN. 9 13NIAlXJK SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Gr 8

October

1983

lS:6070-1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAILER FIRE PUMPS, PORTABLE PUMPS, WATER TENDERS AND MOTOR FIRE ENGINES

( First Revision)
Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, BDC 22
Chairman
SHRI G. B. MENON

Rejresrnting Ministry of Home Affairs

Members Brijbasi Udyog, Mathura SHFU hfAHasH C. AGARWAL SHRI P. S. B~~en~ee (Alternate) Steel Authority of India ( Bokaro Steel Plant) SHRI S. R. BANSAL Tariff Advisory Committee, Bombay SHRI A. CI~ATTERJEE SHRI F. B. SANJANA ( Alternate ) GENERAL Ministry of Railways INSPECTOR DEPUTY ( RPSE )
ASSISTANT SECURITY OPFIUER (FIRE ) ( NORTHERN RAILWAY ) ( Alternate)

Mizistry SHRXV. P. DEWAN LT-COL V. R. BANAHAW ( Alternate )
SHRI

of Dcfcnce

(DGI

) Centre, Bombay Service ), Government

R. R. DHOBLEY

DIRECTOR DEPUTY DIRECTOR

Bhabha Atomic Research Home Department (Fire Tamil Nadu, Madras

of

( rllternatr )
of Andhra

DIRECTOR ( FIRE SERVICES )

Home ( Police ) Department, Government Pradesh, IJyd&abad DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( FIRE SERVICES ) ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and SHRI G. N. GIDWANI New Delhi SHRI D. N. PANDIT ( Alternate )

Disposals,

( Continl.,ed on page 2 ) @ Copyrighr
1983

RUREAlJ OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication IS protected under the fndian Copyrighf Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in %hole or In part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the raid Act.

rs:6070-1983
( Con tinuid fro.% page 1 )

`Msmbcrs
SHRI A. K. GU~TA SXRX K. K. DAS GIJPTA Ccn~~rk~~ilding

&presenting Research Institute ( CSIR),

West Bengal Fire Services, Calcutta Steclage Industries Bombay Limited ( Minimax Division ),

SHRIJ. S. JAMSHEDJI
SXRIC. GHANARAJ (Alkma#r)

SHRI S. N. KUNDU

Fire and Safety Appliances Co, Calcutta Avon Services ( P & A ) Private Ltd, Bombay MA~AOINO DIRECTOR TECxmaAL ExEawrwB ( Ak6fnUt6) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay SXRIL.S.D. MBHERVANJEE (Bombay Fire Brigade), Bombay SXRI V. B. NHCAM( ~~~6UtUf6 ) Institution of Fire Engineers ( India ), New Delhi SXRX B. R. &fBRTA SXXI A. N. AHLUWALIA ( Altcmatrr) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) COL S. A. MOHILE SHIU A. K. SURX( Alfsmata) Steel Authority of India ( Rourkcla Steel Plant) SXRI M. MlJKXERJI SHRI C. D. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Central Industrial Security Force (Minisof Home SRRXP.N. PANCRAL Affti), New Delhi Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun Smu P. L. SEBAST~X Sill V. V. KIMMATKAR( Alrcrnaic) Kooverji Devshi and Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay Sxru P. H. SETRNA SARI N. T. PANJWANI ( Altrrnafr ) Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd, Bareilly SHRI D. K. SIRKAR Zenith Fire Services, Bombay SERI C~ANDRAKANTM. SHAH SRRI M. H. SHAH ( Alfcmafc ) Newage Industries, Surcndranagar, Gujarat SHRI J. V. SHAH SHRI B. J_ SHAH ( Ahmate) Municipal Corporation of Delhi (Delhi Fire SHRI S. S. L. SRARMA . Service ), Delhi SREI R. K. BHARDWAJ(Alternate ) Sur Enamel & Stamping Works Pvt Ltd, Calcutta Sanr TARIT SUR SenI S. SUR ( Al&mats) Dire;tcth;te General of Technical Development, New SHRE SUSHILKWI.~AR SRIU S. VENKASWAMY WAOLB SXXI V. H. MADKNKAR ( Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Urban Development and PublicHealth Department, Bombay
Aitcrnala )

SERI B. v.

SHRI G. RAMAN,

Director

General,

IS1 ( Ex-@ho Member)

Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary
SRRI K. M. MATXUR

Deputy Director

(Civ Engg),

ISI ( Confinurd on Page 33 )

2

IS:6070-1983

Indian .Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAILER FIRE PUMPS, PORTABLE PUMPS, WATER TENDERS AND MOTOR FIRE ENGINES

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard ( First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 January 1983, after the draft finalized by the Fire Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.
0.2 Trailer fire pumps and motor fire engines are some of the major appliances used for regular fire fighting. To be effective, these should be available in a serviceable condition at a moment's notice, and, for this, it is essential that the appliances are correctly handled and regularly maintained. These appliances have certain limitations and each is suitable for a specific purpose. This has been taken note of and necessary guidance for selecting the right appliance to cover a risk has been included. The general principles for the selection, operation and maintenance for any fire pump unit are the same. This standard may, therefore, also be used as a guide for those appliances which are not covered but are similar in general design. No fire fighting appliance can be operated without adequate manpower and extinguishing media. Recommendations for these have, therefore, been included in this standard. 0.3 This Standard was first published in 1971. In this revision requirements with respect to water supply and scale of equipments have been revised. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960.. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard..
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( mid
).

3

IS :6070-1983 1.SCOPE 1.1This standard lays down the recommended practices and procedures for the selection, operation and maintenance of trailer fire pumps, portable pumps, water tenders and motor fire engines conforming to : IS : 942-1982 Functional requirements for 275l/min portable pump set for fire fighting ( second revision ) IS : 943-1979 Functional requirements for 680-l/min trailer pump for fire brigade use ( second revision ) IS : 944-1979 Functional requirements for 1 800~l/min trailer pump for fire brigade use (second revision ) IS : 946-1977 Functional requirements for motor fire engine ($rst
revision )

IS : 948-1983 Functional requirements for water tender, type A for fire brigade use ( second revision ) IS : 950-1980 Functional requirements for water tender, type B for fire brigade use (second revision ) IS : 2696-1974 Functional requirem.ents for 1 12%l/min light fire engine (jirst revision ) IS : 6067-1983 Functional requirements for water tender, type X, for fire brigade use (Jirst revision ) 2. SELECTION

2.1The appliances covered by this standard are primarily meant for fighting class `A' fires ( see IS : 2190-1979* ). These may, however, also be adopted for fighting class `B' fires to a limited extent by using portable foam producing equipment.
2.2 Water tender, type X, is primarily intended for augmenting the water supply carried on the foam and carbon dioxide crash tender. But, it can also be used for the purpose mentioned in 2.1and may be very useful in localities where there is a shortage of water supply for fire fighting. 2.3 In localities where the ambient temperature remains below freezing point, it shall be necessary either to mix anti-freeze in the water carried in the service tank and the radiator tank of water tenders. 2.4 The selection of a particular type of fire fighting appliance depends upon several factors, Some of these are : (a) area required to be covered; (b) type of terrain which the appliance may be required to traverse while turning out to a fire; (c) width of roads, streets, lanes, etc, in the area to
*Code of practice for selection, extinguishers ( second rcoision ) , installation and maintenance of portable first-aid fire

4

IS :6070--1983
be covered; and (d) water supply available for fire fighting and the source and mode of such water supply. Table 1 shows the purpose for which each appliance covered by this standard is best suited.
TABLE 1 GUIDELINES CORRECT TYPE FOR THE SELECTION OF FIRE APPLIANCES OF

( ClaurC 2.4 )' SL No. (1) i) TYPE OF APPLIANCE MOST SUITABLE FOR REMARKS (4)

(2) Yortabic pump set, 275-l/mm capacity conforming to IS : 942-1982+

(3) a) Small factoric6 b) Railway yards c) Dock yard6

The canacitv of these numn6 being limited these Eannbt be reliedfi;EF foiughting large . the advantages are : light mass Towns or area6 of towns and portability which having very narrow enable there pump6 to be lanes where a trailer carried almost any where. pump or a fire engine Though not qualifying a6 cannot be taken a pumping unit dealing Rural area6 where with large fire6 these porponds are in abundtable pump6 can be very ance and may be useful for emptying basereached through ments, static tanks, traiploughed fields only ning, etc, and may be proTowns where water is vided as additional equipscarce, but could be ment where desired drawn from a river bed where a fire engine cannot be taken Upper floor6 of multistoreyed buildings ibr boosting up presrure of water pumped up from street level particularly where internal hydrants on dry risers are not fitted Civil defence work after an air-raid, when it may be difficult to reach a fire becaurc of road blocks and hilly tract6

h)

3 Tea gardens, orchards
*Functional rctGion ) requirement6 for 275-l/min portable pump set for fire fighting (second ( Confinurd)

5

rs:6070-1983
TABLE 1 GUIDELINES FOR THE SELECTION OF CORRECT TYPE OF FIRE APPLIANCES - Contd

I%.
(1)
ii)

TYPE OF APPLIANCE

bfOST SUITABLE ~014

REMARKS

(2)

(3) Same as portable pump sets 275-l/min capacity, except for use at upper floors of buildings a) Medium and large tories and workshops b) Store depots c) Dockyards d) Small towns where the travelling distances are short, but suitable roads exist e) Water relaying f) For auxiliary fire service for civil defence towns fac-

(4)

Traikr 6rc pump, 680-l/min capacity conforming to IS : 943-1979. Trailer fire pump, 1 800~l/min capacity conforming to IS : 944~1979t

These can be either towed behind a motor vehicle or can be manhauled These may be either towed behind a motor vehicle or may be manhauled. Where the distances ore short, as in the case of medium-sized factories, workshops and store depots, or where more than one trailer fire pumps are located so as to reduce the hauling distance, these are usually manhauled. In all other cases, a properly designed towmg tender, conforming to IS : 947196Ot is usually provided This pump, alongwith the towing tender, is more economical in comparison to trailer fire pumps, 680-ljmin capacity in so far as the calculation of pumping units for a particular risk is concerned. It cannot be used in places where it is not possible to take a motor vehicle, like narrow lanes and streets. The cruising speed of a vehicle towing a trailer pump has also to be kept within 35 km/h which is a safe speed for this purpose

iii)

*Functional revision ) . tgunctional revision ) . $Specification

requirements requirements for towing

for of tender

680~l/min 1 800-l/min for trailer

trailer trailer pump

pump pump

for

fire brigade brigade engine

use use

( rccond (mend

for fire

for fire brigade

(jirzr revision ).
( Continued )

6

Is:6070-l!B3

TABLE 1 SL
$I;*

CORRECT

GUIDELINES FOR THE SELECMON OF TYPE OF FIRE APPLIANCES - Conrd
MOST SUITABLE FOR

TVPE

OFAPPLIANCE (2)

REMARltS (4)

(3)

iv)

Motor fire engines, 1 800~l/min capacity conforming to IS : 946-1977,

carries 900 Urban districts where the This appliance litres of water and can of a pnmp provision move faster than the trailer escape/l35 m extension fire pump and towing tenladders with props and der unit. The two first-aid large capacity pump is hose reels used for immedesirable, or where condidiate attack on the tire on tions are such that a fast arrival, till the hose lines manoeuvrable appliance could be laid out. The is more desirable appliance may be provided with a 10.5 m extension ladder where buildings up to 12 m have to be catered for. For buildings up to 15 m height, provision of pump escape/or 13.5 m extension ladder may be necessary (pump escapes are being replaced with 13.5 m light weight extension ladders with props) Rural areas This appliance carries 2 700 litres of water and a portable pump set which may be used either for working of the water tank of the appliance or may be attached and carried to reach sources of water supply otherwise inaccessible to the appliance. A trailer fire pump of 680.l/mitt or 1800-l/min may also be towed behind the appliance. The capacity of trailer pump selected for particular areas shall depend upon the water supply sources (jrsr rtition).

v)

Water tender, type A to conforming IS : 948-1983t

*Functional tFunctional

requirements requirements

for motor fire engine

for water tender type A, for fire brigade use ( second revision ). ( Continued)

7

IS:6070-1983
TABLE 1 GUIDELINES FOR THE SELECTION OF CORRECT TYPE OF FIRE APPLIANCES - Conc,f
SL TYPE OF APPLIANCE

No. (11 vi) (21 Water tender, type B eonforming to IS : 950-1980'

MOST SUITABLE POR

llt31.4R~S

(4) (3) a) Towns or parts of towns This appliance carries 1 800 where the fire risk is litrcs of water, a 1 800-11 such that a high rate of min pump and a hose-reel discharge of water is service. It is therefore necessary for fire fightmore useful than a motor ing and a high degree fire engine of 1 800-l/mm of manoruvrahility is capacity especially where also desired of the tire water for fire fighting is appliance at the same scarce. hlost commonly time used appliance in all civil and industrial fire brigades b) Large industrial underiu the country takings, stores, depots, dockyard, etc a) Replenishing the water This appliance carries 6 080 tank of crash tender litres of water and a 3 200while engaged in fightl/min pump to match the ing an aircraft fire so pump on the crash tender that the fire fighting conforming to IS : 951operations may conti1977+,so that the rate of nue longer without replenishment may be the interruption same at which the crash tender consumes it. The b) Towns and rural areas also be appliance may where there is acute adopted for rural or urban shortage of water for fire fighting in areas where fire fighting water is scarce, because the large capacity tank and the high rate of discharge shall enable the fire to be brought under control quickly. Care shall, however, be necessary to ensure that water is not wasted unnecessarily while fighting a fire a) Rural areas where water This appliance has been supply is available in designed for special reponds or wells which quirements mentioned in are accessible to a jeep column 3 and, to keep the or a similar vehicle vehicle light, the hose-reel is not provided

vii)

Water tender, type X conforming to IS : 6067-I 983t

viii)

engine, Light fire 1 125-l/ min capacity conforming to IS: 2696-19746

*Functional tFunctiona1 $Functional $Functional

requirements for water tender, type B, for fire brigade use ( secondrevision ). requirements for water tender, type X, for fire brigade use (Jrst rcvirion). requirements for combined foam and CO, crash tender (second revision ). requirements for 11 25-l/min light fire engine (first revision). ( Continued)

8

IS : 6070 - 1983
TABLE 1 GUIDELINES FOR THE SELECTION OF CORRECT TYPE OF FIRE APPLIANCES - Contd
SL NO. :`I TYPE OF APPLIANCE (2) b) Hilly

klosr

SUITABLE Fori
(3)

REMARIU (4)

terrain where water supply is available for fire fighting and is accessible to a jeep or a similar vehicle

c)

Towns oc parts of town or urban districts where the streets are of such width that manoeuvring of a motor fire engine or a water tender shall be difficult, but where water for fire fighting is available

3. SCALE

For the purpose of calculation of the number of fire :appliances required for a particular area of risk, an appliance having a pumping capacity of not less than 1 800-I/min at 0.7 MN/ma ( 7 kgf/cms) and a lift of 3 m, shail be termed a pumping unit. The aggregate pumping capacity and the minimum number of pumping units shall be determined , as given in 3.2 to 3.8. The type of pumping units shall be determined in accordance with the guidelines indicated in 2.1 to 2.4. 3.2 The number of pumping units required for towns,parts of towns andurban districts shall be provided on the basis of population as given in Table 2. 3.3 Fire stations for housing the pumping units should be so located that the response time for fire appliances does not exceed a maximum of 5 minutes, and maximum running distance of fire appliance does not exceed 5 km in any direction. Fire appliances shall actually be run during peak hours to determine the approximate locations of fire stations from where the area allotted to them can be covered within these limits. 3.4 No area(s) having high fire risks or hazardous industries shall be left uncovered by any of the fire stations., 3.5 For large industrial towns and for areas involving high fire risk and hazardous industries, the scale of pumping units shall be determined in consultation with local fire authority on the merits of individual case. 3.6 For rural districts, the pumping units shall be so located that the running distance to the farthest village shall be not more than 15 km. The number of pumping units shall depend upon the terrain over which the appliances have to travel and the frequency of fire calls. But, a minimum of two units shall be provided at each station.
9

13.1 Pumping Unit -

IS :6070-1983
TABLE 2 SCALE OF PUMPING UNITS FOR TOWNS/CITIES/ URBAN DISTRICTS ON THE BASIS OF POPULATION ( Cluure 3.2 )
POPULATION IN LAKHS 0.5 1.0 l-5

No.
Two* Two

OF PUE%PINO UNITS REQUIRED ( one as reserve )

AOGREGATE PUMPINO CAPACITY NOT LESS THAN 1 125.l/min 3 600-l/min

Three Four Five Six One additional thereof

5 400J/min 7 200-l/min 9 OOO-l/min 10 800-l/min

2'0 2.5 3.0 Above 3.0

pumping unit for every one lakh of population
approximately to a minimum 9 000 litres of water of one such unit.

or part and a

NOTE-

portable

Extra water tender carrying pump shall be provided subject

*In towns/urban districts where one additional pumping unit should

only one pumping unit is authorized also be provided as reserve.

as per scales,

3.7 For individual factories, tea gardens, railway premises, dockyards, etc,

the number of pumping units shall be according to the proiisions of relevant Indian Standards for fire safety. Where no such standards exist, the scale shall be determined by a competent authority, taking into account various requirements, like the severity of fire anticipated, expected rate of growth of fire, intensity of heat that may be developed, accessibility of fire appliances, special constructional features and topography, and occupancy hazard. 3.8 Reserve - A reserve of 25 percent of the total number of pumping units, subject to a minimum of one pumping unit, at the fire station shall be provided for each of the above areas, in addition to the total number of pumping units calculated in accordance with 3.1 to 3.7 as applicable. 4. HOUSING 4.1 Pumping units shall be housed in properly designed fire station(s) at suitable location(s) to ensure the following: a) Adequate protection from the ravages of weather; b) Adequate facilities for in-service maintenance; and c) Speedy turn out, unobstructed by other road, traffic in front of the fire-station. 4.2 Pumping units shall not be left standing in the open except for the duration of drills or actual usage on fire.
10

IS : 6070 - 1983 5. MANPOWER 5.1 The number of men required to man each of the appliances covered by this standard shall be determined, taking into consideration the following: a) Size of the appliance, b) Design of the nppiiance and the function(s) it is required to perform, c) Accessibility to water supply sources, d) Total number of appliances manned at the station, and e) Recommendations of standing fire advisory council.

5.1.1 Normally six firemen are required conforming to 3.1.

to man each pumping unit

5.2 The crew shall be fully trained in the elfective use of the appliance. 5.3 It shall be ensured that the full crew for an appliance is available for speedy turn-out at all times, when the appliance is required.
6. WATER SUPPLY 6.1 The requirement of water supply is given in IS,: 966%1980+.

7. FOAM

COMPOUND EQUIPMENT

AND

PORTABLE

FOAM

MAKING

.7.1 Where any of the fire appliances, covered by this standard,

which is capable of producing foam (see Table 3 ) with the aid of portable foam making equipment is required for fighting class B fires ( see IS : 2190-1979-j 1, it shall carry : (a) portable foam making equipment conforming to IS : 2097-1983$, and (b) an adequate supply of foam compound conforming to IS : 4989-1974s preferably not exceedin g 500 litres in 20 litres capacity polythene jerrycans. 8. SPARE PARTS
8.1 Adequate spare parts for the maintenance of the chassis, engine and pump shall be provided at each station. This is particularly necessary where spare parts are not readily available. *Code of practice for provision and maintenance of water supplies for fire fighting. tCode of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of portable first-aid fire extinguishers ( second wuision ) . SSpecification for foam making branches ( jrst reuirion ). SSpecification for foam compound for producing/mechanical foam for fire fighting (Jirsf reuision ) .

11

IS : 8070 - 1983 9. OPERATION 9.1 The various operations which are possible to be carried out by each of

the appliances covered by this standard are shown in Table 3. The correct operation in each case is given in 9.2 to 9.12, as applicable. 9.2 General - The following shall be checked at the beginning of each tour of duty or at least once a day by the crew on duty: a) Water tank or hose-reel tank, where fitted, shall be kept full. b) Engine radiator tank and auxiliary tank for the heat exchanger, where fitted, shall be kept full. c) Fuel tank shall be kept full. d) Tyres, except in the case of portable pump sets, 275-l/min capacity. These shall be checked for correct inflation. The correct pressure given in the instruction manual for the chassis appliance shall be painted on the outside of mudguards, above the tyres, in white paint, so as to ensure correct and ready means for checking. e) Oil level in engine sump shall be up to the mark for correct level on the dip-stick. f) Battery, where fitted, shall be topped up with distilled water andthe specific gravity of the electrolyte shall be checked. Connections between the battery terminals and the electrical circuit(s) shall be checked to ensure that these are tight. g) First-aid hose-reel, where fitted, shall be checked to ensure that it rotates freely and that the tubing is correctly wound. The tubing shall be kept filled with water up to the shut-off nozzle and the nozzle shall be kept shut. h) Ancillary equipment shall be checked with the inventory list(s) for correctness of quantity and stowage. 9.2.1 The engine shall be started to ensure that it is capable of starting instantaneously and shall be run for five minutes at the beginning of each tour of duty. All lights, bells and flashing beacon, as applicable, shall also be checked at the same time.
- It is desirable that whenever possible the appliance is taken out on the road NOTE for running up and its brakes and road performance checked at the same time. Onl) one appliance should, however, be taken out of the fire station at a time.

9.2.2 Where a radio-telephone is installed on an appliance, its transmission and reception shall be checked at least once daily by giving a test call to the fire station control room. 9.2.3 While fighting a fire, the appliance shall be positioned as close to the fire as the circumstances would permit. While fighting class B fires, the appliance shall be parked on the upwind side of the fire to keep out of the
12

IS :

60704983

TABLE

3

OPERATION

POSSIBLE

FOR

VARIOUS

FIRE

APPLIANCES

( Cloures7.1 OPERATION

and 9 )
WATER TYPE TENDER, A

SL No.

PORTABLE PUMP Sars 275~l/min CAPACITY

TRamax FIRE PUMPS 680-l/min
CAPACITY

TRAILER FIRE PUMPS 1 800~l/min
CAPACITY

ENGINES

FIRE 1 800-l/ mil CAPAGITY

MOTOR

WATER

`I%e

TENDER, B

WATER TaNDeR, TYPE X

LIOHT Fxna ENGINE 1 125-y min CAPACITY (10) No No

(1) First-aid

(2)
hose-reel

(3) No No

(4) No No

(5) No No

(6) Yes No. The hose-reel tank capacity is 0n.y 900 litres

(7) No
YCS

(9) Yes Yes

i) ii)

Delivery of water jet?, spray or fog, takmg water from the service tank of the appliance

of foam iii) *Production or foam fog, taking water from the service tank of the appliance v) Delivery of water jets? spray or fog, takmg water from a hydrant

No

pi0

No

No. The hose-reel tank capacity is only 900 litrcs

Yes

No

YCS

Yes

YCS

Yes

Yes

Yes

YCS

of foam v) *Production or foam fog, taking water from a hydrant vi) Delivery of water spray or fog, je& taking from an open 01 static SUPPlY natural source, except well

NO

Yes

YCS

Yes, but by using the trailer lirc pump only

Y'cs

YCS

YU YU

YeS

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

vii) *Production of foam or foam fog, taking water from an open static. supply or natural source, except well *This operation is possible

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, but by using the trailer fix p""Lp only

Yes

Yes

YCI

only with

the help of portable

foam making

quipmerit

and foam compound

which

shall be carried

on the appliance. ( Canfinucd )

13

IS : 6070 - 1983
TABLE
OPERATION

3

OPERATION

POSS1U.E FIRE

FOR

VARIOUS

FIRE

APPLIANCES

-

ConM WATER TENDER TYPX X LIGHT FIRE ENQINB 1 1254 min CAPACITY
(10)

&.
(1) viii)

PORTABLE

PttMp

TRAILER

FIRE

TRAILER

SETS 275-l/min
CAPACITY

PUMPS 6804/min CAPACITY (4) No, unless the water level is within 45 m surrounding of ground level and the retentivity of the water level is satisfactory

PUMPS 1 800-l/min CAPACITY (5) No, unless the water level is within 6 m of surrounding ground level and the retentivity of the water level is satisfactory

~~OTOR FIRE ENO NES 1 8CjO-l/min CAPACITY (6)

WATER TENDER TYPE A

(3) Taking water a well from

(3) No, unless the water level is within 3 m of surrounding ground level and the retentivity of the water leyal is satisfactory

(7) No, unless the water level is within 3 m of surrounding ground level when using the portable pump set, 45 m when using traiier fire pump aet, 45 m when using trailer fire pump, 680-l/ min capacity and 6 m when using trailer fire pump 1 800-l/min capacity and retentivity of the water level is satisfactory Yes, As the pump, unless trailer pump used last the is

(8)
No unless the water level is within 6 m of surrounding ground level and the retentivity of tbe water level is satisfactory

(9)
No, unless the water level is within 6 m of surrounding level and the retentivity of the water level is satisfactory

No, unless the water level ia within 6 m of surroundi.tg ground level and the r&en& vity of the water level is satisfactory

No,

unless the water level is within 4+5 m of surrounding ground level and the retentivity of the water level is sati&ctory

ix)

Water

relaying

Yea.

AS

PU 1p ne`ar theI fire

the

last

Yes. AS the last pump near the fire, unless the whole relay is made yp of these pumps L Not applicable

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes. As the last pump near the fire, unlesr the whole relay is made up of these pumps Not applicable

I

x)

Filling the service or hose-reel tank of the :ame ap-

Not

Ipplic :able

Not applicable

YU

Yes

Yes

Yes

plialml -

14

IS : 6070 - 1983 way of the billowing smoke and heat and to make the application of foam more effective. When it is necessary to lay hose line(s) across a road, hose ramps shall be used and a fireman shall be posted to ensure that vehicular traffic cross over the ramps only. 9.2.4 In additon to the instructions for various operations as applicable, given in 9.3 to 9.12, the following general instructions shall be borne in mind while running the engine or operating the pump: 4 In case of portable pump sets and trailer fire pumps, every effort shall be made to ensure that the appliance is as near level as possible while being operated. b? When the engine of any appliance has to be run stationary for long duration, either by itself or for pumping, the bonnet shall be opened to allow cool air to circulate around the cylinder block to assist cooling. In vehicles having forward or semi-forward driving control, all windows and doors of the driving cabin shall also be opened.
NOTE -9.2.4 with a bonnet. (b) does not apply to portable pump sets which are not fitted

c>While
4 4

opening up delivery outlet valve(s) and building up pressure in the hose line(s), the driverjoperator shall take al! possible care. All pump and engine gauges shall be kept under constant watch and prompt action shall be taken to trace and/or rectify the fault if any gauge shows an unusual reading. The pump gland shall be examined from time to time and adjusted as required.

9.3 Using the First-Aid Hose-Reel Only - This operation may be necessitated when fighting class A fires (see IS : 2190-1979" ) where indiscriminate use of water is likely to cause water damage or where the size of fire is so small that it does not warrant the use of full sized jets. It may also be useful by getting a jet of water to work within a couple of seconds of the arrival of the appliance at the scene of fire till the larger jets could be got to work. 9.3.1 The engine shall be started ( if not already running) and the pump shall be engaged (in case of appliance other than the portable pump set, trailer fire pumps and water tender type A ) according to the manufacturer's instructions ( see maker's instruction manual ). 9.3.2 The valve between the appliance service tank/hose-reel tank and the pump suction shall be opened and a pressure of O-7 MN/me ( 7 kgfi cm2) shall be built up at the pump.
*Coda of practice for selection, extinguishers ( second reckion ). installation and maintenance of portable first-aid
fire

15

IS 8 6070 - 1983 9.3.3 The hose-reel valve shall be opened and the required length of hosereel tubing shall be pulled out. The hand controlled nozzle shall be opened and the jet directed at the fire. 9.4 Delivery of Water Jets, Spray or Fog, Taking Water from the Service Tank of the Appliance -This operation is necessary when fighting a class A fire (see IS : 2190-1979 * ) or for cooling down or while carrying out wet drill direct from the water tender (see Table 3 for the type of appliances on which it is possible).

9.4.1 The appliance shall be suitably positioned and the engine started ( if not already running ). The pump shall be engaged? and the water tank suction valve shall be opened.
9.4.2 Necessary hose line(s) shall be laid out from the pump outlet(s) and branch pipe(s), with required size of nozzle(s), or spray branch(es), or fog nozzle(s) shall be connected as required. 9.4.3 The pump delivery outlet(s) shall be opened after building up adequate pressure at the pump. The actual pressure will depend upon the size of nozzle(s) in use. 9.5 Production of Foam or Foam Fog, Taking Water from the Service Tank of the Appliance-This operation is necessary when fighting a class B fire ( see IS : 2190-1979* ) or while carrying out wet drill direct from the water tender ( see Table 3 for the type of appliances on which it is possible).

9.5.1 The operation shall be the same as given at 9.4.1 to 9.4.3 except
that: a) the portable foam making equipment shall be connected on the delivery hose line in place of the water jet or spray nozzle(s). Fog nozzle shall be connected on one or more branches if fog is also desired to be produced simultaneously. b) a pressure of 0.7 MN/m2 ( 7 kgf/cm2 ) plus necessary increase to compensate friction losses shall be built up at the pump before opening the delivery. cl all hoses through which the water-foam compound solution may have passed and all foam making equipment shall be thoroughly flushed out immediately after the operations are over. 9.6 Delivery of Water Jets, Spray or Fog, Taking Water from a Hydrant -This operation may be necessitated while fighting a class A fire (see IS : 2190-1979* ) or during cooling down operations or while carrying out wet drill, when the appliance is entirely dependent upon external source of water supply o:, in case of a water ten.der, when the fire fighting operations havt:
*Co+
extinguishrrs tNot of practice applicable for selection, to portable pump installation and maintenance tender, of portable type A. first44 fire
( secondrevision).

net fitted to water

16

IS : 6070 - 1983 to be prolonged beyond the capacity of the service tank, and tho external source of water supply is through hydrants (see Table 3 for the typo of appliances on which it is possible). 9.6.1 The appliance shall be suitably positioned and connected to the hydrant, using hard or soft suction, as necessary. Care shall be taken to flush out the hydrant before connecting the pump to it. 9.6.2 The engine shall be started ( if not already running ) and tho pump shall be engaged* in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 9.6.3 Necessary length(s) of hose(s) and branch(es) shall be connected to each delivery outlet of the pump. 9.6.4 The hydrant shall be opened gradually, taking care that the pressure on the pump compound gauge does not indicate more than 0.3 MN/ma ( 3 kgf/cm2 ) when hard suction is used. 9.6.5 The pump delivery outlet(s) shall be opened after building up adequate pressure at the pump. The actual pressures will depend upon the size of nozzle(s) in use. 9.7 Praduction of Foam or Foam Fog, Taking Water from a Hydrant This operation may be necessitated while fighting a class B fire (see IS : 219&1979" ) or while carrying out wet drills under circumstances similar to those given in 9.6 (see Table 3 for the type of appliances on which it is possible ). 9.7.1 The operation shall be the same as given in 9.6.1 to 9.6.5 except that: a ) the portable foam making equipment shall be connected on the delivery hose line(s) in place of the water jet or spray nozzle(s). Fog nozzle(s) shall be connected on one or more hose line(s) if foam fog is also desired to be produced simultaneously. a pressure of 0.7 MN/m2 ( 7 kgf /cm2 ) plus necessary increase to 0) compensate friction losses shall be built up at the pump before opening the delivery. all hoses through which the water-foam compound solution may c) have passed and all foam making equipment used shall be thoroughly flushed out immediately after the operations arc over. 9.8 Delivery of Water Jets, Spray or Fog, Taking Water from an Open Static Supply or Natural Source(s) Except Wells - This operation may be necessitated while fighting class A fires ( see IS : 2190-1979* ) or during -._ -___
*Not applicable to portable pump set fitted to water tender, type A. tCode of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of portable ex tinguishrrs ( swnd vi ision ]. first-aid fire

17

IS:6070-1983
or while carrying out wet drill, when the appliance is entirely dependent upon external source of water supply or, in case of a water tender when the fire lighting operations have to be continued beyond the capacity of the service tank, and the external source of water supply is either an open static supply or a natural source of water supply except wells ( see Table 3 for the type of appliances on which it is possible >.
cooling down operations

9.8.1 The appliance shall be set into the water supply and necessary lengths of suction and delivery hoses connected. The strainer and suction hose shall be secured by a rope and the strainer lowered into water, making sure that it is submerged at least 450 mm below the surface of the water and that the water level is at not more than the distance given against item (viii) in Table 3 for each type of appliance.
9.8.2 Necessary branch(es) shall be connected to the end of the delivery hose line(s). 9.8.3 The engine shall be started ( if not already running) and the pump
shall be engaged* in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.

9.8.4 The pump shall be primed and the pump delivery outlet(s) shall bc opened after building up adequate pressure at the pump. The actual pressure will depend upon the size of nozzle(s) in use. 9.9 Production of Foam or Foam Fog, Taking Water from an Open Static `Supply or Natural Source(s) Except Wells - This operation may be necessi: tated while fighting a class B fire (see IS : 2190-lq79t ) or while carrying out wet drills under circumstances similar to those given in 9.8 (see Table 3 for the type of appliances on which it is possible). 9.9.1 The operation shall be the same as given in 9.8.1 to 9.8.4, except that; a) the portabie foam making equipment shall be connected on the delivery hose line(s) in place of the water jet or spray nozzle(s). Fog nozzle(s) shall be connected on one or more line(s) if fog is also desired to be produced simultaneously. b) a pressure of 0.7 MN/m2 ( 7 kgf/cm* ) plus necessary increase to compensate friction losses shall be built up at the pump before opening the delivery(ies). c) al1 hoses through which water-foam compound solution may have passed and all foam making equipment used shall be thoroughly flushed out immediately after the operations are over.

0.10 Taking Water From a Well - Any of the operations given in 9.8 and
9.9 are possible while taking water from a well if the water level is at not
to portable pump set fitted to water tender, type A. tCode of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of portabk extinguishers ( second reoirion ).

*Not applicable

first-aid

fire

18

IS : 6070 - 1983 more than the distances specified against item (viii) in Table 3. In addition, it is also possible to pump water from a well for feeding the appliance pump of the small fire engine, by using a submersible pump, when the lift is beyond the capacity of the pump. In that case, the instructions given in 9.10.1 to 9.10.2 shall be carried out. 9.10.1 The submersible pump shall be lowered into the well, over its tripod, so that it is fully submerged. The delivery hose of the pump shall be connected before lowering it. 9.10.2 The submersible pump electric cable shall be plugged into the generator and the generator shall be started. The water coming out through the delivery hose of the submersible pump shall be used for feeding the appliance pump or the portable pump set, as necessary, by any one of the methods for water relaying described in 9.11 and the pump operated normally. 9.11 Water Relaying - The appliances covered by this standard can be used

for water relaying ( both open and closed relay ), subject to certain limitations. The limitations are the following: a) The largest capacity pump in the relay shall be used as the lifting pump. b) Other pumps in the relay shall be arranged in decreasing order of capacity from the lifting pump to the fire. c) If all pumps in the relay are of equal capacity, these zould be arranged in any order.
9.11.1 While carrying out relay pumping, multiple lines of the largest available diameter hose shall be used. The hose shall preferably be rubberlined. All these contribute towards reducing the friction losses and thus increase the distance at which the pumps can be spaced out. 9.11.2 The spacing of the pumps shall depend to a large extent upon the capacity of the pumping unit, number of hose lines used and the diameter and the type of hose. 9.12 Filling the Service Tank or Hose-Reel Tank of the Appliance -- The service or hose-reel tank can be filled either from a hydrant or from an open static source of water supply (see Table 3 for the type of appliances to which it is applicable ).

9.12.1 While filling from hydrant, the appliance is suitably positioned and connected to the hydrant, using hard or soft suction, as necessary. The tank filling operation is then carried out in any one of the following ways: a) From hydrant to pump and pump to tank through the 5-way control valve in the case of hose re4 tank where fitted. This is not practicable in the case of water tenders, type A.

19

IS :6070-1983 b) l:rom hydrant to of hose reel tank of water tenders, c) From hydrant to (auk through the 5-way control valve in the case where fitted. This is not practicable in the case type A. tank through the iilling orifice of the tank.

9.12.2 While filling from an open static source of water supply, the appliance is set into the water supply and operated as in 9.8.1 to 9.8.4 except that the delivery hose is not laid out. The tank filling operation is then carried out in any one of the following ways: a) From pump to tank through the 5-way control valve in the case of hose reel tank where fitted, except in the case of water tenders, type A. b) From pump to tank through the filling orifice of the tank by connecting a short length of delivery hose to one of the pump deliveries.
NOTE- The pump ( 0.5 kgf/cm' ) . pressure during these operations should not exceed 0.05 MN/me

10. FAULTS 10.1Mechanical Faults - If instructions given in 11 and 12 are followed carefully and regularly, there should be no major mechanical defect or breakdown on the fire-ground. However, minor defects may sometimes occur and the driver/operator should be able to trace the fault and rectify it on the spot. 10.1.1 The driver/operator shall thoroughly study the electrical, fuel and lubrication systems of the engine, with particular reference to the faulttracing chart, normally given in the instruction manual, till he becomes fully conversant,with these. 10.1.2 Mechanical fault may not always be the cause of failure of the engine to start. It may be due to faulty handling also. It is, therefore, essential that the driver/operator is fully familiar with the operating instructions for the vehic!e/appliance, as supplied by the manufacturer and is given adequate practice in its driving/operation under supervision of a competent person. 10.2 Pump Faulis - Centrifugal pump itself is very reliable and shall give trouble-free service throughout the effective life of the appliance. The difficulty may arise only in case of mechanical breakdown of the prime mover or defect in primer, when taking water from an open static supply, or because of faulty operation. Almost all operational faults can be detected by keeping a careful watch on and correctly interpreting the variations in the reading of the pump gauges, that is, the pump pressure gauge and the compound gauge. In actual practice, there may be innumerable minor faults which should not be difficult for a well trained driver/ 20

IS : 6070 - 1983 operator to trace and rectify himself. The interpretation of some commonly encountered variations in the readings on the pump gauges is given in 10.2.1 to 10.24. 10.2.1 General ( Applicable to All Cases ) -The following variations in pump gauge readings may be encountered in all cases where water is pumped through hose lines. The remedy is self evident in each case.

a) Sudden increase in the pressure reading on the pressure gauge may
be due to some obstruction in the delivery line, between the pump and the branch. The driver/operator shall immediately reduce pump speed and investigate the cause. It may be due to any one of the following: 1) Kinks in the delivery hose; or 2) Vehicle standing on the hose; or 3) Debris of collapsed wall, fallen on the hose; or 4) Shutting off hand controlled branch or changing the discharge pattern of a hand controlled branch from jet to spray or fog; or 5) Shutting off dividing breeching with control; or 6) Blockage of the nozzle at the branch by a small stone which might have passed through the pump.

NOTE-IF (6) is suspected to be the cause, the pump delivery shall be shut down and pressure from the hose line reieased, by disconnecting any one of its couplings before attempting to check or remove the stone. Failure to take this precaution may result in serious injury to the person checking the defect.

b) Sudden decrease in the pressure reading on the pressure gauge
may be due to any one of the causes given below (before investigating, the driver/operator shall try to maintain pump pressure by increasing the pump speed ): 1) Bursting of any of the hoses in the delivery line; or 2) Delivery hose couplings getting disconnected; or 3) Opening of a hand controlled branch or changing its discharge pattern from spray or fog to jet; or 4) Opening of a dividing breeching with control; or 5) While pumping from a hydrant, the flow in the mains might have decreased. In this case, the compound gauge shall start showing a vacuum reading. When this happens, the driver/ operator shall reduce the pump speed. to the pump being cut off, as in the cases given below: 1) When taking water from the service tank or the hose-reel tank, where applicable, the water in the tank may be exhausted; or 21

Cl Pressure gauge needle dropping to zero may be due to water supply

IS : 6070 - 1983 2) When taking water from a pressure fed supply, that is, a hydrant or another pump, as in relay pumping, the source of supply may have stopped delivery; or 3) When taking water from an open static water supply, the water at the source may be exhausted, or the water level may have gone down to below the suction, strainer or any of the faults given at 10.2.3(a) for failure of pump priming, may occur. 10.2.2 When taking Water from the Service Tank or Hose-Reel Tank of the Appliance ( see Table 3 for appliances to which this is applicable ) - The pressure gauge may: a) show a sudden increase in pressure reading. For interpretation. see 10.2.1(a). b) show a sudden decrease in pressure reading. For interpretation, see 10.2.1(b). c) show a zero presscre reading. For interpretation, see 10.2.l(c)( 1). d) show an erratic reading. This is due to the water in the service/ hose-reel tank going down to a level where air is sucked into the pump through the water tank and is an indication that the water in the tank is nearing exhaustion. 10.2.3 When Taking Water from an Open Static Source of Supply - Some of the common faults may be the following: a) Failure of pump to prime may be due to either a leak or an obstruction on the suction side. The compound gauge shall indicate a `zero reading in case of a leak and a high vacuum reading in case of an obstruction. When there is a zero reading on the compound gauge, the following shall be checked in the order given below : 1) Suction strainer shall be submerged approximately 450 mm below the surface of the water. 2) Joints between the suction hose and the pump inlet and between the suction hoses, where more than one lengths are used. These shall be tight and washers in female couplings shall be intact and serviceable. 3) Pump casing drain plug, or drain cock, if fitted, shall be tightly closed. 4) Pump delivery valves shall be opened and then fully closed. 5) Heat exchanger/cooling system by-pass valve shall be closed. Service/hose-reel tank suction valve, when the tank is empty, f-9 shall be closed. 22

IS :6070- 1983
7) Shut-off cock on the compound gauge connection shall be open. Occasionally, a leak may develop in the connection(s) between the pressure and compound gauges and the pump. When this is suspected, both shut-off cocks on gauge connections. shall be closed and the pump shall be worked by other indications, such as change of engine sound when the pump is primed, flow of a constant stream of water through the primer waste pipe, etc. 8) Where the primer is not fully automatic, the priming valve may not have been opened. 9) Where the primer is fully automatic, the engine speed may not be correct. 10) Slow running of engine in case of exhaust ejector, and other primers requiring high speed operation. 11) Primer not engaged properly. 12) leaking pump gland. 13) Air leak in suction hose. Change of suction hose, in which air leak is suspected, is the remedy because air leak in the suction hose cannot be detected or rectified ,on the spot. b) When there is a high vacuum reading on the compound gauge, the following shall be checked in the order in which each is given: 1) Basket strainer, metal strainer and the strainer at the pump inlet. The basket/metal strainer shall not be bogged in mud and none of the strainers shall be choked. 2) If the strainer(s) is (are) clean, the suction hose(s) shall be * changed, because in that case the obstruction could be due to a fault in the internal lining or inner walls of the suction hose which collapses as soon as the primer is operated. c) Sudden increase in pressure gauge reading. see 10.2.1(a). d) Sudden decrease in pressure gauge reading. see 10.2.1(b). e) Pressure gauge reading dropping to zero. see 10.2.1(c) (3). For interpretation, For interpretation, For interpretation,

f) Increase in vacuum reading on the compound gauge whilst working. It may be due to any of the following: 1) Drop in water level at the supply source because of pumping. This is no cause for anxiety, unless the supply is nearing exhaustion. 23

IS : 6070- 1983 2) Increase in the rate of delivery of the pump.
This is also no cause for anxiety. 3) Partial blocking of the strainer(s). If (1) and (2) are eliminated, the strainer(s) shall be cleaned before recommencing pumping. At times, shaking the strainer by the rope attached to it clears it of obstruction.

g) Decrease in vacuum reading on the compound gauge whilst work-

ing. It may be due to any of the following: 1) Rise in the water level at the supply source because of the rate of its replenishment being more than the pump off-take. 2) Decrease in the rate of delivery of the pump, when the rate of replenishment of the static supply remains unaltered.

h) Erratic reading on the pressure gauge is an indication that air is
being sucked in from the suction side through the strainer. The suction strainer shall be checked and submerged at least 450 mm below the water level. any of the faults mentioned at 10.2.3(a) for zero reading on the compound gauge.

j) Complete loss of vacuum on the compound gauge may be due to
10.2.4 W!en Taking Waterfrom a Pressure Fed Supply, that is, a Kydrani or Another Pump, as in Relay Pumping- Some of the variations in the pump. .gauge reading may .be the following:

4 Sudden increase in the pressure gauge reading. For interpretation,
see 10.2.1(a).

9

Sudden decrease-in the pressure gauge reading. For interpretation, see 10.2.1(b). gauge needle dropping see 10.2.1(c) (2). to zero. For interpretation,

4 Pressure

4

Tendency towards decreased reading on the pressure gauge with a vacuum reading on the compound gauge. This means that the pump is trying to deliver more water than it is receiving. The driver/operator shall reduce the pump speed till the compound gauge needle returns to zero. pump is delivering less water than what it is receiving and, if necessary, more deliveries can be worked from the pump or its delivery pressure can be raised. There is no cause for worry, unless the pressure reading rises above Q3 MN/m* ( 3 kgf/cma ) in which case the hydrant shall be partially closed/the supply pump delivery pressure shall be reduced, as the case may be. 24

e) A pressure reading on the compound gauge. This means that the

Is:6070-I983 `11. MAINTENANCE 11.1 Daily Routine - In addition to the general operating instructions given in 9.2 to 9.2.2 the appliance shall be cleaned thoroughly every day. The following tasks shall be carried out:

a) The following shall be cleaned and polished to a shine: 1) All painted parts shall be polished by soft rags or polishing cloth. Colourless wax polish shall be applied, if necessary. 2) All unpainted parts, using metal polish and soft rags. 3) All unpainted chromium plated parts shall be cleaned with soap and water and polished with polishing cloth after drying. 4) All unpainted steel, using kerosene oil and fine grade emery cloth and wiping clean with soft cotton rags.

j

9

All scratched paint shall be retouched as necessary with correct shade of good quality paint.

Cl Chafed parts of wooden ladders shall be revarnished. 4 All dull finished parts shall be burnished. 4 All cutting edges of tools shall be sharpened as necessary and all
gear shall be re-stored correctly.

f) Delivery and suction hoses shall be maintained according to the
instructions contained in relevant Indian Standard.

d Locker, doors, hinges, locks, lids and covers on the appliance shall
be checked for proper functioning, where applicable.

4

All parts of body work coming in contact with water shall be checked for signs of rust or corrosion and shall be cleaned and repainted as necessary. tank, all plumbing shall be checked for leaks and leaks rectified as necessary. It shall be ensured that all pipe-work is firmly supported. Standing on pipe-work or control rods and linkage shall be avoided while working in pump compartment, these shall be cleaned, polished and retouched with paint of appropriate shade as necessary. water tank suction valves shall be checked to ensure that these are functioning properly and are in the closed position.

3 In appliances fitted with service/hose-reel

k) Where portable fire extinguishers are carried on the appliance,

ml In appliances fitted with service/hose-reel tank, all drain cocks and

IS : 6070 - 1983

n) All lever and wheel type valves shall be checked to ensure correct

functioning and closed. P) The auxiliary throttle(s) shall be checked, .where fitted, for correct functioning after engaging the pump. 9) Engine shall be cleaned with rags using used engine oil and kerosene oil in equal parts. Care shall be taken not to disturb connections. *> The following shall be lubricated: . 1) Centrifugal pump; 2) Valve spindles, including pump outlet valves, all lever type valves and linkages, auxiliary throttle; and 3) Primer, if it is of the rotary type. In addition to the general operating instructions given in 9.2 to 9.2.2 and the daily routine instructions given in 11.1, the tasks shown in Table 4 shall be carried out, as applicable, at the fire station, once a week. 11.3 Monthly Routine - The maintenance tasks shown in Table 5 shall be carried out at the fire station or at the workshop as stated in the table. These shall be in addition to the general operating instructions given in 9.2 to 9.2.2, the daily routine maintenance tasks given in 11.1 and weekly routine maintenance tasks given in Table 4. 11.4 After Use- Immediately after returning from a fire and after using the appliance for fire drills or testing, the following instructions shall be carried out: a) In all cases: 1) the water tank/hose-reel tank, where fitted, the radiator tank and the fuel tank shall be replenished. lubricating oil level in the engine pump shall be checked and 2) topped up, if necessary. 3) if a heat exchanger is fitted, the by-pass filter shall be cleaned wbenever the heat exchanger has been used. 4) in case of reciprocating primer, water in the primer crank case shall be allowed to settle and then drained out if the primer has actually been used. The primer crank case shall then be topped up with lubricating oil of the correct grade. 5) in case of rotary primer, it shall be run for a short time to eject all water. It shall then be lubricated and turned by hand. 6) the appliance, including the ancillary equipment, shall be thoroughly cleaned and polished as necessary. 26
11.2 Weekly Rootine -

IS :6070-1983
TABLE 4 WEEKLY MAINTENANCE TASKS

(Clauscs11.2and11.3) DAY
OP

DETAILS OF TASKS
' Portable Pump Sets, 275-l/min Capacity (3) Trailer Fire Pumps, 680-l /min Capacity (4) I/ Trailer Fire Pumps, 1 800-l /min Capacity (5) 4

APPLIANCETO WHICH APPLICABLE
Motor Fire Engine, I 800-I /min Capacity (6) d Water Tender Type A (7) 4 Water Tender Type R (8) 4

WEILK

fl~APPLICAIILE x = NOTAPPLICABLE
Water Tender Type X Light Fire' Engine

(1)
(

(2)
i) Inspect tyres, including spare wheel and inner tyres of twin rear wheels, where applicable. Remove flints from tyre treads and from between twin tyres, as applicable. Test pressures and if necessary inflate to correct pressure. Check for uneven wear ii) Clean engine/chassis, as applicable, thoroughly iii) Check and, if ncc&ary, adjust fan belt, where fitted iv) Check road wliecl nuts. Tighten as necessary v) Get a radio technician to clean and test the radio telephone, whari fitted o i) Check all engihe joints ii) Check fuel, oil and watec_ connections on engine for leakage iii) Oil and grease chassis with particular attention to swivel pins, steering linkages, nipples, across shafts, etc iv) Grease fan, if fitted v) Adjust gland of water circulation pump, if fitted vi) Check and clean cooling system filter vii) Lubricate pump shaft bearing, where fitted and provided with means of lubrication i) Check clutch pedal for free play - it shall be not less than 20 mm at pedal pad. Report, if defective ii) Oil bonnet hinges iii) Oil door and locker hinges. catches and window winder mechanism, Tihere possible iv) Lubricate reciprocating and rotary primers, where fitted, with engine oil and grease metal to metal valves In case of reciprocating primers only, drain out water, if any, from primer crank cake and refill to correct level with proper grade of oil

X

i

i
Monday i,
I

::
X X

1

! 1

X
d

Tuesday

X

L/ d

i
f

X X X
4 I/

X 4 X
\/ 4

X 4 X
\/ 4

d 4 4
\/ 4

I/

q

Wednesday

(

1 I

4 4
r/ \/

4 4
d \/

27

1s : M)70-1Y55
TABL~ 4
r)AY OR DJJTAfLS

WEEKLY MAINTENANCE TASKS -- Giwkf
APPLIANCE TO wsrIctI APPMCMSt.F. #= X----_--.-------.----

w TASKS
------------.. . . .. . .. ---_. ----_----

WEEK
______ ------- --. ------ ---......

APPLICASILU NoT AFSW.ICABMS

.-------.--.--..-.-T

Portable
rump sets, 275-1/nlin Capacity (2) f `Cd''csday ~ [ vi) Check road spring anchtrragcs and spray or brush springs with penetrating or engine oil vii) Check searcJt/spot lights for free movement and lubricate as necessary, Alan check hgh t (3) x x

Trailer Fire
Pumps, 6B0.1/min Capacity (4) / d

Trailer Fire
Pumps, J MJfJ-1/mio Capaci\y (5) d 4 -------

Motor Fire
Engine, J fJOO-1/min Capacit v

Water Tender, T)'pc A

Water Tender, Type

Water Tc.rdcr,

Light Fire Engine

B

Type x

(I)

(6) $ d ----..-.. ......... ~1
x

(7] 4 4

cables
i) Check hand and font tbrakes for correct furu,tionipg ii) Check manual towing bar ;tnrd lubricate fotding hingc$ iii ) Examine suspension/shock absorbers including spring fixing bolts iv) Clean mgine/chossis thoroughly as applicable i j Check rmgiqe rx-mt rol$, tiiz. accelerator, throt dc, choke and ignition conncction$ a$ applicable ii) If l-rattery is fittr+, check ammeter reading to ensure dynamo IS charging correctly iii) Clean spark plugs ( for PWIOI engines only ). Scc maker's instructicur book for setting spark plug gap iv) Lay out all delivery hoses for airing and replace theac with frrsh stock from the store. Also clcwr, makeup an(J return to store all hoses after airing i) Check steering wheel for slackness. Check oil lcvd in strxring WI and top up, Jf nccrwmy ii) Ohrxk first-aid J.tosc-reel tu I.ring fbr crtw.ks/ physi~id damage and t.rcat with frcnch chalk externally before rewinding iii) Replace all delivery hosrs and test the ones
which arc rmmvtd --- ............

... .. ......
d /

r
Thursday I {
!

x
x

Hand brake only
/

Hand brake only
4

d
On trailer only d

x
d

x
v'

X d V d 4

d d V' # d

/ ~!

4 ~1 ...

1

d i t . .... .... ..... . ...... ................................ 4 d d v d ( d

..... .

;
I Friday

4 d V1 4

4

d' i. 4

/. 4"

i ~
!

I

4

/

d

4

d

4

L

[
S*turday i { I

x
x

x
x

x
x

4
#

#
x

i
4

d
4

d
x

x

i

4

t

4

i

4

4

1
. ..-

Sunday

( [

nrxxa mry ii) fJomplctc wwkly sumrnaric$ 106 bcok/hose card

in the

vchiclc

v'

w'

IS :6070-1983
TABLE 5
SL No.

MONTHLY MAINTENANCE TASKS (Claurs 11.3)
DISTAILS OF TASK APPLIANCE TO WHICH APPLICABLE

TASK

WHERE TO BE CARRIED OUT (3)

(11

(2)

i)

Fire

fighting equipment

Fire Station

(4) 1) Monthly output test of the centrifugal pump shall be carried out according to the instructions given in 12.1.2(a) 2) Once in six months, the deep lift test shall be carried out in accordance with instructions given in

(5) All appliances, except the portable pump sets

Every appliance fitted with a 1 800-l/mm pump or a larger pump All appliances, except the portable pump sets

12.1.2(c)

3) Vacuum test shall be carried out for the pump according to the instructions given in 12 1.2(b) and for the sucticn hoses according to the instructions given in 12.1.3 first-aid hose-reel 4) The tubing shall be subjected to a pressure test of 1.05 MN/m' ( 10.5 kgf /cm* ) for 24 minutes ii) Body work and engine, etc Workshop 1) All body bolts and screws shall be checked and tightened as necessary. At the same time, necessary repairs shall also be carried out 2) All lockers shall be checked for signs of rust and corrosion and cleaned and repainted as necessary. All locker hinges and catches shall also be checked at the aame time 3) The engine shall be checked, tuned, if necessary, and all self propelled appliances shall be checked for road performance. All defects noticed shall be rectified 4) Complete lubrication of engine and chassis shall be carried out and engine oil changed, if necessary

Motor fire engines, 1 800-l/min tenders, water capacity types B and X and light fire engines All appliances, except the portable pump sets

All appliance.;, except the portable pump sets

All appliances

All appliancea

29

IS ?'60701983
b) After pumping water only - The pump shall be thoroughly flushed out with clean water and all used hoses shall be flushed, cleaned and dried. Hoses shall be replenished with fresh hoses. This shall be in addition to 11.4(a). c) After foam production - The pump, hoses and all foam producing equipment shall be thoroughly flushed out with clean water. The hoses shall be cleaned, dried and replenished with fresh hoses. This shall be in addition to 11.4(a).
11.5 During Winters - Where winters are severe, the following instructions shall be carried out, as applicable, in addition to what is given in 11.1 to 11.4: a) As far as possible, the appliances shall be housed under cover and out of draughts. _W The cooling water and the water in the service/hose-reel tank when fitted, shall be treated with anti-freeze mixture and a warning notice shall be fixed on the appliance in a prominent position. All leaks shall be carefully checked and eliminated before adding the anti-freeze mixture and routine inspection for leaks shall be carried out at regular intervals, not exceeding 24 hours.
NOTE -Anti-freeze cooling system. mixture should not be used in engines fitted with direct

9 Appliance engines shall be protected with muffs.
NOTE-Serviceable muffs can be made out of straw-filled sacking. It is desirable that all cold air shall be prevented from reaching the engine parts to ensure a quick start in very cold weather.

d)

If the battery is fitted in exposed position, it shall be protected with sacking in severe weather.

12. TESTING 12.1 Periodical tests of equipment fitted/carried carried out asrgiven in 1X1.1 to 12.1.3.

on each appliance shall be shall be tested in

1X1.1 Ancillary Equipment - Ancillary equipment accordance with the relevant Indian Standards.

12.1.2 Pump - The pump shall be subjected to the tests given below: a) Monthly output test - The pump shall be operated for not less than 15 min from an open static water supply with a suction lift of 3 m, delivering water through the number of deliveries given in Table 6 through 30 m of rubber lined hose, conforming to Type II of IS : 636-1979 *. A pressure of 0.6 MN/m2 ( 6 kgf/cm2 )
*Specification for fire fighting hose Jacketed ) ( sacond rsoision).

( rubber lined or rubberised fabric lined woman 30

IS:6070-1983
shall be maintained. If the pump fails to sustain this pressure for the full 15 min, the reason shall be investigated and rectified at the workshop. The puinp gland shall be checked for excessive leak`age, if necessary, at the same time.
NOTE - While adjusting the pump gland, care shall be taken to ensure that water It is advisable to does not cease to drip when the pump is working under pressure. make the adjustment with the pump working at a pressure of 0.7 MN/m* ( 7 kgf/cm' ). A drip of 30 drops per minute shall be allowed. TABLE 6 NUMBER OF DELIVERIES MONTHLY OUTPUT (Chm CAPACITY0~ PUMP AND SIZE OF NOZZLES TEST FOR PUMPS 12.1.2 ) FOR THE

TEST i,~,-h-_----___---~ C Number of Deliveries to be Used

Size of Nozzle to be Used on Each Delivery 20 mm 25 mm 20 mm 20 mm 25 mm

680-l /min 1 125-l/min 1 350-l/min 1 800.l/min 3 ZOO-l/min

.

One One Two Three Three

b) Monthly vacuum test - This test shall be carried out immediately after the test given in 12.1.2(a). The suction blank cap shall be tightened on the suction inlet of the pump after ensuring .that its washer is intact and serviceable. All blank caps from the pump delivery outlets shall be removed. With the compound gauge cock fully open, the primer shall be operated for 45 seconds or till a vacuum of 600 mm (Hg) is obtained, whichever is earlier. The priming shall then be stopped and the compound gauge needle watched. If it falls back to 250 mm (Hg) in less than one minute it is an indication that an excessive leak is present and it shall be looked into. The excessive leak may be. due to the following: 1) Loose or defective pump glands; 2) L.eakage in the pump gauge connections; 3) Leakage in the delivery outlet valves; and 4) Leakage in the heat exchanger valve. c) Six monthly deep-lift test - This test shall be carried out once in six months for every pump having a capacity of 1 125-l/min and over. The method of test shall be the same as given in 12.1.2(a), except that size of nozzle shall be as per Table 7 and the pump shall maintain a pressure of 0.6 MN/m* (6 kgf/cm*) for 15 minutes with a suction lift of minimum 6 m in case of pump

31

IS : 6070- 1983

of 1 125-l/mm and 1 350-l/min and 7 m in case of pump of 1 SOO-l/min capacity.
NOTE - If pump passes satisfaction lift test need not be done. on the monthly output and vacuuIn test, a deep

12.1.3 Suction Hose - The suction hoses shall be tested immediately after the vacuum test given in 12.1.2(b). If the pump performance is found satisfactory during the vacuum test, all lengths of suction hose shall be connected to the pump and the blank cap tightened at the end of the last length. The vacuum test shall then be repeated. If excessive leak is detected, all lengths of suction shall be connected individually or together, either to a pump delivery or to a hydrant and subjected to an internal pressure of not more than 0.3 MN/m2 ( 3 kgf/cm2 ). Any leak present will be visible by the water spurting of the suction hose.
TABLE.7 SIZE OF NOZZLES ] SIzn OF Nozzm 15 mm 15 mm 20 mm 25 mm

[ Clause 12.1.2(c) CAPACITY ok' PUMP 1 125-l/min I 350-l/min 1 800-ljmin 3 203-Ijmin No. OP DELIVERIES TO BE USED one one
One

"Ilc

32

IS : 6070 - 1983 ( Continued from page 2 )

Codes of Practice for Fire Fighting Equipments Subcommittee, BDC 22 : 4
Convenar SHR~ V. B. NIKAM Members SHRI S. N. BANDYOPADHYAY Tariff Advisory Committee, Bombay SHRI J. N. VAIUL ( Akernatt ) SHRI EDWIND'SOUZA Electronic Control Devices, Bombay SHRI EUSTACE D'SOUZA ( Allemafe ) SriRr P. N. GHOSH Institution of Fire Engineers ( India), New Delhi SIIRI K. K. DAS GUPTA West Bengal Fire Services, Calcutta SHRI G. B. MENON Ministry of Home Affairs SHARI J. PRAKASH Prakash Security Devices ( India ), Allahabad SHRI PARMODPRAXASU( Altarnats) BRIOV. V. K. RAO Ministry of Defence ( E & D ) SHRI MOHENDRAPRASAD ( Alttmntc) SHRI S. S. L. SHARMA Municipal Corporation of Delhi ( Delhi Fire Service ), Delhi SHRI R. K. BHARDWAJ ( Altnnatr) SHRXB. V. WAQLE Urban Development and Public Health Department, Bombay Rtfipmenting Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay ( Bomb.. Fire Brigade), Bombay

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah afar Marg, NEW DELHI llOOO?! Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax:91113234062, 91113239399,91113239382 Telegams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices)
C*tral~ry: Plot No. 2019, Site IV, Sahibabad Regional OtHcw: Central,;_Manak `Eastea: Northern Southern : SC0 Bhavan, 9 Bal#dur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA700054 160022 Andheri (East), 323 76 17 337 86 62 603643 235 23 15 832 92 95 Industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201010 Telephone s-nsoo 32

1114 CIT Scheme VII'M,

335-336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113
E9 Behind Marol Telephone Exchange,

tWestern : Manakalaya, MUMBAI 400093 Branch O~IRMS: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed

Shaikh Marg, Khanpur. AHMEDABAD Road,

380001

5501348 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 &71 19 96 54 11 37 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 66 76 23 89 23 26 23 05 6 21 17 52 51 71 32 36 35

SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stags, Bangalore-Tumkur BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Kalaikathir Builbngs,

Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751001 641037 121001

Plot No. 62-63. Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 201001 Plot No. 43. Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD Savitri,Complex, 5-a-580, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD

5315 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 761003 L. N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD Nagar. KANPUR 208005 500001 E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 117/418 B, Sarvodaya Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T. C. No. 140421. University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM Institution of Engineers P. 0. Palayam, 695034

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010

( India ) Building. 1332 Shiiaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
Approach, P. 0. Princep Street,

`Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA 700072

.27 10 85 Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 309 65 28 222 39 71 Square,

tSalOs Office is at Novelty Chambers,

*Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja BANGALORE 560002

Printed at New lndls Printing Press, Khurja, India

