**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 928 (1984): Specification For Fire Bells [CED 22: Fire 
Fighting] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR FJRE BELLS 
(Second Revision) 



IS : aia - 1fifl4 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 



UDC 614 842 43:654 -922-4 




® C^yrlghl 1984 

rNDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK QHAVAN^ S BAK^DUK SILAK ZAPAfl MAEIO 

NEW DEtHl UtJOOi 

Gr 1 ■'*'''* J ^84 



18:928-1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE BELLS 

( Second Revision ) 



Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, BDC 22 

Chairman Representing 

Shri G. B. Menok Ministry of Home Aifairs 

Members 

Shri A. N. Ahluwalia The Institution of Fire Engineers ( India ), 

New Delhi 
Shri S. R. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Bansal Steel Authority of India ( Bokaro Steel 

Plant ), Bokaro Steel City 
Chief Fire Officer Municipal Corporation of Delhi ( Delhi Fire 

Service ), Delhi 
Shri R. K. Bhabdwaj ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K, Das Gx:rTA West Bengal Fire Services, Calcutta 

Deputy Inspector Generai. Ministry of Railways 
( RPSE ) 

Assistant Security Officer 
( Fire ) (Northern" Railway) 
( Alternate ) 
Shri V. P. Dew an Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt-Col V. R, Banahati ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. R, Dhobley Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Director Home Department ( Fire Service ), Govern- 

ment of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Deputy Director ( Alternate ) 
Director General of Fire Home ( Police ) Department, Government of 
Services Andhra Piadesb, Hyderabad 

Deputy Director ( Fire 
Services ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Gupta Central Building Research Institute( CSIR), 

Roorkee 
Shri J. S. Jamshedji Steelage Industries Limited ( Minimax 

Division ), Bombay 



Shri C. Ghakaraj ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



® Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act { XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 928 - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri p. Khanna Jaya Shree Textiles & Industries, Rishra 

Shri V. V. KiMMATKAB Oil & Natutal Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 

Shri S. N. Kundu Fire and Safety Appliances Company, 

Calcutta 
MaHaging Director Avon Services ( P & A ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Technical Executivb ( Alternate ) 
Col S. a, Mohile Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri A. K, Suui ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Mukherji Steel Authority of India ( Rourkeia Stee ] 

Plant ), Rourkeia 
Shri C. D. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. B. Nikam Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

( Bombay ^ire Brigade ), Bombay 
Shri P. N. Panchal Central Industrial Security Force ( Ministry of 

Home Affairs ), New Delhi 
Shri D. N. Pakdit Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri p. H. SethKa Kooverji Devshi and Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. T. Panjwani ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Sirkar Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd, Bareilly 

Shri Chandrakant M. Shah Zenith Fire Services, Bombay 

Shri M. H. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. V. Shah Newage Industries, Surcndranagar ( Gujarat ) 

Shri B. J. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri Tarit Sur Surex Production and Sales Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri SusHiL Kumar Directorate General of Technical Develop- 

ment, New Delhi 
Shei J. N. Vakil Tariff Advisory Committee, Bombay 

Shri K, Ravi ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ven*kaswamy Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New 

Delhi 
Shri B. V. Wagle Urban Development Public Health, Housing 

Department, Government of Maharashtra, 
Bombay 
Shri V H. Madkaikar {Alternate) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISl ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 
Shri K M. Mathxjr 
Senior Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

Fire Fighting Equipment Subcommittee, BDC 22 : 2 

Convener 

Shri G. B. Menon Ministry of Home Affairs 

Members 

ShriR.K Bhardwaj The Institution of Fire Engineers ( India), 

New Delhi 
Shri B N. Bhardwaj { Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 7 ) 



IS : 928 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE BELLS 

(Second Revision) 

0. FORE WORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 24 February 1984, after the draft finalized by the 
Fire Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Fire bells are mounted on fire appliances, such as fire engines, fire 
tenders, etc, and also installed in the appliance rooms of fire stations for 
raising alarms at the time of receipt of fire call. 

0.3 This standard was first published in 1958 and revised in 1964. This 
revision has been prepared so as its provisions in respact to materials are 
enlarged. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard lays down the requirements regarding materials, shape 
and dimensions, manufacture, workmanship and finish, and performance 
test of 250 mm diameter fire bell. 

2. MATERIALS 

2.1 The bell metal used in the manufacture of the shell of the bell shall 
conform to IS : 306-1968t with the modification that percentage of the tin 



* Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 
fSpecification for tin bronze ingots and castings ( second revision ). 



18:928-1984 

shall be between 20 to 22 and copper 78 to 80. Alternatively brass 
conforming to IS : 292-1961* may also be used. 

2.2 The mild steel for bracket and other items shall conform to IS : 1977- 

1975t. 

2.3 The steel wire used for the spring shall conform to Grade 1 of 
IS: 4454 (Part 1 )-1975t. 

2.4 Leather used for the strap shall conform to IS : 581-1976§. 

3. CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 The shape and the dimension of the bell shall be as shown in Fig. I. 
The tolerance shall be ±2 mm. 

4. MASS 

4.1 The mass of the shell shall be 10 ±1 kg. 

5. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

5.1 The casting shall be sound and free from sharp edges, pits, blowholes, 
scales and other imperfections and shall not be repaired or filled so as 
to hide casting defects. The unmachined surfaces shall be dressed and 
finished smooth. All sharp edges shall be removed. Mild steel fittings 
shall be given a suitable anticorrosive treatment. 

6. PERFORMANCE TEST 

6.1 The peak sound pressure level produced by each bell in an open 
ground ( see Note 1 ) or ancchoic chamber ( see Note 2 ) when it is struck 
by a mild steel ball with a momentum of 100 000 g.cm/s ( 1 kg.m/s ) shall 
be not less than 100 dB at a distance of 5 m as measured on impact noise 
analyser set to time constant of 0*01 second. The frequency of the strike 
tone shall lie in the range between 600 to 1 000 Hz. 

Note 1 — When the measurements are made in open ground, the ambient 
noise level shaU be at least 10 dB below the output resuUiag from the applied 
acoustic signal; there shall be no obstacle within a radius of i2 m and there shiU 
be no acoustical focussing effects or nearby parallel walls . 



•Specification for brass ingots and castings ( revised ), 

•j-Specification for structural steel ( ordinary quality ) ( second revision ). 

^Specification for steel wires for cold formed springs : Part 1 Patented and cold 
drawn steel wires — unalloyed {first revision ), 
SSpecification for vegetable tanned hydraulic leather ( second revision ). 



IS: 928 -1984 

Note 2 — Anechoic chambeis, ia which the sound pressure variations , from 
the inverse law do not exceed ±1 dB at the frequencies of measurement, are 
acceptable. 

Note 3 — For the purpose of carrying out this test, the bell and microphone 
of the measuring instrument shall be mounted at a height of 1 m above the 
ground level. 




ROUND HEAD NUT 



HANGING BRACKET 



SPRING TO KEEP 

THE CLAPPER IN 

POSITION 



SKIRT 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Fire Bell 



I IS: 928 -1984 

7. MARKING 

7.1 Each fire bell shall be clearly and permanently marked with the 
following information ; 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Year of manufacture, and 
d) Type of materials. 

7*1.1 Fire bell may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark, 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is govirned by the provisions 
of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS I and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safegua*^d. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the ISl Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



IS : 928 - 1984 

( Continued from page 2 } 

Members Representing 

Shki V. P, Obwan Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt-Col V R, Banahati ( Alternate ) 

Coi^ S. A. MoHiLE Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri a. K Sum ( Alternate ) 
Shtli Harish Salot Vijay Fire Protection Systems Pvt Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri P. H. Sethna Kooverji Devshi & Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. T. PaKjwani ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Sirkar Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd, Bareilly 

Shri J. N. Vakil Tariff Advisory Committee, Bombay 

Shri K. Ravi ( Alternate ) 



