**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 2702 (1965) : Method for Determination of Thermal 
Resistance of Textile Fabrics Guarded Hot-Plate Method [TXD 
1: Physical Methods of Tests] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 2702 - 1965 
( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 
Edition 1.1 
(2000-04) 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF THERMAL 

RESISTANCE OF TEXTILE FABRICS 

GUARDED HOT PLATE METHOD 

(Incorporating Amendment No. 1) 

UDC 677.064:620.193.52 



© BIS 2003 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Price Group 2 



IS : 2702 1965 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF THERMAL 

RESISTANCE OF TEXTILE FABRICS 

GUARDED HOT PLATE METHOD 

Textile Standards Sectional Committee, TDC 1 



Cfuilrman 
Dr R L N lYlNCAR 
Members 

Dh V SUNUARAM {/l/fe/naff to 

Dt R L N lypngdr) 
SHRI r S C1IANDRAS[K1IARIAH 
SlIRI M B CllLVIl 

SiiRr I B Dun 

SMRl R G 7.M ANI ( Alternate) 
SlIRI D R CUNOURAJ 

Seiri J O Lai 

Dr S M Mukhi RIFl 

SlIRI S P MUILICK 

SlIRI B D Naiiiiani 

SlIRI C I. CUIMA ( Alternate) 
SllRl R M NANAWAH 

SlIRI M V NAIARAJAN 

SiiRi I L PAin 

SiiRiS R KociiiiAR (/1/fernarp) 



Dr T Radhakrishnan 

SlIRI B R Snt[ Ar { Alternate) 
SlIRl K N Ramacmandran 

SlIRI H Saiiasranaman 
Dr M K Sln 

Dr S I TARARORfWAI A 

SliRiD S Nadkarni ( Alternate) 



Representing 
Indian Central Cotton Commlttcp. Bombay 



Government of Mysore 

The Silk & Alt Silk Mills' Research 

Association, Bombay 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Government of Mysore 

The British India Corporation Ltd , Kanpur 

Government of West Bengal 

National Test House, Cdlcutta 

Ministry ot Defence (DGl) 

The Federation of Gujarat Mills and 

Industries, Baroda 
Government of Mysore 
Inspection Wing, Directorate General of 

Supplies & Disposals (Department of 

Supply & Technical Development, 

Ministry of Industry & Supply) 
Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research 

Association, Ahmedabad 
Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Food 

and Agriculture 
The Millowners' Association, Bombay 
Indian lute Mills Association Research 

Institute, Calcutta 
The National Rayon Corporation Ltd , 

Bombay 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 2702 1965 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members 

Shri W. URE 
SHRl S. D. VASHIST 

PROr. R. C. D. KAUSlllK ( AHernate) 
SlIRl P. R. Yfri 
Shri T. Bai.akrishnan, 

Assistant Uiroctor (Tex) 



Representing 

Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta 

The Technological Institute of Textiles, 

Bhlwani 
Government of Maharashtra 
Director, ISI ( Ex officio Member) 



Secretary 

Shri M. Raghupahiy 

A.sslslant Director (Tex), ISI 

Textile Standards Subcommittee for Physical Methods of Tests 
for Wool, TDC 1 :2 



Convener 

Shri B. D. Naithani 

Members 



Ministry of Defence (DGI) 



SHRI V. Calloway 
Dr. N. L. Narayan 
Shri I. L. Paill 

Shri S. R. KOCHHAR ( Alternate) 



Cawnporc Woollen Mills, Kanpur 
Government of Rajasthan 
Inspection Wing, Directorate General of 
Supplies & Disposals (Department of 
Supply & Technical Development, 
Ministry of Industry & Supply) 
The All India Wool Trade Federation. Bombay 
Shri Parmanand Issardas Fatnani ( Alternate) 
SllRl K. N. Ramachandran Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Food 

and Agriculture 
SHRI P, R. Ylri Government of Maharashtra 



Shri H. S. Rajani 



IS : 2702 1965 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF THERMAL 

RESISTANCE OF TEXTILE FABRICS 

GUARDED HOT PLATE METHOD 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the [ndian Standards 
Institution on 15 July 1965, after the draft finalized by the Textile 
Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

0.2 The thermal resistance of a fabric is one of the important factors 
which influence the effectiveness of the fabric in keeping the body 
comfortable. This factor includes the thermal conductivity of the 
fabric. This standard prescribes a method for determination of thermal 
resistance. 

0.3 The Sectional Committee derived considerable assistance from The 
transmission of heat through textile fabrics' by F. T. Peirce and W. H. 
Rees published in Shirley Institute Memoirs, Vol XVIII and Vol XIX. 

0.4 This edition 1.1 incorporates Amendment No. 1 (April 2000). Side 
bar indicates modification of the text as the result of incorporation of 
the amendment. 

0.5 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this 
standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, 
it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for determining the thermal 
resistance of textile fabrics. 

1.2 This standard is applicable to all types of textile fabrics including 
blankets, shawls, etc, irrespective of their composition (that is, 
irrespective of whether the fabric is made of wool, silk, nylon or a blend 
of two or more textile fibres) and their construction (that is, 
irrespective of whether the material is a woven fabric, a knitted fabric 
or a felted material). 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose ofthis standard, the following definitions shall apply. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS : 2702 - 1965 

2.1 Thermal Resistance — The resistance offered by the fabric to the 
flow of heat when its two faces are at different temperatures, as 
denoted by the ratio of the temperature difference to the rate of flow of 
heat per unit area, the flow being normal to the surfaces. 

NOIE — Since surface temperatures of fabrics are difficult to measure precisely, the 
tomporature difference between tlio liot plate on which the fabric is put during test 
and that of air 20 mm above the other surface of the fabric will be taken to assess the 
thermal resistance. 

2.2 Tog — The unit of thermal resistance. This is the resistance that 
will maintain a difference of 10 deg between two parallel isothermal 
plates with a heat flux of one watt per square decimetre. 

Note I — By adopting this unit the thermal resistance of any fabric could be 
conveniently described by a range of small Integers (1 to 10). For example, a light 
summer suiting has a thermal resistance of I tog and 10 togs represent the thickest 
clothing that could be worn. 

Note 2 — Still air has a thermal resistance of 0.4 togs approximately. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot to this standard shall be 
selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 The apparatus shall consist of: 

a) hot-plate assembly, 

b) heaters, and 

c) devices for measuring the surface temperature of hot-plates. 

4.1.1 Hot-Plate Assembly — The hot-plate assembly ( see Fig. 1 ) shall 
consist of the test plate, guard ring plate and the bottom plate which is 
intended to prevent a downward loss of heat from the other two plates. 
All the plates shall be made from thin (1.5 to 2 mm thick) sheets of 
highly conductive metal like copper. The surface of the metal shall be 
finished to a true plane and lacquered to give a high emissivity. Each 
of these shall be electrically heated and maintained at a constant 
temperature by separate heating grids. 

4.1.1.1 The hot-plate assembly shall be housed in an air-tight wooden 
box of one metre cube provided with: 

a) thermostatic arrangement to maintain a constant temperature 
with an accuracy of ± 0.5 deg C at about 8 to 10 deg below the 
bottom plate temperature, 

b) arrangements to maintain a constant humidity within the box 
and to measure it, 

c) arrangements to maintain the velocity of air at 1 m/s. 



IS : 2702 1965 




-ELECTRIC HEATING GRID 



ELECTRIC HEATINO 
GRID 



EBONITE BLOCK 
MICA SHEETS 

BOTTOM PLATE 



A — Guard ring plate thermo-couple 

B — Bottom plate thermo-couple 
C, D — Test plate thermo-couplet 
EE — Tcit plate heater terminals 

FF — Diflfrrcntial couple serosa the tcst-plale & guard ring plate 
GG — Guard ring plate heater terminal* 
HH — Bottom plate heater terminali 

Fic. 1 Hot-Plate Assembly 



IS : 2702 1965 

d) suitable means to direct the air current so as to impinge on tiie 
specimen at an angle of 45", and 

e) thermocouples suspended inside the box so that the measuring 
junction is exposed to the air at 20 mm above the test specimen to 
measure the temperature of the ambient air inside the box. 

4.1.2 Heaters — Each of the heating grids used for maintaining tiie 
plates at constant temperature shall be provided with separate electric 
circuit with a control to adjust the current and meters to measure the 
current and the voltage to an accuracy of ± 1 percent. The current may 
be alternating or direct. The heating grids shall be insulated from the 
plates by means of thin sheets of mica. 

4.1.3 Devices for Measuring Surface Temperature — The surface 
temperature of the hot-plates shall be measured by fine wire 
thermocouples. The difference in temperature between the test plate 
and the guard ring plate shall be measured by a differential 
thermocouple. 

Note — Calibratpd thermocouples, such as copper constantan or copper-advance, 
may be used. 

4.1.3.1 Potentiometer having high sensitivity of at least 5 microvolts 
shall be used for measuring thermal electromotive force and other 
voltages. The wattage of the central heater may be measured. 

5. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 

5.1 Cut out from each piece constituting the test sample a test 
specimen ( see Note ) of 300 x 300 mm such that two adjacent sides are 
parallel to the direction of warp and weft respectively. Cut out at least 
3 more test specimens so that the total number of test specimens is at 
least 4. 

Note — In case the sample Is a woven fabric, cut out the tost specimen from a 
distance of at least 1 50 mm away from the selvedges. 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 Switch on the electrical circuit of the three heaters and adjust the 
current so as to maintain the temperature of the three plates at 33°C 
to 36 °C. 

NOTK 1 — All the plates are to be kept at the same temperature so that all the 
electrical energy supplied to thi 
normal to the fabric under test. 



kepi 
pis 



electrical energy supplied to the test plate is lost as heat energy only in a direction 



N()lli2 — In order to simulate the actual condition of sample when In use, the 
temperature has been prescribed as 33°C to 36°C which is assumed as the typical 
human skin temperature. 

6.2 Adjust the temperature of the air inside the wooden box to remain 
at a constant value of 25°C and the air circulating inside the box at a 
velocity of 1 m/s and the humidity at a constant value. 



IS : 2702 - 1965 

6.3 Transfer the test specimen to the test plate. If the test specimen is 
preheated {see Note ), this transfer should be effected very quickly. 
By means of suitable clamps, keep the test specimen in contact with 
the test plate and guard ring plate at zero tension and close the 
wooden box. 

Non-' — At low temperature when testing takes more time, pre heating may be done, 
if necessary. 

6.4 Read the temperature of the test plate, guard-ring plate and the 
bottom plate at half-hour intervals until the three temperatures show 
identical and constant values ( see Note ) and the differential 
thermocouple gives zero reading. Take again at least four more 
readings at half-hour intervals. Note down this constant temperature 
( T| ). Note down the current in amperes ( C) and the voltage ( V) as 
read from the ammeter and voltmeter respectively, of the heater 
circuit of the test plate. By means of the thermocouple kept at 500 mm 
above the test specimen, measure the ambient air tetnperature ( Tg ) 
inside the box. 

NOIF — [f the clifferenre in temperature between the successive readings does not 
exceed 0.1 deg, the temperature shall be held to be constant. 

6.5 Calculate, correct to two places of decimals, the thermal resistance 
in togs of the test specimen as under: 

Thermal resistance, in togs, (T - T-) 

of test specimen = a x x — — -, 

10 Cx V 

where 

a = area of the fabric in dm^; 

T] = temperature of test plate in °C; 

T2 = temperature of ambient air inside the box in °C; 

C - current, in amperes, to maintain the test plate at T^ °C; 

and 

V = voltage required to maintain the test plate at T"] °C. 

6.6 Repeat the test with the remaining test specimens and calculate 
the mean of the values. Report it as the thermal resistance of the 
fabric in the lot. Report also the relative humidity inside the box. 



Bureau uf Indian Standards 

BIS IS a statutory institution established under the Buieau oflndldn Standdids Act 1986 to piomote 
hamionious development of the attivities of standardi/ption marking and quahty certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters In the country 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all Its publkatlons No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
fomi without the prior permission in writing of BIS This does not preclude the free use In the course 
of implementing the standard ol necessary details such as symbols and si/os type or grade 
designations Enquiries relating to copyright \k addressed to ihc Director (Publications) BIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments Standards arc also 
reviewed periodically a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review Indicates 
that no changes are needed if the review indicates that changes are needed it is taken up for 
revision Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they arc In possession of the latest 
amendments or edition by referring to the latest Issue of BIS Catalogue and Standards Monthly 
Additions 

This Indian Standaid lias been developed by Technical Committee TDC I and amended by TX 01 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No 



IJato of Issue 



Amd No I 



April 2000 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan 9 Bahadur Shah ^afar Marg New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones 323 0131 J23 3J75 323 94 02 

Regional Offices 

Central Manak Bhavan 9 Bahadur Shah 7dfar Marg 
NEW DELHI I 10002 

Eastern 1/14 C 1 T Scheme VII M V I P Road Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700054 

Northern SCO 335 336 Sector 34 A CHANDIGARH 160022 



Southern C I r Campus IV Cross Road CHENNAI 6001 13 



Telegrams Manaksanstha 
(Common to all ofTices) 

Telephone 



323 76 17 
323 38 41 



337 84 99 337 85 61 
337 86 26 337 91 20 

60 38 43 
60 20 25 

235 02 lb 235 04 42 
235 15 19 235 23 15 

832 92 95 832 78 58 
832 78 91 832 78 92 



Western Manakalaya E9MIDC Marol Andhcri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Brant hes AHMEDABAD BANGALORE BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR COIMBATORE 
FARIDABAD GHAZIABAD GUWAHATI HYDERABAD JAIPUR KANPUR LUCKNOW 
NAGPUR NALAGARH PATNA PUNE RAJKOT THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 
VISHAKHAPATNAM 



