( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9186- 1979

Indian

Standard

GUIDE FOR SCREENING OF ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC 3
Chairman Union Members Public PROF S. SAMPATH Service Commission, New Delhi

and

Representing

Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI J. K. BHAT~ACHARYA SHRI RAVI PARKASH ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) BRIG N. DAYAL LT-COL V. K. KHANNA ( Alternate ) DI~WZCOR, STANDARDS ( S & T ), Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S & T )-II, RDSO ( Alternate ) JOINT DIRECTOR ELECTRICAL ( MRS ), RDSO ( Alternafe ) Philips India Ltd, Bombay DR P. K. DLJ~TA SHRI S. P. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI K. C. GOWRISHANKAR Instrumentation L&l, Kota SHRI A. P. GUPTA SHRI I. S. SULAKH ( Alternate ) Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI JOHN FRANCIS All India Radio, New Delhr SHRI H. S. JOLLY SHRI B. N. MALIK ( Alternate ) Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur MANAGER ( STANDARDIZATION ) ASSISTANTMANAGER ( STANDARDIZATION) ( Alternate ) Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, SHRI S. R. MEHTA Bombay In personal capacity ( 2613, Nitinagar, Roorkee ) DR K. B. MISRA SHRI V. A. MURARI Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras SHRI C. RANGANATHAN ( Alternate )

( Continued @ INDIAN Copyright 1979 INSTITUTION

on page 2

)

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9186 - 1979
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI N. G. NANDA SHRI T. R. MEHTA ( Alternate

Representing Hindustan Aeronautics ) Ltd, Hyderabad

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay SHRI D. V. PETKAR SHRI A. K. BABAR ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore SHRI K. RAMGOPAL SHRI SIHARAN DE ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHR~ A. SATHYANARAYANA SHRI V. MUTHAIAH ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. Hyderabad SHRI G. C. SAXENA The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' SHRI K. S. SODHI Association, Bombay SHRI C. V. RAGHURAMAN ( Alternate ) Directorate of Technical Development & Production SHRI R. SOMASUNDARAM ( Air ), Ministry of Defence SHRI I. C. MATHUR ( Alternate ) Directorate of Scientific Evaluation, Ministry of DR S. S. SRIVASTAVA Defence i R & D 1 DR R. C. GARG ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. SURYANARAYANA Ministry of Defence ( LCSO ) SHRI K. N. TIWARI SHRI P. K. SHUKLA ( Alternate ) Director General. ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI R. C. JAIN. Head ( Electronics ) ( Secretary )

2

IS : 9186 - 1979

Indian

Standard

GUIDE FOR SCREENING OF ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 4 June 1979, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 A screening is additional to the normal inspection and test procedures and it is carried out on all the items concerned. Its purpose is to show up any aberrant items which are likely to fail early or to be otherwise unsatisfactory. Methods of screening may take many different forms, especially when applied to unassembled components, ranging from repeating normal inspection and test procedures to specialised investigative techniques and it need not necessarily be fully related to performance or specification. 0.3 This standard gives details of the factors to be taken into consideration when an assessment is being made of the relevance and advantages of using a screening procedure to a particular situation. It also gives details of the factors relating to the choice of screening method and different screening methods applicable. 0.4 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on reliability of electronic and ,electrical components and equipment. A list of standards published so far in this series is given on fourth cover. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard deals with guidelines relating to screening procedures applied to electronic and electrical items. It deals with the factors to be taken into consideration while deciding the relevance and advantages of using a screening method with the factors relating to the choice of screening method, and the methods of screening available. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms in IS : 1885 ( Part XXXIX )-1979* shall.apply.
items ( first revision ).

and definitions
of electronic

covered

*Electrotechnical

vocabulary:

Part XXXIX
3

Reliability

and electrical

IS : 9186 - 1979 3. GENERAL 3.1 The factors used to determine the feasibility of screening in a particular

case are not necessarily the same factors used when deciding the appropriate method of screening and it is important to distinguish between the two. It is also important to recognize the different considerations that apply to components on the one hand, as these generally fail only once, and on the other to equipment as these may be successively repaired and Moreover special consideration may be required for the operated. screening of `one-shot' items, that is, any items which shall operate on a particular occasion after having been inactive in a rest condition for a long period or alternatively having been in a standby condition. 4. FACTORS
SCREENING TO BE CONSIDERED WHEN WOULD BE BENEFICIAL DECIDING WHETHER

4.1 Essentially, the problem

is to ascertain the reliability characteristics of the item as made and used without screening and then to compare these with required reliability characteristic values. In the case of components, the most important reliability characteristics are usually failure rate and useful life ( or percentile life ). For equipment, mean time between failures is usually the dominant reliability characteristic.

4.2 Some of the factors to be taken into account are described below. 4.2.1 ZdentiJication of Item - It should be decided whether screening is being considered in relation to a particular product, a family of products, or an unspecified range of products, or whether it is a repairable or a ` one-shot' device. It sho.uld also be decided whether screening is to be applied only for a limited maunfacturing period, or to a particular lot, or for an indefinite period. 4.2.2 Conditions of Use - Electrical and environmental be stated separately for each of the following phases : a) Component Stage 1) Storage of components prior to despatch 2) Transport 3) Receipt and storage b) Equipment Stage 1) Assembly and testing of equipment 2) Storage prior to despatch 3) Transport 4 conditions should

IS : 9186- 1979 4) Receipt and storage 5) Installation and commissioning 6) Operational use, including standby 4.2.3 Assessment Criteria - The following may be applied to any or all of the conditions of use: a) Attributes Complete failures Partial failures
NOTE These failures should be defined in the relevant standards.

b) Variables Characteristic

changes

4.2.4 Reliability Data and Characteristics - The following should be taken into account: a) Observed reliability characteristics compared with required values, and b) Non-relevant failures with specific treatment of the following: 1) Items defective on receipt, 2) Failures due to misuse, and 3) The removal of sound components which have been incorrectly diagnosed as defective. 4.2.5 Basis for Considering the Use of Screening - The following should be used as a basis for considering screening: a) When part of the reliability characteristic and use phase is identified in which screening is intended to benefit, for example, early failure period, constant failure rate and wear-out failure period. b) When there is prior knowledge of reliability of the item, including quality record provided by the manufacturer. c) Manufacturing stage at which screening is likely to be applied for maximum effect. d) The need to stabilise characteristics. e) The economic aspects, the cost of screened items compared with cost of `failure, including consequential cost, for example, loss of service. f) The risk of damage through handling, including any that may be caused during the measurement procedure. g) The possibility that the life potential of items passed by the screening process may be reduced. 5

IS : 9186 - 1979
5. FACTORS

TO BE CONSIDERED OF SCREENING

IN DECIDING

ON A METHOD

5.1 The choice of a screening method will be governed by the consideration

of the factors given in 4, and also upon the following: a) Operation to Simulate the Conditions of Use - The choice of the method will depend on the conditions specified by the equipment user. b) Operation to Excite a Failure Mechanism -The choice of the method depends on a thorough knowledge of the principle mechanism which, in turn, means having detailed knowledge of the design of the item and its method of manufacture. In making a choice, consideration should be given to accelerated testing with respect to the validity of the results and economic aspects. c) Experience
-Experience may show that there is a relationship between a particular electrical parameter and the failure rate of an item. In such cases, examination of that parameter may be used for screening purposes.

6. ASSESSMENT

AND REVIEW OF SCREENING

OPERATION

6.1 Method of Assessing the Results of Operation - Following the operation, the results should be assessed using a standard inspection procedure to determine the comparative reliability characteristics. This may be performed using attributes or variables techniques, as appropriate. As' a result of the assessment, a decision shall be taken as to whether the
items fulfil. the requirements regarding current and future specified and productions. what action should be taken

6.2 Review of Screening Operation -

The screening operation

should

be

reviewed in order to determine: a) Whether screening is achieving its objective. b) Whether the reasons for failure are understood and whether the failures are due to design characteristics or a manufacturing abnormality or misuse or whether there has been a wrong diagnosis. c) Whether the economics are still sound or alternatively whether it would be cheaper to take corrective action during manufacture. d) It is necessary, to distinguish between items of the same nominal identification that have undergone a screening test and those that have not.
6

IS : 9186- 1979 7. BURN-IN 7.0 Burn-in is the most commonly employed screening procedure. It is intended to identify, for the purpose of removing from a population, component and equipment types of items having inferior characteristics. The conceptual basis for burn-in procedures is closely related to the validity of a decreasing failure rate for components and equipment during their early life ( see Fig. 1 ).
FAILURE RATE

C

b

TIME

ABCFIG. 1

Early failure period `Constant' Wear-out failure rate period failure period

EXAMPLE OF FAILURE RATE/TIME PATTERN

7.1 Since burn-in removes some aberrant items, this can be a supplement to material and process controls which could have precluded the existence of such aberrant items. Because of this, burn-in shall be sensitive to the product source and to changes in production practices. This is the most likely reason for the fact that documented evidence of experience with burn-in shows such wide variation and attempts at generalization result in contradictory statements. 7.1.1 A burn-in programme, to be viable in both an economic and technical sense, aims to reach the acceptable failure rate condition as rapidly as possible without penalty to either the mean time between failures ( MTBF ) or the useful life of the item under test. 7.1.2 Different 7.1.3 If normal conditions within period concepts relative to time are described in Fig. 1.

operation of the item does not achieve the required an acceptable period of time, then some measure of 7

IS : 9186 - 1979

accelerated testing should be considered. This decision and the method(s) to be employed should be arrived at during the research and development Subsequent experience gained on the follow-up evaluation programme. and production phases may demonstrate the need to modify the initial burn-m plan to align with the defect evidence then available. 7.1.4 When burn-in is applied, it should be carried out at one, or more, of the following stages of assembly: a) Component b) Module c) Line replacement d) System 7.1.5 Many factors influence the choice of the assembly stage and procedures for burn-in, among which the economic aspects often predominate. 7.1.6 When a manufacturer may confidently determine from his experience of his product that the highest incidence of failures is due to component type of items this would obviously favour burn-in at component level, and certain generic types may predominate. However, this type of situation often merits a closer scrutiny. 7.1.7 In most conventional electronic equipments the point of failure is most often an individual component, but whether it was the prime cause of failure or whether its mode of operation, or the processes involved in the manufacture and test of the unit were the real cause, it is often a matter of conjecture. This second look may well lead to a decision to carry out burn-in at unit level. In such instances a degree of burn-in of component parts could also ensue as a part of the process. Equally, similar considerations can apply to mechanical system in relation to their dynamic part population. general, burn-in of components is part of an overall 7.2 Components -In screening procedure. Where used before assembly it can apply failure accelerating conditions which could not be applied after assembly, for example, power dissipation in resistors which would damage a printed board. On the other hand it cannot identify a component in which the unwanted condition will be induced or made worse by the process of assembly, for example, breaking of seals during lead forming with resultant ingress of moisture. 7.3 Dangers of Burn-En
7.3.1 Burn-in may lead to a failure which would never have occurred during normal use, for example, failure at a temperature which would not 8

unit

IS : 9186 - 1979 have been achieved during normal use. Burn-in may also induce a condition in a component which results in a subsequent failure in use which would not otherwise have occurred, for example, consuming useful life of a lifed item. 7.3.2 Because of the usually complex situation in which a burn-in process is proposed, procedures should be determined and revised by adequate assessment in each situation, including the following: a) The observed and theoretical knowledge of failure mechanisms,

b) The cost of the burn-in c) The cost of first assembly

process, replacements, of failures in use, `screening' process assembly, and and tests, their time

d) The cost and disadvantages e) The observed f) The observed relationship, g) The observed h) The observed Factors results failures subsequent subsequent

of other tests including during the burn-in during

failures

field experience. to the particular products by source.

(a) to (h) shall be related

7.3.3 Although the use of burn-in at the component assembly level, on the same product, may be justified, choice should be made between the two. 7.4 Assemblies up to and Including Systems Level

level and at the in most cases a

7.4.1 Environment - It is commonly accepted that temperature cycling and mechanical excitation would enhance the incidence of failures and reduce the duration of the burn-in period. The applied environment is not intended to simulate the in-service conditions, but should merely exercise the item under test in order to enhance early period failures. 7.4.1.1 The temperature limits selected for the test normally should be less severe than, and never exceed, the limits of the design specification. The quoted temperatures should apply to the ambient air temperature surrounding the assembly. 7.4.1.2 The mechanical excitation should also be less severe than specified in the equipment specification. Its only purpose should be to shake loose foreign objects or swarf, and to show up poor joints or badly secured nuts and bolts. The mechanical excitation can therefore be a sinusoidal vibration at a fixed frequency. 7.4.1.3 A typical test profile is given in Fig. 2. The limits profile shall be adequately specified prior to commencement. 9 of this test

IS : 9186- 1979
TEMPERATURE SWITCH -OFF SWITCH-ON PERIOD PERIOD

TIME

FIG. 2 7.4.2 Operation

TYPICAL ENVIRONMENT

7.4.2.1 The assemblies shall be activated during the burn-in procedure. They should be switched `ON' during the hot part of the temperature cycle and during the period of temperature increase. They should be switched `OFF' during the periods of temperature decrease in order to allow the internal temperature of the assembly to fall. 7.4.2.2 The duration of the early failure period will vary with individual assemblies, but the test time should be declared prior to the commencement of the test. The duration may be specified in either operating hours, the number of cycles completed, or the number of faultfree cycles completed. 7.4.2.3 It is necessary that adequate monitoring for failure be carried out throughout burn-in. Testing should be suspended at each individual failure occurrence and not restarted until that particular failure has been repaired. 7.4.3 Repair Philosophy 7.4.3.1 Failed assemblies can be repaired at varying depths, that is, replacement of failed components, replacement of failed printed circuit boards, replacement and rejection of complete assemblies. In instances where assemblies are encapsulated or potted, it is important to define whether burn-in ( and hence repair which includes replacement and rejection of complete assemblies) is carried out prior to, or after, encapsulation or potting. 10

IS : 9186 - 1979 7.4.3.2 Routine preventive maintenance is permissible during the burnin test, but shall be declared prior to commencement of the test. Lifed items should receive special consideration and shall either be excluded from burn-in, replaced before wear out occurs, or be operated for a reduced period of time.

7.5 Comparison

of Burn-In at Different

Stages

of Assembly

7.5.1 Table 1 summarises the advantages and disadvantages by burn-in at different stages of assembly.

of screening

TABLE

1 COMPARISON STAGES

OF BURN-IN OF ASSEMBLY

AT DIFFERENT

STAGE Component

ADVANTAGES 1) Tests can be tailored to individual failure modes 2) Maximum applied rated stress can be failures

DISADVANTAGES 1) Subsequent handling and test can undo benefits 2) Increases effective components cost of

3) No secondary

3) Possible delay in delivery

4) Saves rework costs Modules a n d line replaceable units 1) Can be performed potting/encapsulation 2) Deeper monitoring system test prior to 1) Probable large capital investment on test facilities 2) Interfaces between assemblies may not be covered

t h an

3) Quicker failure diagnosis 4) L i m i t e d iuterruption failure 5) Power secondary System failures is, to 1) Monitoring prehensive may not be comat

1) Comprehensive (th a t includes interfaces ) 2) Less subsequent handling produce further failures

2) Diagnosis to lower levels involves additional steps 3) Complete system stops during diagnosis and repair 4) Secondary failures, or those due to external causes, may be wide-spread

3) Test gear simpler and cheaper

11

IS : 9186 - 1979 7.5.2 System test requires the lowest capital outlay, while line replaceA combination of both is the most valuable ment units test the highest. because it combines the advantages and eliminates some of the disadvantages. The labour cost of testing will not differ greatly for a given time, but could be somewhat larger for line replacement units than for system testing, due to the larger amount of testing involved. The use of automatic test equipment increases the capital costs but reduces labour costs. Costs could be substantially reduced by using built-in test, when provided in the equipment, but as this does not normally test every part of the equipment, and since it is also on a `go/no-go' basis, the monitoring is less thorough and not all failures are necessarily detected. 7.5.3 Component burn-in is normally carried out by the manufacturer. 8. MISCELLANEOUS METHODS 8.0 Methods other than ` burn-in ' are also used for the purpose of eliminating possible failures, some or all of which may be specified prior to screening. 8.1 Examples of Screening Other Than `Burn-In' 8.1.1 Visual Inspection - Visual inspection with optical aids where necessary is effective in: a) Detecting b) Checking c) Locating errors in workmanship, of geometry, and the correctness loose particles.

NOTE- In repetitive visual inspection, steps should be taken to avoid operator fatigue otherwise the benefits sought may not be achieved.

8.1.2 Radiographic Inspection -If the items are already assembled within sealed cans or envelopes, radiographic inspection will be necessary. Radiographic inspection will also be effective in revealing flaws in materials used in the items' manufacture, whether or not they are in sealed containers. 8.1.3 Magnetic Particle Flaw Detection of Materials and Components Magnetic particle flaw detection can be used to locate cracks, discontinuities, non-metallic inclusions and segregation in ferromagnetic materials. 8.1.4 Application of Environmental Stress ( Stresses)- This type of screening utilizes temperature cycling, vibration, thermal and mechanical shock and constant acceleration either singly or in combination and may be used to highlight intermittent failures. of screen by storage at elevated 8.1.5 Storage Life - This consists stabilising temperature. ( Th is can also be used as an acclerated technique. ) 8.1.6 Hermeticity Screening - This type of screening determines the effectiveness of sealing by means of a gas leak detection device. 12

