**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7714 (1975) : Method of seability test for gasket 
material [MED 30: Gaskets and Packing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UPC 621-762-4: 620-193 19 



(Second Reprint JANUARY 1983 ) 



IS : 7714 - 1975 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 




Indian Standard 

METHOD OF SEALABILITY TEST 

FOR GASKET MATERIALS 



U 

Q 

Ui 






o 
a 

Ui 



I 



i 

I 

(0 



O 



!• Scope — Describes the method of evaluating liquid sealing properties of gasket materials. 

2. Apparatus 

2.1 The general arrangement of the apparatus used for»sealability test is given in Fig. 1 . 



MERCURY MANOMETER OR 
OTHER ACCURATE MEANS 
OF MEASURING PRESSURE 




BLEEDER VALVE / /HOSE 
FIG. 1 APPARATUS FOR DETERMINING SEALABILITY OF GASKET MATERIALS 



SEALABILITY 
TEST CELL 



2.2 Compressed Air Supply and Regulator — A source of compressed air with a suitable regulator to 
control the pressure at a point between and 760 mm of mercury. 

2.3 Pressure Gauge — A 760 mm mercury manometer or suitable pressure gauge to read the pressure 
accurate to, 5 mm of mercury column. 

2.4 Burette -^ A 1 0-ml capacity burette graduated in 05 ml with a connection at each end for flexible hose. 



Adopted 26 June 1975 



O September 1975, ISI 



Qr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 7714 -1975 

2.5 Leakage Test Fixture — The fixture shall include a suitable dial indicator graduated in 0025 mm and 
mounted as shown in Fig. 1. 

2.6 Bleeder Valve — k bleeder valve shall be inserted in the upper flange to bleed air from the fixture. 

2.7 Hose — A flexible hose of either rubber or plastic to withstand the pressures and media specified 
for the test being run shall be used for connections. Depending on the type of connection on the regulator 
and manometer, either hose fitting or hose clamp may be used to secure the hose. 

2.8 Loadmg Device — A suitable means of applying an accurate external load to the leakage test fixture 
and of maintaining the load within one percent of its value shall be used as loading device. Loading shall 
be a minimum of 08 MPa* to a maximum of 28 MPa. 

Note — A good device of applying the external load is a tensile machine. If a tensile machine is not available, any other 
means of applying a known load is satisfactory. This could be by dead weights, lever arm and weights or hydraulic ram. 

3. Test Medium ~ Unless otherwise specified, the test medium shall be Iso-octane. 

4. Test Specimen 

4.1 Gaskets cut from the material no be tested shall be cut so that the edges are flat, clean and free 
of burrs. The inside diameter of test specimen shail be 32-25 mm to 32*31 mm and the outside diameter 
44-19 mm to 4432 mm. The thickness of the test specimen shall be 0*8 mm unless otherwise agreed 
upon between the purchaser and the supplier. 

4.2 If variations are observed prior to running any tests, at the completion of running a series of tests, or 
during a series of tests, the apparatus shall be checked up for leaks. 

5. Conditioning 

5.1 Before conducting any test, the specimens shall be conditioned in accordance with their material as 
given in 5.2 to 5.6. 

5.2 Asbestos or Other Inorganic Fibre Gaskets [in accordance with IS : 2712-1971 Compressed asbestos 
fibre jointing (first revision)] — Specimens shafl be conditioned in an oven at 100±2°C for one hour 
and allowed to cool to 27±2°C in a desiccator containing anhydrous calcium chloride. Specimens from 
asbestos paper and millboard gaskets shall be conditioned in an oven for four hours at 100±2X and 
allowed to cool to 27±2*C. 

5.3 Cork; Cork and Rubber; and Cork and Cellular Rubber Gaskets [in accordance with IS : 4253 (Part I)- 
1967 Specification for cork composition sheets : Part I Plain cork; and IS : 4253 (Part II )-1 968 Speci- 
fication for cork composition sheets: Part II cork and rubber] — Specmens shall be conditioned at 
least for 46 hours in a controlled humidity room or in a closed chamber with gentle circulation of the air 
at 27±2°C and 65±5 percent relative humidity. 

5.4 Cellulose or Other Organic Fibre Gaskets (in accordance with IS : 5566- 1970 Specification for vegetable 
fibre base jointing material) — Specimens shall be pre-conditioned for 4 hours at 27±2°C in a closed 
chamber, containing anhydrous calcium chloride as a desrbcaxJt, The air in the chamber shall be circu- 
lated by gentle mechanical circulation of air and conditioned for at least 20 hours at 27^2*^0 and 65±5 
percent relative humidity. 

5.5 If a mechanical means of maintaining 65±5 percent relative humidity is not available, a tray containing 
a saturated solution of reagent grade magnesium nitrate [Mg (NOa)2.6H20] shall be placed in the chamber 
to provide the required relative humidity. In all cases where testing is conducted outside the area of speci- 
fied humidity, specimens shall be removed from the chamber one at a time as needed. 

5.6 Unless otherwise specified, test shall be conducted at room temperature that is 27±2**C. 

6. Methods of Test 

6.1 The specimen shall be removed ^from the conditioning chamber and assembled in the leakage test 

fixture. 

6.2 The assembly fixture shall be placed in the device for applying external load and the load specified 
by the user of the material being tested, shall be gradually applied in 20 seconds. This load shall bis main- 
tained for one minute. 

Note — The fixture can be used from 0-8 MPa to 28 MPa. 

6.3 The dial indicator shall be set to zero and the knurled nut in thd test fixture tightened to maintain this 
zero reading within ± 002 mm as the external load is removed. 



*1 MPa ^ 10kgf/cn>2. 



IS : 7714-1975 

6.4 The loaded test cell and fixture shall be placed on the burette stand. With the bleeder valve on the 
test cell slightly open, the burette tube shall be filled with the specified test medium and the air from the 
system allowed to bleed. 

6.5 After three minutes from the lock up (6,3) which includes the time required for the step outlined in 
6.4, the internal pressure specified by the user of the material being tested shall be applied. The variation 
in pressure during the test shall be within ±5 mm manometer reading. All connections shall be checked 

for leaks. 

Note » Internal pressure on the medium shall be specified by the user of the material being tested. A pressu.e of 760 mm 
of mercury is recommended as a starting point. 

6.6 After the pressure has been applied for five minutes to the test medium, the liquid level in burette 
shall be recorded to the nearest 0*05 ml. This shall be taken as the initial reading. The readings shall 
be continuously recorded at one minute intervals. When the difference between the readings is constant 
(within 10 percent) for three successive readings, the recording of reading shall be stopped. The average 
difference for three successive one minute readings shall then be calculated and multiplying this average 
difference by 60 the result shall be expressed as millilitres of leakage per hour. 

6.7 Each test shall consist of a minimum of two specimens. The leakage as the average of two consecutive 
specimens having average leakage rates within 20 percent of each other shall be reported. 

7. Test Report 

7.1 The report shall include the following; 

a) Type of material tested, 

b) Average leakage in millilitres per hour, 

c) Average leakage of the two consecutive tests used in determining the average for the test specimen, 

d) Number of specimens tested and the maximum and minimum time in minutes required for obtaining 
three consecutive leakage rates within 10 percent, and 

e) External and internal pressures used, the medium used and the specimen thickness. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The method described in this standard is designed to compare measureable leakage rates and sealing 
properties of various gasket materials under controlled conditions. It is intended as a measure of leakage 
through the gaskets or between the gaskets and the flange faces, or through both. Leakage may also be 
caused by flange warp, surface finish, stress relation, etc. Therefore, the results obtained by this test 
shall be correlated with actual working conditions. The method may be used as a routine test when 
agreed upon by the purchaser and the supplier. In the preparation of this standard assistance has been 
derived from ASTM F-37-1968 Standard method of test for sealability of gasket material, issued by thai 
American Society for Testing and Materials. 

3 

Printed atSlmco Printino Press. Delhi, Indta 



