WaT HTA IS 369 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


na aaa wag rasia WA gier 
At pia AATE 
(iter gaor ) 


Household Electric Direct — 
Acting Room Heaters — 
Performance Requirements 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 97.100.10 


© BIS 2019 


ada AA e 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Ba? HAF ei. 9 geigigig AHL AMT, as ect (10002 


wll, HESS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2019 Price Group 6 


Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee, ETD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee has been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 


This standard specifies the performance requirements for direct-acting room heaters for household and 
similar purposes. 


This standard was first published in 1952. Its first revision was done in 1965, the second revision in 1983 and 
the third revision in 1992. This (fourth revision) has been undertaken to incorporate important performance 
requirements which were earlier not covered in the standard and to incorporate performance requirements of 
hot airfans earlier covered under IS 4283. 


The general and safety requirements have been covered in a separate standard. 


Following new performance requirements have been made in this fourth revision of the standard which was 
not specified in the earlier version: 

a) Mass of the heater; 

b) Length of the supply cord; 

c) Temperature rises of air-outlet grilles and external surfaces; 

d) Temperature rises of surfaces surrounding the heater; 

e) Warming-up time of the heater; 

f) Stability of room temperature; 

g) Set-back; 

h) Frost protection temperature; 

i)  Inrush current; 

j) Effect of radiant heat; and 

k) Usable power. 


This standard is based on IEC 60675, Edition 2.1 (1998) ‘Household Electric Direct-acting Room Heaters — 
Methods for Measuring Performance’ issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) with 
following modifications: 


a) Schedule of type test and acceptance test has been incorporated; and 
b) Ambient test condition changed to 27°C; 


With the publication of this standard, IS 4283, ‘Specification for Hot Air Fans’ shall be withdrawn, the 
requirements of which have now been covered in this fourth revision. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


15 369 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


HOUSEHOLD ELECTRIC DIRECT — ACTING ROOM 
HEATERS — PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard applies to electric direct-acting room 
heaters. They may be portable, stationary, fixed, or 
built-in. 


Notes — Example of the heaters covered in this standard 
are: 


a) Panel heater 

b) Convector heater 
c) Fan heater 

d) Radiant heater 


e)  Visibly glowing radiant heater 
It does not apply to: 


a) Thermal-storage room heaters; 


b) Heating appliances incorporated in the building 
structure; 


c) Central heating systems; 
d) Heaters connected to an air duct; and 


e) Wall-paper carpets or drapes incorporating flexible 
heating elements. 


This standard defines the main performance 
characteristics of direct-acting room heaters and 
specifies methods for measuring these 
characteristics, for the information of users. 


These performance requirements are additional to the 
safety requirements given in IS 302-2-30. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards are necessary adjunct to 
this standard. 


IS No. Title 
IS 302-2-30 Safety of household and similar 
(2007) electrical appliances : Part 2 


Particular requirements for room 
heaters 


IS 2500 (Part1): Sampling procedures for 
2000 inspection by attributes : Part 1 
Sampling schemes indexed by 
acceptance quality limit (AQL) for 

lot-by-lot inspection 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Direct-acting Room Heater 


Appliance which converts electrical energy into heat 
after a demand for heat has arisen in a room and 
transfers this heat to the room without delay. 


NOTE — In this standard, a direct-acting room heater 
is referred to as a heater. 


3.2 Panel Heater 


Heater in which the temperature rise of all surfaces 
in contact with the circulating air does not exceed 75 
K in normal use. 


NOTES 
1 Panel heaters may be oil filled. 


2 Panel heaters may be in column form. 
3.3 Convector Heater 


Heater in which the temperature rise of at least one 
non-visible part in contact with the circulating air 
exceeds 75 K in normal use. The air is discharged 
through one or more outlets by natural convection. 


NOTE — “Non-visible part” means that the part cannot 
be seen from a point situated 2 m in front of the heater 
and 1.2 m above the floor when the heater is installed. 


3.4 Fan Heater 


Heater in which the movement of air through it is 
accelerated by a fan. 


3.5 Radiant Heater 


Heater in which the temperature rise of at least one 
visible surface exceeds 75 K in normal use. 


NOTE — The visible surface may be seen through solid 
material which is transparent to heat radiation. 
Materials such as quartz glass are considered to be 
transparent to heat radiation, while ordinary glass is not. 


3.6 Visibly Glowing Radiant Heater 


Radiant heater in which the heating element is visible 
from the outside of the heater and has a temperature 
of at least 650 °C in normal use. 


15 369 : 2019 


3.7 Ambient Temperature Thermostat 


Thermostat, sensitive to the room temperature and 
adjustable by the user, with at least the sensing part 
incorporated in the heater. 


3.8 Programmer 


Control for regulating the room temperature 
according to a programme preset by the user and 
which is incorporated in the heater. 


3.9 Set-back Device 


Device which allows the room temperature to be 
maintained at a lower value than the pre-set 
temperature without changing the setting of the 
ambient temperature thermostat. 


3.10 Frost Protection Means 


Means which allows the room temperature to be 
maintained at a value of 7 °C 3 °C. 


NOTE — The means may be a particular setting of the 
ambient temperature thermostat. 


3.11 Rated Power Input 


Power input assigned to the heater by the 
manufacturer. 


3.12 Energy Ratio 


Ratio between the energy consumption during a 
representative period of operation and the product 
of the rated power input and this period. 


3.13 Average Room Temperature 


The arithmetic average of the maximum and minimum 
room temperatures for a setting of the ambient 
temperature thermostat. 


3.14 Amplitude 


Difference between the maximum and the minimum 
room temperatures for a setting of the ambient 
temperature thermostat. 


3.15 Drift 


Difference between the average room temperatures 
obtained at different energy ratios for a setting of 
the ambient temperature thermostat. 


3.16 Usable power 

Average power input consumed by the heater. 
4 CLASSIFICATION 

4.1 According to Type 


a) Panel heater; 
b) Convector heater; 
c) Fan heater; 


d) Radiant heater; 
e) Visibly glowing radiant heater. 


The type of heater shall be stated by the 
manufacturer. 


NOTES 
1 A heater may be a combination of two or more 
types. 


2 If there is doubt regarding the type of heater, the 
temperature rise of the relevant surfaces is 
determined. 


3 Examples of types of heaters are shown in Fig. 1. 
4.2 According to Regulating Features 


a) Heater without regulation; 

b) Heater with adjustable power input; 

c) Heater with regulated air flow (fan heaters 
only); 

d) Heater with an ambient temperature 
thermostat; 

e) Heater with a programmer; -heater with a set- 
back device; 


f) Heater with frost protection means. 


If the heater has features such as means for 
connection to an external control, details are to be 
stated. 


NOTE — An example is a heater having means for 
receiving an external signal for operating the set-back 
device. 


A heater may have more than one regulating feature. 
The regulating features of the heater shall be stated. 


5 LISTOF MEASUREMENTS 


5.1 Performance is determined by means of the 
following measurements: 


a) Dimensions and mass of the heater, length 
of the supply cord (see 7) 


NOTE — This measurement is suitable for all heaters. 


b) Temperature rises of air-outlet grilles and 
external surfaces (see 8) 


NOTES 


1 The measurement of temperature rises of air-outlet 
grilles is suitable for convector heaters and fan 
heaters. 


2 The measurement of temperature rises of external 
surfaces is suitable for all heaters but is not 
applicable to those for mounting at a height above 
1.8 m, to the back of wall-mounted heaters and to 


visibly glowing radiant heaters. 


c) Temperature rises of surfaces surrounding 
the heater (see 9) 


NOTE — This measurement is suitable for all heaters. 


d) Warming-up time of the heater 


(see 10) 


NOTE — This measurement is suitable for all heaters. 


e) Stability of room temperature (see 11) 


NOTE — This measurement is suitable for heaters with 
an ambient temperature thermostat. 


D Set-back (see 12) 


NOTE — This measurement is suitable for heaters with 
a set-back device. 


g) Frost protection temperature (see 13) 


NOTE — This measurement is suitable for heaters with 
frost protection means. 


h) Inrush current (see 14) 
NOTE — This measurement is suitable for all heaters. 


i) Effect of radiant heat (see 15) 


NOTE — This measurement is suitable for all heaters 
except fan heaters and heaters for mounting at a height 
above 1.8 m. 


The results of these measurements may be given ina 
test report. 


NOTE — An example of test report format is shown 
in Annex A. 


j) Usable power (see 16). 
NOTE — This measurement is suitable for all heaters. 


6 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR 
MEASUREMENTS 


6.1 Unless otherwise specified, measurements are 
made under the following conditions: 


a) Supply Voltage 


The heater is supplied at a voltage which gives the 
rated power input under steady conditions. If a power 
input range is marked on the heater, the voltage is 
that giving the mean value of the range. 


NOTES 


1 Heaters with PTC heating elements are supplied 
at rated voltage or at the mean value of the rated 
voltage range. 


2 If the results obtained by testing the heater as 
specified are considered to be misleading due to 
the national nominal supply voltage, the heater 
may also be tested at a power input corresponding 
to the nominal voltage of the national supply 
system. 


b) Adjustment 


Controls to be set by the user are set at the maximum 
position. 


NOTE — The intention is to obtain an energy ratio of 
100 percent. If this cannot be obtained due to the 
ambient temperature thermostat cycling, even at the 


IS 369 : 2019 


lowest limit of the test room temperature, this 
thermostat is short-circuited or otherwise rendered 
inoperative. 


c) Test Rooms 


The tests of clauses 7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 15 and 16 are 
carried out in a draught-free room in which the 
ambient temperature is maintained at 27 + 2 °C. 


The tests of clauses 11, 12 and 13 are carried out in 
a room where the heat losses can be adjusted. This 
room is referred to as a “climatic test room” and an 
example is given in Annex B. 


d) Positioning of the Heater 


For the measurement of clauses 8, 9 and 10, the 
heater is placed in a corner which consists of two 
walls, a floor and, if necessary, a ceiling, at right 
angles. The corner is made of dull black painted 
plywood having a thickness of approximately 20 mm. 


The heater is positioned in the corner as follows: 


i) Portable fan heaters are placed with the back 
150 mm from one of the walls and away from 
the other wall; 


ii) Other heaters normally placed on a floor are 
positioned with their back as near as 
possible to one of the walls and away from 
the other wall. However, portable heaters 
intended to emit heat in several directions 
are moved away from the wall by a distance 
of 300 mm; 


iii) Heaters normally fixed to a wall are fixed to 
one of the walls, as near to the other wall 
and to the floor as is likely to occur in normal 
use, unless otherwise stated in the 
instructions for installation. A dull-black 
painted plywood shelf having a thickness 
of approximately 20 mm and a depth of 200 
mm is fixed over the heater as near as 
possible to the top of the heater unless 
otherwise stated in the instructions; and 


iv) Heaters normally fixed to the ceiling are fixed 
to the ceiling as near to the walls as is likely 
to occur in normal use, unless otherwise 
stated in the instructions for installation. 


However, built-in heaters are installed according to 
the instructions for installation, using dull black 
painted plywood approximately 20 mm thick. The 
heater is installed as close as possible to a similar 
dull-black painted floor or ceiling, unless otherwise 
stated in the instructions. 


7 DIMENSIONS, MASS AND MEANS OF 
CONNECTION TO THE SUPPLY 


The overall length, height and depth of the heater, 
including any knobs, handles and fixing brackets, 
are determined. 


15 369 : 2019 


The dimensions are stated in millimetres, rounded 
up to the nearest 5 mm. 


The dimensions measured shall be as declared by 
the manufacturer or responsible vendor. 


The mass is stated in kilograms, rounded up to the 
nearest 0.1 kg. 


The mass of the heater shall be as declared by the 
manufacturer or the responsible vendor. 


The length between the point of entry of the cord to 
the heater and the entry to the plug or the end of the 
outer sheath at the free end of the cord is determined, 
unless the heater is provided with terminals for 
connection to fixed wiring. 


NOTE — It is recorded whether or not a plug is fitted. 


The length of the supply cord is stated in metres, 
rounded down to the nearest 0.05 m, or it is stated 
that the heater is for connection to fixed wiring. 


The length of the cord shall be at least 2.0 m. 


8 TEMPERATURE RISES OF AIR-OUTLET 
GRILLES AND EXTERNAL SURFACES 


The temperature rises of air-outlet grilles of 
convector heaters and fan heaters are determined. 


The temperature rises of external surfaces are 
determined except for: 


a) Heaters for mounting at a height above 
1.8 m; 


b) The back of wall-mounted heaters; and 
c) Visibly glowing radiant heaters; 
NOTE — The surface of radiant heaters through which 


the heating element is visible is considered to be an 
external surface and not an air-outlet grille. 


The temperature rises are measured by means of the 
probe of Fig 2. The probe is applied to the surface 
with a force of 4 N+ 1 N in such a way that the best 
possible contact is ensured. 


Air-outlet grilles and their surrounds to a distance 
of 25 mm from the edge of the outlets are divided 
into a minimum number of equal rectangles having 
sides not exceeding 25 mm in height and 150 mm in 
length. The probe is applied to the grille as near to 
the centre of the rectangles as possible. 


Other surfaces are divided into a minimum number of 
equal rectangles having sides not exceeding 150 mm. 
The probe is applied to the centre of the rectangles. 


The temperature rise distribution, the highest and 
the average temperature rises of the various parts 
are stated, rounded to the nearest | K. 


The temperature rise after the test shall not exceed 
the limits specified in Table 101 of IS 302-2-30. 


9 TEMPERATURE RISES OF SURFACES 
SURROUNDING THE HEATER 


The temperature rises of surfaces surrounding the 
heater such as walls, floor, ceiling and shelf are 
determined. 


The measurements are made by using fine-wire 
thermocouples having a diameter not exceeding 0.3 
mm, attached to the back of small blackened disks of 
copper or brass, 15 mm in diameter and | mm thick. 
The fronts of the disks are flush with the surface of 
the board. The thermocouples are positioned to 
measure the highest temperature rise of each surface. 


The highest temperature rises are stated rounded to 
the nearest | K. 


The temperature rise of surface surrounding the 
heater when measured shall not exceed 32 °C. 


10 WARMING-UP TIME OF THE HEATER 
The warming-up time of the heater is determined. 


The time taken for the heater to attain 90 percent of 
the temperature rise under steady conditions is 
measured. The temperature rise of the hottest point 
of external surfaces or air-outlet grilles, whichever 
reaches steady conditions first, is used as a reference 
as long as it is representative of the temperature rise 
of the surface. 


NOTE — Steady conditions are considered to be reached 
when the temperature rise within 15 min does not vary 
more than 2 K. 


The warming-up time is stated to the nearest minute, 
preceded by “approximately”. 


The warm up time shall be as declared by the 
manufacturer or the responsible vendor. 


11 STABILITY OF ROOM TEMPERATURE 


The amplitude and drift are determined for heaters 
incorporating an ambient temperature thermostat. 


11.1 Basic Method of Evaluation — The heater is 
placed in the test chamber of a climatic test room 
(see Annex B). 


The temperature inside the test chamber is measured 
for three different energy ratios which are obtained 
by changing the temperature in the refrigerating 
chamber, without changing the setting of the ambient 
temperature thermostat. The measurements are made 
when the average room temperature is stable over a 
period of five consecutive fluctuations or 2 h, 
whichever is shorter. 


The first measurement is made with the ambient 
temperature thermostat set to give a temperature in 
the test room between 27 °C and 32 °C at a high 
energy ratio. The high energy ratio is (80 + 5) percent 
but if the ratio is not attainable due to the capacity 
of the climatic test room, the highest possible energy 
ratio is used. 


NOTE — If the energy ratio of (80 + 5) percent cannot 
be attained with a heater belonging to a family, the 
method of 11.2 is used instead. 


The temperature of the refrigerating chamber is then 
increased to give an energy ratio of (50 + 5) percent, 
the third measurement is made with a low energy 
ratio. The low energy ratio is (20 + 5) percent, but if 
this results in heat-losses less than 150 W, the low 
energy ratio is that corresponding to 150 W. 


The amplitude is determined for the energy ratio of 
(50 + 5) percent. 


The drift is determined from the average room 
temperature at the high and low energy 


ratios using the following formula: 
D=t, -t, x 60/A-B 
where, 
D is the drift; 


t, is the average room temperature at the high 
energy ratio; 


t, is the average room temperature at the low 
energy ratio; 


A is the measured value of the high energy ratio; 


B is the measured value of the low energy ratio. 


NOTES 


1 In the formula, 60 is the difference between the 
ratios of 80 percent and 20 percent. 


2 If the average room temperature at the energy 
ratio of 50 percent does not fall between /, and ty, 
the formula is not applicable and the maximum 
difference of the three values is stated as the drift. 


The amplitude and the drift are stated to the nearest 
0.1K. 


The amplitude and the drift shall be within + 2 °C of 
the value declared by manufacturer. 


11.2 Method for a Family of Heaters 


The amplitude and drift for a family of heaters may 
be determined using the following procedure. Heaters 
are considered to belong to a family when they have 
the same basic construction and have: 


a) Thesame dimensions except that the length 
of the heating element is proportional to the 
rated power input; 


IS 369 : 2019 


b) The same ambient temperature thermostat; 


NOTE — Ambient temperature thermostats are 
considered to be the same if they have the same type 
reference, and for electronic thermostats, the same 
triac and heat sink if these components influence the 
sensor. 


c) The same arrangement for the space 
containing the ambient temperature 
thermostat; 


d) The same construction at the end of the 
heating element adjacent to the space 
containing the ambient temperature 
thermostat. 


If there are more than two heaters in a family within 
the capacity of the climatic test room, only the heater 
having the lowest rated power input and the heater 
having the highest rated power input need to be 
tested. The amplitude and drift for heaters having an 
intermediate rated power input are calculated by 
interpolation between the values found for the two 
heaters tested. 


If any heater within the family has a rated power 
input higher than the capacity of the climatic test 
room, the amplitude and drift are determined as 
follows. 


The amplitude and drift for the heater having the 
highest rated power input within the capacity of the 
climatic test room are determined as specified in 11.1. 
A resistive load located outside the test chamber is 
then connected in parallel with the heating element 
of this heater. The load is such that the total power 
input is equal to the power input of the heater having 
the highest rated power input. The amplitude and 
drift are determined as specified in 11.1. 


The amplitude and drift for any heater within the 
family having an intermediate rated power input are 
calculated by interpolation between the values 
determined for the heater with and without external 
load. 


The amplitude and drift are stated for each of the 
heaters, rounded to the nearest 0.1 K. 


The amplitude and the drift shall be within + 2 °C of the 
value declared by manufacture. 


12 SET-BACK 


The set-back is determined for heaters incorporating 
a set-back device. 


The average room temperature is determined for the 
high energy ratio as specified in 11.1. 


The set-back device is then activated without 
changing the setting of the ambient temperature 
thermostat and the average room temperature is 
determined again. 


15 369 : 2019 


The set-back is the difference between the two values 
of average room temperature. It is stated, rounded to 
the nearest 0.5 K. 


The set-back setting shall be within +5 °C of the value 
declared by the manufacture. 


13 FROST PROTECTION TEMPERATURE 


The frost protection temperature is determined for 
heaters incorporating frost protection means. 


The temperature of the refrigerating chamber of the 
climatic test room is maintained at the value attained 
when the heater was tested at the high energy ratio 
as specified in 11.1. 


The frost protection means is then activated and the 
room temperature is measured when steady 
conditions are established. 


NOTE — If the ambient temperature thermostat does 
not cycle under this condition, the temperature in the 
refrigeration chamber is reduced. 


The minimum room temperature is stated, rounded 
down to the nearest 1 °C. 


NOTE — The heater is not considered to have frost 
protection means if the value is beyond 7 °C + 3 °C. 


The frost protection temperature setting shall not 
vary by more than 5 °C of the value declared by the 
manufacturer. 


14 INRUSH CURRENT 
The inrush current is determined. 


The current is measured from the time the heater is 
switched on until it stabilizes. 


The heater is considered to have an inrush current if 
the maximum value after 10 s is higher than 1.1 times 
the stable value. 


The inrush current is stated, rounded to the nearest 
ampere. 


The measured inrush current shall not be more than 
1.15 times the stable value. 


15 EFFECT OF RADIANT HEAT 


The effect of radiant heat is determined for panel 
heaters and radiant heaters. 


A dull-black painted plywood board approximately 
20 mm thick, having a width of 1.5 m and a height 
of Im, is positioned vertically on the floor 
symmetrically in front of the heater at a distance 
of | m. 


Thermocouples as specified in clause 9, except that 
the discs are not blackened, are arranged on the 
board, the distance between adjacent thermocouples 
being not more than 10 cm. 


A similar thermocouple protected against heat 
radiation is placed behind the board at a horizontal 
distance of 0.2 m from the centre. 


NOTE — Protection can be achieved by placing the 
thermocouple in a thin wall reflecting cylinder which is 
open at both ends. 


The temperatures are measured when steady 
conditions are established. The temperature rises are 
calculated, being the difference between the 
arithmetic average temperature of the thermocouples 
on the board and the protected thermocouple. 


The following temperatures rises of the board are 
stated rounded to the nearest 1 K: 


a) The temperature rise distribution; 
b) The highest and lowest temperature rises; 
c) The average temperature rise; 


d) The lowest and the average temperature rise 
of the central part of the board over a width 
of 0.5 m. 


NOTES 


1 During the period where measurements are made, 
the ambient temperature of the room is to be 
maintained within 0.5 K. 


2 The board may be positioned to measure the effect 
of radiant heat from the sides of the heater. 


3 If the top of the heater is higher than 1 m above 
the floor, the board may be positioned vertically. 


4 The test is not suitable for heaters for mounting 


at a height above 1.8 m. 


The temperature rise in repect of all condition stated 
above shall be within +5 °C of the value declared by 
the manufacturers. 


16 MEASUREMENT OF THE USABLE POWER 


The measurement of usable power is determined for 
heaters which cycle during the test of clause 10. 


The heater is operated until steady conditions are 
established. The energy consumed during the 
subsequent 10 complete cycles of operation of the 
thermostat is measured. If necessary, the test is 
continued for further complete cycles to ensure that 
the time during which the energy measurement is 
carried out is at least 1 h. 


NOTE — Any ambient temperature thermostat is short- 
circuited. 


The usable power is determined by dividing the 
energy consumed by the time taken and is stated if 
less than 90 percent of the rated power input. 


17 MARKING 


17.1 The marking and instruction for use shall be as 
given in 7 of IS 302-2-30. 


IS 369 : 2019 


tel Jecke Nyl pa” 


e 
e 
II 
Panel heater Double- panel heater Convector heaters 
Radiant heater Visibly glowing radiant heaters 


e | Heating element 


| Circulating air 


Fan heaters 


A" Radiant heat 


Fic. | EXAMPLES OF TYPES OF HEATERS 


7.2 The following information shall be provided by c) Regulating features (see 4.2); 
the manufacturer or responsible vendor to assist the d) 


: : Dimensions and mass of the heater (see 7); 
purchaser with the selection of an appropriate heater: 


e) Means for connection to the supply, length 
a) Rated power input (see 3.11); of supply cord if any and whether a plug is 


b) Type of heater (see 4.1); fitted (see 7); 


15 369 : 2019 


Adhesive 


Tinned copper disc Ø 5 and ` 
0.5 thick 


N Polycarbonate tube 
inside @3 outside Ø5 


Thermocouple wires 0.3 diameter 


\ Handie arrangement permitting 


contect force (4+ 1) N 


NOTE — The contact face of the disc is to be flat. The thermocouple is to be soldered with care to ensured that 


the disc temperature is measured. 


Fic. 2 PROBE FOR MEASURING SURFACE TEMPERATURE 


f) Average temperature rise of the front surface 
of panel heaters and radiant heaters other 
than visibly glowing radiant heaters (see 8); 


g) Average temperature rise of the air outlet 
grille of fan heaters and convector heaters 
(see 8). 


h) Usable power (if applicable, see16). 
18 TESTS 


18.1 Type Tests - The tests specified in Table 1 shall 
constitute the type tests and shall be carried out on 
a sample selected preferably at random from regular 
production lot. Before commencement of the tests, 
the heaters shall comply with the safety requirements 
as given in IS 302-2-30. 


Table 1 Schedule of Type Tests 
(Clause 18.1) 


Sl Tests Clause 
No. Reference 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) Dimensions, mass and means of H 


connection to the supply 
(for all heaters) 


ii) Temperature rises of air-outlet grilles 8 
and external surfaces (for all heaters) 


iii) Temperature rises of surfaces 9 
surrounding the heater (for all heaters) 

iv) Warming-up time of the heater 10 
(for all heaters) 

v) Stability of room temperature (for 1 
heaters with an ambient temperature 
thermostat) 

vi) Set-back (for heaters with a set-back 2 
device) 

vii) Frost protection temperature (for 3 
heaters with frost protection means) 

viii) Inrush current(for all heaters) 4 

ix) Effect of radiant heat (for all heaters S 


except fan heaters and heaters for 
mounting at a height above 1.8 m) 


x) Measurement of the usable power 6 
(for all heaters) 


18.1.1 Criteria of Acceptance - Heater shall 
successfully pass all the type tests for proving 
conformity with the requirements of the standard. If 
the sample fails in any of the type tests, the testing 
authority at its discretion, may call for fresh samples 
not exceeding twice the original number and subject 
them again to all tests or to the test (s) in which 
failure (s) had occurred. No failure should be 
permitted in the repeat tests (s). 


18.2 Acceptance Tests - The following shall constitute 
the acceptance tests: 


Sl Tests Clause 

No. Reference 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Dimensions, mass and means of T 
connection to the supply (for all 
heaters) 

ii) Temperature rises of air-outlet grilles 8 
and external surfaces (for all heaters) 

iii. Temperature rises of surfaces surrounding 9 
the heater (for all heaters) 

iv. Warming-up time of the heater (for all 10 
heaters) 

v. Inrush current(for all heaters) 14 


18.2.1 A recommended sampling procedure for 
acceptance tests is given in IS 2500 (Part 1). 


18.3 Routine Tests - The schedule of routine test shall 
be as given in Annex A of Part | of this standard. 


a) Dimensions, mass and means of connection 
to the supply (for all heaters) 


b) Warming-up time of the heater (for all heaters) 
19 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 
19.1 Clause 7 of IS 302-2-30 is applicable 


19.2 This Indian Standard is amenable provisions of 
the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 


15 369 : 2019 


ANNEK A 
[Clause 5.1(i)] 
TEST REPORT FORMAT 


A-1 ELECTRIC DIRECT-ACTING ROOM HEATER TEST REPORT 


REFERENCE NO. : 


CHECKED BY? vessisitsscpsivssvsassocsssevsavesutecsopsrs sarias ern RN 
ENKE EEN 


MODEE/TY PE REFERENCE asor eet eessen Se ee eet eeng 
RATING OF THE HEATER? w..csscescscesescoosee ses KEE KE 
REMARKS: 


NOTE — It shall be clearly recorded in the remarks whether the climatic test room described in annex A has been used 
or not. 


A-2 DETAILS OF THE SAMPLE TESTED 


a) Classification (see 4) 
b) According to type (see 4.1): 


i) Panel heater 

ii) Convector heater 

iii) Fan heater 

iv) Radiant heater 

v) Visibly glowing radiant heater 


c) According to regulation features (see 4.2): 


i) Heater without regulation 

ii) Heater with adjustable power input 

iii) Heater with regulated air flow (fan heater only) 
iv) Heater with ambient temperate thermostat 

v) Heater with programmer 

vil Heater with set-back device 

vii) Heater with frost protection means 

viii) Heaters with other features 


A-3 TEST RESULTS 

a) Dimensions, mass and means of connection to the supply (see 7) 
Dimensions: Length................ mm Height ........eaeaae. mm Depth, mm 
Mass. ke 

Supply connection: 


Length of the supply cord: ........... mm 


15 369 : 2019 


Plug fitted/without plug 
Terminals for connection to the fixed wiring 


b) Temperature rises of air-outlet grilles and external surfaces (see 8) 


Max Average 
K) (K) 
Temperature rise of air-outlet grilles 
Temperature rise of front surface 
Temperature rise of back surface 
NOTE — The temperature rise distribution is given in the enclosed documents. 
c) Temperature rises of surfaces surrounding the heater (see 9) 
i) Max. temperature rise of the wall (K) 
ii) Max. temperature rise of the shelf (K) 
iii) Max. temperature rise of the floor (K) 
iv) Max. temperature rise of the ceiling (K) 
v) Max. temperature rise of the left side wall (K) 
vi) Max. temperature rise of the right side wall (K) 
d) Warming-up time of the heater (see 10) 
Warming-up time: Approvimatch 10.01. min 
e) Stability ofroom temperature (see11) 
i) Amplitude:........... K 
ii) The average room temperature is ....... °C at the high energy ratio of...... % 
ii) The average room temperature is .....°C at the low energy ratio of .......... % 
iv) Drift......... K 
f) Set-back (see 12) 
Set-back:.......... K 
g) Frost protection temperature (see 13) 
Frost protection temperature......... °C 
h) Inrush current (see 14) 
Inrush current:......... A 
i) Effect of radiant heat (see15) 
Central Full 
part board 
K K 


Highest temperature rise 


Lowest temperature rise 


Average temperature rise 


NOTE — The temperature rise distribution is given in the enclosed documents. 
j) Usable power (see 16) 
Usable power. kW 


15 369 : 2019 


ANNEX B 


(Clause 6.1 c and 11.1) 
CLIMATIC TEST ROOM 


B-1 The climatic test room consists of a test chamber 
for simulating the indoor temperature and a 
refrigerating chamber for simulating the outdoor 
temperature. The chambers are separated by a wall, 
referred to as the exterior wall, as shown in Fig. B.1. 


The heat demand in the test chamber is created by changing 
the temperature in the refrigerating chamber. The test 
chamber has a volume between 30 m? and 40 m’, a length 
between 3 m and 4 m, a width between 3 m and 4 manda 
height between2.4mand 2.6m. 


In the exterior wall, there is a window of at least 3 m 
x 1.5 m having a coefficient of thermal conductance 
not more than 3 W/m? K. The wall under the window 
has a height of at least 0.8 m and has a coefficient of 
thermal conductance not more than 0.5 W/m? K. 


The remainder of the exterior wall has a coefficient 
of thermal conductance not more than 1.0 W/m? K. 
The other walls, the floor and the ceiling have a 
coefficient of thermal conductance not more than 0.6 
W/m? K. 


Cold air in the test chamber is supplied from the 
refrigerating chamber through two inlets placed 
symmetrically above the window. The air is returned to 
the refrigerating chamber at the upper corners of the 
exterior wall by means of ducting. The extraction point in 
the test chamber is on the wall opposite to the exterior wall 
at a height not more than 0.4 m above the floor. 


Test chamber 


TT NGANA NGA ANAA GANGGA NGANG 3,4 m 
| 


Black globe 


2m 


12m 


Re 
| 


Heater — 


The air exchange between the refrigerating chamber 
and the test chamber is approximately one test 
chamber volume per hour. 


The refrigerating chamber is to be capable of creating 
a heat-loss through the exterior wall of at least 1 000 W. 


The ambient temperature surrounding the climatic 
test room is to be within 2 °C of the mean temperature 
of the test chamber when setting the ambient 
temperature thermostat in 11.1. 


The heater is placed in the test chamber against the 
wall, below the centre of the window, according to 
the instructions. If the heater is too high to be placed 
below the window, it is placed on one of the adjacent 
walls with its centre at a distance of 2 m from the 
exterior wall, so that the side of the heater containing 
the ambient temperature thermostat is closer to the 
exterior wall. No heat source other than the appliance 
under test is to be in the test room. 


The temperature of the test chamber is measured by 
means of a thermocouple placed inside a thin-wall 
black globe having a diameter of approximately 10 
cm. The globe is located centrally at a distance of 2 
m from the exterior wall and at a height of 1.2 m above 
the floor. The recording instrument is located outside 
the test chamber. 


Refrigerating chamber 


Cooling 


i t 
Window Pe 


Exterior wall 


SLILEA ALS AS 
EEN 


i i Supporting frame | 


Fic. B.1 EXAMPLE OF A CLIMATIC ROOM 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 32 (6477). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central ` ` Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VIM, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 23379120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 | 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : CUT Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


