( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard
PNEUMATIC MEASUREMENT SPECIFICATION
PART 4 GENERAL INFORMATION AND EXAMPLES O-F APPLICATION

UDC

531'71'082'32

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK April 1992

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG Price Groop 2

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Engineering

Metrelagy

Sectional Committee,

LM 05

FOREWORD `Ihis Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of IndianStandards, after the draft finalized by the Eagineering Metrology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. Only important instructions for use which are typical of pneumatic length measurement are mentioned. Further only a few applications for which as on date there is no alternative solution These examples, therefore may help to decide the or it is too expensive have been mentioned. economical method of gauging even for people not familiar with pneumatic length measurement. This cculd alsobe followed up by detailed advice from the manufacturer. This Indian Standard below: Part 1 General has been published in four parts. information Other parts of this standard are listed

on principles and methods, working in high pressure range, and working on high pressure.

Part 2 Part 3

Design features of instruments Parameters of instruments

In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from DIN 2271 L Part 4 ) : 1977 `Pneumatic length measurement ( air gauging ) : Part 4 General information land fremples of application' issued by Deutsches Institut fur Normung ( DIN ).

IS 12257 ( Part 4 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

PNEUMATICMEASUREmMENTSPECIFICATION
PART 4 GENERAL INFORMATION AND EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION

1 SCOPE

mechanical used.

contact

gauging

elements

may be

1.1This standard applies to pneumatic length measuring instruments which operate on high pressure range as well as the low pressure range.
1.2 The basic aim of this standard is to show the various ways in which the pneumatic length measuring instruments can be used for different measurements at the same time lays out the conditions to be fulfilled for such measurement. 2 REFERENCE IS 12257 (Part 2 ) : 1992 `Pneumatic measurement: Part 2 Design features of instruments working in high pressure range' is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 TECHNICAL CONDITIONS

3.2.3 Thin Walled Work-Pieces and with Very Low Surface Hardness

Work-Pieces

Non-contact pneumatic length measuring unit can be used very effectively with relatively small measuring forces. In case of very thin walled work-pieces of unstable form elastic deformation may occur due to the compressed air flow. In such case it may be recommended that low pressure measuring unit be used.
NOTE - Due to the higher sensitivity of low pressure measuring unit other technical conditions need to be satisfied which are included in this standard.

3.2.4 Surface Roughness The surface roughness of the work-piece plays The a very important role in air gauging. measured value, particularly, in case of noncontact gauging elements is affected by the The mearoughness of ~the measured surface. surement in this case is always an average value of the peak to valley. Due to this, themeasured value obtained by non-contact gauging element and that obtained by mechanical contact gauging element will differ. This -difference can be neglected for peak to valley of Rs 5 pm ( Ra 1'25 pm ). In case of larger Rz values, the measured value difference can be corrected by suitably offsetting the indicator of the measuring unit, provided the peak to valley variations on the surfaces of similar work pieces under test are small. This correcticm value for offsetting the indicator can be had by measuring the work pieces by both non-contact and mechanical contact measurements. 4 INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE

3.1 Compressed Air Sufficient quantity of compressed air supply should be available to the instrument/unit and should not starve for want of air at any part of the time in operation. The compressed air should be as free as possible from oil, water and any solid particles which can cause contamination of the unit. Ideally the compressed air should be free from any foreign material. 3.2 Work Piece
It is not necessary that every job is suitable for testing of various parameters dealt in this standard, such as, dimension, position and form with pneumatic length measuring unit. The following technical conditions should be met with.

3.2.1 Tolerance The measuring range of a Pneumatic length measuring unit depends on the tolerance of the particular work piece. The maximum measuring range with non-contact measurement is 0'1 mm. In some cases it could be up to 0'2 mm depending solely on the measuring technique, 3.2.2 Minimum Land Width of the Measured
Surface

4.1 Normal Application Normal applications means that the economical and practical applications of air gauging units depends largely on the measurement problems. Pneumatic measurement is particularly suitable for the following measurement problems. At the same time technical conditions have to be kept in mind. 4.1.1 Hole Measurement With air gauging, diameter and geometry condition of the hole can be measured quite comprehensively and in a short time. 1

Whea non-contact is used, the surface be as large as to measuring jet.

or open jet gauging element under measurement should cover the end faces of the For smaller land widths

IS 12257 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 4.1.2 Shaft Measurement Outside diameter and geometry of a shaft can be gauged quite effectively. 4.1.3 Measuring jets may be so arranged that measurements can be made in a narrow space that isblind bores, small land width, etc. 4.1.4 Match gauging is possible that is exact clearance or interference between two mating parts can be gauged. 4.1.5 Relation gauging, such as squareness, concentricity, position can be straightness, measured/checked with air gauging. Single or summated measurements are also possible. 4.2 Special Properties of Air Gauging cleaning. Any damage will change the measuring characteristic which can cause errors in measurements. If the length of air passage to the jets is increased by means of a tube, then this tube should not unnecessarily be long, since this may result in slow response and also in some cases a change in the measuring characteristics. In this respect the instructions of the manufacturer should be followed. 5 EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION

Depending on the nature of the measuring problem following properties of air gauging may be of vital importance for its application. 4.2.1 With non-contact air gauging element, the measuring force does not operate as a point load but as an area load, there is no deformation Any damage to the surface of the work-piece. of the work-piece is avoided. 4.2.2 When non-contact air gauging elements are used with high pressure measuring units, self cleaning action of the measuring surface takes place, mostly avoiding errors in measurements due to contaminants on the work piece surface. 4.3 Choice of Indicating Units The selection of the indication unit largely depends on the measurement or on the measuring problems 4.3.1 Column Units

In addition to the examples given in IS 12257 ( Part 2 ) : 1992, the following are examples of with symmetrical crossgauging elements checking about its axes. There also can be other forms of cross-sections with the gauging elements of similar cross-section. The examples shown are the non-contact gauging elements. Similarly, the same can be applied to measuring ~arrangements with mechanical contact gauging elements also. 5.1 Match Gauging Between a hole and a shaft using an air plug gauge and an air ring gauge ( see Fig. 1 ).

Column type units are suitable for single and summated readings. These are normally in modular design, hence they can be combined into a multi-column unit depending upon the number of measurements. These allow a change of magnification by changing the taper tube along with the suitable vertical scale. 4.3.2 Indicating Units

FIG. 1

MATCH GAUGING

5.2 Form Measurement

Indicating instruments are suitable for single and summated readings as well as differential measurements. Furthermore, it is also possible to use an electrical circuit to give the 3 limits by which inspection, grading and feed back for machine control can be had. The magnification of these instruments can also be varied by changing the pilot jet and the indicating scale. 4.4 Gauging Element It is important that there should be a free flow of air through the gauging element with the jets in an uncovered position. The air passing must be absolutely free of foreign particles. The end face and the bore of the measuring jet are very important and due care should be taken when 2

5.2.1 Straightness or banana shape of long holes with special air plug gauge or similarly of shafts with special air ring gauge ( see Fig. 2 ).

FIG. 2

MEASURING STRAIGHTNESS OF HOLES

IS 12257 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 5.2.2 Roundness of holes with special air plug gauge or of shaft with special air ring gauge. 5.2.3 Rate of taper and straightness of the surface line of an internal cone with special conical air plug and of external cone with special conical air ring gauge ( see Fig. 3 ). 5.3.2 Parallelism of a surface or axis to a reference parameter that is parallelism of two bore axis ( see Fig. 5 ).

FIQ.

5

MEASURING PARALLELISMOP Two BORE AXES

FIG. 3 MEASURING ANGLE OF TAPER AND STRAIGHTNESSOF SURFACELINE OF INTERNAL CONES

5.3.3 Position of surface of axis to each other or to a reference parameter that is distance between two bores ( see Fig. 6 ).

5.3 Positional

Measurement

5.3.1 Squareness of a surface, or axis to a reference parameter that is squareness of a bore axis to the end face ( see Fig. 4 ).

1

-

_

t

FIG. 4

MEASURING SQUARENESS OF A BORE Axis TO END FACE

FIG.

6

MEASURING DISTANCE BETWEEN CENTRE~ OF Two HOLES

3

IS 12257 -( Part 4 ) : 1992 5.3.4 Coincidence of the axes of two holes to each other ( Concentricity ) C see Fig. 7 ). 5.3.5 Trueness of a flat end face with respect to the axis of rotation by taking the diameter as the reference and probing the face ( see Fig. 4 ).

FIG. 7 MEASURING COINCIDENCEOF AXES OF Two HOLES TO EACH OTHER

4

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory-institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of ~goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent following reference :

Dot : No. LM 05 ( 5225 ) -Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 Dl 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 235 0216 6 32 92 95

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, -Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : ~AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD-. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

