`.

.,,

IS 12966 ( Part 1 ) : 1992
( Reaffirmed 2002 )

CODEOFPRACTICBFORGALLERIBSAND OTHEROPENINGSINDAMS
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

UDC

627'824'7

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

April 1992

Price Groog' 2

Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow

) Sectional Co&&tee,

RVD 9

FOREWORD This standard ( Part 1 > was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow > Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. A large number of galleries purposes. and other openings are provided in all gravity dams for different

Other openings include all types of sluices, penstock openings, shafts, adits and chambers, stair/lift wells, drainage holes, air vents, conduits, formed drains, porous concrete drains, etc. The structural design of such galleries and other opening provided in gravity dams is covered in IS 12S66 ( Part 2 ) : 1990 `Code of practice for galleries and other openings in dams : Part 2 Structural design'. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

( Part 1 ) : 1992 IS 12966

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEFORGALLERIESAND OTHEROPENINGSINDAMS PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 1 > covers the general requirements for which galleries and other openings are provided in gravity dams. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 Thefollowing Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 10135 : 1985 Title Code of practice for drainage system for gravity dams, their foundations and abutments (first revision ) Criteria for hydraulic design of sluices in concrete and masonry dams
3.5 Drainage

Gallery

This is a supplementary gallery sometimes provided downstream at about 2/3rd the base width from the upstream face for the purpose of draining the downstream portion of the foundation. 3.6 Gate Gallery Gallery, made in a dam to provide access to and room for, the mechanical and eltctricaI equipment required for the operation of gates in outlet conduits, penstocks, etc. 3.7 Inspection Gallery

11485 : 1985

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Gallery The gallery is an opening within dam which provides access into or through the dam. 3.2 Adit A horizontal gallery connecting the gallery system in the dam with downstream face or features outside the dam such as power house or gate house. Also called `Access Gallery' or `Entrance Gallery'. 3.3 Chamber When a gallery is enlarged to permit installation of equipment, it is called a chamber, e.g. hoist chamber, gate chamber, etc. 3.4 Foundation Gallery standard the

Gallery made in a dam to provide access to the interior mass of the dam in order to inspect the structure and study the structural behaviour of the dam after completion. Foundation, drainage gate and grouting galleries also serve as inspection galleries. 4 PURPOSE 4.1 The need for galleries varies from dam to dam. Some of the common purpose for which galleries are provided are as follows: a) To provide drainage way for water seeping through the upstream face of the dam and from the foundations;

b) To provide 4

space for drilling holes and grouting the foundation in order to provide a grout curtain; To provide access to the interior of the dam for observing its behaviour after completion; chamber, pump chamber, instrument niches, etc; Visitors gallery to provide for visitors. pump weI&

4 To provide access to chambers like hoist 4
access routes

It is a gallery which generally extends over the length of the dam near the rock profile conforming in elevation to the transverse profile of the canyon; in plan, it is near and parallel to the axis of the dam. From this gallery, holes are drilled and grouted for the main grout curtain and drainage holes are drilled for draining water seeping through the foundation in order to provide relief in uplift pressures. 1

4.2 In addition to galleries other openings are also provided in dams for different purposes. 5 LOCATION AND SIZE OF COMMON GALLERiES AND OPENINGS 5.1 Foundation Gallery

This gallery should be provided in the body of the dam where height of the dam above normal foundation level is more than IO m ( measured

I!3 12966 ( Part 1) ; 1992 up to to crest level in case of overflow portion of the dam ). For lesser heads, its necessity should be left to the discretion of the designer. The purpose of this gallery is defined in 3.4, 4.1( a ) & 4.1(b). The miqimum size of gallery should be 1.5 m X 2'25 m, however a larger size of 2'0 m X 2'5 m can be provided to acccmmcdate drilling equipment. The general details of this gallery are given in IS 10135 : 1985. It should bz located at a distarce of 3'0 metres or 5 percent of the reservoir head ( measured from ERL to the foundation level ) from the upstream face of the dam, whichever is greater ard ccnsistent with any other requ,irement. There should be minimum 1'5 metre concrete cover between the flooi of the gallery and the foundation grade. Scmetimes, depending upon the fcundaticn grade profile aqd other considerations like the height of the dam from foundation grac'e up to Ihe spillway crest in respect of overflow section, gallery dicpositicn in other blocks, etc, a fcucdatjor gallery may have to be lccated in a trench ( see Fig. 1 ). A minimum concrete cover of about 2'0 metros is generaliy prcvided in the trench. 5.1.1 Cottnsrream Crcincge
Gcllery

5.3 Qte

Galleries and Chambers

Their size should depend lupon the size of the gates, etc. However IS 11485 ; 1985 may also b.e referred to for their sizing. 5.4 Instrumentation Gallery

The number and location of such galleries should depend upon the extent of instrumentation provided in a dam. These galleries should generally be aligned perpendicular to the dam axis in plan. The size is generally 1'5Om X 2'25m ( rectanguIar )with minor modification necesstry for instruments like plumb-line, etc. 5.5 Sump Well They should be provided in the deepest location, Their rumber and size should depend upon the quantity of water Seeping through the foundations acd body of the dam. The seepage wa!er inspection galleries collected in upstream provided at higher levels shculd, as far as possible be drained-off towards the downstream side by gravity through adits/any other suitable Sump well may also be located arrangements. outside the dam. In this case, sump pit provision and a cast iron pipe of 6C0 mm diameter will have to be provided from sump pit to sump well. A pump house may be housed above the sump well. This is convenient to avoid flooding of water in the gallery in case pumps get failed due to Fewer failure or some other cause. 5.6 Pump Chamber Pumps of suitable capacity should be provided to pump-off the water collected in the sump well. As far as possible, the pumps should be located in a chamber adjacent to an inspection gallery above the foundation gallery so that in the contipgency of the foundation gallery getting flooded, the pump-chamber remains approachable ( see Fig. 2 ). 5.7 Elevator Tower and Shaft Elevator towers shculd generally be provided at the end of spillway Fortion in the NOF blocks to provide access to the galleries from top of the dsm. Grnerally, only a lift well should be provided for which a size of 3 m X ? m should normally suffice. Sometimes, a Stan--well may

In high dams ( greater than 100 m ), a supplementary dlainsge gallery is scmtimes provided at about 2/3rd the base \n(idth from the upstream face fcr drainirg the do\nnstream portion of the foundation, if the tail water levels are high. The size of this gallery should, usually be 2.0 m X 2'5 m. 5.2 Inspection Galleries at Higher Levels Above Foundation Gallery f-!n inaF:ction @alIely should be prcvidcd stove tie fcurdation gallery so as to be shout 7% Eetrrs telcw Ihe spillway crest ccnsistent with structural ccnsidcration in ca:e of overflow fccticns lavirg a height of about 25 metres or nore n;czlurtd frcm the spiIlw;y crest to tke fcul c'aticn grz.de co as to facilitate cIe:nirg/ rcamil;g cf tke fcrmed/l:orcus ccucrete drains in ihe bcdy of the dzm ( fte Fig. 2 ). Generally ictelmcdiate insyecticn gaI]erirs shculd be prcvidcd at evely 30 xetres intervals (ref Fig. 3). ?he size cf these pslltries chculd gcnelally be 1'5 m X 2.25 m ( rcctzngular ).

( 1500 X 2 250 min FOUNDATION GALLERY r ACCEPTABLE FOUNDATION GRADE

FIG. 1 FOUNDATION GALLERY IN TRENCH 2

TS 12966 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

SPILLWAY INSPECTION GALLE (~S00X225Omm FORMED DFWN

PIER

DELIVERY PIPE (EXIT ABOVE UPpER NAPPQ

OPENING

FOR SUCTION

PIPES

~ouN!JAnON GALLEA (1WOX225Qmm I+)

FIG. 2 LOCATION OFFOUNDATION AND INSPECTIONGALLBRIESIN OVER FLOW SECTION
also be provided either separately or around the lift well, if considered necessary. The size of elevator tower should accordingly be modified to include a stair-case.

5.8 Ventilation

Shaft/Pipes

Generally, 300 mm diameter ventilation pipes/ holes should be provided in every alternate dam blocks from the galleries for ventilation. However, where adits are not provided, ventilation shafts ( about 1 m diameter ) may be provided, one each near either end of the gallery to maintain a draft of air. However in case of ventilation shafts lengthy dams, intermediate may also be provided. 5.9 Formed Drain These drains should be located as per IS 10135 : 1985. They are spaced at approximately 3m centres along the axis of the dam. The size of the drains is about 200 mm diameter. The lower ends of the drains extend to the gallery, or are connected to the downstream face near the fillet through a horizontal drain pipe or header system The tops of the drains if there are no galleries. (in OF section ) are located about 1 m below the crest level. In NOF section, the tops are located at road level ( see Fig. 2 and 3 ). 6 MISCELLANEOUS GALLERIES 6.1 General Depending upon the rock profile and other DETAILS ABOUT

conditions, a gallery can be either horizontal or on a slope. In the later case, steps with tread 250 mm and riser 200 mm may be provided. Generally, 25 steps should be provided in one flight. Hand railing along stairs should also be provided. It should normally be ensured that the steps do not cross the contraction joints between the two adjacent dam monoliths. Generally minimum horizontallengthofabout 1'0-1'5 metres should be kept in the gallery adjacent to the contraction joints before it is stepped. + 6.2 All galleries should have gutters to carry away seepage water which gets collected into the gallery. On horizontal runs, the depth of the gutter may vary from 225 mm to 375 mm to provide a drainage slope. A slope not flatter than 1 in 1000 should be provided for drainage. 6.3 Ramps can also be provided up to 10" angles with the horizontal. However, for slopes more than 10" and up to 15" special non-slip surfaces should be necessary. Hand rails should also be provided on ramps. 6.4 In case of very steep abutments where it is not possible to follow the canyon shape by the sloping galleries ( with steps ) vertical shafts of about 2'0-2'5 m diameter with spiral staircase ( metallic ) may be provided to connect galleries at two levels. 6.5 Adits to galleries should be provided for approaching them from downstream side of the NOF dam at suitable elevation above the tail water level. 3

IS

12966 (

Part 1) :1992

M. w. L FRL INSPECllON GALLERY (15CQX2250mm)

FORMED

DRAINS

Fra. 3 LOCATION OF INTERMEDIATEINSPKTION GALLERY IN NON-OVERFLOW SECTION
6.6 Other requirements like shock proof, lighting throughout galleries and adit, grilled door near adit entrance to prevent nuisance of birds like bats, fool-proof surface drainage near adit entrance to prevent accidental rusting of rain water by landslide, chocking of catch water drains, etc, and marking R.D. figures on the

wall of the galleries to be attended to. 6.7 Where separate instrumentation galleries are not provided in the dams of low height, provision may be made for accelograph inverted plump bobs, etc, by leaving suitable space ( say 5 m ) in the foundation gallery itself.

4

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards

Bureau of Indian Standards

`..,

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bareau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyrlght be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to lime. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent latest amendments or edition. following reference :

Dot : No. RVD 9 ( 4340 ) Amendments Issued Since Poblication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C1.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 235 0216 6 32 92 95

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Swataatra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

