Indian Standard

IS : 4167-1660 ( Reaffirmed 2003 )

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO AIR POLLUTION

( First Revision )
Second Reprint DECEMBER 1989

UDC 614'71 : 001'4

0 Copyright 198 1
BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG I

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 8

October 1981

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO AIR POLLUTION

( First Revision )
Air Quality Sectional Committee, Chahnan
Dn B. B. SUNDAnISAN Mbmbers SFIXU P. K. YENNAWAR ( Altmak to Dr B. B. Sudarcsan ). National Institute of Occupational Sfllu A. L. AOARWAL ( 1-R ), Ahma+abad Idii~ti~fb~rporation Ltd ( R & D DR J. S. AHULWALIA

CDC 53
Raearch

Rspnssnting National Environmental Engineering Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur

Health Centrc ),

______ ..~_

SEUUV. S. Moaa (Al&auk) San1 K. D. AMRE SARI H. M. SHAXKEI ( Akvnati SERI N. G. ASliAR DR M. S. VAIDYA ( ALtm&) Sam A. K. BAN
DRNUAY ~HAUDHUPJ

National ) Dbaramsi Calcutta
Central

Organic Chemical Morarji Chemical Metropolitan

Industricd Ltd, Bombay Co Ltd, Bombay Authtirity, Control of

Development and

SIIRI R. K. SF.NGUFTA(A&em&)

Board for the Preveption Water Pollution, New Delhi

MMBER SSCZRETARY (AItem&) DR D. CHOUDHURY Union Carbide India Ltd, Bhopal SHRI Y. G. PATANICAR ( A&ma&) SEW DALJITSINQE Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi DR. R. K. D~TTA ( Altcm~tu )~ Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi Sam J. M. DAVB Society for Clean Environment, Bombay DR P. J. DEORAS DR S. B. CHAPHEKAR (Aftem& I) Soar T. N. MIAHADEVAN( Aftcmuta II ) Smu M. V. DEW IndianCilczhti&cal Manufacturers' Association,
SRRI

Srrar B. SARAN ( &%m& ) N. B. BNolNEaR SERI A. K. GWTA SHPIB. P. PUNDZR ( Al&mu& )

Cement Manukturcrs' Association, Bombay Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ), Dchra Dun (Crmrinusd oil @g8 2 ) * Copyrig& OF INDIAN 1981 STANDARDS

0 BUREAU

This publication is protected under the XII&N CoprripAt Act (XIV of 1957 ) d ' reprodrroioa in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of thr publishor shall be deaned to be an infringement of copyright under the rrid Act.

Is : 4163- 1980
( Continurdfrom page1 ) Members SRN V. S. GIJPTA +I
SMT M. CHANDRA ( Alternate ) R. M. KULKARNI

w-w
tie fertilizer (Pktning Ltd, Sindri Prevention h Development of Water Pollution ) In* Board,

Maharashtra Bombav

SMT S. S. BHENDE ( Alternate) Dn H. B. MATHUR DR'N. K. MEHROTRA

Indian +titutF of `I'echnology, New Delhi Indtistt~al;;ucology Research Ccntre ( CSIR ),

DR P. N. VISHWANATHAN( AltsrnalcI ) DR J. L. KAW ( Alternate II ) Gujarat Water Pollution Control Board. S~ru R. S. MEHTA Gandhinagar S. F. India Ltd. Calcutta !~RI A. ~~OKHERIEA Smu E. NICOL~YSEN ( Allarnafc) Central Fuel Research Institute ( CSIR ), Dhanbad DR P. N. MUKHERJEB DR R. U. ROY ( Alwnate ) The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi DR V. PACHA~YAPPAN Meteorological Department, New Delhi DR B. PADMANABHAYUHTHY Hindustan Insecticides Ltd, New Delhi .SHRI A. R. PANICKER Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), Gwfior DR P. K. R~ACHANDRAN DR B. V. RAMANI ( Altcrnafc ) Chlor-Alkali Manufacturers Association, Bombay S-X V. RAMADURAI Directorate General, Factory Advice Services & Da S. S. RAMA~WAMY Labour Institute, Bombay SPRI S. K. DANOWAL ( Altcmata) Directorate General of Technical Development. SRRXA. N. RAO New Delhi Coal India Ltd, Calcutta Smtx S. B. SARKAR Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR V. V. SHIRVAIKAR Cent;kanrdting Research Station ( CSIR), DR J. K. SINUA

Sanr A. K. BOSE ( Altcrnatr) SHRI S. A. SUBRAMANIAN SHRI J. S. VASANT DR HARI BHAGWAN, Director ' Chem )

Central Electricitv Authoritv. New Delhi Hindustan Dorr dliver Ltd; &mbay Director General, IS1 (~-c@o Men&r) secretary SHRI A. K. BAWL

Assistant

Director

( Chem ), IS1

Terminology
Conucner DRV.V. SEIIRVAIKAR

Subcommittee,

CDC 53 : 1
Centre, Bombay New Delhi

Bhabha Atomic Research Indian

Members
DR S. P. LUTHRA DR H. B. MATHUR ( Altarnate ) Institute of Technology,

15:4167-l9m

Indian Standwd
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO AIR POLLUTION

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD 0.1This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian
Standards Institution on 29 December 1980, after the draft fhmlized by the Air Quality Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 Air pollution control, today, is a precondition of `high priority for the improvement of the quality of life in highly industrialized countries as well as in developing countries. Pollution control in this context depends, among others, on the advances in the related technology. 0.3 Standards may define what we may or may not put into the air based on the best available scientific knowledge. They may place limits on the pollutants that can be tolerated without endangering the health and welfare of human beings and of the ecological systems in which we live. In order to avoid misunderstanding in the interpretation of scientific knowledge and data and to facilitate interaction between different sets of people, it becomes necessary to define terms typical to air pollution technology. 0.4 This standard was originally published in 1966. Due to advances in the field of air pollution, it has become necessary to review and update the existing glossary of terms. Consequently, this revision has been prepared incorporating many additional terms and deleting some terms depending on their usage and meaning in the present context. 0.5 Should any difference exist between the definitions in this standard and those in the individual standards, the latter shall prevail. 0.6 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical definitions of terms, and it may not necessarily include all the legal interpretations of terms.

1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard defines the terms relating to air pollution.
3

2 TERMINOWY
A

Abatem& - Reduction (anuisance). The a?

or lessen&

( of pollution ) or doing away with

W

taking up usually of a liquid or gas into the body of another material ( the absorbent ). Thus an air pollutant may be removed by absorption in a suitable absorbent. The taking up of radiation by a material it encounters or passes through. This can be the basis of measuring a number of substances.

Acadsoa - A phenomenon consisting of the increase in size of particles by the process of external additions; for example, water to salt particles. Aecaraey - Closeness of agreement between the true value and the mean resnlt which would be obtained by applying the experimental procedure a large number of times (see also Error ). A&nugrapb - An instrument for recording ( see also Actinometer ).
ako

the incoming

solar radiation

Aetimmeter - An instrument to measure the incoming solar radiation (see Actinograph ).
Acmte-

Used in relation to the effects of certain concentrations polhrtants to describe a response coming rapidly to a climax. line on a thermodynamic

of air

diagram ( for example .Tephiof a parcel of dry .air as its pressure changes. Since in atmosphere pressure decreases with height, often in lower atmosphere a dry adiabat is taken to be a line on a heighttemperature graph such that the slope is ~98"C/100 m.
gram) depicting the variation of the temperature

Adiabat, Diy -A

Adsorption - The phenomenon in wluch molecules of a substance ( the adsorbate) are taken up and held on the.,surface of another material ( the adsorbent ). Advectio~~ - The process of transfer of an atmospheric property example, heat, moisture, pollution ) by horizontal motion of the air. Aerosol- Finely divided solid or liquid particles of pended and dispersed in a gas or in atmosphere as in haxe or smoke. The term is applied to the system of dispersing medium together, while particles alone
WtiCleS".

( for

microscopic size susthe case of mist, fog, dispersed phase and are called "aeroso!

4

I!3 :4167-m

-burner - A device fitted after the main point of fuel combustion in a statihary plant or a vehicle to produce more nearly complete combustion of the exhaust gases. It may be a burner fitted to incinerate polluted process gas. Agglomeration - The clustering or adhering together of a number of small particles to form a body or structure ( an agglomerate) which then acts as a larger single particle. Agglomeration, Sonic Aggregate

Agglomeration caused by sound waves.

a) Similar to agglomerate, but having weaker bonding. b) Sand and rubble used to make concrete. Air Pollution - See Pollution. Air Pollution Control - See Control, Air Pollution. Air, Primary - The air supplied to the fuel in its early stages of combustion. Air Quality - The term usually refers to the concentration in air of one or more pollutants. For many pollutants the air quality is expressed as a concentration over a certain period of time, for example, rg/m* over 24 hours. Air, Secondary - Air introduced above or beyond the bed of burning fuel to promote complete combustion of volatile material produced in the first stage of combustion. Air, Standard - See S.T.P. Aitken Nucleii - Particles ranging in size from Cl*005 pm to 0.1 pm with or without electrical charge. Albedo - The ratio of the amount of electromagnetic radiation reflected by a body or a surface to the amount incident upon it ( see also Reflectance). Allergy-The abnormal reaction of a living body to physical, chemical or biological agents to which certain body cells are supersensitive. The final effect may be redness, itching, inflammation, tissue damage or other forms of morbidity. These effects, depending on the nature of the material and root cause of exposure, may be localized over a part of body or widespread. Ambient - Surrounding. It is used to describe physical properties of air (temperature, humidity, pressure, etc) or air pollution concentration in the open air, as against, at the point of emission or indoors, for example, ambient temperature, ambient air quality. Amenity - In air pollution this means pleasantness and it usually refers to the general quality of the environment distinct from Wrds of air pollution can cause physical damage.

- It refers to a pollution measuring system in which the analysis is so quick that the results represent the current situation as in the case of optical techniques.
ABdysis,Iustautaaeous

Anemometer - An instrument for measuring wind/air speed. Anoxia - Deficiency of oxygen in the blood or thereby in body tissues. Anthracite - A high calorific value coal yielding little ash and volatileshence low smoke production. It is slow burning and not normally used on open fires. It is cleaner to handle than most other coals. Antibody - A substance, protein in nature, synthesised and released into the body's system specifically in response to invasion by an antigen. Antlcyelone - The condition of atmospheric pressure distribution in which pressure increases towards the centre. This is usually associated with fine, calm weather and with fog in winter. Antigens- Foreign substances of different chemical types which when introduced into the body, cause the production of specific antibodies cap able of reacting with them. Antiknock Additives - Compounds added to petrol to allow its use in higher compression ratio engines than otherwise permissible and with greater thermal efficiency without the phenomenon of `knock'. The additives are generally organic lead compounds. .Aromatics - Hydrocarbon compounds containing, as part of their structure, rings of atoms like those found in benzene and other similar cyclic molecules and generally having strong aroma. In petroleum -products, this term distinguishes these hydrocarbons from those which are chainlike in structure ( paraffins ). Aromatics tend to have higher octane ratings. Arrester - A device used to affect arrestment. Arrestment- Arrestment of a pollutant from a gas stream is the process of its trapping or removal by an arrester or cleaning device. Aspiration - Passing fluid through a medium or over an object by suction. Thus air is aspirated through a filter medium or over a thermometer (see also Aspirator ). Aspirato'l'- Any apparatus, such as a squeeze bulb, fan, pump or venturi, that produces movement of a fluid by suction. Atmosphere a) The atmosphere is the envelope of air surrounding the earth. 6

IS : 4167 - la80 b) An atmosphere may refer to a much more local volume of air without implying the quality of that air. c) The term is also often used as a unit of pressure ( 1 atmosphere pressure equivalent to 760 mm of mercury or 1 013.18 millibars ). Atmosphere, Neutral - A neutral atmosphere is one in which lapse rate is dry adiabatic, that is, there is no change in potential temperature with height (see aho Lapse Rate, Dry, Adiabatic). Atmosphere, Stable- State of the atmosphere in which vertical air movements are restricted. This happens when there is temperature inversion. Atmosphere, Unstable - An unstable atmosphere is one in which vertical movements tend to grow thereby substantially increasing turbulence and Atmosphere is unstable when lapse aiding the dispersion of pollution. rate is higher than adiabatic lapse rate ( see also Lapse Rate, Super Adiabatic ). Atmospheric Dispersion - See Dispersion. Atomizatirm - The process by which a solid or liquid is reduced, not to atoms but, to very small particles or droplets as in a fine spray. Good atomization of fuel oil allowing increased fuel/air mixing is necessary to Atomized pollutants may persist remainobtain sstisfactory combustion. ing suspended in air because of their small particle size. Autometer, Thomas - A device for continuous recording of sulphur dioxide based on the electrolytic conductivity of water through which air passes. Average, Moving - In a consecutive data set, of n elements, a moving average of r elements is taken as follows: first take the average of elements numbering 1 to r. Next take the average of elements numbering 2 to r + 1 and so on giving running averages consisting of ( n - r + 1 ) elements. B Backgromtd- The levels of pollution ( in terms of concentration ) present already in the atmosphere exclusive of that due to the pollution source under consideration. In general the term is used to imply the level of any entity present exclusive of the specified source for example, background noise, background illumination. Sometimes the term is used to mean the concentration of the substance some distance from the particular source and therefore largely uninfiuenced by it. Bag&me/Bag Filter - Fabric filter used for dust removal usually made into bag of tubular or envelope shape. The entire structure housing the bags is called a baghouse, 7

IMoou, Pilot - Balloon f&d with a light gas (for example hydrogen or helium ) released to determine the wind at various heights in the atmosphere. The balloon is tracked by theodolites and successive locations of the balloon are computed, from which winds can be estimated. This is done on routine basis at several stations by national weather services. Radar is also used for this purpose. Beaufort Scale-A scale for estimating and reporting wind force ranging from zero for calm to 12 for a hurricane. The latter corresponds to a wind speed range of 133 to 147 km/h. Wind speeds above this and up to 218 km/h are also classed under hurricane having Beaufort scale up to 17 depending upon wind speed.

Blank Determination - See Determination, blank. Bhdf Body - An obstacle in the path of fluid flow,
flow gets modified,

because of which the causing, under certain conditions turbulence in the wake, for example on the leeward side.

Bonndary Layer - Where a fluid flows past a physical boundary, the boundary layer is that part of the fluid extending from the boundary into the bulk of the fluid in which the motion of the fluid is significantly affected by the frictional drag at the boundary.

The earth's atmospheric boundary layer is typically the lowest 1000 m or so of the atmosphere. This is also called planetary boundary layer or friction layer. Breathing Zone - That location in the atmosphere at which persons breathe. Generally, a layer 0 - 1.5 m above ground level is considered as breathing zone., Breeze, Sea - A local wind blowing on shore when ( and because) the land surface is warmer than the sea surface, for example, on a sunny day. The situation may be reversed at night, producing an off-shore land breeze. Bronchitis - Basically, bronchitis is inflammation of bronchi, the two branches of the air pipe leading to the lungs. It is a reaction of the mucosal lining to an irritant. The word is less exactly, but more widely used to describe a variety of lung disablements which can be associated with air pollution and smoking. RubbIer - An apparatus charged with water or a reagent selected to absorb specific pollutants when a sample of air is made to bubble through it (Jee also Impinger ). wrtfer Capacity - The capacity of certain solutions to oppose a change in properties, for example, acidity when acid or alkali is added.
hY=Y - The tendency of material immersed in a fluid to float up. In Jr pollution it is frequently applied to the tendency or otherwise of the hot

..

8

IS : 4167- 1980 gas& emitted from a chimney to rise in view of their lower density relative

to that of the surrounding air. In the atmosphere it implies the upward force experienced by parcels of air. which are heated and less dense as compared with the surrounding air.
C

C&II- The air is described as calm in meteorological terms if the wind speed is less than 1 knot. ( 1 knot - I.8 km per hour = 05 m per second approximately. ) _ Sometimes the term is also used when the wind speed is below the measurement threshold of the anemometer. Caloritic Value - A measure of the heating quality of the fuel usually expressed as available heat units from complete combustion of a unit mass of fuel. For example kJ/kg for svlid or liquid fuels and kJ/ma for gaseous fuels. There are gross and net caloritic values for hydrogen eontaining fuels depending respectively on whether the heat of condensation of water produced is included or excluded.
Cancer -

A malignant growth, a tumour.

Carburation - The mixing of air with a volatile fuel to provide a combu2tible mixture for use in the internal combustion engine. The device in which this occurs is the carburator.
Carcinogen ( Carcinogenic Substance ) - A substance which causes carcinoma or cancer. Carc,homa -

Malignant tumor of epithelium, regardless of its derivation. See Impactor.

Cascade Impactor -

Catalyst- A substance which, though not itself permanently changed, alters the rate of ( usually speeds up) a chemical reaction.
Centrifugal - The tendency of outward movement of an object travelhg in a curved path, for example if one whirls a ball on a string, the ball tries

to move away from the centre and causes tension on the string which is related to the centrifugal force 0x1the ball. Channelllng Effect - Change of normal flow of air when it passes through peculiar constructed topographic features such as valleys or streets and lawns flanked by buildings. Often channelling leads to increase in local wind velocity. Channelling is sometimes also called canyon effect.
Chauxlling in Packed ~olu~s(Floidized

;;rs

pattern

Beds -- `I& reiers to the localized of a fluid ( hquid or gas ) m packed columns or fluid&d

9

lS:4167-1980 Chimney ( Stack ) Height, Fbacrire -The c&c&e height of a chimney is the sum of its actual physical height and the plume rise. The latter is the rise of the effluent due to buoyaucy and e&x v+c$y. Chronic - Referring to injurious effects of air pollution, particularly effects on health. It implies lasting or long term morbid e&cts as against acute effects. Cla&ib!ation - Separation of items into types. In relation to particles, it impiies the process of separating them into fractions on defined size range. Clh&er - Aggregated or sintered ash formed when the ash is heated strongly in a furnace. Coal Eqaivalent -A method of describing combustion energy of a given mass of fuel in terms of the mass of a standard coal which would produce an equal amount of heat energy. COH- Coefficient of haze. This is a unit for measuring smoke stains which depends on the reduction of light transmission through the titer after it has collected the smoke sample. Its object is to measure haze over a distance of about 300 metres. coke - A smokeless solid fuel of low volatile content, from coal by destructive distillation. traditionally formed of bituminous

Coke, Gas- Solid fuel produced" by the carbonization coal in a closed chamber known as retort

Collectiou Efftcieucy ( of a De&e) 7 Ratio of the quantity of a substance retained by a device to that passed through it In any air pollution control equipment, if Ml is the mass of incoming dust, Me the mass of collected dust and M,.the mass of outgoing dust, then collection efficiency is:

Collector - A device for removing and retaining contaminants from air or other gases. Usually, this term is applied to cleaning devices in exhaust systems. Collector, Dust Fall, Adhesive Type- A &vice with an adhesive surface for collecting particulate contaminants settling out of the atmosphere. Combustiou - The chemical combination of oxygen with fuel ( combustible matter ) with rapid heat evolution so that the temperature rises. The products of combustion are the oxidation products of the components of the fuel. Thus hydrocarbons produce carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and hydrogen oxide ( water ). Combustion of the sulphur in fuels produces sulphur dioxide.
10

IS : 4167- 1980

Combo&ion, Catalytic - Coxnbustion in the presence of a catalyst, to increase the rate of combustion, or afFect combustion at a lower temperature. (amount Conceatration, Groand Levdl - The concentration volume) of a pollutant in air near ground. For physiological this may refer to between 1 to 2 m above the ground, that is, at level. For computation, however, zero height is considered. practical cases, there is no difference between the two. per unit purposes breathing In most

Concentration, lhss - The amount of a substance in unit volume of the medium, for example air, flue gas. Generally ambient air concentrations are expressed in mg/m* or pg/m*. In case of stack emissions, normal m3 is used instead of ms. Concentration, Odour - The number of volume units which a unit volume of sample will occupy when diluted to the odour threshold. Concentration, IWticle - Concentration expressed in terms of number of particles per unit volume of the medium, for example, air, flue gas. Also called `number concentration'. ' Concentration_,Time I&grated (TIC!)- The concentration at a point integrated with respect to time over a given period. If concentration is plotted against time, TIC is the area under this curve. It has units of pg s,/ms ( or Ci s/m* for radioactive pollutants ). TIC divided by the time period over which integration is done is therefore equal to average concentration over that period (see also Dose and Exposure ). Concentration, Vohime - See ppm. Condensate - Liquid or solid matter formed by condensation from the vapour phase. In sampling, this term is applied to those components of an atmosphere which have been isolated by simple cooling. Confidence Level -The taining the true value. value of the probability of a given interval con-

Coning -A type of plume behaviour in which both vertical and lateral diffusion occurs. The plume appears like a cone. This takes place in a near neutral atmosphere when the wind velocity is moderately high or high. Con~alnlnant/contalnlnation - Synonyms for indicating the presence of a foreign component or pollutant in air, gas, liquid or on surfaces. Control, Air Pollution-The process of effecting reduction in the concentrations and extent of contaminants in atmosphere within permissible limits, by whatever means, such that they do not become injurious to human, plant or animal life, or property. con?ection - The transfer of heat in a fluid by flow of parts of the fluid at different temperatures. Convection currents can be set up in air with the 11
l

IS : 4167-1980 rise of hotter, less dense parts and downward flow of cooler, more dense. parts ( see also buoyancy).
Correlation-

A mathematical term which deals with the relationship between two factors or variables. The degree or intensity of linear relationship is measured by correlation coetllcient which lies between -1 and + 1. A value of zero indicates absence of correlation.

Cracking - The refinery process of chemically breaking up the heavier petroleum distillates to obtain greater quantities of lighter products.
Criteria ( Air Quality) -

air quality standards relationships.
Cupola -

Information used as guidelines for establishing or goals, often in the form of dossresponse

A firebrick-lined shaft furnace used for melting metals,`often pig iron ( with or without scrap ) for castings. Metal, coke and flux ( if used) are charged at the top and airis blown in near the bottom Its operation ' involves the emission of iron oxide fume which has to be arrested.
Cyclone

a) A mechanical device for the removal of particles from gas streams

b)

by centrifugal force imparted by a whirling motion of the gas inside the device. A natural wind system rotating around a centre of low atmospheric pressure. A cyclonic system ( in contrast to anticyclonic system ) has a low pressure centre around which strong winds flow anticlockwise in northern hemisphere and clock~se in southern hemisphere D

Decay - In air pollution, the decay of an airborne pollutant usually implies the rate at which it is lost from the atmosphere, for example, by absorption or precipitation, including its loss by transformation into some other chemical. For radioactive pollutants it implies reduction by radioactive transformation. Degree

condition of a mean of one degree difference in Day -The temperature between the outside temperature and a given base temperature over one day of 24 hours is termed ` one degree day `. The heating requirements ( fuel consumption) of a building over a period are often taken to be proportional to the number of degree days, that is, the sum of the degree day values for the days of the period.
Deposit Gauge-An

instrument designed to assess the rate of deposition of material from the air. In most instances, the gauge receives material through a horizontal opening and the results can be expressed in terms of amount deposited on a given area in a given time.
.I2

IS : 4167 - 1980 A parameter describing the rate at which a pollutant Depositionveloeityfrom air denosits on a snrface. It is the ratio of the rate of deposition per unit area of the surface to the concentration near the surface. Though having the dimensions of velocity, it is only a parameter and not a real velocity. The removal of absorbed or adsorbed material. DeserptienDesulplmrlaatie~~- Literally the removal of sulphur. To reduce sulphur dioxide emissions it is possible to use `fuel desulphurisation' so as to reduce the sulphur present in the fuel when it is burnt or `flue gas desulphurisation' in which the sulphur dioxde is removed from the gases formed lqy combustion. Detemlination, Blank - When a sample is analysed for assessment of a given pollutant using some procedure, equipment and material, an identical assessment is also made using only the collecting medium for example, a filter paper or a bubbler reagent through which air is passed, not containing the material to be assessed. This latter assessment is called blank determination, sample or run, and is carried out to determine the background contribution due to impurities inherent in the medium, equipment or process. It is necessary to take this into account in the normal sample analysis. Dew Point-The temperature to which the sample of air has to be cooled to make it saturated with respect to water at its existing pressure and humidity mixing ratio. It is a measure of moisture content of air. The higher the moisture content, the higher is the dew point. Diameter, Mass Median - The mass of a sample of particulate' matter in terms of the diameter above and below which the masses of all large and smaller particles are equal ( see also Median ). DlRusion a) On the scale of molecules, ditfusion is a mixing of substances caused by molecular motion ( Molecular Diffusion). b) In atmosphere it implies the spread of pollutants by turbulence or eddy motion ( also called Atmospheric Diffusion ). Dlsperslon -The method by which a pollutant spreads from its point of emission and becomes diluted in the atmosphere. It includes transport by winds and simultaneous spread by turbulence ( atmospheric diffusion ). Disposal - Getting rid of, by suitable process and treatment, for example, disposal of the gases to atmosphere and disposal of gaseous wastes after treatment for desulphurisation. Distance, Exclosion - A distance from or area surrounding a source of pollutant from a given plant entirely under the control of the plant and within which no habitation is permitted 13

x!3:4167-1980
Distillate - Any product obtained by vapourisation from a still or distillation apparatus. The term distillate fuel is often applied to a fraction heavier than petrol or to par&n ( kerosene or gas oil).

Diurnal - An adjective .describing the variation of some parameter a typical day or over 24 hours.

during

Dose-The amount taken in or received. Time integrated exposure to pollutants, for example, dose of exposure for 1 h to an average sulphur dioxide concentration of 1 000 yg/m *. In radiology, it refers to the amount of energy absorbed by a unit mass of body tissue from radiation such as gamma or X-rays ( see also Exposure and Concentration, Time Integrated ). Down Wash ( Down Draught ) - A downward movement of smoke or other emissions on the leeward side of stack ( chimney) or other obstacles such as buildings, hills, etc, due to aerodynamic characteristics of flow past obstacles ( bluff bodies). The downward motion of air itself may be called downdraught whereas downwash applies to the pollutant. Downwash causes reduction in the effective height of emission. Driving Cycle - In relation to the testing of motor vehicles, particularly to estimate their pollution emission characteristics, they may be made to perform standard driving cycles which are fixed patterns of steady speeds, accelerations and decelerations typical to some particular form of driving, for example, urban use. Droplet - A small liquid particle of such size and density that it falls under still conditions but may remain suspended under turbulent conditions. Dust - Small particles in the size range 1 to 200 pm in diameter. Particles above 75 w size would come into the category of grit. Below about lprn the particles, if air borne, would tend to remain in suspension rather than settle due to gravity ( see also Fume ), Dust Fall-The rate at which dust is deposited horizontal surface. from the air on a

Dust Loading - Mass of dust per normal unit volume in a gas or air stream. When applied to equipment, it is expressed as mass per unit time. E Eeolegy -The relation and their environment. or interaction of living systems with each other of science dealing with

The term is also used to denote the branch ?he above.

Eddy - A fluctuation from the mean motion of a fluid; also used for parcels of air having circular whirlpool type of motion in the atmosphere. Eddies are the result of turbulent motion of the atmosphere. 14

IS :4167-1980

- Increasing or building up of cumuiative . the effect with successive or continuing exposures.
Eik?ct,

The emission collection efficiency of a specific Effieieucy, Fractionalsize fraction of a contaminant. This term is commonly applied to the performance of air cleaning equipment intended for particulate matter in various sizes and ranges. Eg.ilWut - Literally anything which flows out or is discharged. Usually applied to the discharge of a waste material into a water body or the atmosphere. Etfiux Velocity - The speed with which' something his discharged from an orifice, for example gases from the top of a chimney. Also called discharge velocity. Ejector - A device which uses a fluid under pressure, .such as steam, air or water to move another fluid by developing suction. Suction is developed by discharging the fluid under pressure through a venturi.
Ekctrostatic -

A genersll ten

describing something having an electrical

charge. Electrostatic Precipitator - A device for removing particles from a gas by making them electrically charged and then making them to adhere to a plate or plates by application of electrostatic field. Ehrtriation - A process for separating tie particles into sized fractions by their different rate of settling down under gravity in a stream of fluid. Emissiou Discharge of effluent into the atmosphere. The term is often
' used to express an emission rate, for example mass per unit time or an

emission concentration, in terms of volume or mass of material per unit volume of total emitted gas.
Emission Standard - The amount of pollutants permitted to be discharged

from a pollution source. Emission standards are commonly described in one or more of the following ways: a) Mass of pollutants over a certain time, for example kg/h or tonnes/day; b) Mass of pollutants per unit mass of material processed, for example, 25 kg per tonne ( approximately 025 percent ); c) Volume of pollutants ( if gaseous) per unit volume of; discharged gas, for example, parts per million.
Emphysema - Pulmonary or lung emphysema is a distension or swelling of the lung air spaces due to destruction of the alveoli which diminishes the_ area for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air and the blood.

15

E3:4167-l9m
&&I% internal ComUon - An engine in which- a fuel/air mixture is burnt within a chamber and the resulting .pressure of hot gas is converted to mechanical energy. Iu contrast, external combustion as in a boiler furnace involves the transmission of energy by a separate agent, for example, steam cycle. EWrorune& - Literally surrounding?; may apply to the indoor or-working conditions but commonly refers to man's toti surroundings, natural and manmade. Parts of the environment are often specified. For example biological environment, water environment, air environment, marine environment, etc.
Epidemihgy - The scientific study of the frequency and distribution of a disease within a population and often extended to include the relationship of the disease with external factors such as air pollution. Diameter - In relation to airborne particles, it is used to describe the way in which a particle of generally irregular shape behaves as if = it were a sphere of a certain diameter ( arid often of a standard density ). Equivalent

The settling rate equivalent diameter of a dust particle is defined as a diameter of a sphere with unit density which has the same settling rate as the particle in question in air at 20�C and I:103 bar ( 760 mm mercury ). JSrror - The difference between a measured value of an entity and its true value, due to defects in instruments or due to inaccuracy of observation. &or, Aualytical -The deviation composition of the entity analyzed. of the analytical result from the true due to

Error, Samp@~ - Part of the t&al estimation error of a parameter the random nature of the sample.

Error, Total Esthimtion L- In the estimation of a parameter, the difference between the calculated value of the estimator and the true value of this parameter. It may be due to: (a) sampling error, (b) measurement error, (c) rounding off values, (d) bias of estimator, or.(e) other errors. EMaust Vent or aperture from which gases are discharged out.

Exposure - A measure or description of the extent to which &I object or organism has been sub_jected or exposed to a particular pollutant (see aZso Dose and-Concentration, Time-Integrated ).
JWrapolation - Estimating the value of something beyond the range in which it has been measured, for example, estimating pollution levels in the near future from a number of values over past years may be called extrapolation of pollution levels in time. Estimation of winds at higher levels from those measured at two or more levels below may be called extrapolaction in h&ghi.

16

IS:4167119NI F Fan@ - A type of plume behaviour under extreme inversion conditions where mostly lateral ditIusion takes place with very little vertical mixing. pollution or analytical chemistry, it means a medium for separating solids from liquid or gas, by passing the liquid or gas through the medium. W In optics it means a device which allows rays or radiation of a given wavelength range only to pass through. In spectral analysis of turbulence it has an analogous meaning cl

a) In air

signifying a mathematical device which allows only a given frequency of turbulent oscillations to pass through. FaIlopt - A radioactive pollutant in the air caused after the explosion of a nuclear device; its degree of contamination depending on several factors, such as distance, wind and power of the device. Sometimes also used to mean, depending upon context, heavy grit, dust and ash depositing near the source ( chimney). Flame Ionisation - Certain gaseous compounds, notably those containing carbon can be esti,mated by the extent to which they are ionised in a hydrogen flame. The technique is called flame ionisation. Flash Point - The lowest temperature at which a liquid fuel will give off a flammable vapour which will burn momentarily on application of a small flame. There are several methods of measuring the flash point, for example, using an open ( Cleveland ) or closed cup ( Pensky-Martens ) apparatus for test. Plow Meter - An instrument for measuring the rate of flow of a fluid moving
through a pipe or duct system. The instrument is calibrated to give volume or mass rate of flow ( see also Rotameter, Veuturi ). Flue Gas-The gaseous product of combustion from a combustion

equipment, for example, a boiler furnace or a kiln. Pluldised .Bed - A chemical engineering term to describe a bed of solid particles through which air or any other gas is made to flow upwards in such a fashion as to support the particles and to make them act, in many ways, like a liquid. Furnaces have been devised in which oil or powdered or granulated coal can be introduced into such a ( heated ) bed where it can burn evenly and produce an even temperature throughout the bed. Flaoriue (F)/Fluerides - In air pollution the term fluorine is often used to cover both the element of that name and its compounds, mostly fluorides. Fluorine and its soluble compounds can be toxic. They are pollutants particularly associated with brick and aluminium production. 17

IS:4167-1980 Flux - The rate of passage or transfer of a quantity per unit area. F'ly Asb - The finely divided particles of ash readily entrained in flue gases arising from the combustion of fossil fuels ( mainly coal ). The particles of ash may contain partially burnt fuel. Fog- Atmospheric obscuration caused by liquid water droplets. In meteorological terms fog implies red&b of visibility to less than 1 km. Fog, Radiation -With a clear sky and light wind there can be substantial cooling of the air during the evening and night due to earth losing heat by radiation. Where the air temperature falls below the dew point, a fog can be formed. Fog formed by this process is called radiation fog. general term covering coal, mineral oil, natural gas, etc, Fossil Faels -A which are fuels dervied from organic deposits in ancient geological periods. They consist mainly of carbon and hydrocarbons. By comparison wood and nuclear fuel are not fossil fuels. Freeze-Out Trap - A device to retain specific pollutants by cooling to low temperatures. Freons - A range of hydrocarbons with hydrogen replaced partly or totally by fluorine or chlorine. These wholly manmade compounds are used as refrigerants, in fire extinguishers and as aerosol propellants. Frequency Distribution - A graphical or mathematical method of showing the frequency of occurrence of values of some parameter against the value of that parameter. Front, Cold- The sharp boundary between two extensive air masses where cold air is replacing warm air. Front, Warm- The sharp boundary between two extensive air masses where warm air is replacing the cold air. Fuel, Authorized - A fuel with specified performance characteristics' from the point of view of smoke and other pollutants, on the basis of which it may be authorized for use in smoke contrOlled areas. Fume -Very fine solid or liquid particles, O*OOlto 1 pm in diameter, arising from chemical reactions or condensation of vapour (often metal vapour ) . The word ftimes is ckmmonly used to imply unpleasant and smelling airborne effluents. Fumigation - When atmospheric conditions are such that there is an unstable layer of ,atmosphere above ground, topped by a stable inversion layer, the pollutants in the unstable layer often experience a thorough vertical mixing raising the ground level concentration. This is called 18

Is : 4167 - 1980 fumigation. It may occur early in the morning when night time inversion breaks up after sunrise or may exist near the coast when sea breeze brings cold air over the warm air on land.
G

Grain - In air pollution this is often encountered as a unit of mass ( One grain = OG4 8 g ). This old apothecaries's unit is still used in certain regulations for describing permissible concentrations ( 1 grain/ft* 9 2.3 g/m* ) of pollutants in process emissions. Green House EBect - Retention of heat by the earth and the atmosphere owing to the carbon dioxide in air being `transparent' to incoming shortwave solar radiation but `opaque' to long wave radiation back from the earth. This term comes from analogy of green houses where glass and water vapour inside cause shortwave sun's radiation to enter but does not allow long wave radiation to pass out. Grit - Particles of solid ranging from 75 to 200 vrn in diameter in the aid or flue gases which fall out or deposit under their own weight (see also Dust ). Ground Roughness - Natural terrain is not smooth but consists of rocks, grass, trees, buildings, etc, which affect the air flow near the surface of the earth. Thus, forest will be rougher than short grass. A roughness parameter usually denoted by Zo is defined such that in neutral atmosphere, the wind U changes with height Z according to the law,

Guideline, Air. Quality-Air quality guideline indicates the level and duration of air pollution by a pollutant above which effects on materials, vegetation or health are produced. H The Haze - Fine aerosol dispersed through a portion of the atmosphere. particles are so small that they cannot be felt or individually seen with the naked eye, but they diminish the horizontal visibility and give the atmosphere a characteristic opalascent appearance which subdues all other colours. Blue haze is found due to the combustion of sulphur or its compounds or some other organic compounds. JrIistogrm - A graphical representation of the frequency distribution of a continuous variable. Classes are represented by continuous intervals on X-axis and absolute ( or relative ) frequencies of the classes are represented by rectangles on X-axis, with the areas proportional to the absolute fre quencies of the classes. 19

Is:4167-l!Mo Hemeestasls-The maintenance of internal constancy and independence of the environment within a living substance. Thus, despite changes in ambient temperature, body maintains a nearly constant temperature. Similarly, in spite of deteriorated air quality, the body maintains its functions through proper compensation. There is, however, a limit beyond which the compensation is not possible leading to permanent damage. Humidity/Relative Hamldity - The water vapour content of atmosphere is its humidity. Relative humidity is the ratio ( expressed as percentage ) of the quantity of water vapour in the atmosphere ( per unit volume ) to that of the quantity at that temperature if it was saturated with water vapour. Hydrometer - An instrument humidity of the air. for measuring the I Inu&sionStrictly this means intake by a receptor of pollution. Since this is often related to the concentration of the pollutant in the air there has been a tendency to speak of the immission concentration or even immission as the same as ground level concentration. A forcible contact of particles of matter on any surface. This term is often used synonymously with `Impingement'. The impacting particles adhere to the surface; a property used in air sampling.
impaction -

humidity

or relative

Impactor - A sampling device which employs the principle of impaction ( impingement ). `Cascade Impactor' is a specific instrument which employs several impactions in series to collect successively smaller sizes of particles. tipactor, g;Fzment
.

Cascade - See Impactor. In air sampling, it refers to a process for the collection

The act of bringing matter forcibly in contact with any of particulate matter in which the gas being sampled is directed forcibly against a surface. Impingement, Dry - The process of impingement so carried out that particulate matter carried in the gas Stream is retained upon the surface against which the stream is directed. The collecting surface may be treated with a film of adhesive. Impingement, Wet - The process of impingement carried out within a body of liquid, the latter serving to retain the particulate matter. Impinger - A sampling instrument employing impingement for the colleo tion of particulate matter and gases. Iuclueratlon - A waste disposal process by means of which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are converted, through controlled combustion, toa residue, which contains virtually no combustible matter, and to gases. 20

Is:4167-l!m l&m&y, Chlor Alkali- Industry camcctal with the manufacture of chlorine, caustic soda and caustic potash and/or related products.

IngestIon- The taking in of a substance to the stomach.
Imohtion

\

- Incoming solar radiation falling on a unit horixontal surface ( of the earth ). This may consist of the radiation directly received from the sun plus that received after scattering by the atmosphere and clouds.

Intens& ( RaWaIl ) - Rate at which rain falls. In practice this is determined by measuring the rainfall over some given time or by measuring time r uired for a given rainfall. It is important that this time interval should% mentioned. I&s&y ( Turhnkstee ) - Square root of the mean square wind speed flue tuation drvided by the mean wind speed. The fluctuations may be measured in downwind direction, cross wind direction or in vertical direction separately. Thus, intensity of vertical component of turbulence or horizontal `component of turbulence may be defined.
*, Interfm - E!%cts on the determination of a pollutant, due to the presence of other pollutants or impurities.

Internal Combustion Engine - See Engine, Internal Combustion. Interpolate - To estimate the value of an entity at points between actual,

measured or known values, for example estimating pollution levels at points between sites at which pollution measurements are actually made. Interpolations can also be done in time, that is, in between two instants.
Inversion - In meteorology an inversion exists when the air temperature

increases with height. Under such conditions, vertical movements are damped and vertical spread of the pollutants is attenuated. Inversion may occur in isolated layers also. During inversion, atmosphere is said to be stable. In Vitr43jInVivo - Those two terms difFerentiate the experimental reproduction of biological processes in isolation from the living organism and biological process occurring within the living organism. The former is called `in vim' and the latter `in vim'.
&&imtk - Isokinetic sampling implies sampling in such a way that the velocity of the gas entering the sampler is the same as that of the gas being sampled. The sample can thus be expected to have the same particulate content as the gas being sampled.

~eopletb- A line drawn on a map linking places with the same value of some parameter, for example, height, annual rainfall, pollutant concentration. 21

Is:4167-l!Jso

Isothemal - Literally, at constant temperature. An isothermal layer in the atmoshere is one in which there is no temperature variation with height within the layer. An isothermal process is that in which temperature does not change. Ienisation Chamber - A device for detecting and measuring radioactivity or nuclear radiation. It consists of a chamber containing a suitable gas and two electrodes having a potential difference high enough to prevent recombination of ion pairs produced when an ionising particle passes through it. Ion pairs are collected by the electrodes and the resulting pulsesor current amplified and recorded.K Knock -The situation in where part of the air/fuel flame front has reached it. engine can be reduced by or by antiknock a.dditives. a spark ignition internal combustion engine mixtire dGonates on compression bel'ore the The tendency of a fuel to knock in a petrol the blending of suitable compounds in the fuel

L Labile - A labile material is one which is unstable or reactive. Lachrymator - A substance which, on contact with eyes, causes irritation and flow of tears. Lapse Rate-The decrease of an atmospheric variable with height, the variable being temperature unless otherwise specified. Lapse Rate, Dry, Adiabatic - Rate of decrease of temperature at the rate of 0.009 8%/m. It is the rate at which parcel of unsaturated air will cool if Also called neutral lapse rate. lifted adiabatically. Lapse Rate, Super Adiabatic - Atmospheric lapse rate in which the decrease in air temperature with elevation is greater than the normal adiabatic lapse rate. Under this condition, vertical motions are accelerated, and the atmospere is said to be unstable. Laser Technique, Ramai- A technique in which laser is used as the source of monochromatic light. The scattered beam is scanned for the Raman Lines for a given pollutant which gives the concentration of the pollutant in the path of the beam. 22

IS :4167-m Layer, Mixing, or Layer, Mixed - A layer bounded between two surfaces in which pollutants can disperse and mix well in the vertical direction. Usually, the lower surface is ground and the upper surface may be the lower boundary of a layer having temperature inversion. Lead Dioxide ( Peroxide) Candle - A device in which sulphur dioxide in the air reacts with a film of lead dioxide to produce lead sulphate which is subsequently measured. The device thus gives an indication of sulphur dioxide in the air. Its pefformance is influenced by condition such as wind and humidity. Lean Mixtore - The air/fuel mixture in an internal combustion engine is described as lean if it contains a low proportion of fuel while a mixture with a high proportion of fuel is described as rich. Level, Adverse - Referring to level of concentration of a pollutant in the atmosphere at which remedial action is necessary. Lidar -Laser radar used to study the location and concentration pollutants, both particulate and gaseous by the reflection or absorption a laser beam. of of

Lofting - A type of plume behaviour characterjsed by vertical mixing above a specific level, caused by an unstable condition above and a stable ( inversion ) condition below the level. Looping - A type of plume which has a wavy character. highly unstable atmosphere because of rapid mixing. It occurs in a

Lung Function - Literally the function of a lung, that is, the transfer of oxygen from the' air to the blood and the disposal to the air of carbon dioxide from the blood. More specifically it is a measure of efficiency of lung performance. M MAC Maximum Allowable Concentration. A term similar to the TLV.

Mean, Arithmetic tions.

Sum of the values divided by the number of observa-

Mean, Geometric - The nth root of the product of n values. Means, Best Practicable - The overall approach of anti-pollution legislation towards industrial emissions which takes into account available technology and cost of pollutant abatement. A scheduled process should be provided with the best practicable means for abatement of pollution. 23

IS:416701980 Mesh -The middle most value of a series of observations arrangea according to the ascending or descending order of magnitude of a charaen+ 1 th value, if n is odd. If n teristic. In a sample of size n, it is 2 ( > is even, it is the average of (;)th and (; + 1 )thvahtes.

Nate - The distinctive pattern of meteorological variables within the lowest layers of atmosphere or ( sometimes ) within a limited area, for example, a town. lUiuometeor&gy - Study of physical phenomena in the very lowest layers of the atmosphere ( of the order of 100 metres ) or occasionally, over a restricted area, generally of a few kilometres in extent. MIIIRmr (mb) - A unit of pressure, one thousandth of the basic unit bar. The millibar is equal to 100 Newtons per square metre or 1000 dynes/cm' and approximately Q75 mm of mercury.
Mist-A suspension or dispersion of liquid droplets in a gas. Usually applied to water droplets in air where visibility has a value of 1 km or more. Natural mists may be aggravated by air pollutants.

Mist Eliminator - A device used for removing mist. of wire mesh for mist removal.

It generally consists

hilx& Wit - The height in the atmosphere within which emitted pollutants are dispersed and mixed vertically, the vertical mixing being attenuated by presence of inversion layers above that height. Mixture, Leaa - See Lean Mixture. Model., Mathematical - An air pollution mathematical model is a numerical simulation of the emission, dispersion and chemical and other processes controlling ambient pollutant concentrations. Model, Physical-A physical simulation., like in a wind tunnel, of the emission and dispersion processes controlhng ambient pollutant concentrations in a model, used as an aid to understanding the process. Monitoring- Generally this is used interchangeably with surveillance to mean measuring concentration levels continuously or regularly over a period of time. More specifically it may imply checking that the level of an air pollutant is within prescribedlimits. Stack monitoring implies the monitoring of the concentrations in the stack effluents from which total emission rates can be estimated. Month - For reporting analyses of outdoor air on a montly rate results are calculated to a base of thirty days, irrespective of the calendar month having 28 to 31 days as &fined in Gregarian Calendars. 24

_

*
N

I!3:4167-l%N

Necresls - Localized death of a cell or cells in the living body tissues. NephelemeterAn instrument for measuring the amount of light scattered or absorbed by a suspension of particles ( aerosols). It is used to determine suspended particle concentrations or particle size. Newton ( N ) - The SI unit of force; a force required to produce an acceleration of one metre per second when applied to a mass of 1 kg. It is equal to I@ dynes or 0.102 kg force. NO ( Nitrogen Oxides-) - Refers to all the oxides of nitrogen, but usually to nitric oxide ( NO ) and nitrogen dioxide ( NO* ) in m&ters of air pollution. Nitrous oxide ( N,O ) the anaesthetic laughing gas is a third reasonably stable oxide of nitrogen. Nomogram - A form of chart containing scales for the variables ( usually 3 ) involved in a particular formula or calculation. For any values of two of the variables, the corresponding values of the third he in a straight line with the values of the other two. The basic three variable structure is often extended progressively to cover more variables, taken three at a time, for example, A and B give C, C and D give E. Noxidous - Harmful. 0 obscuration - Concealing from sight, tion of visibility. In meteorology it relates to rest&

l

Octane Rating-An indicator of the tendency of `a motor gasoline to knock in a spark ignition internal combustion engine, higher octane ratings being required for engines of higher compression ratios. The octane number is the percentage by volume of the hydrocarbon iso-octane in a mixture with normal heptane which has the same knocking characteristics as the fuel under test. The higher the octane number, the lower the tendency to knock. Odour concentration - See Concentration;Odour. Oil, Gas- A liquid petroleum distillate having a viscosity and distillation range between paraffin (kerosene) and light lubricating oil, It is in the same boiling point range as diesel oil. Often used for heating purposes, it has a relatively low sulphur content. On-Line a) A method of measuring a variable in a process continuously rapdily as the process continues. 25 and

lS':4167-l!W
b) The arrangetient of a computer to process without delay input data obtained from the process, and p&t an output result, say to control a plant, is described as on-line operation. Opacity Eating - A measurement of the opacity of emissions, defined as the apparent obscuration of an observer's vision to a degree equal to the apparent obscuration of smoke of a given rating on the Ringehnann Chart. Orgenoleptic - AtTecting an organ. Thus organoleptic methods of estimating odour depend upon its perception by the human nose. Or&e Meter - A flowmeter, employing as the measure of flow rate the difference between the pressures measured on the upstream and downstream sides of the orifice ( that is, the pressure differential across the orifice) in the conveying pipe or duct. Oven, Coke - Large ovens in which hard caking bituminous coal is subjected to a long process of carbonization at high temperatures. Oxidants - Material which have an oxidising action on other materials, that is, generally adding oxygen to them chemically or extracting hydrogen. Typical atmospheric oxidants are ozone and nitrogen dioxide whose a action on vegetable material can be damaging. P PAN - Peroxywtyl with photochemical Particle nitrate. smog. This is an eye irritant compound associated

A small discrete mass of solid or liquid matter. Particle.

Particle Concentration - See Concentration, Partide Fall See Dust Fall.

PartEcnlates - Particulate matter in the air usually-refers to small solid particles of material found in the atmosphere in addition to gases. Less frequently, it is applied to small liquid aerosol particles. Peak, Instantaneons - It refers to a short term high value, for example of a pollutant concentration. Percentile - One of the set of numbers on the random variable axis which divides a probability distribution into 100 equal areas. It is a quantile equal to one-hundredth of total populition. Photochemlcal Smog - The result of reactions on the atmosphere between nitrogen oxides, organic compounds and oxidants under the itiuence of sunlight, leading to the formation of oxidizing compoun+ ?r possibly 26

IS:4167-19Qo

causing poor visibility, eye irritation or damage to materialand vegetation, if sufllciently concentrated.
PhjWOXiC -

Poisonous

to plants.

Phme-

The flow or path of et&tent from a specific outlet such as a chimney stack or vent. While for smoke, the plume is visible, for many pollutants it may not be so.

Pueameeeuiosis ( or m) - A term applied to various diseases of the lung caused by the inhalation of dust particles in such occupations as coal mining, quarrying and asbestos working; an excess of fibrous tissue forms in the lungs round the dust particles. The small grains from the anthers of flowers which contain the male reproductive nuclei. Transported in the air certain of these grains in the air can induce hay fever or asthma in some people by action in the nose. They are thus natural air pollutants.
Pollutant ( Primary & !%condary ) - A pollutant is something which pollutes the air. A primary air pollutant is one which is put into the air in that form. A secondary pollutant is not emitted as such, but forms in the air from primary pollutants. Pollution, Air - The presence in ambient atmospheres of substances, generally resulting from the activity of man, in sutllcient concentration, present for a sufficient time and under circumstances such as to interfere with comfort, health or welfare of persons or with reasonable use or enjoyment of property. Pollen -

A billion in European usage is a million times a million ppb(Emopeap)( 10" ) so ppb is parts per million million that is one part in 10". ppb ( US ) - In America a billion is used to mean a thousand million as against a million million in Europe. = 1 Ooo ppb ( European). pphm - Parts per hundred million.
ppm - Parts per million. In pollution of the air by a gaseous pollutant, it refers to the number of parts by volume of the gaseous pollutant in one million parts of the total air.

Thus 1 ppb(US)

The quantity ppm is related to l&m* by the relation. Concentration in p g/m8 = 44%4 M .273 %-+T where M = molecular weight of the pollutant, T = temperature in degrees centigrade, 27

lS:4167-l980 P1 - Pressure at NTP, and P p = Air pressure.
NOTX It is rccom&ndcd that instead of ppb or ppm, pg/mr should be used.

Precipitation a) The formation of solid particles in a solution. b) A process of separation of particles from a fluid. c) In meteorological parlance, moisture fting on the earth% surface as rain, hail or snow. Precipitation, Thermal-A process consisting of the separation of particulate matter from air and other gases under the influence of a sticiently steep thermal gradient. In the thermal precipitator (a sampling instrument), the air or gas is drawn slowly through a narrow chamber across which extends a heated wire, the particulate matter being deposited upon the adjacent collecting surface. Precipitator, Ekctrostatic - See Electrostatic Precipitator. Precision - Closeness of agreement (or smallness of variability) among the results obtained by applying the test procedure several times under the prescribed conditions. Precur~r - Something which goes before. Commonly applied to substances in the air which subsequently react or are transformed to produce new air pollutant, far example hydrocarbons are precursors of oxone and other compounds associated with photochemicsl smog. Pressure, Critical - The pressure at which-a gas may just be liquefied at its critical temperature ( see also Temperature, Critical ). . Pressure, Gauge - The difference between pressure existing within a system and that of the atmosphere. Zero gauge pressure is equal to atmospheric pressure. Pressure_, Static-The pressure of a fluid at rest or in motion exerted perpendtcularly to the direction of flow. Pressure, Total - The pressure representing the algebraic pressure and velocity pressure at the point of measurement. Pressure, Velocity ( or Dynamic) the velocity of the flow of fluid. the fluid. sum of static

The pressure caused by and related to It is a measure of the kinetic energy of

Probe - A tube used for sampling or for measuring pressures at a distance from the actual collection or measuring apparatus. It is commonly used for reaching inside stacks and ducts. 28

IS :4167-2980 Palmomm - Related to lungs.
d

Pomp- A device which forces air or other fluids from one place to another. This is usedin forcing air to pass through a sampler such as titer paper or bubbler. Pyrbeliogmpb - See Actinometer. R Radiesonde -A balloon borne instrument which transmits data on temperature, pressure and humidity as it rises and moves with the wind. Rain, 0rographie - Rain caused by the raising and cooling of moist air as it passes over mountains. Rainont - The mechanism whereby small particle? in the air are removed by raindrops as they. form in the cloud. Ram&nEffect - Appearance of additional lines in the spectrum of the light scattered by a substance when illuminated by monochromatic light. The lines are characteristic of the substance and the phenomenon is used to identify and measure its quality. Ratio, Be&It/Cost --`The benefit/cost ratio seeks to compare the of a particular action with its cost. In the case of pollution expenditure the benefits have to be assessed in terms of the effect of pollution. A ben.efit/cost ratio of 10 : 1 implies that for every spent on controlling the pollution, the benefits can be valued at Rs b&efits control reduced 1 rupee 10.

Reqdii - Recovery and reuse of the material generally to make the-same sort of products. In some cases reuse for another purpose is included in the term recycling in that it assists material conservation. Exhaust gases. from motor vehicles may be recycled in the air input to reduce the overall production of air pollutants. Refaence Method - A. reference method or analysis is one against which others are compared. Usually it is a method of, high accuracy and precision, and therefore, is not always as simple to perform as a routine method. ReWtanee - The reflectance of a surface is a measure of the extent-to which it reflects light or other radiation of specific wavelength. When the radiation is not monochromatic, the term Albedo is used2 Remote serrping- Detection or m easnrement of a property of a medium like atmosphere) such as temperature, concentration of pollutants, etc I rom a distance. For example, using Radar, rain can be detected or using Laser beam, concentration of pollutants can be measured along the path of the beam by analysing the scattered radiation from the beam. This is in contrast to in situ sampling or measurement where the sensor measures the property in the immediate vicinity of the sensor. 29

rs:4167-lso RqIrodpbbitity - The closeness of agreement alLong the test results ob-, tained by the same method on identical test material but under different conditions (difPerent operators, different apparatus, Merent laboratories and/or d&rent times ). It is defined as that difference between two such single and independent results as would be exceeded in the long run in only one case in twenty in the normal and correct operation of the test method.
Residence Time-Average time for which any pollutant or particulate matter remains in the atmosphere before settling on earth's surface. It is equal to the time required for the removal of half the quantity of matter divided by M93 or the time required for the contents to reach l/e or 3@8 percent of original value, where e is the base of lo&. Resp~orA device used by a person for breathing filtered air, or arti&ial air from a cylinder while working in an area having air contamination.
Rcspoese- Reaction or effect of something to a stimulus or influence, for example the effect of 8 pollutant concentration upon a living organism or responses of an instrument to a given_signal. Response Time-

Time taken by an instrument to change the indication from the initial level to I/e times (e = base of natural logarithms = 2712 ) the final level on giving a step incremental input. Retention Factor - Fraction of a contaminant the body of the person. breathed that is retained in

Riielmann Chart ( Scale) - A chart for assessing the darkness of a plume of smoke by visual comparison with a numbered set or grade differing from each other in the width and spacing of black lines printed on a white background. Thus Ringelmann 1 is equivalent to- 20 percent black. The percentage of blackness represented by Ringelmann num'bers is as follows:
Rin@nam Percent of Blacknes

1
2 3 4 5

20
40 60 80 ,

100

`Dark smoke' is smoke which is as dark or darker than Ringelmann
2 and `Black smoke' is as dark or darker than Ringelmann 4.

Rotameter - A device, based on the principle qf Stoke's Law for measuring the rate of luid flow. It consists of a tapered vertical tube having a circular cross-section and containing a float which is free to move in a vertical path to a height dependent upon the rate of fluid flow upward through the tube ( see crlso Flow Meter and Orifice Meter ). 30

Is:4167-1980
Rm, Blank - See Determination, Blank. / / Rmming Average - See Average, Moving.

Sample,

Cumidative- A' sample obtained over a period of time, the collected atmosphere being retained in a single vessel, or with a separated component accumulating into a single whole such as dust sampling in which all the dust separated from air is accumulated in one mass of fluid; acid gas is absorbed in an alkaline solution; and-air is collected in a @stic bag or gasometer. Such a sample does not reflect variations in concentration during the period of sampling. Sample, Grab - A sample taken or grabbed at a single point in a short time rather than accumulated over a period. This is representative of only the conditions at the particular time of sampling. This is also known as

Snap sample. Sampling -

Taking or withdrawing a fraction of a substance usually for study as representative of the whole.

Sampling, Contimow - Sampling without interruptions throughout an operation or for a predetermined time, that is, uninterrupted sampling of air, usually at a Gxed rate. Where the sample can be analysed continuously, the stream of gas may be passed through a measuring instrument continuously. Otherwise, the sample is collected in an uninterrupted fashion for a given period and the entire sample is &rally analysed to give the mean composition of the air over whole period. Samplii, Cmndative- A process or system in which the sample is accumulated either by sampling continuously or for t&&e periods at regular intervals to give a single sample whose composition is regarded as representative of the whole period of its accumulation.
Sampling, In-situ - Sampling of a property of a medium ( for example atmosphere ) by using sensors or detectors at the actual place where sampling is desired ( see also Remote Sensing).

Sampling, Instantanems - Obtaining a sample of an atmosphere in a very period of time, such that this sampling time is insignificant in compar&m With the duration of the operation or the period being studied. It implies sampling at one point in time. ( Instantaneous sampling is possible with electrical and optical devices. )
short

Sampling, Intermittent - Sampling successively for limited'periods of time throughout an operation or for a predetermined period of time. The durations of sampling periods and of the intervals in between are not 31

.

IS:4167-1980
necessarily regular and are not specified. In contrast to continuous sampling, intermittent sampling means that sampling occurs at intervals for only a fraction of the total time. Sampling, Random - Random sampling is a sampling scheme without a predetermined pattern. Proper random sampling involves the express selection of sampling units or times so that there is no bias towards selection of particular units or times and the .sample is likely, as far as possible, to be representative of the whole.
Sampling, Rum&g - Withdrawal of a portion of the atmosphere over a period of time with continuous analysis or with separation of the desired material continuously and in a linear form such as withdrawal of the atmosphere accompanied by absorption of a component _ma flowing stream of absorbent or by filtration in a moving strip of paper. Such a sample may be obtained with a considerable con%ntration of the contaminant but it still indicates fluctuations in concentration which occur during the period of sampling.

Sampling of air containing contaminants at the place of origin of the contaminant. sampihlg Devices, Inertial -Devices, such as depository trays, dust fall gauges and collectors, to determine the total amount of material settling in them in a given time. Saturation -The paint where a substance is charged with the greatest possible amount of another substance or property. In meteorology or air pollution work it is frequently used in respect of-air being saturated with moisture in which case air put in contact with a plane surface of water at that temperature will neither gain nor lose water vapour, Sembbing/Serubber -An absorption operation in which gaseous or fine particulate pollutants are removed from a stream of air or gas by contact with a liquid spray or a bath or. wetted packing/wet surfaces in a tower. The apparatus/equipment used is known as scrubber. Sea Breeze - See Breeze, Sea. Sensitivity a) In chemical analysis the sensitivity of a method is a measure of the minimum value which can be estimated by the method. h) It is also used to describe an abnormal reaction of the body to certain substances. c) Sensitivity of an instrument is used to &note lowest measurable change in a variable that the instrument can measure. Settling Velocity, Ten&al -The maximum velocity reached by a falling particle when the gravitational force on it (its weight ) is balanced by the viscous drag of the fluid through which it is falling. 32

Sampling, Source -

Is:

4167.l!m

Sim Dldrhtion, Particle - A method of c:xpressing the make up of a population of particles ( in any dust, aerosol;:, etc ) in terms of either: the mass or number of part&s between certain size limits, for example equiva(see also Impactor, lent dieter of 0 to 1 pm, 1 to 5 pm 5 to 10 fl Cascade ). Smelter - A place where fusion of an ore or concentrate is carried out with suitable fluxes, to produce a melt consisting of two layers; on top a slag of the flux, and below, molten impure matter. Smog - Term derived from the terms `smoke' and `fog'. Extensive atmospheric pollution by aerosols, arising partly through natural processes and partly from human activities (see also Photochemical Smog ). Smoke . a) Small gas borne liquid and/or solid particles formed by incomplete combustion of fuel and in the size range O*OOl)tm to 1.0 pm. b) In some cases soot, ash, grit and gritty particles emitted in smoke are also included. c) Suspended matter collected on filter paper. Smoke Scale, Bacharach - A scale of 10 shades from white to black for the assessment of smoke in flue gases. A smoke stain obtained by samp ling flue gases through a filter paper in a prescribed manner is graded according to the scale. Smuts - Small aggregates of soot, unburnt solids or fly ash which `may be emitted from chimneys and then be deposited in the vicinity. In certain circumstances, the production of sulphur trioxide during combustion may give rise to acid smuts which are corrosive. Solarimeter - Sic Actinometcr. Soot - Aggregates of carbonaceous particles impregnated with tar formed by the incomplete combustion of carbonaceous material, particularly bituminous coal. They tend to adhere to the inside of the chimney, etc. SorbentA liquid or solid medium in or upon which materials are retained by absorption or adsorption. Sorption - A process consisting of either absorptiou or adsorption. Source (of Pollution) - A point or place from which efiluents are discharged into air. Spectrcchemical Method - The method using optical absorption or emission properties of a substance. The light absorbed by or emitted from a substance when made to do so is measured using a spectrometer. The wavelength and quality of light absorbed or emitted is used to detect the substance and measure its quality in a sample. 33

IS:4167-En30 Spectrometry,

I.

I

NDIR - `Non Dispersive Infra Red' specttometry. While III conventidnal spectrometry, a light beam is first dispersed using a prism or grating and a ( effectively ) monochromatic beam is selected, by changing a suitable angle, in the NDIR spectrometry a beam in infrared region of the spectrum is made monochromatic using an interference filter. Absorption of this beam by a sample gas is measured to determine the quality of gas in the sample. Spectrophotometry - The measurement of the concentration of a substance in solution by the amount of light emitted or absorbed of a colour (wavelength) characteristic of the substance being measured. Stable ( Compound ) -A stable compound is one which is not easily decomposed or does not react readily. Stack Solids -The solid content of the gas stream going up a stack or chimney. Stain, Smoke - This term is applied to the darkness OF a filter through which air has been sampled. The filter retains smoke particles and the stain can be expressed as a concentration of equivalent standard smoke. Standard Air - See S.T.P. Standard Deviation - A widely used measure of dispersion of a number of observations of some quantity. It is the square root of the average of the squares of the differences of each observation from the mean of thqse observations. It is a parameter in the Gaussian distribution and represents the value of the variable measured on either side from the mean within which 68.45 percent of the probability is covered. It is the square root of the variance. Standard Level - In respect of air quality it may imply a commonly agreed level above which effects of some type or other are believed to occur. It also represents arr air quality or emission level which should not be exceeded at all or for specified periods. It may also refer to the maximum permitted level of air contaminant as established by a legal authority. Standard Smoke - For certain smokes the relationship has been measured between the darkness of stain produced by sampling on a filter and separate gravimetric measurements of the smoke concentrations. This allows filter stains to be expressed in terms of a concentration of equivalent standard smoke. S.T.P. - Standard Temperature and Pressure. Usually the same as N.T.P. but sometimes referring to other. conditions, for example 27"C, 760 mm of mercury etc. When referring to air, 65 percent humidity is also assumed. Survey ( Swveillance ) - An air pollution survey is an examination of the condition of the air usually at a number of points and/or over a length of time. Surveillance, usuajly from safety consideration, implies surveying over time. Monitoring is often used in the same sense,

34

Is:4167Ipo Sarvey, Damage - Assessment
specified area.
Suspended Particulates -

of damage caused by the pollutant' in a

Particles which are too fine to have an appreciable falling velocity and therefore tend to stay suspended in atmosphere for a considerable period.
Synergistic - Referring to additive or mutually supporting or aggravating effect of toxic substances on living things.. Synoptic-Affording

an overall view. In meteorology a. synoptic chart displays the state of atmosphere over a large area at one time. By extension, synoptic is used to refer to features, for example cyclones or anticyclones, which appear in such charts.
T Tar A thick dark brown or black viscous liquid obtained by distillation of wood, coal, peat, crude, oil etc.

The distillation need not be in a still. a domestic grate and chimney.
Telemetering -

Distillation

may occur in

The transmission of signals from a measuring instrument by cables or by wireless to a distant point where the results can be displayed or recorded. Telemetering enables the levels of pollution at a number of locations to be displayed at a single point. Temperature, Critical - The critical temperature of a given gas is the temperature above which it cannot be liquefied. Temperature ihat a parcel of air in the atmosTemperature, qotentialphere would attain if it is brought adiabatically to a pressure of 1 000 mb ( see also Lapse Rate, Dry, Adiabatic ).
Tephigram -

A thermodynamic diagram or chart depicting graphically relations between physical variables of a gas, for example between temperature, pressure, potential temperatule of air m the atmosphere with different moisture content.
Threshold, Odour -

The lowest concentration of an odour bearing gas at which only half of a panel of sniffers can detect its presence.

TLV - Thtesiold Limit Value. This is the concentration of any of a numbeti of pollutants recommended as a maximum to which healthy adult workers may be qxposed 8 hours a day for five continuous days a week without adverse effects.
NOTE -The list is compiled by the American Conference of Governmental IndusAlthough l/30 or l/40 of trial Hygienists but is used extensiGely in many countries. the TLV is often used as a rule-of-thumb guide to an acceptable ambient concentration of a pollutant for `the general public', them are many exceptions and the ACGIH specifically warns against the practice.

35

Is :4167=l!m Topography - The layout of an area in terms of height, the natural features and/or buildings, etc. Tower, Flare - An outlet, generally elevated, to exhaust inflammable gases after igniting them. Also called `flare stack', or `flare'. Tower, PriiingA tower in fertilizer industry, where a hot concentrated solution of ammonium nitrate or urea is sprayed and in which it crystal&s as it descends through a rising ctirrent of atmospheric air. Toxicity - A measure of poisonous or damaging effects of a substance on a living organism. Tracer Technique - A method of studying pollutant behaviour in the air by the injection or release of a specifically identifiable substance. The subsequent distribution of the tracer is taken to be similar to that of the pollutant from the same starting point. Troposphere-The low&t part of the ds atmosphete, (about 9 to 20 km deep depending upon latitude), in which the temperature generally decreases with height.. Tobe, Indicator-A tube containing a substance or reagent which reacts with some specific pollutant to give a visible indication of the quality of the reagent reacted with the pollutant by change in colour or otherwise. When polluted air of known quality is passed through the indicator tube, the concentration caa be approximately assessed from the degree of visible indication. Such tubes are oRen used for grab sampling. Turbidity a) The ~cloudiness of a liquid caused by fine suspended particles. More precisely it describes the reduction of light passing through the liquid ( caused by the suspended particles). b) In meteorology it refers to any condition of the atmosphere which reduces its transparency to light; a measure ~of reduction of transparency normally excluding cloud. Turbulence- A motion of the wind or air flow in a highly irregular manner both in speed and direction. It is the main mechanism of diffusion of pollutants in the air ( see also Eddy ). U
I

\

Urban Heat Island-A zone of excess warmth withih a city over the suburban and rural environs. The warmer air in this region rises upwards and then spreads radially outwards. The colder air from the surrounding countryside at the surface flows inwards towards the heat island to replace the rising and outspreading warm air. This occurs when the heat islands are intense. This circulation is known as Urban Heat Island El?" 36
\

Is:4167=lmI UebMe CmnpdAn unstable chemical compound easily decomposed or which reacts readily. V Vapour - A gas is said to be vapour if, at the temperature concerned, it can be liquefied by pressure alone. The pressure exerted by a vapour, either alone or Vapour Fressuremi-xed with other gases. The saturated vapour pressure of a substance at any temperature is pressure of the vapour of the substance in equilititun with its liquid form. Variance - A statistical term. The square of the standard deviation that is, the average of the squares of the deviations of a number of observations of a quantity from their mean value. Ventilation a) The process of replacing contaminated or stale air by fresh air. b) The movement and circulation of outdoor air. c) The.volume of air entering or leaving the lungs in one respiratory cycle. Ventilation Coefficient - It is defined as a product of mixing height and average wind speed. Venturi - A tube which is constricted and then opens out again and can be used to meter the flow of gas or to assist the scrubbing of a gas by a liquid. Visibility - A measure of cleanness of the air expressing how far objects can be clearly seen under specified conditions. Light absorption and scattering by aerosols are the main causes of reduced visibility. W Washout - The removal of gases, and sometimes particles, from the atmosphere by their solution or attachment to rain drops as they fall. Week @' a) For inplant use it is considered to be the number of workdays within a period of seven consecutive days. b) For reporting Bnalyses of outdoor air on a weekly rate results are calculated to a base of seven consecutive 24-hour days. Wind Rose - A diagram showing the frequency and strength of winds of various directions over a period in a particular place. Wind Shear - The change in speed and direction of the wind, usually with height. 37 is one which is

is:4167-1990

Year - For reporting analyses of outdoor air on a yearly rate, twelve 3o_day months are to be used.
Z Zane, Exclusion See Distance, Exclusion.

Zoning - A method of abating air pollution at a location by a systematic planning of sites for dwellings and for factories/Industries which discharge effluents taking into account the micrometeorological conditions in and around the location.

IS : 4167- l930 c(34-o=Pw21)
M&s
Da S. D. MAKHIJANI DRK.R.KHAN(A~~) DR B. PADYANABHAMURTHY SRRXV.L. PAMPATTIWAR DR V. I. PANDIT( AI&ma&) SHRXR. R. PRAMD SHRI P. C. VARBU ( Altcrnac ) DR K. P. R. VITTAL MURTBY SARI A. L. AGARWAL ( Alternate) W&r

Ccntrai Board for the Prevention and Control of
Pollutioh, New Delhi
&fc~4cn~ogical

w-w

?cp~t, New =_ Envxonmental Engmccring Raearch Institute I CSIR 1. Namur

The Fertilizer ( Planning & Development ) India Ltd, Sindri National Institute of Occupational ( ICMR ), Abmadabad Health

39

ES:

S'biIUDARD8

RBUXTNG

TO AIR POLLUTION

4167~i980 5182

Glossary of t&ms relating to air pollution (Jrst rmisisa 4 Methods for measurement of air pollution

.

( Part I )-I969
( Part II )-1969 (Part III )-1970 (Part IV )-I973 ( Part V )A975 ( Part VI )-1975

Dustfall Sulphur dioxide Radioactivity (particulate) iu air Suspended matter Sampling of gaseous pollutants Nitrogen oxides Hydrogen mlphide Sulphation rate Qxidants Carbon monoxide Polynu~lear aromatic hydrocarbons in air particulate

( Part VII )-1973 ( Part VIII )-1976 ( Part IX)-1974 ( Part X )-I976 (Part XII )-1974 matter

( Part XIV

) Guidelines for planning the sampling of atmosphere Mass concentration of particulate, matter in the atoms-

( Part XV'i-`z74

( Part XVI)-1980 Recommended practice for collection by filtration and determination of mass, number and optical sixing of atmospheric particulates ( Part XVII (Part 8118-1976 8635-1977 8636-l 977 8829-1978 9005-1978 9057-1979 90781979 )-I979 Ct to Cs hydrocarbons in air by gas chromatography recording of the XVIII)-1974 Continuous analysis and automatic oxidant content of the atmosphere

Smoke emission levels for diesel vehicles Limits for gaseous emissions from sulphuric acid and phosphatic plants Limits for gaseous emissions from petroleum relineries Guidelines for micrometeorological Limits for industries techniques in air pollution studies nitric acid and nitrogenous fertilixer gaseous emission from f&ixer

Emission limits for carbon monoxide for vehicles powered by spark ignition engines Code for use of Ringelmann and miniature smoke charts fibre plants

9233 ( Pat t I )-1979 Limits for gaseous emissions from man-made Cellulosic fibres 9620-1980 Guide for units used in air quality measurements

: Part I

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Regional Offices: Telephones Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 331 01 31 13311375 NEW DELHI-1 10002 *Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, 21843 t 31641 CHANDIGARH 160036 (41 2442 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 1:; :: :6" TWestern : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), 6 32 92 95 B OM BAY 400093 Branch Ofjkes: `Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 26348 AHMEDABAD 380001 [ 26349 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 [ 38 49 56 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, , 66716 BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82183. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53627 53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road), 23 1083 HYDERABAD 500001 63471 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 I 6 98 32 21 6876 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 121 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 62305 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam 6 21 04 [ 621 17 TRIVANDRUM 695035 Inspection Oflce (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 251 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 52435 PUNE 411005
*Sales Offke in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Bombav 400007 $Saies Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, Bangalore 560002 276800 896528 22 36 71

Printed at Slmco Prlntino Press, Oelhl, India

