RAT AAF IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


defan Ua Sach seata At 
aao waat 
AUT 4/ATATT 2 Bist À Ma, Uee 
awh TE sik Ut À faces TEST 
( RAT GARETT ) 


Methods of Test for Petroleum 
and its Products 


Part 4/Section 2 Ash from Grease, Sulphated 
Ash and Water Soluble Ash 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 75.080 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2021 Price Group 4 


Methods of Test for Petroleum, Petroleum Products and Lubricants Sectional Committee, PCD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4/Sec 2) (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the 
draft finalized by the Methods of Test for Petroleum, Petroleum Products and Lubricants Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1964 and subsequently revised in 1968, 1984 and 2016. The Committee in 
2008 has adopted ISO 6245 as IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 1) : 2008/ISO 6245 : 2001 ‘Methods of test for petroleum 
and its products: Part 4/Section 1 Determination of ash’. However, ISO 6245 covers only Method A of 
IS 1448 (Part 4). As the Committee felt that all the four methods were needed, IS 1448 (Part 4) was divided into 
two sections as follows: 


a) IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 1) : 2008/ISO 6245 : 2001 Methods of test for petroleum and its products: 
Part 4/Section 1 Determination of ash. 


b) IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2016 Methods of test for petroleum and its products: Part 4/Section 2 
Ash from grease, sulphated ash and water soluble ash. 


Hence, in third revision Method A was deleted, which is now (Part 4/Sec 1)/ISO 6245 and precision of the 
methods have been modified. 


In this revision, calculation procedure in Method A (A1) has been included and Method D has been deleted. The 
standard now covers the following three methods for determination of ash: 


a) Methods Al and A2 prescribes procedure for the determination of ash from greases; 


b) Method B describes a procedure for determining the sulphated ash from unused lubricating oils 
containing additives and from additive concentrates used in compounding; and 


c) Method C prescribes procedure for the determination of water soluble ash from all type of petroleum 
oils, either unused or used. 


Further, precision statements are included in line with international standards. 


This is a part of the series of Indian Standards on test methods for petroleum products, being published as 
IS 1448 Part. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. 


IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF TEST FOR PETROLEUM 
AND ITS PRODUCTS 


PART 4/SECTION 2 ASH FROM GREASE, SULPHATED 
ASH AND WATER SOLUBLE ASH 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes three methods for the 
determination of ash, sulphated ash and water soluble 
ash from petroleum products and greases. 


1.1 Methods Al and A2, are prescribed for the 
determination of ash from greases. 


1.2 Method B describes procedure for determining 
the sulphated ash from unused lubricating oils 
containing additives and from additive concentrates 
used in compounding. These additives usually contain 
one or more of the metals namely, barium, calcium, 
magnesium, zinc, potassium, sodium and tin. The 
elements, such as sulphur, phosphorus, and chlorine 
may also be present in combined form. 


1.2.1 Application of this method to sulphated ash levels 
below 0.02 percent (m/m) is restricted to oils containing 
ashless additives. The lower limit of the method is 
0.005 percent (m/m) of sulphated ash. 


1.2.2 There are evidences that magnesium does not 
react in the same way as other alkali metals in this test. 
If magnesium additives are present then the data should 
be interpreted with caution. 


1.2.3 There are evidences that samples containing 
molybdenum may give low results because 
molybdenum compounds may not be fully recovered at 
the temperature of ashing. 


1.2.4 The sulphated ash may be used to indicate the 
concentration of known metal-containing additives 
in new lubricating oils. When phosphorus is absent, 
barium, calcium, magnesium, sodium and potassium 
are converted to their sulphates, and tin (IV) and zinc 
to their oxides. Since zinc sulphate slowly decomposes 
to its oxide at the ignition temperature specified in the 
procedure, samples containing zinc may give variable 
results unless the zinc sulphate is completely converted 
to the oxide. Sulphur and chlorine do not interfere, but 
when phosphorus is present with metals, it remains 
partially or wholly in the sulphated ash as metal 
phosphates. 


1.3 Method C describes the procedure for determining 
water soluble ash from all types of petroleum oils, 
either unused or used. When the sample under test 
contains lead compounds or alkali metals, the result 
does not express the true value as some of the metals 
will be lost by vaporization. 
WARNING — The use of this document can involve hazardous 
materials, operations and equipment. This Standard does 
not purport to address all of the safety problems associated 
with its use. It is the responsibility of users of this document 
to take appropriate measures to ensure the safety and health 
of personnel prior to the application of the standard, and to 
determine the applicability of any other restrictions for this 
purpose. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
266 : 1993 Sulphuric acid — Specification 
(third revision) 
537: 2011 Toluene — Specification 
(second revision) 
1083 : 2021 Industrial white oil — 


Specification (second revision) 


1448 (Part 4/Sec 1) Methods of test for petroleum 


: 2021 and its products: Part 4/ 
Section 1 Determination of ash 
(fourth revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this document, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 


3.1 Ash — The inorganic residue left after ignition of 
the sample under prescribed conditions, calculated as 
the percentage by mass of the original sample. 


3.2 Sulphated Ash — The ash that remains after 
the sample has been carbonized and the residue 
subsequently treated with sulphuric acid and heated to 
constant mass. 


3.3 Water Soluble Ash — The water soluble portion of 
the ash of the sample, calculated as the percentage by 
mass of the original sample. 


4 METHOD A — ASH FROM GREASES 


4.1 General 


4.1.1 Two methods are prescribed for determining ash 
from greases other than petroleum products. Method Al 
is a rapid routine method and is substantially the same 
as prescribed in IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 1). Method A2, 
which involves sulphate ion, gives more concordant 
results than Method Al, but requires more time and 
manipulation. Method A2 shall be used as a referee 
method. 


4.1.2 Method A2 is also preferred because Method A1 
sometimes gives unsatisfactory results for the following 
reasons: 


a) Sodium carbonate derived from the soap may 
react with inorganic fillers; 


b) The ash may react with the porcelain crucible 
during the long, continued heating necessary to 
burn off all carbon; 


c) If much sodium or potassium carbonate is present, 
the ash is fusible and often encloses carbon, 
making complete removal of the latter very 
difficult; 


d) Results are low when easily reducible oxides of 
volatile metals are present; 


e) There is uncertainty as to when calcium carbonate 
has been completely ignited to calcium oxide; and 


f) The ash test results are likely to vary widely on the 
same sample in different laboratories because of 
above errors. 


4.2 Outline of the Methods Al and A2 


In Method A1, the sample is heated gently till it burns 
and the residue is ignited until it is free from carbon. 
Alcohol may be added to prevent the foaming of wet 
samples. In Method A2, the partially ignited residue 
is treated with dilute sulphuric acid solution and the 
sulphated ash is weighed. 


4.3 Apparatus 


4.3.1 Dish or Squat-form Crucible — The crucible 
made up of silica, porcelain or platinum, and of about 
15 ml capacity. A platinum dish shall not be used if 


the sample contains lead, zinc or other metals which 
attack platinum at high temperature. 


4.3.2 Electric Muffle Furnace — The furnace shall be 
capable of maintaining a temperature of (775 +25) °C 
and preferably has apertures at the front and rear to 
allow a slow natural draught of air to pass through the 
furnace. 


4.3.3 Analytical Balance — Capable of weighing to 
the nearest 0.1 mg. 


4.3.4 Desiccator/Cooling Container 
Desiccant) 


(without 


4.3.5 Watch Glass 
4.3.6 Burner 

4.4 Method Al 
4.4.1 Procedure 


Heat the dish to redness, allow it to cool in a 
desiccator and weigh. Weigh 2 to 5 g of the sample 
to the nearest 0.01 g. Heat the dish gently in a 
well-ventilated fumehood until the grease urns at the 
surface (see Note). Burn off the combustible matter 
slowly and heat the residue strongly with a flame or 
in a muffle furnace until the ash is free from carbon. 
Cool the dish and contents in a desiccator and 
weigh them. 

NOTE — In case, the sample contains sufficient water to cause 

foaming and loss, add 1 to 2 ml of absolute alcohol before 

heating it. 


4.4.2 Calculation and Reporting 


Calculate the ash content, A, as a percentage by mass of 
the test portion, using the following equation: 


m 
A=— x 100 
mM 
where 
m,= is the mass of the ash, in g; and 
m, = is the mass of the test portion, in g. 


Report the percentage of the mass of the sample to the 
nearest 0.1. 


4.4.3 Precision 


4.4.3.1 Repeatability 


The difference between successive test results, obtained 
by the same operator with the same apparatus under 
constant operating conditions on identical test material, 
would, in the long run, in the normal and correct 
operation of the test method, exceed the following 
values only in one case in twenty. 


Repeatability = 0.0312 X + 0.1386 
Where, X is the average of the results. 


4.4.3.2 Reproducibility 


The difference between two single and independent 
results, obtained by different operators working in 
different laboratories on identical test material, would, 
in the long run, in the normal and correct operation of 
the test method, exceed the following values only in 
one case in twenty. 


Reproducibility = 0.0738 X + 0.1659 


Where, X is the average of the two results. 
4.5 Method A2 
4.5.1 Reagents 


4.5.1.1 Dilute sulphuric acid — Approximately 
10 percent (m/v). 


4.5.1.2 Methyl orange indicator — Containing 1 g of 
methyl orange in one litre of water. 


4.5.1.3 Ammonium carbonate 


4.5.2 Procedure 


Carry out the ash content of the sample as prescribed 
in 4.4.1 till the ash is nearly free from carbon. Cool the 
dish and its contents and dissolve the soluble portion 
of the ash in a little water. Add a slight excess of 
dilute sulphuric acid solution carefully from a pipette 
inserted under a watch-glass covering the dish. Warm 
the dish and its contents on a boiling water bath until 
effervescence ceases. Rinse the watch-glass with water 
into the dish. Test the solution with methyl orange or 
methyl red indicator to ensure the presence of free acid. 


Evaporate the contents of the dish to dryness and ignite 
them at a low red heat, adding a small quantity of dry 
ammonium carbonate to drive off the excess of sulphur 
trioxide. Cool the dish and contents in a desiccator and 
weigh them. 


4.5.3 Calculation and Reporting 


Calculate the mass of the residue as a percentage of the 
mass of the sample to the nearest 0.1 and report it as 
ash, under Method A1. 


4.5.4 Precision 


The precision of this method as obtained by statistical 
examination of inter-laboratory test results, is given 
below. 


4.5.4.1 Repeatability 


The difference between successive test results, obtained 
by the same operator with the same apparatus under 
constant operating conditions on identical test material, 
would, in the long run, in the normal and correct 
operation of the test method, exceed the following 
values only in one case in twenty. 


Repeatability = 0.0312 X + 0.1386 
Where, X is the average of the results. 


IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 


4.5.4.2 Reproducibility 


The difference between two single and independent 
results, obtained by different operators working in 
different laboratories on identical test material, would, 
in the long run, in the normal and correct operation of 
the test method, exceed the following values only in 
one case in twenty. 


Reproducibility = 0.0738 X + 0.1659 
Where, X is the average of the two results. 


NOTE — Identification of metal — Grease containing sodium, 
potassium or both can be identified by an easily fusible ash 
dissolving completely in water to give a strongly alkaline 
solution whereas lithium is indicated by a white infusible ash 
readily soluble in water giving a strongly alkaline solution. A 
white infusible ash practically insoluble in water but imparting 
to it an alkaline nature, may indicate calcium with or without 
magnesium or aluminum. Yellow colour of the ash while hot 
shows the presence of zinc. The presence of metallic globules 
or by the yellow colour of the ash while cold indicates the 
presence of lead. 


5 METHOD B — SULPHATED ASH FROM 
UNUSED LUBRICATING OILS AND 
ADDITIVES 


5.1 Outline of the Method 


The sample is ignited and burned until only ash and 
carbon remain. After cooling, the residue is treated 
with sulphuric acid and heated at 775+25 °C until 
oxidation of carbon is complete. The ash is then cooled, 
re-treated with sulphuric acid, and heated at 
71525 °C to constant mass. 


5.2 Significance and Use 


The sulphated ash may be used to indicate the 
concentration of known metal-containing additives in 
new oils. When phosphorus is absent; barium, calcium, 
magnesium, sodium and potassium are converted to 
their sulphates and tin (stannic) and zinc to their oxides 
(see Note 1). Sulphur and chlorine do not interfere but 
when phosphorus is present with metals, it remains 
partially or wholly in the sulphated ash as metal 
phosphates. Sulphated ash below 0.02 percent (m/m) is 
restricted to oils containing ashless additive of which 
the lower limit is 0.005 percent (m/m). 


NOTES 


1 Since zinc sulphate slowly decomposes to its oxide at 
the ignition temperature specified in the method, samples 
containing zinc may give variable results unless zinc sulphate 
is completely converted to the oxide. 

2 This method is not intended for the analysis of used engine 
oils or oils containing lead. Neither it is recommended for 
the analysis of non-additive lubricating oils, for which 
IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 1) shall be used. 

3 For best results on samples containing less than 0.1 percent 
sulphated ash, platinum dishes should be used. The precision 
values shown in 5.8 for this type of sample were so obtained. 
4 If magnesium additives are present, the data should be 
interpreted with caution since magnesium does not react the 
same way as alkali metals in this procedure. 


IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 


5 As molybdenum compounds are not fully recovered at 
the temperature when sample is converted to ash, therefore 
resulting in the low values. 


5.3 Apparatus 


5.3.1 Dish — An evaporating dish or crucible made 
of porcelain, fused silica, or platinum of 50 to 100 ml 
capacity. For samples yielding less than 0.02 percent 
sulphated ash, a platinum evaporating dish or crucible 
of 120 to 150 ml capacity is specified. 

NOTE — A platinum vessel should not be used if the sample 


is likely to contain elements, such as phosphorus, which attack 
platinum under the conditions of the test. 


5.3.2 Electric Muffle Furnace — The furnace shall be 
capable of maintaining a temperature of 775+25 °C 
and preferably have apertures at the front and rear to 
allow a slow natural draught of air to pass through the 
furnace. 


5.3.3 Analytical Balance — Capable of weighing to the 
nearest 0.1 mg. 


5.3.4 | Desiccator/Cooling Container 


Desiccant) 


(without 


5.3.5 Filter Paper — 0.01 percent (m/m) ash maximum. 
5.4 Reagents 


5.4.1 Low-Ash Mineral Oil — White oil (see IS 1083) 
having sulphated ash lower than the limit capable of 
being determined by this method. 
NOTE — Determine the sulphated ash of this oil by the 
procedure given in 5.5 using 100 g of white oil weighed to 
the nearest 0.5 g in a 120 to 150 ml platinum dish. Deduct the 
sulphuric acid blank value as described in 5.5 (n). 


5.4.2 Sulphuric Acid (Relative Density 1.84) — 
Conforming to the requirements of IS 266. 


5.4.3 Sulphuric Acid (1:1 v/v) Solution — Prepare by 
slowly adding one volume of concentrated sulphuric 
acid (relative density 1.84) solution to one volume of 
water. 

Caution — Sulphuric acid is highly corrosive and has a high 


heat of hydration. Protective clothing, including gloves and 
face mask, should be worn while handling this acid. 


5.4.4 Iso-propyl Alcohol— Minimum purity 99 percent. 


5.4.5 Toluene — Conforming to the requirements of 
IS 537. 


5.5 Procedure 


a) Select the size of the evaporating dish or crucible 
according to the quantity of sample necessary 
[5.5 (c)]. 

b) Heat the evaporating dish or crucible at 
775+25 °C for at least 10 min. Cool to room 
temperature in a suitable container and weigh to 
the nearest 0.1 mg. 


NOTE — The container in which the dish is cooled should not 
contain a desiccating agent. 

c) Weigh into the dish, a quantity of sample given by 
the following equation: 


m= 
A 


where 
M= mass of sample, in g; and 
A= expected percent of sulphated ash. 


d) Do not take a quantity more than 80 g. In the case 

of lubricating oil additives yielding a sulphated 
ash of 2 percent or more, dilute the weighed 
sample in the dish with approximately 10 times its 
mass of low ash mineral oil. 
NOTE — If the calculated amount of sulphated ash differs 
from the expected amount by more than the factor of two, 
repeat the analysis with a sample of mass different from the 
one taken for first analysis. 

e) Heat the dish or crucible in a well-ventilated 

fumehood and sample carefully until the contents 
are ignited with a flame. Maintain the temperature 
such that the sample continues to burn at a uniform 
and moderate rate. When burning ceases, continue 
to heat gently until no further smoke or fumes are 
evolved. 
NOTE — If the sample contains sufficient moisture to cause 
foaming and loss of material from the dish, discard the sample, 
and to an additional sample add 1 to 2 ml of 99 percent 
iso-propyl alcohol solution before heating. If this is not 
satisfactory, add 10 ml ofa mixture of equal volumes of toluene 
and Iso-propyl alcohol and mix thoroughly. Place several strips 
of ashless filter paper in the mixture and heat. When the paper 
begins to burn, the greater part of the water will be removed. 

f) Allow the dish to cool to room temperature, and 
then completely moisten the residue by drop-wise 
addition of sulphuric acid (5.4.2). Carefully heat 
the dish at a low temperature on a hot plate over 
a gas burner, avoiding spattering, and continue 
heating until fumes are no longer evolved. 

g) Place the dish in the furnace at 775+25 °C and 


continue heating until oxidation of the carbon is 
almost complete. 


h) Allow the dish to cool to room temperature. Add 
three drops of water and ten drops of sulphuric 
acid solution (5.4.3). Shake the dish so as to 
moisten the entire residue. Heat the dish again as 
given in 5.5 (Ê). 

j) Place the dish again in the furnace at 
775+25 °C and keep it there for 30 min. Cool the 
dish to room temperature in a suitable container 
[see Note under 5.5 (b)]. 

NOTE — Zinc dialkyl or alkaryl dithiophosphates and blends 
containing these additives may give a residue which is partially 


black at this stage. In this case, repeat 5.5 (h) and (j) until a 
white residue is obtained. 


k) Weigh the dish and residue to the nearest 0.1 mg. 


m) Repeat 5.5 (j) and (k) until two successive 
weightings differ by no more than 1.0 mg. 

NOTE — Normally, one repeat will suffice, unless a higher 
proportion of zinc is present. In case of higher zinc proportion, 
three or four heating periods may be required. 

For samples expected to contain 0.02 percent 
or less of sulphated ash, determine a sulphuric 
acid blank by adding 1 ml of the concentrated 
sulphuric acid to a tared platinum dish or crucible 
and by heating until fumes are no longer evolved. 
Then heat it in the furnace at 775+25 °C for 
30 min. Cool the dish or crucible to room 
temperature in a suitable container and weigh 
to the nearest 0.1 mg. If any ash is found in the 
sulphuric acid, an adjustment to the mass of 
sulphated ash obtained is made by subtracting 
the mass of ash contributed by the sulphuric acid, 
determined from the total volume of sulphuric 
acid used and the mass of ash found for the 1 ml 
blank, from the total mass in grams of sulphated 
ash for the sample. 


n 


wm 


Use this corrected mass m, in calculating the percent 
sulphated. 
5.6 Calculation 


Calculate the mass of sulphated ash as a percentage of 
the original sample as follows: 
Sulphated ash, percent by mass = 100x m 

where 

m= mass of ash, in g; and 

M= mass of sample, in g. 
5.7 Reporting 
Report the result to the nearest 0.001 percent for 
samples below 0.02 percent and to the nearest 
0.01 percent for higher levels as the sulphated ash. 
5.8 Precision 


The precision of this method is as follows: 


Sulfated Ash, Repeatability Reproducibility 
percent (m/m) 
0.005—0.10 0.047 y °% 0.189 y °% 
0.11-25.0 0.060 y °” 0.142 y °” 


Where, y is average of two results in units of percent 
sulphated ash. 


6 METHOD C — WATER SOLUBLE ASH 


6.1 Outline of the Method 


The water soluble ash is determined by boiling the 
ash, as obtained by method prescribed in IS 1448 
(Part 4/Sec 1) or Method B, in water, filtering, 
evaporating the filtrate to dryness. 


IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 


6.2 Procedure 


Place the crucible containing the ash, as obtained by 
method prescribed in IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 1) or Method 
B, in a beaker, add about 350 ml of water, cover the 
beaker with a watch-glass and boil gently for about 
15 min. Remove the crucible from the water and wash 
any residue from crucible into the beaker with a fine 
jet of water. Heat the beaker until the volume of water 
is reduced to about 50 ml. Filter through a filter paper 
(Whatman No. 30 or its equivalent) collecting the filtrate 
in a tared glass evaporating dish of 200 ml capacity. 
Rinse the beaker and the filter paper with hot water, 
and filter the rinsing into the evaporating dish. Place 
the evaporating dish on a steam bath, and evaporate the 
contents to dryness. Remove the evaporating dish from 
the steam-bath, wipe the outside with a clean cloth, and 
put it into an oven maintained at 105 °C. At the end of 
1 h remove the dish from the oven, cool in desiccator 
and weigh again. Repeat the process until the mass is 
constant. 


6.3 Calculation and Reporting 

Calculate the mass of the water soluble ash as a 
percentage of the mass of the sample, and report it two 
significant figures as water soluble ash, Method C. 
6.3.1 Calculation 


Calculate the mass of water soluble ash as a percentage 
of the original ash as follows: 


100 x m 


Water soluble ash, percent by mass = 


where 
m= mass of water soluble ash, in g; and 
M= mass of total ash as obtained by method 
prescribed in IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 1) or Method 
B, ing. 
6.4 Precision 


The precision limits of this method have not been 
established. 


7 TEST REPORT 
The test report shall contain at least the following 
information: 

a) areference to this Standard; 


b) the type and complete identification of the product 
tested; 


c) the result of the test (see applicable Clause); 


d) any deviation, by agreement or otherwise, from 
the procedure specified; and 


e) the date of the test. 


IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, 
Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee, PCD 01 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Air Headquarters, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers 
Association, Mumbai 


Bharat Oman Refineries Limited, Bina 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Castrol India Limited, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology, Bhuwaneshwar 


Central Revenue Control Laboratory, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


CSIR-Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality 


Assurance, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 

Elico Limited, Hyderabad 

GAIL (India) Limited, Noida 

Gulf Oil Lubricants India Limited, Silvasa 

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 

HPCL Mittal Energy Limited, Noida 

Indian Oil Corporation (R and D Centre), Faridabad 

Indian Oil Corporation Limited-Refineries and 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Lubrizol India Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr ANJAN Ray (Chairman) 


WG CMDR S. A. TAWAB 
WG CMDR D. ANANDRaJ Roy (Alternate) 


ProF G. M. Rao 


SHRI ANAND PRATAP RAGHAV 
SHRI B. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 
SHRI R. SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMAN RAI 


DR SMITA MOHANTY 


DR T. A. SREENIVASA RAO 


SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 
DR V. SELVAVATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. SINGH 
Suri S. R. K. Rao (Alternate I) 
SHRI S. DUTTA (Alternate II) 


SHRI SANTOSH NAMDEO INGOLE 
SHRI C. B. PANDEY 


Suri N. RAJU 
Suri T. V. Sarva K. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. KASHYAP 
DR SUSANTA MAHANTY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 


SHRI MADHUSUDAN 
SHRI ELECHERAN KUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHITANSHU Pati (Alternate II) 


SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI SATYABRATA BANDYOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI V. KAGDIYAL 
Dr S. K. Masumpar (Alternate) 


DR ASHUTOSH MISHRA 
SHRI SHASHI PAL SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri P. D. DUSANE 
SHRI G. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARAD TARSODE 


Organization 


Mangalore Refinery and Petro Chemical Limited, 
Mangalore 


Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 
National Test House, Kolkata 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


Numaligarh Refinery Limited, Golaghat 


Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Oil India Limited, Duliajan 


Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, 
New Delhi 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 

Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 

BIS Director General 


IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SHALINA KUMAR 
SHRI YOGEESHA (Alternate I) 
SHRI R. M. PRAKASH (Alternate II) 


SHRI RAJESH SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SONAM GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. NASKAR 
SHRI P. K. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI DHIRAJ M. GONDALIA 
SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR (Alternate I) 
Suri HARSAL Mop (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANJAN KALITA 
SHRI SOBHAN KONWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY KUMAR JAIN 
SHRIMATI LEENA JOHN (Alternate I) 
SHRI DinesH S. R. REDDY KAKUTURI (Alternate II) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ANIL MEGHANI 
SHRI Noor KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI M. P. BANGWAL 


SHRI PRAMOD MALL 
SHRI SHAMBHU THAKUR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri N. K. BANSAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T. 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (PCD), BIS 


Physico-Chemical Test Methods for Petroleum and Related Products of Natural or Synthetic Origin 
(Excluding Bitumen, Lubricants, Greases and Gaseous Fuels), PCD 1:3 


Organization 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. D. DUSANE (Convener) 


SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 
SHRI SUNIT VINAYAK PARKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI AVULURI SRINIVASA REDDY (Alternate II) 


SHRI DINABANDHU GOUDA 
SHRI B. K. JAKHMOLA (Alternate) 


SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 


SHRI AMIT GUPTA 
SHRI DHARMENDRA SINGH YADAV (Alternate I) 
SHRI RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate II) 


IS 1448 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2021 


Organization 


Representative(s) 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of Suri C. B. PANDEY 


Defence, New Delhi 
Gulf Oil Lubricants India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


HP Green Research and Development Centre, 
Bengaluru 


HPCL Mittal Energy Limited, Noida 


Indian Additives Limited, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Oil Corporation (R and D Centre), Faridabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited-Refineries and 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi 


Intertek Laboratories, Mumbai 


Lubrizol India Limited, Mumbai 


Mangalore Refinery and Petro Chemical Limited, 
Mangalore 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited, Golaghat 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 


Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 


Research Design and Standards Organisation, 
Lucknow 


SGS India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Society For Petroleum Laboratory-Fuel Testing 
Laboratory, Noida 


SHRI A. K. KANAusIA (Alternate) 


Ms INbu M. GUPTA 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI B. SARNATHAN 
Suri K. M. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Sarı B. Ravi 
SHRI SANDIP BHOWMIK (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYABRATA BANDYOPADHYAY 


SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr R. K. SINGH 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANAUJIA (Alternate) 


DR A. K. ARORA 


Dr Ram JANAM SINGH 
Dr AMIT MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVIN S. POOJARY 
SHRI DATTATRAY GHADI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND REDKAR 


SHRI SALINA KUMAR 
SHRI G. V. SURYAM (Alternate I) 
SHRI R. M. PRAKASH (Alternate II) 


SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR 
SHRI DHIRAJ M. GONDALIA (Alternate) 


SHRI SOBHAN KONWAR 
SHRI ANJAN KALITA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. P. BANGWAL 


SHRI KISHOR MAHAJAN 
SHRI RAVISHANKAR V. Desal (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SONAM GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBASINI SARASWAT SHARMA 
SHRI MANISH MALHAN 


DR AJAY KUMAR GUPTA 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 01 (15597). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


