INA WAP IS 4343 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ToT SST TAC H fA Set H STAR 
fee spare afar 


( FAT FRAT ) 


Code of Practice for Treatment of 
Water for High Pressure Boilers 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 13.060.25 
© BIS 2023 
acer HAR SAT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF HAF, 9 FR ME AH AT, AE feet - 110002 
‘ene’ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 7 


Water Quality for Industrial Purposes, CHD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Water Quality for Industrial Purposes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


The terms low, medium, and high, used with pressure in boiler practice, are not definite but relative. However, it 
is customary to call those boilers which operate at pressures below 2.0 MN/m?(20 kg/cm?) as low-pressure boilers; 
those working between 2.0 MN/m? and 5.9 MN/m? (20 kg/cm? and 60 kg/cm?) as medium pressure boilers; and 
those operating at pressures above 5.9 MN/m*? (60 kg/cm?) as high-pressure boilers. 


The treatment of water for low pressure boilers, is given in IS 1680, which, though mainly prepared for the 
guidance of operation of low-pressure boilers, is also applied to the operation of medium pressure boilers with the 
conditions given for them where necessary. The procedures laid down in this code are for general guidance of 
high-pressure boilers only and each case has to be treated on its own merit, taking into consideration the plant 
cycle, equipment design and plant and process requirements. High pressure boilers are not riveted, they are welded 
and stress relieved. This fact has been one of the guiding considerations in formulating this code. 


This standard was first published in 1967, which was covering boilers operating at pressures above 4.1 MN/m? 
(42 kg/cm’). 


In the first revision of this standard published in 1983 the following modifications were incorporated: 


a) Standard was made applicable to boilers operating at pressures above 5.9 MN/m? (60 kg/cm’); 
b) Condensate purification was incorporated; 

c) Control of concentration of solids in boiler water was incorporated; 

d) Protection of idle boilers was incorporated; and 


e) Care of high-pressure drum-type boilers during condenser tube leakage was incorporated. 


In this second revision the following modification have been incorporated: 
a) Feedwater treatment methods have been incorporated; 
b) Boiler water treatment methods have been incorporated; 
c) Wet and dry method for storage have been updated; 
d) References, ICS No. have been updated; and 
e) Other editorial changes have been done to bring the standard in the latest style and format of Indian 
Standards. 


The composition of committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4343 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TREATMENT OF WATER FOR HIGH 
PRESSURE BOILERS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This code deals with the chemical methods of 
attaining the conditions to be aimed at, in the water 
side of boilers operating at pressures above 
5.9 MN/m? (60 kg/cm?) at the drum and for 
once-through type boilers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, which constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publications, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 3025 Methods of sampling and test 

(Part 39) : physical and chemical for water 

2021 and wastewater: Part 39 Oil and 
grease (second revision) 


IS 10496 : Specification boiler water for 
1983 feedwater, and condensate for 
pressure boilers 


3 OBJECTIVES OF TREATMENT 


The objective of chemical treatment is to prevent 
corrosion of the boiler and fittings, scale and deposit 
formation on heat transfer surfaces, reducing 
corrodent concentrations and maintaining high level 
of steam purity to avoid deposition on turbines. For 
this purpose, the composition of feedwater, boiler 
water and condensate are maintained as given in IS 
10496. In most cases, the return condensate is the 
bulk of feedwater and the make-up is obtained from 
evaporated water or demineralized water. 


4 TREATMENTS 


4.1 The makeup water is obtained from the 
following sources: 


a) Condensate or Evaporated Water 


Care shall be taken that it is free from oil. If 
any oil is present, it shall be removed with the 
help of special oil-removal plants. The water 
shall be sufficiently alkaline, pH being above 
8.5. If necessary, an alkali is added to obtain 
this condition. The silica level shall not 
exceed 20 ppb as SiO2. If the make-up is 
obtained from evaporated water, and if it is 
softened by the lime-soda process before 
evaporation, addition of magnesium 
hydroxide or magnesium oxide along with 
softening chemicals would remove silica. 


b) Demineralized or Deionized Water, with 
silica removal. 


4.2 Feedwater Treatments 


4.2.1 The three recommended feedwater treatments 
are as follows: 


a) All Volatile Treatment (Reducing) AVT (R) 


Reducing agent such as hydrazine hydrate is 
added at Condensate Extraction Pump (CEP) 
discharge. The pH is maintained by using 
ammonia. This feedwater treatment is 
generally suggested for mixed metallurgy 
systems. 


b) All Volatile Treatment (Oxidized) AVT (O) 


No reducing agent is added. Ammonia is 
added for pH control. This feedwater 
treatment is suggested for  all-ferrous 
systems, especially in those units that 
generally have good feedwater purity 
(ACC < 0.2 uS/cm). 


c) Oxygenated Treatment (OT) 


Ammonia plus oxygen is added. This 
feedwater treatment is suggested for 
all-ferrous systems with the ability to 
maintain feed water cation conductivity of 
less than 0.15 uS/cm. 


4.3 Boiler Water Treatments 


4.3.1 There are four recommended boiler water 
treatments: 


IS 4343 : 2023 


a) All Volatile Treatment (AVT) 


In this the feed water treatment is either 
AVT(R) or AVT(O) as appropriate and no 
further chemical treatment is applied within the 
boiler. 


b) Phosphate Treatment (PT) 


In this treatment a drum boiler is dosed with tri 
sodium phosphate (TSP). Dosing of the boiler 
water with sodium hydroxide up to 1 ppm 
is also allowed as a supplement to TSP 
(during condenser tube leakage) when needed 
for pH control but addition of sodium hydroxide 
is generally not recommended for drum 
pressures above 170 kg/cm”. 


c) Caustic Treatment (CT) 


In this treatment a drum boiler is dosed with 


WITH BOILER DRUM 


& HP 
Chemical turbine 


® impurity ingress 
& Corrosion 
E Deposition 


sodium hydroxide only incase when OEM is 
recommended. This treatment is generally not 
recommended for drum pressures above 
170 kg/cm’. 


d) Oxygenated Treatment (OT) 


In this treatment the feed water dosed with 
oxygen as needed for OT is used in the boiler 
without further treatment. OT may be used in 
cycles with once-through or drum type boilers, 
however, with the latter feed water oxygen 
dosing must be more carefully controlled so as 
to avoid possible corrosion in the boiler. 


The water chemistry of with boiler drum and 
drumless boiler is given at Fig. 1. 


B 
Condensate 
polisher 


© 
NH4OH 
Noha 


DRUMLESS BOILERS (SUPERCRITICAL UNITS) 


® impurity ingress 
& Corrosion 
m Deposition 


iP — 
turbine 


@NiIH,OH Dosing 


Poxygen Dosing 


L 
turbine 


m sate 
polisher 


— | Conden: 
es n 
NH4OH Dosing 
Soxygen Dosing 


FIG. 1 CYCLE CHEMISTRY 


4.4 Condensate Purification 


4.4.1 Condensate purification is a means of 
recovering contaminated condensate for re-use as 
feed water. Otherwise, it may have to be discarded 
and replaced by treated make-up water at extra 
expense. The principal sources of contamination are 
as follows: 


a) During commissioning and early operation of 
a boiler plant the condensate is usually 
contaminated with, mill scale and other 
debris which increases the risk of corrosion 
of the tubes in a water-tube boiler. In a 
once-through boiler they may lead to 
abnormal pressure drops and unacceptable 
contamination of the steam. Silica can also be 
particularly troublesome during the period 
and the commissioning may be delayed by 
excessive demands for water brought about 
by the large amount of blowdown required to 
limit the levels of silica in boiler water and 
steam; 


b) Condensate is often contaminated for a 
period of several hours after start-up 
following an overnight or weekend shutdown 
and it may be necessary to reject such 
condensate from the system with a 
consequent increase in demand on the water 


supply; 


c) Some contamination of condensate by 
products of corrosion of the materials of 
construction occurs during normal operation 
and, even if other contamination is absent, 
purification plant may be necessary to meet 
the highest standards for chemical quality of 
feed water; and 


d) Where steam is used for industrial process 
heating and is recovered as condensate, it 
may be contaminated by untreated water or 
by chemicals used in the industrial process. 
Precautions should be taken to prevent these 
contaminated condensates being returned to 
the boiler without treatment. Wherever 
possible, such contamination of condensate 
should be prevented at source. 


4.4.1.1 The decision to install condensate 
purification plant and the capacity and type of 
equipment depend upon the design, duty and feed 
water specifications of the individual boiler plant, 
and comparative costs. 


4.4.1.2 When the condensate contains more than a 
trace of impurity it may be more economical to 
return it up-stream of the make-up water treatment 


IS 4343 : 2023 


plant rather than to install a separate plant to purify 
the condensate if the ionic load permits. 


4.4.1.3 If economic consideration favor partial 
rejection of the condensate, an automatic instrument 
should be used to monitor the contamination and 
operate the rejection or recovery devices in 
accordance with the varying quality of the 
condensate. 


4.4.2 Condensate Polishing 


A plant is often provided for purification of slightly 
contaminated condensate that forms the major part 
of the feed to high pressure boilers. Such removal of 
traces of impurities, usually iron and copper, is 
referred to as ‘condensate polishing’. This provision 
is of particular importance with 500 MW and above 
MW units and once-through boilers and where 
condensate is recovered from industrial processes or 
heating. 


4.4.2.1 Mixed bed ion-exchange, preferably 
externally regenerated to avoid contamination by 
regenerants, is an essential part of condensate 
polishing. It may be preceded by integral or separate 
cation exchange, with or without a filtration stage. 
Several types of filters have been used successfully, 
including precoat filters, paper cartridge filters and 
fibre-wound candles. Magnetic separators have also 
been used. 


4.4.2.2 The purpose of the filter is to reduce the 
quantity of suspended solids reaching the 
ion-exchange units and hence lower the risk of 
fouling the resins. The integral or separate cation 
exchange unit also protects the mixed bed resins by 
removing a proportion of the suspended solids and, 
by reducing the cationic load to the mixed beds, 
helps to ensure that the highest quality of purified 
condensate is obtained. The cation resin may be used 
either in the hydrogen or in the ammonia form; the 
former gives greater purity, but the latter may be 
cheaper to operate in some cases. 


4.4.2.3 Two other system have also been 
successfully adopted; mixed beds alone and filters 
precoated with expendable powdered or micro-bead 
resins, installed either alone or as a component of the 
condensate polishing plant. 


4.4.3 Condensate Contamination by Cooling Water 


Entry of cooling water into the steam and 
condensate system is a common cause of 
contamination of condensate. The cooling water 
may be fresh, brackish or sea water from 
once-through cooling systems or treated water from 
a circulating evaporative cooling system in which 


IS 4343 : 2023 


dissolved solids have concentrated. 


4.4.3.1 Condensates contaminated in this manner 
may usually be purified by treatment in a plant 
similar to that used for treatment of makeup water 
or, if the proportion of condensate is small, by 
adding the condensate to the raw water going to the 
make-up water treatment plant. 


4.4.4 Condensate Contamination by Oil 


Every effort should be made to avoid contamination 
of feed water by oil, if necessary, by rejecting oily 
condensate. 


4.4.4.1 Vegetable oils introduced into alkaline boiler 
water are usually converted into soaps that can 
rapidly form a stable foam on the surface of the 
boiler water and may lead to severe contamination 
of the steam. Where this risk exists, continuous 
addition of an antifoam is prudent even when 
contamination is not apparent. 


4.4.4.2 Mineral oil introduced to the boiler may form 
non-wettable films on heat transfer surfaces and 
interfere with the detachment of steam bubbles 
leading to inadequate cooling by the boiler water. 
Therefore, severe corrosion or failure of such 
surfaces may occur. 


4.4.4.3 If sludge in a boiler absorbs oil, it may 
become less mobile and obstruct circulation. Similar 
obstruction may occur in condensate lines and steam 
traps owing to the presence of oil, which is carried 
forward with the steam. 


4.4.4.4 Various treatment processes are available for 
substantially removing small amounts of oil in 
condensate. Some of these processes are as follows: 


a) Coagulation, flocculation, and sedimentation 
in alkaline conditions in a sludge-blanket 
clarification plant followed by filtration 
through an anthracite filter. It is capable of 
handling the greatest variations in oil 
contamination. 


b) Conventional coagulation, and flocculation 
in alkaline conditions in a sedimentation 
plant, followed by filtration through an 
anthracite filter. 


c) Absorption of the oil by a pre-coat of 
aluminum hydroxide or ferric hydroxide 
upon a filter bed of anthracite or sand is 
capable of handling large flow rates at low 
levels of contamination. 


d) Absorption onto an expendable fixed bed of 
activated carbon, substantially removes low 
levels 1 mg/l to 2 mg/l of oil. 


e) Filtration and absorption by a pre-coat of 
diatomaceous earth upon a filter candle is 
suitable for small flow rates and low levels, 
for example, 5 mg/l, of oil contamination. 


4.4.4.5 The choice of treatment depends upon the 
amount of contamination, the type of oil and the 
amount and temperature of the condensate to be 
treated. It is difficult to measure accurately small 
concentrations of oil in water. It is recommended 
that treatment to remove oil should reduce it to a 
level; that is not detectable by the method described 
in IS 3025 (Part 39). 


4.4.4.6 Each case needs individual consideration; 
but as a general guide method that use diatomaceous 
earth or sand filtration may not be suitable, if a feed 
water of low silica content is required; and an 
anthracite filter bed should be used; methods based 
on continuous coagulation may be unsuitable where 
feed water of low dissolved solids content is 
required, unless the purified condensate is 
subsequently treated in a demineralizing plant. 


The water obtained in 4.1 is mechanically de-aerated 
to remove air and dissolved gases. For water to be 
used for boilers operating above 5.9. MN/m? 
(60 kg/cm?), a high degree of removal of oxygen 
should be attained; dissolved oxygen should 
preferably be less than 0.010 mg/l in the feed. 


4.5 The de-aerated and degassed water is 
conditioned as given in 4.5.1 to 4.5.3. 


4.5.1 For the removal of traces of oxygen dissolved 
in the water, a suitable amine is used. Sodium 
sulphite, which is used in low and medium pressure 
boilers is unsuitable for use in high pressure boilers 
as it decomposes at high temperatures to produce 
sulphur dioxide or sodium sulphide or both, which 
are corrosive. The amine used generally is 
hydrazine. It reacts with oxygen from the water to 
form nitrogen and water. Thus, neither the total 
solids are increased, nor any corrosive substances 
produced in the boiler. 


4.5.1.1 At higher temperatures in the boiler, 
hydrazine decomposes into ammonia and nitrogen. 
Ammonia and hydrazine being volatile, a portion of 
these two substances returns to the condensate. This 
makes the condensate alkaline and protects the 
condenser line from corrosion. 


4.5.2 Phosphate is added to the boiler water in the 
drum for maintaining pH and also to ensure the 
removal of any hardness-causing salts that might 
have accidentally found access to the feed water. 


4.5.3 A certain amount of alkali is added to maintain 
the desired alkalinity in the boiler feed water. The 
alkali to be used may be amines or ammonia. A 
volatile amine such as cyclohexylamine or 
morpholine may also be added. Amines make the 
condensate alkaline. 


5 CONTROL OF TREATMENT 


5.1 Control of treatment is effected by examining 
feed water, boiler water, steam and condensate. Feed 
water is examined for hardness, dissolved oxygen, 
silica, hydrazine, pH, iron, copper, oil, specific 
conductivity, After Cation Conductivity (ACC), 
sodium, ORP and oxygen consumed in 4 hr. Boiler 
water is examined for pH, hardness, caustic 
alkalinity, dissolved solids, specific conductivity, 
ACC, silica, phosphates, chlorides, and hydrazine. 
Condensate should be tested for pH, hardness, oil, 
ACC, silica, ammonia, sodium, dissolved oxygen 
and iron and copper, and demineralized water 
should also be tested for pH, silica and hardness 
from time to time. 


5.2 In some modern high pressure boiler plants, 
instruments are fitted in the condensate line, feed 
system and stream lines which indicate and record 
conductivity, pH value and dissolved oxygen in the 
feed water; conductivity, and dissolved oxygen in 
condensate; and conductivity, and sodium in steam. 
These are often provided with warning alarms set at 
desired values. These aids are valuable in the 
operation of the boiler plant. 


5.3 Control of Concentration of Solids in Boiler 
Water 


5.3.1 When a water containing dissolved impurities 
is boiled and the vapor (steam) is driven off, most of 
the salts remain and concentrate in the diminishing 
bulk of water, thus the dissolved solids content 
increases. If the evaporation is continued some of 
the impurities come out of solution as scale or as 
suspended solids. These particular impurities will 
cease to concentrate as dissolved solids, but the 
suspended solids so formed concentrate. 


5.3.1.1 In boiler design it is difficult to prevent the 
entrainment of small amounts of boiler water with 
the steam though this can be greatly limited. This 
entrainment normally increases with continuing 
concentration of dissolved and suspended solids 
and alkalinity. In order to limit the amount 
of solids in the steam it is necessary to control the 


IS 4343 : 2023 


concentrations of dissolved and suspended solids in 
the boiler water. At pressures greater than 
3.9 MN/m? (40 kg/cm?) some solids have a 
significant solubility in steam. 


5.3.1.2 In practice one or several impurities in the 
boiler feed water may be critical with respect to their 
concentration in the boiler water. The following are 
examples: 


a) The level of dissolved solids should be 
restricted to maintain steam purity; 


b) The silica content may have to be restricted 
to limit the level of silica in the steam or the 
formation of silica scales in the boiler; 


c) In high pressure boilers the level of chloride 
ion should be limited to minimize corrosion; 


d) The level of alkalinity should be limited to 
maintain steam purity and minimize caustic 
attack; and 


e) The level of suspended solids should be 
restricted to below that at which adherent 
deposits form, or steam purity or circulation 
are impaired. 


5.3.1.3 The limits for these and other critical 
constituents are given in IS 10496. In certain special 
cases of design or operation limitations may have to 
be imposed that are not covered by that standard. It 
is then normal for a boiler manufacturer to 
recommend values for the maximum concentration. 
In general, these limits may be set from experience 
or determined by trial. Once set they should be 
scrupulously observed. 


5.3.2 Blowdown 


Blowdown may be continuous or intermittent, or a 
combination of both. It may be manually or 
automatically controlled. 


5.3.2.1 Continuous blowdown 


Continuous blowdown is a continuous removal of 
boiler water controlled by a specially designed 
adjustable valve or by an orifice plate. The 
installation of heat recovery equipment may be 
economically justified. Suspended solids may block 
or erode the adjustable valve or orifice plate and 
continuous blowdown is, therefore, usually limited 
to the control of dissolved solids. Additional manual 
blowdown is necessary to control suspended solids 
and prevent the build-up of sludge. 


IS 4343 : 2023 


5.3.2.2 Intermittent blowdown 


Intermittent blowdown may be affected by specially 
designed valves either operated by hand or 
automatically controlled, for example, by timers, 
feed water flow or conductivity. Where automatic 
valves are installed the manual blowdown valve 
shall be operated at intervals to ensure that the latter 
is clear. It should be noted that the most effective 
and economic use of all types of intermittent 
blowdown valves is achieved by frequent full-open 
operation for short periods rather than extended use 
at infrequent intervals. It is usually not practicable to 
recover waste heat from infrequent intermittent 
blowdown. 


6P ECTION OF IDLE BOILERS 
of boilers during standing periods 


frequently, leads to serious corrosion in the steam 
and water spaces from which further attack may 
develop during subsequent working periods. 
Various methods of corrosion protection may be 
applied although the choice of method usually 
depends upon the length of time for which the boiler 
is to be stored. Procedures for the protection of the 
fireside of an idle boiler are outside the scope of this 
standard. 


6.2 Storage Overnight 


It is usually sufficient to allow the boiler to stand-by 
with the water conditions recommended for normal 
steaming provided these are maintained during the 
idle period. Any feed water that is added 
subsequently should have been adequately 
de-aerated. The space above the water should 
preferably be kept filled with steam or nitrogen at a 
pressure greater than atmospheric. Special 
precautions may have to be taken to protect 
superheaters and expert advice should be sought. 


6.3 Storage for Extended Periods 
6.3.1 Wet Method 


If the boiler is likely to be out of service for more 
than a few days, but may be needed for steaming at 
short notice, it should be completely filled with 
correctly conditioned water. Non-drainable 
superheaters should be filled only with condensate 
quality water treated with volatile chemicals such as 
hydrazine or ammonia. It is most important that, 
pockets of air are not allowed to remain in the boiler 
and there should be no leakage. 


For optimum storage of the boiler, increase blow 
down on shutdown to achieve minimum 
concentrations of contaminants (like phosphate, 
chloride, silica etc) in the boiler water. 


6.3.1.1 Shutdown duration < 4 days 


6.3.1.1.1 After shut down of unit, keep boiler above 
saturation temperature and pressurized as long as 
possible. 


6.3.1.1.2 The nitrogen should be applied while the 
superheater/drum is still at positive pressure 
(for example, ~2 kg/cm?). As the steam pressure 
decays, nitrogen fills the steam space. Maintain 
0.3 kg/cm? to 0.5 kg/cm? nitrogen cap. 


6.3.1.2 Shutdown duration > 4 days 


6.3.1.2.1 For Once-though boiler, super heater can 
be filled by overflowing of separator 
(separator water turbidity < 1 NTU) after complete 
mixing of ammonia solution in boiler. Filling water 
quality is specified in Table 1. Boiler and Super 
heater vents samples pH should be 10 to 10.5. 


Table 1 Feed (filling) Water Quality for Wet Storage 
(Clausse 6.3.1.2.1, 6.3.1.2.5, and 6.3.1.2.6) 


SI No. Shutdown All Ferrous System Mixed Metallurgy System 
Duration FW Regime: FW Regime: AVT (R) 
AVT(O)//OT 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) < 4 days Maintain the same chemistry parameters as that of normal pressure 
ii) > 4 days pH 10.0 to 10.5 For equipments For equipments 


containing copper containing only ferrous 
alloy (Condenser, feed metallurgy 
water, heaters etc) (Boiler, Superheater, etc) 


pH: 9.0 to 9.2 pH: 9.5 to 10.0 
Hydrazine: 40 ppm to Hydrazine: 200 ppm to 
50 ppm 250 ppm 


Dissolved oxygen (DO) < 100 ppb “(preferably) 
Filling water turbidity should be less than 1 NTU 


* To avoid pitting corrosion, low DO water/deareated water should be used for filling and pressurization of the system. 


6.3.1.2.2 For drum type units, super heater should be 
filled only by backfilling line and not be filled by 
flooding the boiler drum into the superheater. If 
boiler uses any type of solid alkali treatment 
(phosphate or caustic) during its normal operation, 
filling the super heater by overflowing the boiler 
will cause contamination of the superheater and 
turbine during subsequent operation. After 
completion of superheater filling, start filling of 
boiler with water of quality as specified in Table 1. 


6.3.1.2.3 Care must be taken not to exceed 
permissible DT between boiler metal 
temperature/superheater metal temperature and feed 
water temperature as prescribed by OEM 
recommendations. 


6.3.1.2.4 Establish and maintain 0.3 kg/cm? to 
0.5 kg/cm” nitrogen cap at the vents of super heater, 
steam drum/separator and other preserved system 
after completion of filling. 


6.3.1.2.5 If N2 capping facility is not available, then 
keep boiler always pressurized up to 10 kg/cm’. 
Feed water quality (using for pressurization) shall be 
as specified in Table 1. 


6.3.1.2.6 During wet preservation, chemical 
concentration near surface can be lowered and to 
avoid pitting corrosion, it is recommended to 
circulate the boiler once in a week by boiler 
circulating pump (if provided). If chemical 
concentration is found lower than specified values 
(see Table 1), the chemical mixed water to be 
injected in the preserved water to restore the desired 
chemistry parameters. After taking any fresh 
makeup in boiler, it should be thoroughly circulated 
by boiler circulation pump (BCP) and chemistry 
parameters checking to be done. For units, where 
boiler circulation pump is not in design, the boiler 
water circulation can be maintained via a suitable 
capacity external pump arrangement. An alternate 
method is to drain some reasonable amount of water 
from boiler and refill with fresh treated water of 
quality as specified in Table 1 on a regular interval 
(preferably fortnightly). However, circulation of 
boiler water by external pump will be a good option. 
Boiler water chemistry parameters and quantity of 
makeup water is to be recorded in preservation 
protocol. 


6.3.1.2.7 Only an equipment requiring maintenance 
needs to be drained and nitrogen (if used for 
capping) purged with air to provide an environment 
suitable for safe entry of personnel. 


6.3.1.2.8 If boiler is drained for any reason, then 
boiler shall be refilled with deaerated treated water 
of quality as specified in Table 1 and cap with 
nitrogen or pressurized. 


IS 4343 : 2023 


NOTES 


1 High chemical laden boiler water should be drained prior 
to boiler startup. 

2 Hydrazine should not be used for startup and layup on 
AVT (O)/OT units. 


6.3.2 Dry Method 


When a boiler is not likely to be required for a long 
period, it is advisable to empty it completely and dry 
it thoroughly. Particular attention should be paid to 
any parts that are not self-draining. Where possible 
the boiler should be blown through with a stream of 
warm air to make sure that all surfaces are 
completely dry. Any deposits should be removed, 
since they tend to retain moisture. To avoid the 
ingress of moisture into the boiler it is advisable to 
remove and blank-off all connections. 


Dry lay-up with instrument air is not to be done at 
sea-shore stations. 


6.3.2.1 Procedure 


6.3.2.1.1 The main steam temperature is decreased 
at a rate of 50 °C/h to 60 °C/h after boiler shutdown. 


6.3.2.1.2 When main steam pressure reached 
10 kg/cm? in pendant type SH (non-drainable SH) 
and 5 kg/cm? in horizontal type SH, open all vents 
valves and eject the steam in tubes and pipes. 
Drum/separator vents to be opened at 2 kg/cm”. 


6.3.2.1.3 When water wall temperature becomes 
110 °C, open the water wall section drain valves 
(latent heat of WW will be used to dry WW) and 
then drain all the water in the water wall section. If 
thermocouple is not there it should be mounted on 
water wall firing floor near corner. 


6.3.2.1.4 Complete box up of boiler to be ensured 
after stoppage of fans (APH FG inlet temperature 
< 220 °C) and seal trough sealing to be maintained. 
All manhole and peephole to be kept closed to 
ensure drying of the boiler heating surfaces by the 
latent heat of component itself. 


6.3.2.1.5 After completion of draining, start 
instrument air purging when minimum acromat 
temperature reaches approx. 110 °C or if acromat 
not available SAPH flue gas I/L temperature reaches 
110 °C or steam stops coming out of vent line. 
Instrument air at ambient temperature can be filled 
for dry preservation. Arrangements are to be made 
for Instrument air-line to be routed through 
pent-house to give hot air. This is preferable but 
not necessary to start with. 


6.3.2.1.6 Pressurize the boiler internal and other 
circuits with instrument air and maintain pressure in 


IS 4343 : 2023 


a range of 0.3 kg/cm? to 0.5 kg/cm? (just above the 
atmospheric pressure). Maintain partial opening of 
header drains and vents at opposite end (if drain on 
LHS is opened then vent of RHS to be used for 
filling to avoid air short circulation), at least one 
drain and one filling line in all circuits, to establish 
flow of instrument air and also to control the boiler 
internal air pressure. 


6.3.2.1.7 After injecting instrument air, measure the 
relative humidity at the lowest drain points of each 
circuit and maintain RH < 35 percent to avoid any 
dew formation in preserved equipment/circuits. 


6.3.2.1.8 Measure and record dew point of purge-in 
air, relative humidity of purge out air and air 
pressure of system on daily basis. Measuring 
location for the relative humidity: 


Furnace front wall inlet header drain line/low 

point drain for both drum type and 

once-through boilers; 

a) Economizer inlet drain or any other 
suitable location; 

b) Hot reheat line drain valve left and right 
side; and 

c) Any other suitable location based on local 
conditions. 


6.3.2.1.9 Inner most loop of platen SH/final SH to 
be checked for any condensation by 
radiography/coil heating and in case of any water in 
the loop, instead of dry only wet preservation to be 
employed. However, reheater preservation will 
remain dry preservation in all situations. If reheaters 
bottom bends are dry, then dry preservation by 
instrument air if not then by No gas (reheater vents 
to be opened 30 min before killing vacuum). 


6.3.2.1.10 Dry preservation procedure in pendant 
type boiler to be kept under observation. 


NOTE — Dry lay-up involves rapid draining of 
water-touched components and evacuation of reheat steam 
lines (using the vacuum in condenser) while the piping is 
still hot, followed by continuous purging with instrument 
air (Relative Humidity of purge-out air should be 
< 35 percent)/dehumidified air or nitrogen gas to maintain 
a low moisture environment throughout the system. 


7 CARE OF HIGH-PRESSURE BOILERS 
DURING CONDENSER TUBE LEAKAGE 


7.1 Boiler water regime requires careful monitoring 
control and adjustment whenever condenser tube 
leakage is suspected or confirmed. The condenser 


tube leakage brings large amount of chlorides into 
the condensate and consequently into the feed water. 
This is more predominant in sea water cooled power 
stations where magnesium chloride and other forms 
of chlorides can leak in large quantities. These are 
hardness salts and acid forming in nature due to 
hydrolysis reaction at high temperature. Whenever 
the feed water gets contaminated by the cooling 
water leakage from the condenser the following 
changes take place in the boiler water in the drum: 


a) pH of, boiler water drops rapidly due to the 
acid forming nature of condenser leakage salts; 


b) The phosphate level of boiler water drops 
down very low. This is due to consumption 
of the residual phosphate by its reaction with 
hardness in leakage salts to form sludge 
constituents; and 


c) Specific Conductivity, chloride and silica of 
boiler water rises due to increasing salt 
concentration brought about by condenser 
leak. 


e Online Specific conductivity of 
hotwell (L/R)-both passes or only one 
pass-shows increasing trend. 

e Feed water ACC (online) shows 
increasing trend. 

e Increasing trend of condensate online 
ACC/DCC and sodium from 
recommended values. 


In case of increasing trend of the above online 
parameters, offline testing of condensate and feed 
water silica; boiler drum silica and chloride; and 
hardness in condensate, feed and boiler samples are 
to be done on hourly basis to further ascertain the 
trend. 


7.2 Under these circumstances experience indicates 
accelerated corrosion of boiler tubes and consequent 
tube failures can be caused even if such operation is 
limited only to a few hours. In such a situation, the 
following course of action is recommended. It 
should be realized that operation of the boiler with a 
condenser leak requires extreme care and 
judgement. Failure to follow instructions as 
mentioned below would lead to tube failure at a later 
stage: 


7.2.1 Immediately start chemical injection pumps to 
maintain excess phosphate and pH conditions in 
boiler water as specified in Table 2. 


IS 4343 : 2023 


Table 2 Phosphate and pH Conditions in Boiler Water Depending on the Boiler Pressure 
(Clause 7.2.1) 


SI No. Characteristic Limits Recommended 
For Boiler Pressure For Boiler Pressure 
for Boiler Pressure for Boiler Pressure 
6.0 MN/m? 9.9 MN/m? 
to 9.8 MN/m2 (in the drum) and 
(in the drum) Above 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Phosphates (as PO«), mg/ 5 to 40 5 to 20 
ii) 1 pH value 9.1 to 10.4 9.1 to 10.1 


7.2.1.1 The phosphate and pH measurements in 
boiler water should be made every 30 min and the 
phosphate pump should be operated based on the 
measurements to maintain the above regime. This 
would require, depending on the severity of tube 
leakage, extra dosage of phosphate. This can be 
done either by increased running of the phosphate 
pump at the maximum capacity or by increasing the 
strength of the phosphate solution charged to the 
tank. 


7.2.1.2 Solid alkali dosing is to be continued for 
maintaining boiler drum pH within recommended 
limits. 


10.8 


7.2.1.3 Some operators rely on dosing caustic soda 
(NaOH) in boiler drum under such conditions to 
restore quickly the boiler water pH. Caustic soda 
dosing should be done with utmost care, as 
concentration of free hydroxide may lead to 
corrosion of boiler tubes. In such cases caustic and 
phosphate (preferably disodium phosphate) shall be 
combinedly dozed together, and the pH and 
phosphate content shall be closely monitored such 
that pH for the corresponding phosphate residual 
does not fall above the curve (Fig. 2). The region 
above the curve indicates the presence of free 
hydroxide. 


10.4 


10.0 


9.6 


9.2 


8.8 


PH VALUE AT 25°C ——=— 


8.4 


8.0 


0 5 10 15 
PHOSPHATES (AS PO, ),mg/| —— 


25 30 35 40 


FIG. 2 RECOMMENDED COORDINATED PHOSPHATE CURVE 


IS 4343 : 2023 


NOTE — Operation above the curve, which results in free 
hydroxide, is to be avoided. 


7.2.2 Increase blow down to the extent possible to 
keep the conductivity in boiler within the limits as 


specified in Table 3. 


Table 3 Limits of Conductivity in the Boiler 


(Clause 7.2.2) 
SINo. Boiler Pressure Specific 
(in the drum), Electrical 
MN/m? Conductivity at 
25 °C, pS/em 
d) 2) (3) 
i) 6.0 to 9.8 400 
ii) 9.9 to 11.8 200 
iii) 11.9 and above 100 


7.2.3 Monitor the following at an interval of every 
30 min. 


a) Condensate sample either from ejector or 
from hot well for conductivity; and 

b) Boiler water sample for pH, phosphate, and 
conductivity. 


7.2.4 Isolate the condenser section one by one for 
locating the damaged section and isolate and repair 
the damaged section. (If damaged condenser section 
cannot be isolated and repaired, shut down the unit.) 


7.2.5 Do not continue to operate the unit if pH of 
boiler water cannot be maintained above 8.0 or the 
conductivity as given 7.2.2. 


7.2.6 Avoid unnecessary use of desuperheater spray 
by permitting reheat temperature to fall or by 
reducing load. 


7.2.7 If the unit is shut down-for condenser repair, 
drain and flush the system to the extent possible and 


establish wet lay-up of boiler unit and auxiliary 
equipment during condenser repair. 


7.2.8 Wherever CPU is available in drum-type units, 
both CPUs are to be kept in service for purification 
of contaminated hotwell water. 


7.2.9 For drum less boiler units, 100 percent 
condensate should pass through CPU and in case 
condensate water quality at CPU outlet deviate from 
normal limits and parameters cannot be controlled, 
unit should be shut down. 


7.2.10 For units operating on OT, stop injecting 
oxygen into the feed water if feed water after cation 
conductivity (ACC) exceeds 0.20 uS/cm, convert 
the boiler feed water treatment to AVT (O) and 
adequate ammonia is dosed to maintain system pH 
between 9.3 to 9.4. 


7.2.11 Under any circumstances the leaking pass 
should be isolated before Cation conductivity in 
CEP sample reaches 1 uS/cm for all ferrous sub 
critical (1.2 wS/cm for mixed metallurgy) and 0.6 
uS/em for supercritical units. In case of 
Supercritical units with series condenser if isolation 
is not possible then prepare for shutdown. 


7.2.12 For drum type units, when feed water Cation 
conductivity of sample shows increasing trend and 
reaches to 1.0 uS/cm or Boiler water pH (measured 
at 25 °C) falls to 8.0 with further descending trend, 
unit should be taken under shut down immediately. 
Units under exclusive AVT (R) operation with no 
phosphate dosing to be taken under shutdown if 
ACC>1.50r pH<7.0. 


7.2.13 In case of supercritical units and sub critical 
drum-less units with AVT (O) operation, when 
economizer inlet ACC is > 1.0 uS/cm, or 
sodium > 20 ppb or pH drops to 7.0, the unit should 
be taken into shut down immediately. 


IS 4343 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Water Quality for Industrial Purpose Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


Organization 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, Thiruchirapali 


ClII-Triveni Water Institute 


Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute, 
Sharanpur 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 
Bhavnagar 


CECRI, Karaikudi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Consumer education and Research Centre, 


Ahmedabad 
Delhi Jal Board 


Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, New 
Delhi 


Department of Science and Technology, 
New Delhi 


Grasim Industries Limited, Nagda 


Indian Chemical Council 


Indian Farmers Fertilizer Limited, 


Allahabad 


Cooperative 


Ion Exchange India Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. P. BHATTACHARYYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI SHIVAYYANAMATH S. 
SHRI T. K. DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR 
K. ANANDA BABU (Alternate) 


SHRI KAPIL K. NARULA 
DR SIPIKA CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


DR NEELAM NIGAM 
SHRIMATI POOJA MEHROTRA (Alternate) 


DR C. MURALIDHARAN 

DR K. SRI BALA KAMESWARI (Alternate) 
SHRI NAZIMUDDIN 

SHRI VISHAL GANDHI (Alternate) 


DR NITIN ENDLAY 
DR SANJAY TYAGI (Alternate) 


DR SOUMYA HALDAR 
DR D. N. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


DR S. VASUDEVAN 
DRR. MALINI (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHANKAR 


MS ANINDITA MEHTA 
Ms DOLLY JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 


SHRI T. S. G. NARAYANAN 
SHRI UDAY SINGH MINA (Alternate) 


DR NEELIMA ALAM 
DR SANJAI KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. SASTRY 
SHRI ALOK SINGH (Alternate) 


DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 
SHRI KEDAR OKE (Alternate) 


SHRI GORAKH SINGH 
SHRI K. S. S. MOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI SACHIN SAHA 
DR RENU SARAPH (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANIL K. KHERA (Alternate II) 


IS 4343 : 2023 


Organization 


Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Chandrapur 


Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation , New Delhi 


Ministry of Urban Development 
Alleviation, New Delhi 


and Poverty 


National Environment Engineering Research Institute, 
Nagpur 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Padarsh Pharmaceuticals Private Limited, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


The Energy and Resource Institute, New Delhi 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


Water and Steam Chemistry Division, BARC Facilities, 
Kalpakkam 


In Personal Capacity (307, Dwarka Palace, Nipania opp 
to Samar Park Colony Indore -452010) 


In Personal Capacity (514, Veer apt Sector 13 Rohini 
Delhi-110085) 


In Personal Capacity (6/66, 5th Street, Ahemed Colony, 
Woraiyur, Tiruchirapalli- 620003) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. P. GHODMARE 
SHRI RAJESH DATTATRAYA CHIVANE (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJASEKHAR 
SHRI SUMIT PRIYADARSHI (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
Ms CHAITRA DEVOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. KHADSE 
DR V. ATUL MALDHURE (Alternate) 


SHRI. L. K. NAYAK 
SHRI ANKIT VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUNEESH CHADDA 
SHRI MAHON MANOHAR KHANDEKAR (Alternate) 


DR VIVEK NARAYAN SINGH 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANSHUMAN 
DR SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR B. ANUPKUMARDIRECTOR 


SHRI R. S. BAGHEL 


SHRI D. K. JAIN 


DR A. LAWRENCE 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 

(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 13 (21133). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


