IS 14985:2001

W7m9nm7

FFll WaiR*

WEm *
Indian Standard

--gwl-mfm

METHYL ACRYLATE AND ETHYL ACRYLATE -- CODE OF SAFETY

ICS 71.080.70

@BIS 2001

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 December 2001 price
&OUp

6

Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 7

FOREWORD
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. Methyl acrylate is used in the manufacture of leather finish resins, plastic films, textile and paper coatings. Methyl acrylate producing the hardest resins of acrylate ester series is used in the manufacture of acrylic fibres as the comonomer of acrylonitrile because its presence facilitates the spinning of fibres. It is also used in the dentist~, medicine pharmaceuticals and for polymerization of radioactive wastes. Ethyl acrylate is used in the manufacture of water emulsion paints, leather finish resins textile and paper coatings, and adhesives. It imparts flexibility to hard films. Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate both in liquid and vapour forms are corrosive to eyes and get absorbed through skin, and irritates the respiratory systems. There is no 1S0 standard on the subject. In the preparation of this code considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: a) Dangerous properties of industrial materials (7th edition) by N. Irving Sax. b) Chemical safety date sheet-SD-79 for Methyl Acrylate and Ethyl Acrylate(adopted-April 1960), prepared by Manufacturing Chemists Association, U.S.A. c) NIOSI-UOSHAPockets guide to chemical hazards, published by U.S Department of LabOur Occupational Safety and Health Administration. The Composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A.

IS 14985:2001

Indian Standard

METHYL ACRYLATE AND ETHYL ACRYLATE -- CODE OF SAFETY
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard describes the properties of methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate, natute of hazards associated with it, safety measures for controlling hazards, essential information on symptoms of poisoning, first aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and employees safety. 1.2 This standard does not however deal with specifications for design of buildings, chemical engineering paints, method and ingredients used in the manufacture, equipment for waste disposal and operation control. 2 REFERENCE The Indian Standard listed below contains provision which through reference in this text, constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard. IS No. 4155:1966 i'ltle Glossary of terms relating to chemical and radiation hazards and hazardous chemicals Table 1 General Information ( Clause 4.1 )
S I Characteristic No. (1) (2) i) ii) iii) Methyl Acrylate (3) Ethyl Acrylate (4) Ethyl acrylate Ethyl acrylate
CH2= CHCOOC,H,

Common name Methyl acrylate Chemical name Methyl acrylate Empirical formula CH2= CHCOOCH3 iv) Molecular mass 86 96-33-3 v) CAS No. vi) UN No. 1919 vii) UN Class 3 viii) Hazchem Code 3WE ix) NFPA Hazard Index a) Health 2 b) Flammability 3 c) Reactivity 2

100 140-88-5 1917 3 3WE 2 3 2

Table 2 Physical Properties ( Clause 4.2)
S1 Characteristic No. (1) (2) i) Physical state ii) Odour Methyl Acrylate (3) Liquid Acrid odour, lacrimator 2.95 Ethyl Acrylate (4) Liquid Acrid penetrating odour, lacrimator 3.45 99.4 0.940 (-)72 1.4068 1.4032 1.50 1.5

3 TERMINomY For the purpose of this standard the definitions given inIS4155 sh'hllapply. 4 GENERALINFORMAT'ION AND PROPERTIES 4.1 General Information Some of the general information about methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are given in Table 1. 4.2 Physical Properties Some of the important physical properties of methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are given in Table 2. 4.3 Fire and Explosion Hazards

iii) Vaporrr density (air = 1) iv) Boiling point, T 80.3 at 760 mm Hg v) Specific gravity at 0.956 20W14�C vi) Freezing point "C (-)75 vii) Refractive index, at 2(PC 1.4040 25�C 1.4003 viii) Volubility in water, 5.00 g/100 g, at 25%2 ix) Volubility of water in 2.5 monomer, g/100 g at 2P c x) Specific heat, 0.48 kJ/ mole-K xi) Vapour pressure, kpa, at -20"C 0.85 -1 O"c 1.72 w 3.12 2(PC 5.40 50T 34.0 xii) Vkcosity at 25" C, 0.49 mPa.s

0.47

0.31 0.61 1.16 2.20 16.8 0.55

4.3.1 Some of the importantfm and expkkm hds of methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are given in concentrations. Both monomers are quite volatile and Table 3. . their vapours being heavier than air, tend to accumulate 1

4.3.2 Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate have low flash points, flammable liquids and their vapours, form explosive mixtures with air over a wide range of

IS 14985:2001
at low points, may travel along the ground and distant ignition possible. Both react violently with oxidants. Ethyl acrylate reacts violently with chlorosulphonic acid. Polymerization may be initiated by ultra-violet light and heating, if uncontrolled, may result into explosion.

`1'hble4 Toxiaty Data ( Clause 5.1.3)
S1 Characteristic No. (1) (2) i) TLV (skin)
ii) TWA, ppm iii) STEL, ppm iv) TCm, ppm (human) Methyl Acrylate (3) 10 ppm (35 mg/m3) 2 -- 75 Ethyl Acrylate (4) 5 ppm (20 mglm') 5 15 --

Table 3 Fn and Explosion Hazard Properties ( Clat4se4.3.l )
S1
No. (1) (4) Characteristic (2) Methyl Acrylate Ethyl Acrylate (3)

5.2.1.1 Systemic effects
(-)3 (-)2 9 19

i) Flash point," C Closed cup Open cup ii) Explosives limits (percent volume in air) LEL UEL iii) Heat of evaporation, kcal/mole iv) Heat of polymerization, kcal/mole v) Heat of combustion, kcal/mole vi) Auto ignition temperature, "C

2.8 25 8.25 18.8 502.88 463

1.4 14 8.27 18.6 655.49 345

Severe exposure to vapours or swallowing of the acrylate maybe fatal. Oral intake is characterized by marked local irritation of the mouth and digestive system. Severe vapour exposure is indicated by extreme irritation of eyes and respiratory system. Death may result from pulmonary edema and from damage to internal organs. Terminal stages are marked by shortness of breath, blueness of the lips and convulsive movements 5.2.1.2 Local effects Marked local irritation of the eyes and linings of the nose, throat and lungs results from acute vapour exposure. Eyes water considerably and chemical bums may develop on the cornea. Single exposure of intact skin does not result in significant irritation unless the monomer is held in close, covered contact with the skin as by clothing or gloves. 5.2.2 Chronic Toxicity 5.2.2.1 Systemic effects The odour and irritant `effects of methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate vapours are such as to preclude significant absorption in trained workman under conditions other than acute accidental exposure. Methyl acrylate is highly irritant and can cause sensitization. Chronic explosive may damage liver/ kidney tissues. Ethyl acrylate is grouped as Class 2B carcinogen according to the Encyclopedia of Occupational Health and Safety. 5.2.2.2 Local effects Prolonged exposure for extended periods (16 h or more) to tolerable concentrations of vapours may result in eye irritation and injury. 5.2.2.3 Warning properties

4.3.3 Polymerization Hazards Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate polymerize readily at room temperature unless properly inhibited. Considerable heat is evolved during polymerization and explosive forces may develop if the material is in a closed container. 5 TOXICITY AND HEALTH HAZARDS

5.1 Routes of Entry 5.1.1 Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are irritants for the skin, mucous membranes and the gastrointestinal tract. They may be absorbed through the skin, gastrointestinal system or the lungs. Systemic absorption may lead to degenerative changes in the liver and kidneys. 5.L2 Accidental industrial exposure may Occurin tluee ways: a) acute exposure to high vapour concentrations, b) prolonged exposure to lower Vapour concentrations, and c) liquid absorption of eyes or skin. 5.1.3 The vapour pressures of both methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are such that air concentrations above the threshold limit may readily develop under many ordinary conditions of handling unless precautions are taken. Available toxicity data of methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are given in Table 4. 5.2 Health Hazard 5.2.1 Acute Toxicity

The odour of methyl acrylate maybe detected by most individuals at a concentration of about 20 ppm and of ethyl acrylate at about 8 ppm. Odour detection has little practical value in chronic repeated exposures since most workers become less sensitive to the odour and will tolerate atmospheric concentrations greater than the threshold limits. On the other hand. the odour

IS 14985:2001 becomes disagreeable and irritation of the eyes and mucous membranes is experienced beginning at about 75 ppm and these symptoms, if needed, constitute adequate warning for acute exposures. 6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE 6.1 Availability and Use 6.1.1 While personal protective equipment is not an adequate substitute for good, safe working conditions, adequate ventilation and intelligent conduct on the part of employees working with methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate, is, in many instances, the only practical means of protecting the worker. In emergency situations one should keep firmly in mind that personal protective equipment protects only the worker wearing it, and other unprotected workers in the area may be exposed to danger. 6.1.2 The correct use of personal protective equipment requires the education to the worker in proper employment of the equipment available to him. Hazardous conditions require personal protective equipment, its use should be supervised and the type of equipment should be capable to give provision against any potential hazard. 6.2 Eye Protection 6.2.1 Chemical Safety Goggles Cup type or rubber framed safety goggles, equipped with the approved impact resistant glass or plastic lenses, should be worn whenever there is danger of methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate coming in contact with the eyes. Goggles should be carefully fitted to ensure maximum protection and comfort. 6.2.2 Spectacle Type Sajky Goggles Metal or plastic rim safety spectacles with imperforatekl side shields which may be obtained with prescription lenses or suitable all plastic safety goggles. may be used where continuous eye protection is desirable, as in laboratories. These types, however, should not be used where complete eye protection against methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate is needed. 6.2.3 Face Shields Plastic shields (full length) with forehead protection may be worn in addition to ,chemical safety goggles where complete face protection is desirable. Chemical safety goggles should always be worn as added protection where there is danger of material striking the eyes from underneath or around the sides of the face shield. 6.3 Respiratory protection 6.3.1 Severe exposure to methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylates may occur in tanks during equipment cleaning 3 EQUIPMENT and repairs, when decontaminating areas following spills, or in case of failure of piping or equipment. Employees who may be subject to such exposures should be provided with proper respiratory protective equipment and trained in their use and care. 6.3.2 Self contained breathing apparatus which permits the wearer to carry a supply of oxygen or air compressed in the cylinder, and allows considerable mobility. The length of time a self-contained breathing apparatus provides protection varies according to the amount of air or oxygen or regenerating material carried. Compressed oxygen should not be used where there is danger of contact with flammable liquids, vapours, or sources of ignition, especially in confined spaces such as tanks or pits 63.3 Positive pressure hose masks which are supplied by blowers requiring no internal lubrication. The wearer must be able to use the same route for exit as for entrance and must take precautions to keep the hose line free of entanglement. The air blower must be placed in an area free of contaminants. 6.3.4 Air-line masks supplied with clean compressed air are suitable for use only where conditions will permit safe escape in case of failure of the compressed air supply. These masks are usually supplied with air pipes to the area from a compressor. It is extremely important that the air supply is taken from a safe source, and that it is not contaminated. The safer method is to use a separate compressor of the type not requiring internal lubrication. Pressure reducing and relief valves, as well as suitable traps and filters, must be installed at all mask stations. An rdtemate arrangement frequently used is high pressure breathing air from standard (7 cm ) cylinders, with a demand type valve and face piece. This arrangement may also be used with 25-50 kg, clean piped plant air, and, as an additional precaution with the demand mask, a small cylinder of compressed air may be worn for use as an emergency escape from the area. Consult a reliable safety equipment dealer for details on the proper use of equipment approved by Bureau of Mines. 6.3.5 Industrial canister type gas masks, equipped with full face pieces fitted with the proper canister for absorbing methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate vapour, will afford protection against concentrations not exceeding 2 percent by volume when used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The oxygen content of the air must not be less than 16 percent by volume. The masks should be used for relatively short exposure periods only. They may not be suitable for use in an emergency since, at that time, the actual vapour concentration is unknown and an oxygen deficiency may exist. The wearer must be warned to leave the contaminated area immediately on detecting the odour of a harmful vapour. This may indicate that the mask is

IS 14985:2001 not functioning
exhausted properly, that the vapottr canister fitted. is

or that the mask is not properly

7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND TRANSPORT 7.1 Handling and Storage 7.1.1 General All precautions should be taken to safeguard the health of worker against health and fire hazards whenever methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate are handled and stored. Spark resistant tools should be used and the area should be posted with no-smoking or other appropriate signs. If leaks or spills occur, only properly protected personnel should enter the area. Leaking containers should be removed to the outdoors or to an isolated, well ventilated area and the contents transferred to other suitable containers. Gaskets in general should be flushed on the inside and not extend into the column or pipes, as polymer tends to get affected and brown at such points. 7.1.2 Small Containers Glass bottles should be handled carefully to prevent breakage. Vapours of methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate should not be allowed to come into contact with open flame or other sources of ignition. Bottles or cans which are not returnable, care should be taken to avoid discarding such empty containers near sources of ignition or where unauthorized persons might handle them. They should be flushed out with water and left uncapped. 7.1.3 Drums 7.L3.I Handling

NOTE --Where carbon monoxide or other gas having little or no odour may be encountered in addition to methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate, the mask should be equipped with an "all purpose canister" and a "time device".

6.3.6 Chemical cartridge res~irators may be used to avoid inhaling disagreeable but relatively harmless concentrations of methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate vapour. These respirators, however, are not recommended for protection where toxic quantities may be encountered.
CAUTZON -- Filter type respirators do not offer protection against gases and are unsuitable for use when working with methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate.

6.4 Head Protection "Hard" hats should be worn where there is danger from failing objects. If hard hats are not considered necessary, soft-brimmed hats or caps may be worn to give protection against liquid spillage and splashes. 6.5 Foot Protection 6.5.1 Leather safety shoes with built-in-steel toe caps are recommended for workers handling drums and cans of methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate. Neoprene or plastic overshoes may be worn over le+her safety shoes. Overshoes and shoes should be thoroughly cleaned and ventilated after contamination. . 6.5.2 Liquid methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate will penetrate leather shoe tops readily, and if allowed to remain in contact with the foot, will produce severe irritation. Contaminated shoes should be removed promptly and thoroughly dried before rewearing. 6.6 Body, Skin and Hand Protection 6.6.1 Sustained or intermittent skin contact with liquid methyl actylate or ethyl acrylate may produce dermatitis at the site of contact. It is imperative that contaminated clothing be removed promptly and laundered before reuse. Affected areas of the body should be washed with water alone. As a general hygienic measure, facilities for personal cleanliness should be provided and washing before lunch and at the end of the work day should be encouraged. 6.6.2 Clothing made of rubber or other impervious material may be worn to protect the body against splashes. Neoprene or PVC gloves should be used for hand protection (cloth or leather gloves are not adequate). These garments must be cleaned inside and out each time they are used. 4

When a truckload of drums containing methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate is received the truck doors should be opened to allow thorough ventilation of the vehicle before it is entered. Each shipment should be examined for leaking dmms. 7.1.3.2 Emptying Before drums are opened, they should be supported and grounded. Drums should be opened with spark resistant tools and fittings and never be struck with tools or other hard objects which may cause sparking. 7.1.33 To remove the body plug from a drum of methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate, the operator should wear goggles and use bung or plug wrench. He should place the bung up stand to one side with face away during the operation. After the plug beings to loosen it should be given not mom than one full turn. If internal pressure exists, it should be allowed to escape to the atmosphere. Then only should the operator be allowed to loose the plug further and remove it. 7.13.4 The preferable safe method for emptying drums is by hand pump or electrical pumps with explosion

IS 14985:2001 proof motors. Theuseofpressure is not recommended. 7.1.4 Disposal If any metal drums are to be scrapped they would be drained completely and then steamed to remove vapours. They should be made unusable by crushing or piercing. 7.1.5 Storage Methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate polymerize readily at room temperatures unless properly inhibited. ,Considerableheat is evolve during polymerization and explosive forces may develop if the material is in a closed container. These monomers should be stored at temperatures recommended by the manufacturers. Prolonged storage should be avoided. 7.1.6 Storage Conditions 7.1.6.1 Methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate are normally inhibited before storage. Acrylates should never be stored under an inert gas atmosphere as some dissolved oxygen is necessary for the inhibitor system. If uninhibited monomer has been handled it shall be immediately cooled to 40Cand held in refrigerated tanks. Uninhibited monomer should not be held more than 3 days even under these conditions. 7.1.6.2 Drums of inhibited methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate should be stored in a cool place. While the inhibitor dosages used are adequate to prevent uncontrolled polymerization even on prolonged storage at temperatures as high as 38"C. It is suggested that as an additional safeguard, storage conditions should be such that temperature above 3&'C are avoided or at least not encountered for any significant proportion of the expected storage time. Of course, even though uncontrolled polymerization will not take place even on prolonged storage at temperatures as high as 38W, there exists a possibility of quality deterioration, particularly if storage at these temperatures is prolonged. Experience has shown that for the most critical applications particularly for the lower inhibitor concentrations where methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are used without inhibitor removal, the storage temperature should beheld below 10'C. 7.1.7 Indoor Storage 7.1.7.1 When filled drums or other containers me stored indoors, they should be stored in non-combustible, well ventilated structures. When filled drums, or other containers are stored in separate storage rooms, floor drains should be provided. The floors should be pitched to the drains and the latter should lead to a safe location. In case, no drains are provided, 10 mm curbs or a drained gutter, covered with an appropriate grills should be constructed at door openings. In either case, only those properly protected should attempt to 5 foremptying drums clean up areas in which methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate has been spilled. 7.1.7.2 All storage areas should be provided with automatic sprinklers or some other adequate extinguishing system. 7.1.7.3 Methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate should not be stored in glass bottles or containers or near other combustibles, acids in glass bottles or containers or near other combustibles, acids and oxidizing materials. Safety cans with pouring outlets equipped with tight fitting caps or valves normally closed by springs and with fire baffles in the outlets should be used. 7.1.8 Bulk Storage Since the bulk storage of methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate in above or underground tanks poses many problems relating to such factors as size of vents, diking, and separation distances, which depend upon other variables such as nature of the tank contents, tank wall thickness, or protection, it is recommended that tank storage requirements be determined through consultation with qualified fire protection engineers, the fire insurance carriers concerned and manufacturers of methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate. . 7.1.9 Ventilation Good ventilation is essential in rooms or areas where methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are handled to prevent the accumulation of explosive or toxic mixtures. The type of ventilation needed will depend upon several factors as like vapour density, dead air spaces, temperature, convection currents, wind direction which must be considered by the engineer when determining equipment location, type and capacity. If mechanical ventilation is used, spark proof fans are recommended and electrical equipment should meet national electrical code requirements. 7.1.10 Electrical Equipment Wiring in the immediate area should be Class I, Division I, when equipment using methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate is located in large area. The electrical equipment in the immediate area should be Class I, Division I. Where not exposed to the possibility of solvent spills, the wiring should be weather tight. It is recommended that the areas be carefully surveyed by a qualified fire protection engineer. Flash lights should be approved for the exposure. 7.1.11 Over Heating Automatic temperature controls are recommended for processes where methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are heated; but even with these, close supervision is necessary because the methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate or its mixture is highly combustible. Low pressure steam or hot water is recommended for heating methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate mixtures in which either of them are used.

IS 14985:2001 7.1.12 Static Electricity Sparks from static electricity may ignite methyl aerylate and ethyl acrylate vapour and air mixtures. Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate flowing through or being discharged from a line, generates static electricity. Therefore, an effective grounding of the line is necessary to prevent possible fire and explosion hazards. 7.1.13 Before methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate is poured. or discharged from one metal container to another, the two vessels should be grounded and electrically interconnected. All metal surfaces with which methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate comes in contact should be grounded and bonded so that the resistance to ground is not greater than 5 ohms. This applies to all metal equipment and piping such as tanks, mixers, stills and pipelines. Where drive belts are neeessary, conductive `V'belts are recommended. Pulley and drive shafts should be grounded. Non-conductive drive belts may accumulate an electric charge and their use should be avoided. 7.2 LabeUing Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are classified as flammable liquids. Packages containing inside containers of onequarter capacity or larger shall be packed with filling holes up, and the container outside shall be plainly marked "THIS SIDE UP". Drums and each box containing inside containers must bear the red label for "Flammable Liquids". All containers of methyl acrylate should bear the following label in addition to or in combination with any label, warning or other statement required by statutory, regulations or ordinances: METHYL ACRYLATIVETHYL ACRYLATE -... ----------) (Inhibitedwith-- WARNING : FL4MMABLE VAPOURHARMFUL MAY lRRITA~ SKIN AND EYES Keep away from heat, sparks and open flame. Keep containers closed. Use only with adequate ventilation. Avoid breathing vapour. Avoid contact with skin, eyes and clothing. In case of contact, immediately flush skin or eyes with plenty of water for at least 15 rein; for eyes, get medical attention. Remove and wash contaminated clothing before reuse.
NOTE-The same label is recommended for ethyl acrylate.

should conform to the Static and Mobile Pressure Vessels (Unfired) [SMPV(U)], Rules 1981 and should be approved and licensed by the Chief Controller of Explosives. 7.3.2 Proper working, a label and signs should be worked on the tanker. The tanker shall have a placard class label of "Flammable". A slight higher pressure above atmosphere should be maintained inside the filled tanker out of contact with air or oxygen. Two fire extinguishers should be fixed on each tank lorry. 8 TANK CLEANING/REPAIRS 8.1 Preparationof Tankand Equipment 8.1.1 Tank cleaning should be under the direction of thoroughly qualified supervisor who are fully familiar with all the hazards and the safeguards necessary for the safe performance of work. 8.1.2 It should be ascertained that all sources of ignition have been eliminated from the vicinity of the tank. All pipelines to the tank should be disconnected and all connecting lines should be blanked off. Agitators, if any, should be disconnected or locked off. Methyl acrylate or etlq 1 acrylate vapours being heavier than air, will flow out of bottom openings and may travel considerable distances to sources of ignition. Provisions shall be made regarding this hazard. 8.13 Tanks and equipment, pumps, lines and valves should always be drained and thoroughly flushed with water before being repaired. Workmen should never be allowed to attempt to repair equipment while it is in operation and the lines full. If pipe sections are to be removed and flanged opened, the lower bolts should be loosened first and although the lines have been flushed, care should be taken to avoid personal contact with the liquid draining or dripping from the equipment. Spillage fmm the lines or equipment should be removed immediately by flushing to the drain with large quantities of water. 8.1.4 Except in large tanks, steam is recommended for removing vapours and accumulations from tanks. The steam lines should be large enough to raise the tank temperature above the boiling point of meth yl acrylate and ethyl acrylate and the steaming should be continued until all vapours have bet n removed. If steam is not available, the tank maybe flushed by filling with water and draining to the sewer."Thisprocedure should be repeated several times. After the tank has been steamed, it should be cooled, preferably by filling with water and draining. The volatilized methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate in the steam effluent should not be of sufficient concentration to contaminate the work area in excess of safe limits. The steam and water line should be (electrically connected) to the tank shell to prevent the accumulation of static electricity. 6

73 `Ikansport 7.3.1 Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate is usually transported through pipeline and tankers. Tank lorries

IS 14985:2001 8.1.5 The tank should then be purged with fresh air and the atmosphere in the tank tested with an approved comlmstible gas taking the sample for the test from the bottom of the tank. If the gas indicator shows that any flammable vapours are present, the steaming and washing operation should be repeated until the tank is free of all flammable vapours. 8.2 Entering Tank 8.2.1 No one should enter a tank or confined space until a work permit has been signed by an authorized person indicating that the area has been tested for absence of toxic gas and for sufficiency of oxygen and found to be safe. Furthermore, no workmen should enter a tank or vessel that does not have a manhole or opening large enough to admit a person wearing a safety harness, life line and emergency respiratory equipment. It should be ascertained that the tank or vessel may be left by the original entrance. One man on the outside of the tank should keep the men in the tank under observation and another man should be available nearby to aid in rescue if any of the men in the tank are overcome. 8.2.2 A supplied-air respirator or self-contained breathing apparatus together with rescue harness and life line should always be located outside the tank entrance for rescue purposes, regardless of the type of respiratory equipment or air supply which is provided for employees inside the tank. 8.2.3 Special ventilation is recommended during the entire time when men are cleaning, repairing or inspecting the tank. Ventilation may be accomplished by exhausting or removing vapours from the bottom of the tank either through its bottom openings or by means of a large flexible duct where tanks have a top opening only. The blowers or air movers used for ventilation to ensure against oxygen deficiency should be sparkproof and they should be cleaned frequently so that moving parts will not setup frictional heat which may cause ignition of the vapour. On tanks having only a top opening, care shall be exercised to insure complete removal of vapours from the entire tank, Care shall also be taken to avoid having exhaust gases recycled into the tank. 8.2.4 During the course of the work, frequent tests should be made to determine that the atmosphere in the tank is being maintained within a safe range. This precaution is necessary because residues not completely removed by washing may recontamination the tank atmosphere. Tests for oxygen sufficiency should also be made. 8.3 Emergency Rescue Under no circumstances should a rescuer enter a tank to remove a victim of over-exposure without proper 7 respiratory protection, a safety harness and an attached life line. The free end of the life line should be manned by an attendant located outside of the tank. Another attendant should be immediately available to assist in the rescue, if needed. The rescuer should be in view of the outside attendant at all times or in constant communication with him. 8.4 Repairing Work 8.4.1 Exterior tank repair, including repairs to steam coils, cutting, riveting and welding, should be permitted only after thorough cleaning and testing of the tank to make sure it is free of vapours and after a work permit has been issued by an authorized person. Repeated tests with an approved combustible gas meter should be made to fully protect the workmen. 8.4.2 All outside welding or burning on tanks or equipment which have contained methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate should be done only after such containers have been completely purged with steam. Purging should be continued while repair work is in progress and frequent checks made as for internal work. Filling clean, empty tanks with water or with inett gas is also satisfactory for outside work. 8.4.3 In all cases, if repair work is interrupted, the tank atmosphere should be checked thoroughly and a new work permit issued before resumption of work. 8.4.4 When it is necessary to remove polymer from the equipment, the section should be removed to an isolated burning-area and the polymer burned off by means of a torch. Polymer should not be burned from a confined section, such as condenser tubes, unless a hole is drilled completely through the polymer to permit the combustion gases to escape. 9 SPJLIu4GE/LEAKAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL 9.1 Spillage/Leakage 9.1.1 If leaks or spills occur, only properly protected personnel should enter the area. 9.1.2 Frequent equipment inspections should be made to detector prevent leaks. 9.1.3 Spilled methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate should never be left unattended. Immediately flush with large quantity of water; but excessive quantity of these monomers should not be permitted to enter drains or sewers where there is a danger of vapours becoming ignited, or of contaminating public water supply. These chemicals in the monomeric stage, will impart taste and odour to water supplies at low concentrations. 9.1.4 Leak containers should be removed to outdoors or to an isolated, well ventilated area and the contents transferred to other suitable containers.

IS 14985:2001 9.2 Waste Disposal 9.2.1 Waste disposal ofmethyl acrylate, ethyl acrylate and materials reacted or contaminated with them depends to a great extent on local conditions. The chemicals, in the monomeric state, even at low concentration will impart taste and odour to water. Be sure that all state and local regulations regarding health and pollution are observed. 9.2.2 Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate waste in dilute concentrations is readily decomposed and taste and odour properties destroyed by biological oxidation systems employed by industrial waste and local sewage treatment plants to which they maybe sent for disposal. High concentrations of these wastes maybe burned. 9.2.3 Waste mixtures containing methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate should not be allowed to enter a drain or sewer system in which vapours could accumulate and become ignited. 10 FIRE FIGHTING 10.1 Fires involving methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate may be extinguished with carbon dioxide, dry chemical, vaporizing liquids and foam. Water spray is effective for controlling methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate fues in open containers when properly applied. 10.1.1 When fires occur in the vicinity of methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate storage areas it is particularly important to cool the tanks or drums with water hose streams since the exposure heat from the fire may be sufficient to induce polymerization even though it is below the actual ignition temperature of the monomers. 10.1.2 When fighting fires involving methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate, firemen should be equipped with standard fireman's clothing plus adequate eye protection. If fire-fighting involves work in close or confined quarters, the firemen shall be equipped with proper respiratory protection. 11 TRAINING AND HEALTH MONITORING 11.1 Employee Education and Tkahdng 11.1.1 Methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate do not pose serious industrial hazards when their use is properly controlled through the application of engineering measures and workers are provided with proper protective equipment and are effectively instructed and supervised in proper handling procedures. 11.1.2 Safety in handling methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate depends to a great extent upon the effectiveness of employee education, proper safety instructions, intelligent supervision and the use of safety equipment. 8 11.1.2.1 The education and training of employees in work safely and to use of the personal protective equipment or other safeguards provided for them is the responsibility of supervision. Training classes for both new and old employees should be conducted periodically to maintain a high degree of safety in handling procedures. .Workers should be thoroughly informed of the hazards that may result from improper handling of methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate. They should be cautioned to prevent spills and thoroughly instructed regarding proper actions to be taken against them. Each employee should know what to do in an emergency and should be fully informed about firstaid measures. 11.2 Health Monitoring 11.2.1 Preventive Health Measures Methyl acrylate and ethyl acrylate are not serious industrial hazards, if workers are adequately instructed and supervised in proper means of handling these chemicals. 11.2.1.1 Personal hygiene Personnel should be instructed and equipment designed to avoid contact with acrylates in liquid or vapour phase. Where excessive contact is unavoidable, adequate personal protective devices as described in 6.6 should be used. The necessity for immediate emergency under shower and prompt removal of all contaminated clothing following massive skin contact shall be stressed. Even minor splashes shall be washed off promptly and contaminated apparel shall be decontaminated. Particularly leather goods such as shoes and gloves, shall be removed, thoroughly washed and dried or laundered before wearing again. Adequate emergency showers, wash-up facilities and eye wash fountains should be available in accessible locations in areas where these acrylates are handled. Employees should be instructed to report promptly all symptoms such as irritation of eyes, nose and throat or lung congestion. 11.2.1.2 Physical e.wminations a) Preplacement examinations -- Preplacement examinations are advisable for all persons handling methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate. It may be advisable to exclude those persons having chronic or pm-existing diseases of the lungs, liver and kidneys from contact with methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate. Persons with eye infections or conjunctivitis should not be exposed to acrylate vapours. b) Periodic health examinations -- Employees regularly exposed to acrylates should have periodic medical evaluation.

IS 14985:2001
12 FIRST AID

First aid should be started at once in all cases of massive exposure or contact with methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate. Refer case to a physician. 12.1 Contact with Skin and Mucous Membranes Spills on skin or mucous membranes shall be washed off promptly with copious quantity of water. Remove clothing and continue washing with water and soap. Pay particular attention to hair, ears and other portions of body where chemical may not be easily flushed off. Contaminated clothing should not be re-worn until it is laundered. 12.2 Contact with Eyes If methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate has entered the eyes, they should be washed promptly with copious quantities of water for at least 15 min. Medical attention should be obtained promptly. 12.3 Taken Internally A physician should be called at once. Vomiting should be induced by giving large quantities of warm salt solution or by having the patient place his finger in the back of his throat. When retching and vomiting begin, place the patient face down with his head lower than hips to prevent the vomits from entering the lungs. Keep the patien~ warm and comfortable. Oxygen may be administered as directed by the physician, if symptoms warrant it. 12.4 Inhalation 12.4.1 A worker who has been overcome by methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate shall be carried at once into an uncontaminated atmosphere and effective artificial respiration initiated~inmediately if breathing has ceased. A physician should be called at once. 12,4.2 If oxygen inhalation apparatus is available, oxygen should be administered, but only by a person authorized for such duty by a physician. 12.4.3 The patient should be kept warm but not hot. Stimulants will rarely be necessary where adequate oxygenation is maintained. Any such drugs for shock should be given only by an attending treatment

physician. Never attempt to give anything by mouth to an unconscious patient, 12.5 Suggestions to Physicians 12.5.1 Signs and symptoms of mucous membrance irritation and neurosis may be present following acute exposure to methyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate. These symptoms are not specific. Treatment is symptomatic and no specific antidotes are known. 12.5.2 Oxygen Administration 12.5.2.1 Oxygen has been found useful in the treatment of inhalation exposures of many chemicals, especially those capable of causing either immediate or delayed harmful effects in the lungs. 12.5.2.2 In most exposures, administration of 100 percent oxygen at atmospheric pressures has been found to be adequate. This `is best accomplished by use of a face mask connected to the cylinder containing oxygen. Inhalation of 100 percent oxygen should not exceed one hour of continuous treatment. After that each therapy may be interrupted. It maybe reinstituted as the clinical condition indicates. 12.5.2.3 Some believe that superior results are obtained when exposure to lung irritants are treated with oxygen under an exhalation pressure not exceeding 4 cm water. Masks providing for such exhalation pressures are obtainable. A single treatment may suffice for minor exposures to irritants. It is believed by some observers that oxygen under pressure is useful as an aid in the prevention of pulmonary edema after breathing irritants. 12.5.2.4 In the event of an exposure causing symptoms or in the case of a history of severe exposure, the patient may be treated with oxygen under 4 cm exhalation pressure for one and a half hour periods out of every hour. Treatment maybe continued in this way until symptoms subside or other clinical indications for interruption appear.
CAIJTZOh' : It may not be advisable to administer oxygen under positive pressure in the presence of impending or existing cardiovascular failure.

IS 14985:2001

ANNEX A ( Foreword)
COMMllTEE COMIWMTION

Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 7
Organization Representative(s)

Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi Century Rayon, Kalyan Development Commissioner (SS1), New Delhi ` Department of Explosives, Nagpur Directorate General of Factory Advice Services & Labour Institute, Mumbai Excel Industries Limited, Mumbai Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited, Raaayani Hindustan Lever Limited, Mumbai Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, New Delhl Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited, Birbhadra Indian Petrochemical Corporation Limited, Vadodara Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow Ministry of Defence (DGOF), Kolkata Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi Ministry of Defence (R&D), New Delhl Ministry of Environment & Forests, New Delhi Ministry of Industry, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, New Delhi National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad National Organic Chemicals Limited, Mumbai National Safety Council, Mumbai Oil Industries Safety Directorate, Mumbai Projects & Development (1) Limited, Sindri SIEL, Chemical Complex, Punjab Southern Petrochemical Industries Corporation, Chennai Tata AIG Risk Management Services Limited, Mumbai BIS Directorate General

DR K. V. RAGHAVAN ( Chairman )
SHRt P. K. GHOSH DRB. N. RATHI R5w3FNrm DRK. V. RAMALINGAM SHRt JAYANTA ADHtA (Alternate) SHRM411SUNrrA

DRH. MuxHrmrEs SHSU S. S. GA~AM (Alternate) DR BRUMOHAN
SHRt P. M. KAIUA SHIU MOHAN PATtL (Alternate) SHRI V. H. CHUDAMANI SHraA. G. SSSHAN (Alternate), DR A. BHASXAR SHRIA, JHAVAR (Alternate)

V. N. DAS SHSU SHRt K. R. SHASMA SHIU J. N. SHARMA DR P. N. VWWANATHAN V.R. J.usrmrA SHRt SHru R. VENUOOPAL (Alternate) M. S. SULTANIA SHRI SHRI K. G. NtOAM (Alternate)
h ~ S. VENKATARAMANI (Alternate) DR A. K. SAXENA DR M. %NOOPTA DR (Ms) INDRANt CHANDRASHEXHARAN (Alternate) SHStM. P. SUSGH SHRtN. C. TIWARI (Alternate) DR D. J. PAIUXH

DR T. S. PA~ (Alternate) DRB. V. BAPAT
SHRS M. B. SURVE (Alternate) SHRI P. M. RAO (Alternate) SHruV. B. PATU REPsmmrm Smu A. C. SRtVASTAVA SHRI A. K. MEHRA SHtU T. S. KRtSHNAN SHRI J. I? AZAIUAH WINSTON (Alternate) SHRt AJAY PANCHAL MURHSRSEE (Alternate) SHRt SADHAN SHRS LANNDER SINGH , Director&

Head (CHD) [Representing Director General (Ex-o#7cio)]

Member-Secretary SHrO N. K. PAL

Dkector (CHD), BIS
(Continued on page

11)

10

IS 14985:2001
(Continued from page

10)

Explosive/Flatntnable Substances Subcommittee, CHD 7:2
Organization Representative(s) ( Converser) SHRt J. N. SHARMA DRB. N. RATHI DR A. K. BHALLA (Alternate) DR K. S. UPPAL SHtU S. K. BHARDWAJ DR A. K. MAJGMDER SHRt K. BALUUBRAMANIAN (Alterrrate) DR D. R. MISHRA SHIU A. K. GUPTA RmsmmTmvE Smt M. RAMAXRSSHNA DR R. SUNDAR RAJAN (Alternate) SHRS V. N. DAS SHIU ABHMTDAS SHRtP. T. DEOTALE (Alternate) SHRt N. V. Pru.%t DR. A. K. SARANGI (Alternate) %uMAn S~A

Indian Petrochemical Corporation Limited, Vadodara Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai Centre for Environment& Delhi Explosives Safety, DRDO,

Department of Explosive, Nagpur Directorate General of Factory Advice & Lahour Institute, Kolkata Directorate General of Ordinance Factory, Kolkata Directorate General Mines Safety, Dhanbad ICI L]mited (Explosives Division), Kolkata IDL Industries Limited, Hyderabad Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, New Delhi Loss Prevention Association, Mumbai Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune Ministry of Environment & Forests, New Delhi National Organic Chemical Industries Limited, Mumbai Oil Industry Safety Dkectorate, New Delhi

JrNDAL

DRB. V. BAPAT SHtuM. B. SGRVE (Alternate) ~A~

11

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of' BIS Handbook' and' Standards: Monthly Additions'. This lndian Standard has been developed from DOC: No. CHD 7 ( 9197).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zaf% Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617,3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CO IMBATORE, FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI . HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH, PATNA. PUNE. R.AJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

