IS : 4014 ( Part II ) - 1967

Iizdian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR STEEL TUBULAR SCAFFOLDING
PART II SAFETY REGULATIONS FOR SCAFFOLDING

(Third Reprint APRIL 1996 )

UDC 69.057.6:614.8

(b Copyright 1967

BUREAU
Gr 4

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Juti

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC NEW DELHI 110002

1967

IS : 4Q14 ( Part

II ) - 1967

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR STEEL TUBULAR SCAFFOLDING
PART

II

SAFETY

REGULATlONS

FOR SCAFFOLDING

Structural Chairman

Engineering

Sectional

Committee, Represclrtirrg

SMRDC

7

DIRRCTOR STAN~AIXZ

( CIVIL )

Ministry

of Railways

Members
lndustrial F;lsteners Association of Indie Calcutta SJ~RI L. N. AGRAWAL SHRI M. M. MU~~AR~A ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organisation, New Delhi SHRI B. D. AI~UJA SHRI D. NYTEKCHANDANI ( Alternate ) Ministry of Transport and Communication, SHRI P. c. BH.4SIN Department of Transport (Road Wing ), New Delhi Stewarts & Lloyds of India Private Ltd, Calcutta &RI K. E. BISHOP SHRI P. K. RAY ( Alternate) Bureau, Central and Engineering Design SHRI DAVID BOLTON Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI S. R. CHAKRAVARTY ( Alternute ) Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies SHRI D. P. CHATTERJEE & Disposals (Ministry of Supply, Technical Planning ) Development 8; Materials New Delhi Government of West Bengal DR P. N. CHATTERJEE Bridge & Roof Co ( India ) Ltd, Howrah DR P. K. CHOUDHURI SIIRI A. SEN GU~TA ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI P. L. DATTA Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur DR P. DAY ARATNAM M. N. Dastur & Co Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. S. DESAI Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta SWRI M. DHAR Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay SRRI M. A. D'SOUZA SHM J. S. PINTO ( Alternate ) Richardson & Cruddas Ltd, Bombay SHRI W. FERNANDES SHRI P. V. NAIK ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Wast SHRI SAILAPATI GUPTA Bengal ( Continued an page 2 )

`BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 4014 ( Part II ) - 1967 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members
SHRI G.S. IYER

Representing
The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SNATDARDS Ministry of Railways

JOINT DIRECTOR (B&S) DEPUTY DIRECTORSTANDARDS II ( AIternate ) (B&S)Electrical Manufacturing Co Ltd, Calcutta SERI OM KXXOSLA SHRI S. N. SIN~H ( Alternate ) Burn & Co Ltd, Howrah SHRI P. K. MALLICK SHRI A. I'. KAYAL ( Alternate ) Hindu&n Steel Limited, Durgapur SHRI A. K. MITJXA SHRI B. N. SEX (Alternate ) Central Water & Power Commission (Water SERI Y. K. MUHTHY Wing ), New Delhi SHRI B. T. A. SAGAR ( AIterrrare ) Irrigation & Power Department, Government of SHRI M. G. PADHY~ Mahai-ashtra SHRI P. V. PAWAR ( Alternate ) Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), PROF G. S. RAMASWAMY Roorkee SHRI M. RAMAIAH ( Afternute ) Engineer-in-Chief's Bmnch, Ministry of Defence PROF B. N. SANYAL SHRI B. S. PARAKASH RAO (Alternate ) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SERI D. C. SHARMA Research Mechanical Engineering Central SHRI K. V. SHETTY Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur SHRI S. K. GHOSH ( Alternate ) Jadavpur University, Calcutta PBO~ P. K. SOM ENGINEER Government of Madras SUPERINTENDIN@ DESIGN ( PLANN~NQ AND CIRCLE) EXECUTIVE ENOINEEX ( BUILDING CENTRE DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) Bombay Port Trust, Bombay MAJ R. P. E. VAZIFDAR Central Water and Power Commission ( Power SHRI M. N. VEN~ATESAN Wing ), New Delhi SHRI P. V. N. IYENQAR ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) DB A. Ii. CEATTEBJEE, Director ( Strut & Met )

Secretary
H. N. K~IS~NAMUXTHY Deputy Director ( Strut & Met ), IS1

2

IS : 4014 ( Part II) - 1967

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR STEEL TUBULAR SCAFFOLDING
PART II SAFETY REGULATIONS FOR SCAFFOLDING

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 March 1967, after the draft finalized by the Structural Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council and the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 With the heavy construction programme envisaged, the importance of the use of modern scaffolding cannot be over-emphasized. Steel tubular scaffolding is one of the modern types of scaffolding which can be assembled quickly, and transported and handled easily. It can be dismantled rapidly and re-used,.and relied upon for long service and life. The Sectional Committee, therefore, felt that a code of practice for steel tubular scaffolding should be formulated. 0.3 In the preparation view the manufacturing this field. of this standard, the Sectional Committee kept in and trade practices followed in the country in

0.4 This code is being published in four parts and is intended to act as a guide for the construction and use of scaffolds and other structures of tubular scaffolding material normally used in construction, maintenance, repair and demolition work, and which enables persons to obtain access LO, and to perform work, or which enables materials to be taken to any place at which such work is performed. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numerical
vslue~ (

revised 1.

IS : 4014 ( Part 1. SCOPE

II ) - 1967

1.1 This code ( Part II ) coverssafety regulations in the design and construction of scaffolding. 2. PROVISION OF SCAFFOLD AND MEANS

that shall be observed

OF

ACCESS

2.1 Suitable and sufficient scaffold shall be provided for all work that cannot safely be done from the ground or from part of the building, or from part of a permanent structure or from a ladder or other available means of support, and sufficient safe means of access shall as far as reasonably practicable, be provided to every place at which any person has at any time to work. 3. SUPERV'ISION OF WORK AND INSPECTION OF MATERIEL

3.1 No scaf?`old shall be erected or be substantially added to or altered or dismantled except under the immcdiatc supervision of a competent person ( that is a qualified and authorised safety engineer ) and as far as experience of such possible by competent workmen possessin g adequate work. All material for any scaffold shall be inspected by a competent person on each occasion before using. 4. MAINTENANCE 4.1 All scaffolds shall kept so fixed, secured practicable, accidental be properly maintained or placed in a position displacement.' and every part shall be as to prevent, as far as is

4.2 No scaffold or part of a scaffold shall be partly dismantled and remain in such a condition that it is capable of being used unless either: the scaffold continues a> these regulations; or to comply and would, if used, comply ,with

b)

if the scaffold or part thereof would, if used, not comply with these regulations, a prominent warning notice indicating that the scaffold or part thereof is not to be used, is affixed ne$r any point at which the scaffold or part, as the case may be, is liable to be approached for the purpose of use. OF SCAFFOLDS of this by regulation a qualified no scaffold and shall be used safety

5. INSPECTION 5.1 Subject unless: a)

to provisions

it has been inspected engineer before using;

authorised

4

IS : 4014 ( Part II ) - 1967 b) it has been inspected by a qualified and authorised within the immediately preceding seven days; safety engineer

c) it -has been inspected by a qualified and authorised safety engineer since exposure to weather conditions likely to have affected its stability or to have displaced any part; and d) a report of the results of any such inspection certifying that the scaffold is suitable for use signed by the person making the inspection has been entered into a register to be kept at the worksite.

5.2 The requirement of 5.1 ( a } and ( b ) shall not apply in the case of a scaffold no part of which has been ~erected for more than seven I days, and 5.1 (d ) shall not apply to a ladder scaffold, a trestle scaffold or a scaffold from no part of which a person is liable to fall more than 2.0 m. 5.3 The requirements of 5.1 shall not require a scaffold to be inspected ~by reason only that it has been added to, altered or partly dismantled. 6. SCAFFOLDS EMPLOYER USED BY WORKMEN OF MORE THAN ONE

6.1 Where a scaffold or part of a scaffold is to be used by or on behalf of any employer other than the employer for whose workmen it was first erected, the first mentioned employer shall, before such use, and without prejudice to any other obligations imposed upon him by these regulations, take express steps, either personally or by a competent agent, to satisfy himself that the scaffold. or part thereof is stable, that the materials used in its construction are sound and that the safeguards required by these regulations are in position. 7. SUPPORT AND STABILITY OF SCAFFOLDS

7.1 The displacement of the foot of any standard or upright shall, unless prevented in some other sufficient way, be prevented either a) by sinking the standard ground; or or upright a sufficient distance into

b) by placing the standard or upright on an adequate base plate on top of timber sole plate in some chases in a manner to prevent slipping or sinking. 7.2 Every scaffold shall be securely supported or suspended and shall where necessary be sufficiently and properly strutted or braced to ensure stability and, unless it is properly designed and constructed as an independent scaffold, shall be rigidly connected with the building. 5

IS : 4014 ( Part II ) - 1967
and appliances used as supports for scaffolds, working platforms, gangways or ramps shall be of sound construction, have a firm footing or be firmly supported, and shall where necessary be sufficiently and properly strutted or braced to ensure stability. 7.4 Any travelling scaffold which may be moved on wheels or skids shall, unless it is a suspended or slung scaffolds, shall be: a) constructed with due regard to stability, stability, adequately weighted at the base; and, if necessary for

7.3 All structures

b) used only on a firm and even surface, not so sloping as to involve risk of instability of the scaffold or any load thereon; c) adequately secured to prevent working upon it; and d) moved only by the application without overturning. movement of a force when any person at or near is

the base

7.5 Loose bricks, drain pipes, chimney pots or other unsuitable material shall not be used for the construction or support of scaffolds save that bricks or small blocks may, if they provide a firm support, be used to support a platform not more than O-5 m above the ground or floor. 7.6 No part of a building shall be used as support for part of a scaffold unless it is of sound material and sufficiently stable and of sufficient strength to afford safe support. Overhanging eaves, gutters shall not be used as such supports unless they have been specially designed as walkways and are of adequate strength. 8. CANTILEVER,

JIB, FIGURE AND BRACKET SCAFFOLDS, ETC
unless it is adequately side of the support, has and is where necessary to ensure rigidity and

8.1 No cantilever or jib scaffold shall be used supported, fixed and anchored on the opposite outriggers of adequate length and cross-section sufficiently and properly strutted or braced stability.

8.2 No working platform resting on bearers let into a wall at one end and without other support shall be used unless the bearers are of adequate strength, pass through the wall and are securely fastened on the other side. 9. TRESTLE SCAFFOLDS 9.1 No trestle scaffold shall be used: a) if,constructed with more than three tiers; or b) if it has working platform more than 4.50 m above the ground or floor or other surface upon which the scaffold is erected. 6

IS : 4014 ( Part II) - 1967 9.2 No trestle scaffold shall be erected on a scaffold platform unless:

a) the width of the platform is such as to leave sufficient clear space for the transport of materials; and b) the trestles or uprights are firmly attached adequately braced to prevent displacement. to the platform and

9.3 No trestle scaffold shall be erected on a suspended scaffold. 9.4 No figure or bracket scaffold supported or held by dogs, spikes or similar fixings liable to pull out of the stonework or brickwork in which they are gripped or fixed shall be used. 10. WORKING PLATFORMS ( INCLUDING WORKING STAGES ) more

-10.1 Every working platform than 2-O m shall be: a) closely boarded,

from which a person is liable to fall or plated;

planked,

b) at least 700 mm wide if the platform is used as a footing and not for the deposit of any material; c) at least 900 mm wide if the platform material; d) at least 1 100 mm wide if the platform of any higher platform; e) at least 1300 mm~wide if the platform dressed or roughly shaped; and

only of

is used for the deposit

is used for the support is one upon which stone is

f) at least 15QO mm wide if the platform is used for the support of any higher platform and is one upon which stone is dressed or roughly shaped. lo-2 Requirement of 10.1 ( a ) shall not apply to a platform consisting of open metalzork having interstices none of which exceeds 40 cm2 in area, if there is no risk of persons below such platform being struck by tools or other object falling through the platform. 10.3 Requirement of 10.1 (a) shall not apply to a platform which is~part of the permanent fixed equipment of a building and the boards, planks or plates of which are so secured as to prevent their moving and so placed that the space between adjacent boards, planks or plates does not exceed 25 mm, if there is no risk of persons below such platform being struck by tools or other objects falling through the platform. 10.4 Requirements of 10.1 ( b ) to ( f ) shall not apply to a working platEonfr which 1s at least 500 mm wide, and is on the outside of any sloping 7

IS : 4014 (Part

II ) - 1967

10.5 Requirements of 10.1 (b ) and (c) shall not apply in the case of the platform of a suspended scaffold, or in the case of a platfoi-m not less than 500 mm wide being the platform of a ladder scaffold or of a trestle scaffold or being a platform under a roof which is supported k,y or suspended from roof members or the roof and which is used only by painters for the purpose of painting work in the vicinity of the roof, where in any such case the work is of such a light nature and the material required for the work is such that a~platform less than 700 or 900 mm wide, as the case may be, can be used with safety, and the platform is not used for the support of any higher platform.
10.6 Requirements of 10.1 ( b ) and ( c ) shall not apply in the case temporary platform not less than 500 mm wide passing between adjacent glazing bars of a sloping roof if the space between those does not admit of the platform being at least 700 mm wide and if platform is used only for work in the vicinity of those bars. of a two bars the

11. BOARDS AND PLANKS WAYS AND RAMPS 11.1 Every
board a) shall board be: or plank

IN WORKING
part

PLATFORMS,
or used

GANGas a toe

forming

of a platform

b) not less than 200 ~rnm wide or in the case exceeding 50 mm in thickness, not less than

of a thickness (minimum 32 mm ) which is such as to afford adequate security having regard to the distance between the transoms, putlogs, board bearers or standards; and -. of boards or planks 150 mm wide.

'

11.2 The distance between two consecutive transoms, putlogs, board bearerers or other supports on which a platform rests shall be fixed with due regard to the a.nticipated load and the nature of platform flooring. As a general rule the distance with single planking shall not exceed 1000 mm with planks 32 mm in thickness, 1500 mm with planks 38 mm in thickness, or 2600 mm with planks 50 mm in thickness. 11.3 NO board or plank which forms part of a working platform, gangway or ramp shall project beyond its end support to a distance exceeding four times the thickness of the board or plank unless it is effectively secured to prevent tipping, or to a distance which, having regard to the thickness and strength of the plank renders the projecting part of the plank an unsafe support for any weight liable to be upon it. 11.4 At the joints, boards generally should be butted, but lapping is permissible if bevelled pieces of wood are fitted, or other suitable measures taken to minimise the risk -of tripping. 11.4.1 Suitable measures such as the provision of adequate bevelled pieces shall be taken to reduce to a minimum the risk of tripping and to 8

IS : 4014 ( Part II ) - 1961
facilitate the movement of barrows where boards or planks which form part of a working platform, gangway or run overlap each other or are not of reasonably uniform thickness where they meet each other or owing to warping or for some other reason do not provide an even surface. 11.5 Every board or plank which forms part of a working on its supports, and platform shall:

a) rest securely

and evenly

b) rest on at least three supports unless, taking into account the distance between the supports and the thickness of the board or plank, the conditions are such as to prevent undue sagging. 11.6 Where work has to be done form at such wall shall, wherever beyond the end of the wall. 12. at the end of a wall the working platpracticable, extend at least 600 mm

GUARD-RAILS

AND TOE-BOARD

AT WORKING

PLACES

side of a working platform or working place, being a side thereof from which a person is liable to f?,ll, a distance of more than 2 m shall be provided one or more suitable guard-rail on guard-rails of adequate strength, to a height of at least 900 mm (but maximum 1200 mm) above the platform or place and above any raised standing place on the platform, and with toe-boards up to a sufficient height being in no case less than 150 mm and so placed as to prevent so far as possible the fall of persons, materials and tools from such platform or place. 12.2 The guard-rails and toe-boards used on a working platform or working place shall be placed on the inside of the uprights, and the space between any toe-board and the lowest guard-rail above it shall not exceed 750 mm. 12.3 Guard-rails and toe-boards required by 12.1 and 12.2 may be removed or remain unerected for the time being and to the extent necessary for the access of persons or the movement of materials. 12.4 The provided roof. requirements with suitable of 12.1 and 12.2, shall not apply to a platform guard-rails which is on the outside of a sloping

12.1 Every

12.5 The requirements of 12.1 and 12.2 shall not apply to a temporary platform which is used only by erectors of structural steelwork for the purposes of bolting up, riveting or welding work of such short duration as to make the provision of a platform with guard-rails and toe-boards unreasonable if: a) the platform b) there is at least 900 mm wide, and is adequate handhold,

9

IS : 4014 ( Part, II ) - 1967 c) the
platform is not used for the deposit of tools or materials otherwise than in boxes or receptacles suitable to prevent the fall of the tools or materials from the platform.

12.6 The requirements of 12.1 and 12.2 shall not apply to. a temporary platform passing between two adjacent glazing bars of a sloping roof if those bars or the roof framework afford secure handhold for the and the requirements of toe-boards as full length of the platform, specified in clauses under 12 shall not apply as respects such platform where and is so far as the provision of a toe-board is impracticable on account of the nature or circumstances of the work. 12.7 The requirements of 12.1 and 12.2 shall not apply to a platform under a roof which is supported by or suspended from roof members or the roof and which is used only by painters for the purpose of painting work in the immediate vicinity of the roof, being work of such short duration as to make the provision of a platform with guard-rails and toe-boards unreasonable, if: a) there is adequate handhold at every working position, the and can b) the material required be used with safety. 13. WORKING ANCE OF for the work is s'uch that platform

PLATFORM AT PASSAGE WAYS

BUILDING

FACE

AND

CLEAR-

13.1 Where work at t.he face of a building is done from a working platform the space between the face of the building and the working platform shall be as small as practicable so that where workmen sit at the edge of the platform to work the space shall not exceed 300 mm.
13.2 A clear passage w:iy of' at least 500 mm wide shall be left between one side of any w!~rki~l;; platform and any fixed obstruction or deposited material.

14. CONSTRUCTION 14.1 Every
to fall, gangwav a distance

AND USE OF GANGWAYS
or ramp from any part than 2 m shall: planked or plated; of which and

AND RAMPS
a person is liable

ofmore

a) be closely b) be at least 14.2 The

boarded,

500 mm wide. of 14.1 ( a ) shall not apply:

requirement

a) to a gangway or ramp consisting of open metalwork having interstices none of which exceeds 40 cm2 in area, if there is no risk of persons below such gangway or ramp being struck by tools or other objects fallin g through the gangway or ramp; or 10

IS : 4014 ( Part II ) - 196? b) to a gangway or ramp which is part of the permanent fixed equipment of a building and the boards, plates or planks of which are so secured as to prevent their moving and so placed that the space between adjacent boards, planks or plates does not exceed 25 mm, if there is no risk of persons below such gangway or ramp being struck by tools or other objects falling through the gangway or ramp. 14.3 No gangway, ramp or working platform shall be used for the passage of materials unless it affords a clear passage way which is adequate in
width for the passage of the materials without removal of the guardrails and toe-boards and in any case is not less than 700 mm wide. 14.4 All planks forming a gangway or ramp shall supported as to prevent undue or unequal sagging. 14.5 No gangway or ramp 1 vertical to 1.5 horizontal. sha!l be used, the slope be so fixed of which and

exceeds

14.6 Where the slope of gangway or ramp renders additional footholes necessary and in every case where the slope is more than 1 vertical to 4 horizontal, there shall be provided proper stepping laths which shall: a) be placed at suitable intervals, maximum 500 mm apart; and

~b) be the full width of the gangway or ramps, except that they may be interrupted over a width of not more than 100 mm to facilitate the movement of barrows, 14.7 Ramps landing. may have a continuous length maximum 7 m without

15. GUARD-RAILS,

GANGWAYS,

TOE-BOARDS, HAND-RAILS, RAMPS AND STAIRS

ETC, FOR

15.1 Stairs shall be provided throughout their length with hand-rails or other efficient means to prevent the fall of persons except for the time and to the extent necessary for the access of persons or the movement of materials. If necessary to prevent danger to any person the band-rails shall be extended minimum 1-O m beyond the ends of the stairs. 15.2 All gangways, ramps and stairs from which a person is liable to fall a distance of more than 2 m shall be provided with: a) suitable guard-rails of adequate strength to a height of at least 900 mm (but maximum 1200 mm ) above the gangway, ramp or stair; and b) except in the case of stairs, toe-boards up to a sufficient height being in no case less than 200 mm and so placed as to prevent as far as possible the fall of persons, materials and tools. The 11

IS ; 4014 ( Part II ) - 1967 space above between any such toe-board it shall not exceed 700 mm. and the lowest guard-rail

15.3 The requirements of 15.2 shall not apply to a temporary gangway which is used only by erectors of structural steelwork for the purposes of bolting up, riveting or welding work of such short duration as ttr make and toe-boards unthe provision of a gangway with guard-rails reasonable. 16. PLATFORMS, GANGWAYS, ETC, TO AND TO AFFORD SAFE FOOTHOLD 16.1 Every unnecessary nails. BE UNOBSTRUCTED

platform, gangway, ramp or stair shall be kept free from any obstruction, material or rubbish and from any prqjecting

16.2 If a platform, gangway, ramp or stair becomes slippery, appropriate steps shall as soon as reasonably practicable be taken by way of sending, cleaning or otherwise to remedy the defect. 17. SCAFFOLDS NOT TO BE OVERLOADED shall not time. be kept

17.1 Scaffolds shall not be overloaded and materials upon them unless needed for work within a rcasonablc 18. AVOIDANCE OF SHOCK ON SCAFFOLDS

18.1 When any material is transferred moved or deposited without imposing 19 PROJECTING NAILS AND

on or to a sca!&,ld any violent shock. MATERL4LS

it shall

be

LOOSE

19.1 No timber or material with projecting nails shall be used in any work in which they are a source of danger to persons employed or be allowed to remain in any place where they are a source of danger to such persons. 19.2 Loose materials where not required for use shall not be placed or left so as to impede the passage of persons upon platforms, gangways, floors, or other places on the site used for such passage, but shall be removed, stacked or stored so as to leave such places free from obstruction. Materials shall not be insecurely stacked in a place where they may be dangerous to persons employed, or so stacked as to overload and render unsafe any floor, roof or other part of a building. 20. LIGHTING OF WORKING PLACES

20.1 Every working place ing or lowering operations

and approach thereto, every place where raiswith the use of a lifting appliance are in 12

IS : 4014 ( Part progress, adequately and all openings dangerous and suitably lighted. WIRING to persons employed,

II-) - 1967 shall be

21. ELECTRICAL

21.1 The setting up of a scaffold near unprotected current carrying wires or equipment, or insulated wires and equipment shall be started only when the~lines have been disconnected, The wiring shall be disconnected by skilled persons or protected against accidental contact. After the erection of scaffold the wires may be made to carry the current only when sufficient safety measures have been adopted to avoid accidental contact. 22. SCAFFOLDS AND TRAFFIC signs, ensure

22.1 During the setting up and dismantling of scaffolds, warning safety cardons and other safety measures shall be provided to safety for the traffic.

22.2 Scaffolds shall be protected against accidental collisions with the traffic. A clear height of 2.5 m shall be maintained over pedestrain traffic areas. Up to a height of 4.5 m, all parts of the scaffolds shall remain at least 0.8 m behind the front edge of the curb. 22.3 Scaffolds built over street pavement shall preferably have a through passage for the pedestrians the clear height of the passage being minimum 2.5 m. The roof of the passage should be closely boasded or suitably covered with roofing-sheets, tarpaulin or other materials as protection from falling materials. 22.4 Scaffolds on throughfares light is not sufficient to make shall be provided it clearly visible. with light if the street

22.5 Access to fire alarms, cable tunnels, hydrants, etc, shall remain free Care should be taken for underground cables and equipat all times. This is specially important when parts of scaffolds or other ment also. fasteners have to be driven in the ground. 22.6 Trees damaged. and street poles shall be cordoned, so that they are not

23. PROTECTION FROM TION OF WORKERS

FALLING MATERIALS AND FROM FALLING DOWN

PROTEC-

23.1 Any place on the site of the operations at which any person i's habitually employed shall be covered in such manner as to protect any person who is working in that place from being struck by falling materials or article. 13

IS : 4014 ( Part II ) - 1967 23.2 Scaffold materials, tools and other objects and materials (including waste materials) shall not be thrown, tipped or shot down from a height where they are liable to cause injury, but shall be properly lowered; in any place where proper lowering is not practicable and also where any part of a structure is being demolished or bracken off adequate shall be taken, where necessary, to protect persons employed from falling or flying debris. 23.3 When the work is done above an open space at a height of more than 5-O m, catching scaffold shall be set up to protect these working on floors or roofs against falling down, and also to stop building materials and tools from falling. Depending on the conditions these may be set up as independent scaffolds, cantilever scaffold, suspended scaffold or mobile scaffold. Further, these may be built up by laying scaffolds boards on beams or rafters of the structure under construction or by attaching the boards to room trusses, crane rails or similar structural members. 23.3.1 When building with precast concrete parts of setting up wooden or steel structures which are already tied up for assembly and it is not possible to fix a catching scaffold or a catching net, it is necessary that only such workers are employed who have experiece in this kind of work. 23.3.2 The width of the catching scaffold shall depend on the height from the scaffold covering to the place of work and generally be as follows: Height up to Minimum width 2-O m 1.0 m 3-O m l-3 m 4-O m 1% m

23.4 For the purpose of only preventing workers falling down, instead of catching scaffold a catching net or strong fabric or individual person safety belt may he used if it can be fixed and secured perfectly. The traffic below the catching nets! etc, shall be stopped as safety measure against building materials falling through. 23.5 When working on pavement, street or driveway, to avoid disturbance of traffic unnecessarily by dust or mortar, scaffolds should be covered at the sides by protection coverings, for example, timber plank, tarpaulin, cloth or roofing sheets. For working on gables which are not directly above traffic and on the courtyard side, it is sufficient to block the ways.

14

BUREAU
Headquarters

OF :

INDIAlp

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafsr Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams Telephones : 331 01 31

: Manaksafiaths

Regionel
Central
l

331 13 75 Offices :

(Common to all Offiid' Telephone K: 9: 37 86

: Martak Bhavan, 9. Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg.
NEW DELHI 110002

Eastern

: 1114 C.I.T. Scheme VII M,

82

t

V.I.P. Road,.Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern * SC0 445446. Sector 35-C, CHANDtGARH 160035 Southern I C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya. ES MIDC. Marol. Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093 Brmch Offices :.

21843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 3BOOOl t Peerlya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkuri Road. BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. bagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83, Lewis ,Rcvad, BHUBANESHWAR 75102 Kalai Kathir Building; 6/4B-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Quality Marking Centre! N.H. IV, N.I.T., FARlDeBAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 53/5 Ward NO. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th `By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 i S-B-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, ( Nampally Station Road ) HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 fl7/418 B SaNodaya Nagar. KANPUR 208005 Plot No. A-S, House No. 561163, LUCKNOW 226005 Patliputra `industrial Estate, PATNA District ln'dustries Cantre Complex, SRINABAR- 190011 Sindhu Nagar, Kanpur RoaQ. 800013 Bagh-e-Ali Meidan.

28348 39 49 56 55 40 21 5 36 27 2 67 05 B-71 19 96 3 31 77 231083 63471 21 66 76 55507 62305

T. C. No. 14/1421, University P. 0.. Palayam, THIRWVANANTHAPURAM 695034 fnspection Offices (With Sale Point)

621

04

:
52 51 71 5 24 35

,Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411005

-

`Sales Off ice Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA t Sales Office is at NoveltyChambers. is at Unitv Building, %A~~;L~;E~

Approach. Grant Road, BOMBAY

276806 89 65 26 22 39 71

Narasimharaja

ssuare.

Reprography Unit, BIS. New Delhi, India

