( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9080 ( Part II/Set

2 ) - 1980

lndian Standard
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS
PART II PARTICULAR ,REQUIREMENTS RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 2 Protection in Indirect Heating Installations Equipment ETDC 61 FOR

Section

Resistance

Industrial
Chairman SHRIS.K.

Electra-heating

Sectional

Committee,

Reprcsmting The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur

MAZUMDER Members

SHRI A. K. BISWAS ( Alternate to Shri S. K. Mazumder ) Steel Furnace Association of India, New Delhi San1 S. N. A~A~WAL M. N. Dastur & Company ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. K. BRATTACHARJI SHRI T. K. GHOSH ( Altcrnnk ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara Sam R. M. CHANDWANI SHRI P. S. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Engineering Projects ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi SHRI KATJSHALGOEL SERI M. M. PRASAD ( Alternate ) Graphite India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. K. JAIN SHRIJ. K. A~ARWAL ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI G. L. KESWANI New Delhi SRRI D. D. RAJDEN ( Alternate ) Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants ( India ) SHRI 0. N. KRISHNAN Ltd. Ranchi Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI J. C. MADAN SHRI A. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) SHRI H. T. MAKHIJANI Westerwork Projects Ltd. Bombay SHRI L. C. CHANDI ( Alternate) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MUKRERJEE SHHI SUJIT DAS ( Alternate ) Bharat Machine Building Plant, Heavy Engineering SHRI P. g. MUKHOPADHYA Corporation, Ranchi ( Continued on pap 2 )

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1981 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act

IS:9080( PartII/Sec 2 )-1980
( Confinucdfr0m page Members SERI M. K. NAIR

1)
Representing

Ordnance Factories Directorate General of ( Ministry of Defence ), Calcutta SHRI P. A. PATEL Indian Furnace Company Ltd, Bombay SRRI M. PURANDHAR ( Alicrnatc ) Da RAVINDRA -REDDY Rharat Heavy Elcctricals Ltd, Sccundrabad Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, SHRIM. SHANIKLZALINQAM New Delhi SHRI R. V. NARAYANAN ( Alcernats ) The General Electric Co of India Ltd, Calcutta SRRI Y. P. VATSA SHRI S. M. BANERJEE ( Altarnate ) Director General, IS1 ( E.Y-oficio Member ) SHRIS.P. SAORDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) Secrctacv KM G. M. JOSEPI~ Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), ISI

2

IS : 9080 ( Part

II/Set

2 ) - 1980

Indian Standard
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS
PART Ii PARTlCULAR REQUIREMENTS RESISTANCE H~EATING EQUIPMENT Section 2 Protection in Indirect Heating Installations FOR

Resistance

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II/Set 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 13 December 1980, after the draft finalized by Sectional Committee had been the Industrial Electra-heating Equipment approved by the Electrotechrhical Division Council. 0.2 This standard forms Section 2 of Part II covering the requirements for ~protection in indirect resistance heating installations. The other parts of the series are as follows: Part Part I General 1 requirements Protection in direct in resistance and heating sodium installations nitrate and potassium II/Set

Part II/Set 3 Protection nitrite bath furnaces

Part II/&c 4 Protection in installations and other similar products Part III Particular induction furnace requirements installations

used for drying and medium

varnishes frequency

for mains

this standard considerable assistance has been derived 0.3 In preparing from IEC Publication 519-2 ( 1975 ) ` Safety in electro-heat installations: Part II Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment ' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, with expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 9080 ( Part II/Set 1. SCOPE

2 ) - 1980

apply to equipment for 1.1 These particular requirements resistance heating of a charge, such equipment being energized or with single-phase or polyphase ac of low frequency. In such equipment, heat is generated by current flow in:

indirect with dc

a) solid metallic heating conductors ( iron, nickel, chromium, tungsten, or alummium, copper, platinum, molybdenum, alloy of these different metals ); b) solid non-metallic heating conductors ( silicon carbide, carbon or graphite . . . in the form of rods, tubes or in granulated form ). 1.2 From the different types following may be mentioned. of electric furnaces generally used, the

a) Batch-type furnaces ( for example, box-type furnaces, bell type furnaces, bogie-hearth furnaces );

pot furnaces,

b) Furnaces for heating in transit ( continuous furnaces ) or passage furnaces ( for example roller-hearth furnaces, pusher furnaces, walking-beam furnaces, rotary kilns, rotary-hearth furnaces, tunnel kilns ); and c) Melting and holding furnaces furnaces, rotary furnaces ). 1.3 Other include: industrial type equipment liquids moulds, ( for example with crucible furnaces, pot

resistance

heating

system

a) equipment b) equipment c) equipment and d) equipment types. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the

for heating for heating heated heated

and gases; rollers of rolling-mills, for industrial elements of tools, etc; emitters heating purposes; various

by infra-red by individual

purpose

of

this

standard, Furnaces movement

the following

definitions

shall

apply. 2.1 Batch-Type Furnaces stationary and undergoes no holding and cooling. in which a solid charge is during heating, temperature

( Passage Furnaces ) 2.2 Furnaces for I-hating in Transit Furnaces in which a solid charge is displaced continuously or intermittently during heating, temperature holding and cooling. 4

IS: 9080 ( Part II/Set 2.3 Melting Furnaces Furnaces introduced Furnaces used for melting

2 ) - 1980

solid charges. in the liquid is heated by its

2.4 Holding state charges 2.5 Bath immersion

- Furnaces in the liquid

used for maintaining state.

Furnaces - Furnaces in which the charge in a liquid medium at working temperature.

2.6 Heating Elements ( for Example Heating-Element Assemblies ) - Resistors are the components of the equipment which transform electric energy into heat. When resistors are designed to he integral with their refractory support, the assembly is called the ` heating elrmrnt `. 2.7 Removable Elements ( for Example, Removable Heatinga resistor is said to be `easily Element Assemblies ) - Conventionally, removable' when it can be removed or replaced by the user independently of any other component of the furnace ( thermal insulation or refractory ). When the replacement can be carried out without interrupting the operating process, the resistor is said to be ` removable in service `.
NOTE The same definitions shall apply to heating elements.

3. CONSTRUCTION

AND

LNSTALLATION

DETAILS

3.1 Voltage Values - Attention is drawn to high values of the leakage measures should be taken current which may appear, in consequence, for protection against indirect contact [ see IS : 9080 ( Part I )-1980* 1. 3.1.1 In these conditions, rated phase and earth and 420 V between ment is earthed. voltages reaching 420 V between phases can be applied if the equip-

3.1.2 Rated voltages over 400 V but not exceeding 500 V can be applied if special measures are taken to exclude any hazards which ~may arise during operation due to an involuntary contact with a live element. 3.1.3 In some exceptional cases, for example for heating air or gas, rated voltages exceeding 500 V can be used provided that minimum air clearances as specified in relevant Indian Standards for the construction of apparatus operating at voltages above 1 kV are observed for heating elements and their connections. 3.2 Nameplates and Wiring Diagram 3.2.1 For equipment having its own variable voltage source ( transformer or generator ), it is necessary, when the resistance of heating elements varies considerably with temperature, or due to ageing or wear,
*Safety requircmcnts in electro.heat installations: Part I General requirements.

5

IS : 9080 ( Part II/Set that the nameplate following values: a) Rated b) c)

2 ) -

1980
the power of the equipment shall give the

indicating

current; the voltage source, instead of the respective

Installed power of furnace data; and Working temperature.

If the power absorbed by the equipment in the cold state exceeds by more than 30 percent that absorbed at rated power, it shall also be mentioned on the nameplate. This does not apply to equipment heated at reduced power. or, the

3.2.2 Spare heating elements shall, preferably, be marked indelibly, if this is impossible, they shall be provided with labels specifying type, the rated voltage and the rated power. 3.2.3 The wiring diagram facturer to the user. may be supplied separately

by the manu-

3.3 Protection Against Accidental Contacts - Furnaces or equipment provided with unprotected conductors at voltages above Band 1, which, after the opening of the door or of any other closing device ( such as a lid ) may be touched accidentally either by hand or with tools, shall be equipped with a door contact which, by means of a relay, switches off the heating conductors when the door is open. For equipment which is required to remain in operation during short though frequent periods and during which the door may be open ( for instance in enamelling furnaces, forge furnaces, hearth furnaces for melting light metals, etc ), particular care should be given to the earthing of charging devices which are introduced inside the furnace and to the protection of operators ( suitable shoes, gloves and a dry working site ). Furthermore, personnel should be warned by display of ` Danger ' warning notices. If for other furnaces also, such as furnaces for heating in transit or it is impossible, because of their method of op~eration, passage furnaces, to provide door circuit-breaker as a measure of protection against possible contact with a bare heating conductor, clearly visible warning notices shall be placed near service openings or other provisions made to indicate that the heating conductors are live. 6

IS I 9080 ( Part II/Set 2 ) - 1980
This applies to furnaces in which the earthing of components, removable from the furnace, is disconnected before the voltage is switched off by contacts. This may also be the case in pot furnaces where the removable tank at the same time constitutes the closing of the furnace where no other special lid has been provided. 3.4

Overheating

-

Where

because

of:

4 b)
c)

insufficient accidential

care; switching-on; or of the temperature or without limiting

fault of the control equipment device ( see Note 1 ); and operation without limiting device: control

4

equipment

the temperature

the ( internal or external ) temperature either of the furnace or of the electro-heat installation could attain a value likely to cause danger in the vicinity of these installations, measures should be taken to operate: i) an alarm ii) device for supervised furnaces, and for other furnaces.

an automatic

cut-out

with an alarm

device

NOTE 1 - The hazard due to a fault in the temperature control system or limiting device can be reduced either by equipping the temperature controller with an over-temperature contact or by using a thermo-electric controller provided with a thermal protection against breaking. Another solution consists of providing a second independent temperature limiter ( for example a second controller, a cut-out, etc ). NOTE 2 - Temperature control and limiting systems can be omitted only if the operating personnel have made the necessary arrangements or if the heating Dower has been determined as a function of furnace losses so that a danxerous iemperature cannot be attained.

3.5 Auxiliaries
as transport and tional hazard. 4. OPERATION

-

Measures shall be taken to prevent charging devices, from constituting

auxiliaries, such a source of addi-

heating elements supplied at voltages exceeding Band 1 shall be located in a manner that renders their contact with the heated charge impossible durin-g operation. When media representing a sufficiently high electric resistance are heated, the latter can be in 7

4.1 Unprotected

IS : 9980 ( Part II/See 2 ) - 1980 contact with heating cal damage. elements provided, however, to avoid they cause no mechanihazards due to leakage

4.2 Suitable measures should be taken current flowing through the media.

4.3 If, during operation, the charge emits vapours or if precipitations or sediments, etc, occur, account shall be taken of chemical and thermal effects which could affect the heating elements.

8

