**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13081 (1991) : Earth moving machinery - Symbols - 
Guidelines for development and evaluation [MED 7 : Material 
Handling Systems and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 13081 : 1991 

(Reaffirmed 2001) 



/iPa^/Vjin Standard 

E^RTH MOVING MAjCHINERY — SYMBOLS 
GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPMENT AND 

EVALUATION 



UDC 62r878/'879 ( 026 ) : 00362 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANE^ARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHAPUR SHAH ZAFAR NtARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 199) Price Group i 



Bulk Handling Equipment Sectional Committee, HMD 07 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Bulk Handling Equipment Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

Symbols and graphical representations are used to convey instructions and messages at a glance and 
considered to be quick methods of communication. Any ambiguity or misinterpretation of a 
symbol may lead to problem. Therefore symbols should be devised with utmost care to convey 
what exactly is to be conveyed. 

The symbols may have to be devised for use at national level or company level or for specific 
area/field of use. 

This Indian Standard attempts to provide guidelines for devising the symbols and method of their 
evaluation. However, the symbols should be so devised that these shall not refer to symbols used 
for purposes such as registered trade marks, suppHer's identification symbols and equipment 
identification symbols. 

In the preparation of this Indian Standard considerable assistance has been taken from document 
ISO/TC 127 N 251 'Guidelines for development and evaluation of symbols', circulated by the 
International Organization for Standardization. 



IS 13081 : 1991 



Indian Standard 

EARTH MOVING MACHINERY — SYMBOLS — 
GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPMENT AND 

EVALUATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This Indian Standard lays down guidelines for 
development and evaluation of symbols for earth moving 
machinery. 

2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 Symbols shall be graphically as simple, clear, 
distinct and logical as possible to enhance recognition 
and reproduction. 

2.2 Symbols shall incorporate basic symbol elements 
into a logical symbolic language which, if not imme- 
diately obvious, is at least readily learned. 

2.3 Graphical clarity shall prevail in disputes with 
logical consistency, because no composite symbol is 
recognizable, no matter how logical it may be, if it can 
not be distinguished from other composite symbols or 
if the individual symbol elements cannot be distin- 
guished from each other. 

2.4 A minimum detail shall be included in individual 
symbol' elements and composite symbols; only details 
which enhance recognition shall be allowed, even if 
other details are accurate recognition of the machine or 
equipment. 

3 SYMBOL ELEMENTS 

3.1 Symbol elements may be divided into a number of 
fundamental types including one or more of those 
described below. 

3.2 Symbol elements representing operational sys- 
tems (for example, engines, transmissions, hydraulics, 
brakes) or functional equipment (for example, dozor 
blades, loader buckers, grapples). 

33 Symbol elements representing vital machine fluids 
(for example, oil, fuel, coolant, air). 

3.4 Symbols elements representing the status of vi- 
tal fluids (for example, pressure, temperature, level) or 
the functional condition of operational systems (for 
example, lock/unlock, failure or malfunction). 

3.5 Symbol elements representing spatial movement 
or distinct location (for example, direction of move- 
ment arrows). 



3.6 Symbol 
movement. 

3.7 Symbol 
operation. 



elements representing rotational 



elements representing continuous 



4 REPRESENTATION OF SYMBOLS 

4.1 Symbol elements representing vital machine fluids 
shall be combined with symbol elements representing 
operational systems to create basic composite sym- 
bols. For example, the oil symbol element shall be 
placed within the engine symbol element to represent 
engine oil, within the transmission symbol element to 
represent transmission oil, within the hydraulic ele- 
ment symbol to represent hydraulic oil, and within the 
brake symbol element to represent brake oil. 

4.2 Composite Symbols 

4.2.1 Composite symbols representing the status of 
vital fluids or the functioning of operational systems 
shall be formed by combining symbol elements in 
logical relationship. Examples are given below. 

4.2.1.1 In general monitoring or status-indicating 
symbol elements (for example, temperature, pressure, 
level) shall be placed outside the basic composite 
symbols (for example, engine, engine oil, transmission 
oil, hydraulic oil). 

4.2.1.2 Composite symbols for monitoring tempera- 
ture shall combine a thermometer (the temperature 
symbol element)with the basic composite symbols, 
with the thermometer placed to the right-hand side of 
the basic composite symbol. 

4.2.1.3 Composite symbols representing failure or 
malfunction of an operational system shall place the 
malfunction symbol element within the symbol ele- 
ment for the operational system. For example, the 
brake failure symbol shall place an exclamation point 
(the malfunction symbol element) inside the brake 
symbol element. 

4.2.2 Composite symbols which represent controlled 
spatial movement of equipment or machine elements, 
whether visible or invisible to the operator, shall 
show both the final position of the equipment or 
machine element effected by actuation of the control 
and arrows indicating the direction of movement expe- 
rienced by that equipment or machine element. For 
example symbols for raising a boom shall show the 
boom on its raised position and an arrow pointing up, 
while symbols for lowering a boom shall show the 
boom in its lowered position and an arrow pointing 
down. The arrows shall be located such that the two 
alternative motions of the boom are clearly differenti- 
ated by both the location of the boom and the location 
of the arrows. 

4.2.3 Composite symbols which represent direction 
of rotational movement shall combine a symbol ele- 
ment for an equipment or machine element with 



IS 13081 : 1991 

symbol element differentiating clockwise or counter 
clockwise rotation. 

4.2.4 Composite symbols which represent continu- 
ous operation of a system or machine element shall 
combine the symbol element for a system or machine 
element with symbol elements indicating whether the 
system or machine element is operating. 

5 EVALUATION OF SYMBOLS 

5.1 Each symbol shall be examined and shall 



conform to the general requirements and guidelines 
laid in 2 to 4. 

5.2 Each symbol shall be examined in relation to other 
symbols and it shall be distinct from all other symbols. 

5.3 The symbol shall convey interpretation of its 
intended use without ambiguity and possibility of 
misinterpretation. 

5.4 The symbol shall be such as to be reproducible 
easily. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Boreau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquires relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, arc 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference : 

Doc : No. HMD 07 ( 5059- ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



f331 01 31 
|331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola " 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



