(Reaffirmed 2002)

IS : 9077 - 1979

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CORROSION PROTECTION OF STEEL REINFORCEMENT IN RB AND RCC CONSTRUCTION
Corrosion
ChllirmlW SHRI C. P. DE Members DR S. N. PANDEY ( Alternate to Shri C. P. De ) SHRI A. K. BHATTACHARYYA SHRI P. K. PAIN ( Alternatc ) SHRI S. BHATTAC~ARYYA

Protection

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

SMDC

29

Naval Chemical Bombay

&

Metallurgical Laboratory,

National Test House, Calcutta The Alkali & Chemical Calcutta Corporation of

` India ' Ltd,

SHRIV. R. KRISHNAN( Alternate ) Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI D. D. BHUPTANI Tube Products of India, Avadi SHRI B. N. DAS SHRI H. R. THILKAN ( Alternate ) The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Sindri SHRI A. D. GUPTA SHRI A. N. SINDHI( Alternate ) Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun SHRI V. K. JAIN SHRI K. S. BHATIA ( Alternate) Ministry of Railways JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( CARRIAGE I ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR( CHEMICALS ) ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. K. KHANNA SHRI SHASHI KANT ( Alternate ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi DR A. K. LAHIRI Heavy Electricals ( India) Ltd,Bhopal SHRI R. C. MISHRA SHRI A. K. BASU ( Alternate ) National Metallurgical Lab, Jamshedpur SHRI K. P. MUKIIERJEE DR INDER SIN~H ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India (Bokaro Steel Ltd ), Bokaro SHRI R. N. MUKHERJEE Steel City SWRI K. ANNAIAH ( Alternate ) Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SHRI R. P. NACAR Indian Lead/Zinc Information Centre, New Delhi SHRI L. PU~AZHENTHY ( Continued on page 2 ) @I

Copyright 1979

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copvright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or iu part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Aec.

IS : 9077 - 1979
( Cmtinudfrom DRK.S.

pagt I )
Representing Central Electra-chemical Karaikudi Research Institute,

Members
RAJAOOPALAN

Dn N. S~BRAMANYAN( Altemnte) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI S. RAMAJAYAM SHRI M. S. NANJVNDA RAO ( Alternute ) Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI G . R AMA~~URTXY Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) DR N. P. RAO SHRI j. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Fibreglass Pilkington, Bombay SHRI G. H. RODRICKS SHRI S. G. PITRE ( Alternate ) Addisons Paints & Chemicals Ltd, Madras SHRKM.B. SATYANARAYANA Hindustan Steel Ltd, Rourkela SHRI B.N. SEN SHRI P. C. PRADA ( Alternate ) Pvrene-Rai Metal Treatments Ltd, Bombay DR R. SIVA KIJMAR SHRI M. BALAKRISHNAN ( Alternate ) ' Directorate General, Ordnance Factories, Calcutta SmuY.C. SIJFIRAM~~YA &RID. SEN ( Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( &o&o Member ) SHRI C. R. RAMA RAO, Director ( Strut & Met ) SIrrctary SHRXB. MUKHERJI Deputy Director ( Metals), ISI

Panel

for Corrosion Protection of Steel Reinforcement RB and RCC Construction, SMDC 29/P-2
National Buildings Organization,

in

CO?lUCtl.3 SHRI K. K. KHANNA Members
SHRI S. CHANDRASEKARAN

New Delhi

SWRI S. K. CHAWLA SHRt R. K. DAmA DR R. B. HAJJ~LA ( Ahmate REPRESENTATIVE

Central Electra-Chemical Research Institute, Karaikudi Central Public Works Department. New Delhi Central Buildings Researdh Instituie, Roorkee ) Public Works Department, Government Chandigarh of Haryana,

2

IS : 9077 - 1979

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CORROSION PROTECTION OF STEEL REINFORCEMENT IN RB AND RCC CONSTRUCTION
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 January 1979, after the draft finalized by the Corrosion Protection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 The National Buildings Organization of Government of India had entrusted a research scheme on Corrosion of Reinforcement in Reinforced Brick (RB ) and Reinforced Cement Concrete ( RCC ) to the Central Electra-Chemical Research Institute, Karaikudi in order to investigate the causes leading to corrosion and to evolve suitable preventive measures. The Institute conducted the research work during the years 1960 to 1967 and also carried out a survey of deteriorated reinforced brick and reinforced concrete structures at different places in the country. 0.2.1 This code has emerged as a result of the investigations carried out and the recommendations made by CECRI for Corrosion Prevention of Steel Reinforcement in their report. 0.3 This code has been prepared to provide a better understanding of the mechanism of reinforcement corrosion for the benefit of practising and builders engaged in the planning and execution engineers, architects of work involving reinforced brick and reinforced cement concrete construction. Adoption of preventive measures recommended in the code would enable substantial economies to be achieved by increasing the durability of the construction. 0.4 Stray current corrosion, which may also contribute to corrosion of~steel reinforcement has not been considered in this code. It was also decided to defer recommending the use of galvanized reinforcement rods, until conclusive data on its use become available. 0.5 This standard should be read in conjunction with IS : 456-1978*.

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). 3

IS : 9077 - 1979
0.6 For rounding off the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the The number result of a test or analysis, IS : 2-1960* should be followed. of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the value given in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard deals with the protection of reinforcement from corrosion in reinforced brick ( RB) and reinforced cement concrete (RCC ) construction. 2. TERMINOLOGY ~2.1 For the purpose shall apply. of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 3531-19697

3. ELECTRO-CHEMICAL CONCRETE

BEHAVIOUR

OF STEEL

IN

3.0 The tendency of steel reinforcement to corrode or not to corrode in an environment like concrete may be expressed in terms of the electrical potential of steel with respect to the environment. 3.1 Effect of Alkalinity of Concrete on Steel - Most cement mortars and concrete are highly alkaline and the potential of steel in alkaline solution is positive, the steel being maintained in a passive condition. 3.1.1 Alkalinities of extracts from 1 : 2 cement,sand mortar and Ml50 ranges between cement concrete are given in Table 1. The alkalinity 0.05 N and 0.06 N and is produced by the liberation of free lime and free alkali during setting of mortar and cement concrete. It is likely to fall with passage of time due to gradual carbonation of free lime, and the alkalinity Therefore, an in concrete, brought about by free alkali, may only remain. alkalinity of 0.04 N is assumed in Ml50 cement concrete, which is normally used in reinforced concrete construction. 3.1.2 Alkalinity of 0.04 N, obtained in Ml50 cement concrete, is sufficient to maintain the passivity of the reinforcement, but the immunity may be lost if the leachate from the concrete contains appreciable amounts of sulphate and chloride. 3.2 Effect of Chloride and Sulphate on Steel - The potential of steel in a solution containing sodium chloride or sodium sulphate is negative and
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). tGlossary of terms relating to corrosion of metals.

4

IS : 9077 - 1979 Introduction of these salts in the the steel corrodes freely in these solutions. alkaline solution breaks down the passivity of steel obtained in alkaline medium, and the positive potential becomes negative. 3.2.1 In case of steel embedded in Ml50 concrete, the positive potential of steel is found to become negative in the presence of a few hundred parts per million of sodium chloride in the water in which concrete is dipped ( see Table 2 ). 3.2.2 The concentration of chlorides and sulphates necessary to make the alkaline medium obtained in reinforced concrete work corrosive are given in Table 2. Alkalinity, which is likely to be had in set Ml50 cement concrete is inhibitive when the maximypl content of chlorides only is 130 ppm and the maximum content of sulphates only is 2750 ppm. In the presence of 500 ppm of sulphates and 100 ppm of chlorides, the concrete with 0.04 N alkalinity remains inhibitive. Beyond these limits, the environment around Ml50 reinforced concrete becomes corrosive. 3.2.3 It is observed that water extracts of fresh cements are corrosive, whereas water extracts of powdered set cement are mostly non-corrosive. This is explained by the fact that the chlorides and sulphatcs present in fresh cement make the extract corrosive and that during setting of cement, chlorides and sulphates react with aluminate present in the cement and only a small fraction of the chloride or sulphate is left free. On an average, the chloride contents decrease to one-fifth and sulphate centents to one-tenth of their original values. 3.2.4 Simultaneous with the fall in alkalinity due to gradual carbonation of free lime in set cement concrete, even the same concentrations of chloride and sulphate render the environment more corrosive. Further, during the course of time as more and more chloride and sulphate diffuse into the concrete, the environment around steel reinforcement becomes A stage may be reached when the passivity more and more corrosive. of steel reinforcement breaks down at points where chloride or sulphate is able to attack the steel and the steel is gradually covered by corrosion product. The depth to which the reinforcement is attacked depends upon the duration for which each point of attack or pit is active, which in turn shall depend on the alternate wetting or drying of the concrete. 4. FACTORS INFLUENCING CORROSION OF REINFORCEMENT

4.1 Reinforcement corrosion in reinforced brick and reinforced cement, concrete construction takes place, when corrosive salts, for example chlorides and sulphates, increase beyond a critical limit and sufficient alkalinity is not obtained within the concrete to maintain steel in a passive condition. 5

IS : 9077 - 1979
TABLE 1 ALKAWNITIES OF AQUEOUS EXTRACTS FROM CEMENT SAND MORTAR OF 1: 2 MIX AND Ml50 CONCRETE MIX ( Clause 3.1.1 ) SL No. RATIO OF CEMENT/SAND 0~ CWENT/SAND/ AGGREGATES CaO
(PI~RCENTAGE,

0N IGNITED RESIDUE BASIS) (3) 37-7 149 31-l 49.6 32.7 37.8

ALKALIESAS Na,O (PERCENTAGE, 0N IGNITED RESIDUEBASIS) (4) 60.5 69.4 66.5 51.0 53.4 58.6

ALKALINITY

(1) 9
ii) iii) iv) v) vi)

(2)
Cement sand mortar (1 : 2) , using river sand Cement sand mortar (1 : 2) using sea sand . ' Cement sand mortar (1 : 2) wing standard sand (Ennore) Concrete (Ml501 mix using river sand Cement concrete (MI 50) mix using sea sand Cement concrete (M150) mix using standard sand (Ennore)

(5) 0*05N @06N 0*05N 0*06N 0.06N O-06N

4.1.1 Corrosion of reinforcement results in the formation of rust which occupies a much larger volume than the steel from which it is formed. This corrosion product exerts large internal pressure resulting in cracks and spalling in concrete. The formation of cracks in concrete further leads to quicker rate of corrosion, due to ingress of moisture and air resulting in failure of structures in due course.
4.2 The following factors are also responsible for corrosion of steel reinforcement in reinforced brickwork and reinforced cement concrete work: a) Qunlity of Concrete - Concrete consists of coarse aggregate, fine aggregate, cement and water. The right quality of materials water/cement ratio, with proper correct mixing, adequate compaction by tamping or vibration and proper curing, results in good quality concrete. Dense concrete rich in cement content is impervious to a large degree and generally resists the corrosion of embedded steel.

b) Cover Thickness of Concrete Over Reinforcement - The reinforcement is protected by the concrete cover over it. The greater the cover thickness, more is the degree of protection against the various climatic and other environmental conditions. For various structural members, the cover thickness should be different 6

IS : 9077 - 1979 depending upon their importance and degree of exposure. Evenness of the cover over the reinforcement is also very important for its corrosion protection.

4

Condition of the Reinforcement - The surface condition of the steel reinforcement, at the time of its placing in concrete, affects its corrosion rate. If the reinforcement is contaminated with salt or the corrosive action on reinforcement after badly corroded, placement in concrete is aggrevated and promoted rapidly.
2 TOLERABLE LIMITS FOR CHLORIDE -IN ALKALINE SOLUTION AND SULPHATE SALTS

TABLE

(Clauses 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 ^and Appendix A ) NORMALITY (1) O.OlN-NaOH WOlN-NaOH O.O2N-NaOH 0*02N-NaOH O.O4N-NaOH 0.04N-NaOH O'OGN-NaOH O.OGN-NaOH 0'08N-NaOH O.O8N-NaOH O.lON-NaOH @ION-NaOH 002N-NaOH 100 0'04N-NaOH 500 O.OGN-NaOH 1000 POGN-NaOH 1250 O.OGN-NaOH 2500 O'OGN-NaOH 3000 20 60 170 130 2750 225 3250 375 7200 575 13250 50 100 175 24 12
INHIBITIVE (2) 5 ppm CORROSIVE (3)

ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm

SOS SO, SOS SO3 SO, SOS

ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm ppm -

Cl SO, Cl SO3 Cl SOS Cl SOS Cl SOa Cl SO, Cl Cl Cl Cl Cl

6 ppm 22'5 ppm 65 ppm 175 ppm 150 ppm 2900 ppm 250 ppm 3300 ppm 400 ppm 7300 ppm 600 ppm 13500 ppm 55 ppm 105 ppm 200 ppm 27 ppm 15 ppm 5 ppm

Cl SO3 Cl SOa Cl SO, Cl SOa Cl SO3 Cl SO, Cl Cl Cl Cl Cl Cl

5. MEASURES RECOMMENDED CEMENT CORROSION 5.1 Controlling Concrete Mix the Quality

FOR

PREVENTlNG

REINFOR-

of Concrete

and Composition

of Raw

5.1.1 Quality of Concrete - The grade of cement concrete should be Ml50 or higher for reinforced concrete work. The concrete should be properly compacted by tamping or vibration and adequately cured. The reinforced concrete may be rendered with cement plaster of 1 : 2 or 1 : 3 proportion. The rendering should be done only after the structure is passed and accepted for quality and finish. 7

IS t 9077 - 1979 5.1.1.1 Calcium chloride should not be used as far as possible fmaccelerating the setting and hardening of cement concrete, as this may accelerate corrosion of the reinforcement in all mixes of concrete.
5.1.1.2 Sea sand should not he normally used in RCC work. If there is no alternative, sea sand shall be washed free of chloride and sulphate before use. 5.1.2 Sulphate and Chloride Content of Raw Concrete Mix - Cement, sand, stone aggregates and water, should be tested for chloride and sulphate contents, as corrosion of the reinforcement bar is likely to occur if the total water soluble chloride and sulphate contents exceed the limits of 50 ppm and 500 ppm respectively in raw Ml50 concrete mix (see coating on the bars may be Appendix A ) . If such cases a protective necessary. 5.2 Provision of Adequate Cover Thickness to Steel Reinforcement reinforcement

5.2.1 Cover Thickness should be as follows:

The thickness

of cover on concrete

a) At each end of reinforcing bar twice the diameter of the bar.

Not less than 25 mm, nor less than

b) For a longitudinal reirzforcing bar in a column - Not less than 40 mm, In the case of nor less than the diameter of such rod or bar. columns of minimum dimension of 20 cm or under, the reinforcing bars of which do not exceed 13 mm, a cover of 25 mm may be used. c) For longitudinal reinforcing bars in a beam - Not less than 25 mm nor less than the diameter of the rod or bar. d) For tensile, compressive, shear or other reiqforcement in a slab -Not than 13 mm nor less than the diameter of such reinforcement. e) For any other reinforcement - Not less than diameter of such reinforcement. less

13 mm nor less than the

5.2.2 Increased cover thicknesses should be provided when surfaces of concrete members are exposed to the action of harmful chemicals, acids, saline atmosphere, sulphurous smoke ( as in case of steam vapours, operated railways ), etc. The increase in cover thickness may be between 15 mm and 40 mm beyond the figures given in 5.2.1 but the total cover thickness should not exceed 50 mm. 5.2.3 For reinforced concrete members, totally or periodically immersed in sea water or subject to salt spray, the cover should be 50 mm. 5.2.3.1 Concrete cover of more than 50 mm is not recommended as it may' give rise to increase crack widths which may further allow direct ingress of~deleterious materials to the reinforcement. It may, however, be 8

IS t 9077 - 1979 noted that IS : 456-1978* does not impose any such limitation on cover thickness. In case of reinforced concrete members in areas exposed to the action of harmful chemicals or sea water, it is desirable to use richer mixes of concrete, like grade M200 or M250. 5.3 Protective Coatings on Concrete Cover and Reinforcement be by

5.3.1 Protective Coating on Concrete - Efisting RCC structures may protected from reinforcement corrosion in aggressive atmospheres applying protective surface coatings to the exposed surfaces of concrete.

5.3.1.1 Cement-sand-asphalt/coal -tar pitch mixture coating - The dry concrete surface should be roughened by chiselling. A mixture of dry cement, molten asphalt or coal tar pitch and dry sand in the ratio 1 : 1 : 3 by weight, should be applied on the dry concrete surface by trowelling to a thickness of 6 mm and the surface should be finished by flaming. 5.3.1.2 Cement-sand-mortar with neat cement finish - Dry concrete surface should be roughened by chiselling and a workable mixture of 1: 3 cement sand mortar~should be applied on the concrete surface, after water in the surface properly, by trowelling to a thickness of 6 mm. The surface should be finished with a neat cement slurry consisting of water and cement in the ratio 2 : 1. 5.3.1.3 Epoxy coating or epoxy mortar to existing structures for better performance. rendering may also be applied

5.3.2 Steel reinforcement for RB and RCC work should be free from loose rust and salts which are likely to be present in marine atmosphere. Slight rust may be removed by rubbing the rod with gunny cloth. Heavy rusting of reinforcement should be removed by wire brushing or applic?gtion of commercially produced derusting and phosphating jellies of It should, however, be ensured that no oil or paint is approved quality. applied as a protective coating to the reinforcement bar. 5.3.3 Protective Coating of Reinforcement Bars - Since it may not be possible to restrict the chloride and sulphate content within the tolerable limits in marine atmospheres or in contact with sea water, the reinforcement bars should be coated with a protective coating of inhibited cement slurry. One method adopted for application of such type of coating is given in Appendix `B' for guidance only. 5.4 Proper Design and Construction of Roofs

5.4.1 Type of Bricks Used in Reinforced Brick Construction - Reinforced brick work should not be used for roofing of permanent buildings as the bricks have a greater tendency to gather moisture including salts which *Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision). 9

IS t 9977 - 1979 Roofing with precast RCC battens and brick corrode the reinforcement. filling or hollow clay blocks may be adopted with advantage. The minimum cover thicknesses should be 25 mm of Ml50 cement concrete. 5.4.1.1 Machine-made or hollow blocks wherever available are Reinforced brick work may be used preferable to hand-moulded bricks. wi.th caution in intermediate slabs of construction which are protected Care should from water and rain as well as direct approach of moisture. be taken to see that the reinforcement in reinforced brick work is protected by a minimum cover thickness of 25 mm of Ml50 cement concrete or 1 : 2 cement mortar. 5.4.1.2 Reinforced aggressive atmospheres. brick slab shall not be adopted in marine or other

5.4.2 Roof Design - Flat roofs should be designed to have adequate slope so that rain water flows off quickly without stagnating and penetrating into roof slab. The top of the roof slab should be finished even and The exposed smooth with a trowel before the concrete begins to set. surfaces of RCC work should be rendered smooth with 1 : 3 cement mortar. Further the tops of the roofs should be painted with a coat of bitumen or provided with other water-proofing material, such as alkathene film with a layer of lime concrete or mud-phuska and tiles laid over on top.

APPENDIX
(

A

Clause 5.1.2 )
*

METHOD USED FOR CALCULATING THE PERMISSIBLE CHLORIDE AND SULPHATE CONTENT OF RAW
CONCRETE MIX

A-l. The maximum permissible chloride content of raw concrete mix is calculated on the basis of the critical amount of sulphate and chloride in capillary water, beyond which the passivity of the reinforcement in the alkaline medium, obtained in set concrete, is not maintained. A-2. An alkalinity of 0.04N is likely to be maintained in set grade Ml50 Therefore, the maximum tolerable values of chloride and concrete. sulphate content for corrosion inhibition would be 100 ppm and 500 ppm respectively in capillary water ( see Table 2 ). A-3. Assuming that the average porosity for water permeation of grade Ml50 cement concrete is 10 percent, the maximum permissible limits of chloride and sulphate content in set cement concrete work out to 10 ppm and 50 ppm respectively. 10

IS : 9077 - 1979 A-4. It has been observed
experimentally that on an average, the chloride content decreases to one-fifth and the sulphate content decreases to onetenth of their original values, during setting of the cement concrete. The maximum permissible limits for raw concrete mix, therefore, works out to 50 ppm of chloride and 500 soluble ppm of sulphate respectively.

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.3.3)
PROCEDURE B-l.

B

FOR APPLICATION OF PROTECTIVE OF REINFORCEMENT RODS

COATING

The reinforcement rods should be dipped in the derurting solution of approved quality and the rods removed as soon as the rust is satisfactorily removed and a bright surface is obtained. This should be immediately followed by cleaning the rods with wet waste cloth and alkaline cleaning powder. The rod should then be brushed with the phosphating jelly of approved quality by means of a fibre brush. The jelly should be left on the surface for a period of 45-60 minutes and then removed by means of wet waste cloth. This should be followed by brushing the inhibitor solution of approved quality and the first coat of cement slurry, prepared by mixing 500 cc of inhibitor solution for each 1 000 g of portland cement. All the above steps should be applied in the same day and after 12-24 hours of air-drying the sealing solution of approved quality should be brushed followed by the second coat of cement slurry. It should then be dried for 12-24 hours followed by a brush coat of the sealing solution which should be applied again after 4 hours of air-drying.

11

INDIAN
ON CORROSION IS: 3531-1968 3618-1966 4180-1967 4777-1968 5555-1970 6005-1970 7808-1975 6062 (Part

STAN-DARDS

Glossary of terms relating Phosphate treatment Code of practice building

to corrosion of metals against corrosion used in of light gauge steel sections

of iron and steel for protection

for corrosion protection

Performance tests for protective steel against corrosion Code of procedure metals

schemes used in the protection field studies on atmospheric of iron and steel studies on underground protection

of light gauge corrosion of

for conducting

Code of practice for phosphating Code of procedure for conducting I )-1976 Code of practice principles Underground Ships' hulls

corrosion of metals. General

for cathodic

of steel structures:

( Part II )-I976 ( Part III )-1977 822 1-1976

pipelines of metal components in packages

Code of practice

for corrosion prevention

8629 ( Parts1 to III )-1977 Code of practice from atmospheric corrosion

for protection

of iron and steel structures

