IS : 7881 ( Part -I ) - 1975
( Reaffirmed 1996 ( Reaffirmed 2006 ) )

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO BUILDERS' HARDWARE
PART I LOCKS ( Second Reprint JULY 1997 )

UDC

683.33

: 001.4

0 Copyright BUREAU
MANAK

1976 STANDARDS

OF-INDIAN

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 5

February

1976

Indian Standard

IS : 7881 ( Part I ) - 1975 ( I<eaIlirmcd I')!,% )

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO BUILDERS HARDWARE
PART I Terminology,
Chairman SHRI J. M. BENJAMIN Members

LOCKS Sectional Committee, BDC 1

Notations.

and Drawings

Rgrcsenting

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi

Public Works & Housing Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI S. BALAKRISHNAN SERI D. K. GANQAEAR ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI J. R. BHALLA SHRI S. R. YARDI ( Alternate ) D I R E o T o B ( RESE~~~CH & Public Works Department, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh DESIONS ) Central Building Research Institute SHRI T. N. GUPTA (CSIR), Roorkee DR S. K. MTSRA ( Allernafc) Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi SBRI s. L. KATHURIA SHRI R. P. SIsKA ( z`&-mate ) Ministry of Railways, New Delhi SHRI Y. K. KOCRAAR Central Water Commission, New Delhi San1 K. MADHAVAN DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( PH-III ) ( Alte7natc ) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHR1T.R. h'fERANDRU National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SI~RI M. M. M~STRY Posts & Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI J. L. NARULA Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, SRRI R. S. PANESAR New Delhi Town & Country Planning Organization, New Delhi SHRI P. B. Rar Public Works Department, Government of Uttar SHRI K. S. SAHNI Pradesh, Lucknow Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, SERI STJRJITSINQX Chandigarh Director General, BIS ( Ex-oJ'icio Member ) SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) ARCHITECT
Secretary

Snm S.P. MAGGIJ Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS
( Continued on page 2 j Q Cofiyyripl;t 1976

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

I

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means excepr with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act,

IS:7881
( Continued

(Part

I)-1975

frompage1)
Terminology Subcommittee, BDC 1
: 1

COflWW SHRI T. R. MEHANDRU

Representing
Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta

Members
Engineer-in-Ghief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI S. BALAKRIBHNAN SHRI D. K. GANGAHAR ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SIIRI J. R. BHALLA DI~PUTY CHIEF E N Q I N E E R Ministry of Railways, New Delhi NORTHERN ( CENTRAL ), RAILWAY Central Water Commission, New Delhi SHRI K. MADHAVAN DEPUTY DIRECTOR I PH-III ) ( dternatc 1 ' council of Scientific & Industrial Research. SHnI R.S. PENESAR ' New Delhi Town & Country Planning Organization, New Delhi SERI B. N. RAHALKAR National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN E N G I N 1 E R Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SZPERINTENDIN~ ( VIOILANCE ) E N G1N E ER EXECUTIVE ( VIOILANCE ) ( Altcrnatc ) In. personal capacity ( A-16 Vasant Vi/car, SHRI R. L. SURI

New Delhi 110022 )

2

IS:7881

(Part I)-1975

hdia.n Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO BUILDERS' HARDWARE
PART I LOCKS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part. I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 1 I November 1975, after the draft finalized by the Terminology, Notations and Drawings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil'Engineering Division Council. 0.2 A number of Indian Standards have various items of builders' hardware and many With a view to bringing about formulation. of various items, pertaining to locks, used industry this standard has been prepared. already been published on more are in the process of uniformity in the expression in the builders' hardware

0.3 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards and practices prevailing in other, countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has:been met by deriving assistance fr0m.B. S. 3827 : Part l : 1964 ` Glossary of terms relating to builders' hardware; Part 1 Locks ' published. by the British Standards Institution; '

1. scQPl2

.
of terms relating to locks

1.1 This standard (Part I ) covers definitions (including locks and latches in one case ). 2. GENERAL TERMS

2.1 Automatic Deadlocking - .I he eqloyment of an antithrust action, `whereby a spring-loaded bolt, when engaged in the staple or striking plate, is prevented, from being forced back by pressure applied to the bolt head. The contact of the auxiliary bolt or plunger with the striking plate or staple releases a paw1 behind the spring-loaded bolt head thereby securing that bolt. The operation of the handle or key disengages the paw1 and withdraws the spring-loaded bolt. 2.2 Backset - The horizontal distance from forend of a rim or mo?tice lock to the centre or both. 3 the outside face of the of the keyhole or follower

IS : 7881 ( Part I) - 1975 2.3 Deadlocking ( of Night Latches ) complete turn of the key to give additional preventing operation of the handle. An operation made by a security to a night latch by

variation between locks of similar design which 2.4 Differ -The allows each lock to be operated only by its own key and in special circumstances, by a master key ( see 3.15 ), grand master key ( see 3.12 ) and emergency key. 2.5 Dimensioning-of Locks - Measuring and height, thickness and size of locks and latches. The vertical distance 2.6 Dropedge to the centre of the keyhole. 2.7 Face of Door -The distinct from the edges. plane in drawer surface describing the length, top as

and box locks from the on either side

of a door

2.8 Fixed Projection of Bolt -The distance by which, in certain circumstances, the bolt or bolts of a lock must protrude from the case in the withdrawn position. 2.9 -Handed a) Locks which bj Locks for which the hand must cannot be readily converted are supplied to the be stated when ordering and from one hand to the other. purchaser in equal numbers of

Locks which each hand.

2.10 Handing of Doors relationship of the handing, 2.11 Handing of Locks relationship of: a) the direction

The rules for determining and describing the and the directions of the opening, of doors. The rules for determining of hinged of the door, or sliding and and describing doors, the

of opening

b) the inside and outside c) the lock which

is intended

to be affixed to the door.

2.12 Height of Lock - The overall vertical dimension of the case of the lock ( when the lock is held in the plane in which it is intended that it shall be fixed ) excluding any exposed bolt head but including the thickness of the forend, if any. 2.13 Latch - A device, openable from both sides and generally selfengaging, for holding closed a door, gate or the like. It consists of a movable part falling by gravity or sliding or moving by means of a spring into a retaining member of some sort, the moving part of the device being operated by a handle and not by a removable key. 4

ISr788i 2.14 Left-Hand Lock

(Part

I)-19;15

'

a) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of an inward opening hinged door which is on the left-hand of a person viewing the door from the outside. b) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of a cupboard, wardrobe or locker hinged door ( that is outward opening ) which is on the left-hand of a person viewing the door from the outside. c) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of a sliding door which is on the left-hand of a person viewing the door from the outside in such a position that the door moves to the left in closing. 2.15 Length of Lock - The overall horizontal dimension of the case, of the lock ( when the lock is held in the plane in which it is intended that it shall be fixed ) excluding any exposed -bolt head but including the thickness of the forend, if any. 2.16 Lock a) A device, for securing a door, gate, lid, drawer or the like, when ! closed, consisting of a bolt or a system of bolts propelled or withdrawn by a mechanism operated by a key or other means. b) A mechanism combining, in one case, a spring bolt and a dead bolt operated respectively by handles and a removable key. arrangement of 2.17 Master-Keying of Locks - The predetermined the mechanism of a group or suite of locks so that they may all be operated by one common key known as master key ( see 3.15 ) in addition to their own individual keys. 2.18 Outside of Door Any of the following sides of a door:

The external side of a door in an external wall, The corridor side of a room door, The side of a communicating door on which the hinge knuckles are not seen when the door is closed, The side of either of two twin doors facing the space between them, or The room side of a closet, cupboard or wardrobe door.
NOTE -The outside of a sliding door fitted with secret binges or pivots, and a door across a corridor or leading into or out of a vestibule or lobby cannot be described in general terms as it depends on individual circumstances.

2.19 Passing a) The operating of a lock by a key. b) The arrangement of the mechanism of a series of locks so that all may be operated by the same key, other than master key. 2.20 Reverse Bolt Lock - A lock in which bevel set to suit an outward opening door. 5 the spring bolt has the

ISr7881(PartI)-1975

:

2.20.1 Left-Hand Reverse Bolt Lock - A reverse bolt lock intended to be fitted to that edge of an outward opening door which is on the left-hand of a person viewing the door from outside. 2.20.2 Right-Hand Reverse Bolt Lock - A reverse bolt lock intended to be fitted to that edge of an outward opening door which is on the right-hand of a person viewing the door from outside. 2.21 Right-Hand Lock

a) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of an inward opening hinged door which is on the right-hand of a person viewing the door from the outside. b) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of a cupboard, wardrobe or locker hinged door ( that is outward opening ) which is on the right-hand of a person viewing the door from the outside. c) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of a sliding door which is -on the right-hand of a person viewing the door from the outside in such a position that the door moves to the right in closing. 2.22 Secured - The state of a lock or mechanism or part of a lock when the use of the correct key or more than one key is a necessary preliminary to the withdrawal or release of the bolt. 2.23 Shoot ( of Bolt ) action of the spring. 2.24 Thickness of Lock The distance a spring bolt travels under the

2.24.1 Overall Thickness of Lock - The maximum dimension measured over the case and the cap of the lock in a horizontal plane at right angles to the length of the lock, including any raised portions of the case, or cap, or rivet heads projecting therefrom. 2.24.2 Outside Thickness of Lock-The dimension measured over the case and the cap of the lock in a horizontal plane at right angles to the length of the lock, excluding any raised portions of the case, or cap, or rivet heads projecting therefrom. 2.25 Throw ( of Bolt ) - The distance a dead ward direction under the action of the key. 3. KEYS 3.1 Bit - That part of a key which is shaped or cut especially the mechanism of its own lock.
3.2

.

bolt moves

in the out-

to operate

Bit Key - A type of key the bit of which projects right angles in the same plane. 6

from the shank at

IS : 7881 ( Pa-rt I ) - 1975 3.3 Blade The bit of a cylinder key.

3.4 Blank Key - A key which has been made to suit the type of lock but of which the bit has not been finally shaped to suit an individual lock. 3.5 Bulleted Key - A key having longitudinal projections on the bit which correspond with projections in the keyhole. grooves and/or and/or grooves of a key in which

3.6 Collar - A circular flange or projecting ring on the shank that limits distance through which the key may be inserted. 3.7 Corrugated Keycorrugations are pressed 3.8 Cylinder Key a cylinder. key. A bulleted key made or stamped in the bit. of sheet

a) Any key to operate

' h

b) A pin tumbler

3.9 Disc Tumbler Key - A bulleted key which is fiat and has a long bit, or blade, in which `V' cuts are made on one or both edges to operate the tumblers in a disc tumbler lock. 3110 Double Bitted a) A key having b) A key having Key a bit on each side of the shank. steps on each side of the blade. grooves lock in or a

3.11 Flat KeyA key made from sheet metal without corrugations in the thickness but having the edges shaped. 3.12 Grand Master Key - A key which number of suites of master-keyed locks. 3.13 Head a lock. 3.14 Key or latch. will pass every

The part of a key that is held in the fingers when operating A removable device for operating the mechanism of a lock each

3.15 Master Key of which is different. 3.16 Nose -

A key which

will pass all the locks in a suite,

The outer edge of the bit.

3.17 Paracentric KeyA pin tumbler key or a disc tumbler key having eon both sides of the bit, or blade, bullet grooves which in depth, The corresponding bullet equal or exceed half the thickness of~the key. projection in the keyhole thus do not admit a flat strip of metal. 7

IS : 7881 ( Part 3.18 Pin Key bit.

I ) - 1975 A bit key having a solid pin which projects in
cross

beyond

the

3.19 Pin of Key - That end, solid and circular shank of a pin key from which the bit projects.

section,

of the

3.20 Pipe Key - A bit key having a hollow shank, to fit over a drill pin, and one edge of the bit flush with the end of the shank. 3.21 Individual locks. 3.22 Shank the bit. Key A key to a lock in a master-keyed suite of

The part of a key between

the head and the end, excluding

3.23 Shoulder - A projection flat key that limits the distance

on the edge of a cylinder key or other through which the key may be inserted.

3.24 Skeleton Key - A bit key having the bit cut away to avoid fixed obstructions in a lock, leaving only sufficient material to lift movable detainers and move the bolt. 3.25 Steps -Those cuts operate movable detainers on the outer edge of a bit or the bolt, or both. or blade which a

3.26 Sub-master Key ( Sub-suite Key ) - A key which passes only given number of locks (sub-suite ) in a suite of master keyed locks. -3.Z&7 Ward lock. 4. LOCK Cuts-Those MECHANISMS cuts in the bit to pass over the wards

in a

4.1 Disc Tumbler Mechanism ( Flat Tumbler Mechanism )- A lock mechanism having a cylindrical plug rotating in a body and having, as its principal feature, movable detainers in the form of flat plates ( disc tumblers ) sliding generally under spring pressure, in .transverse `slots in the plug. The disc tumblers project from one end or the other of the slots except when correctly aligned by the key. When secured, the projecting tumblers engage in two or more diametrically opposite longitudinal grooves in the sides of the plug hole and thus prevent the plug from turning. 4.2 Double Hand Tumbler Mechanism - A lock mechanism for rim locks which can be used as left-hand or right-hand without alteration by turning the lock upside down while moving it from one edge of the door The mechanism has as its principal features: to the o!her. a) a tumbler acted upon by the key directly for one hand and indirectly, through an interlock pivoted member (the dummy tumbler ), for the other hand; and b) a double ended keyhole ( so that the key may be inserted turned in the coriventional manner for either hand ). 8 and

.

IS : 7881 (-Part I ) - 1975 lock mechanism having, as its principal 4.3 Lever Mechanism -A feature, one or morelevers to work as detainers. 4.4 Lo& #eclwmis~ - The arrangement of parts of locks and the way in which the parts perform in order to provide the differing and security elements in locks operated by one or more keys or other means. 4.5 Notched Detainer Mechanism - A lock mechanism having as its principal features: a) movable detainers, each in the form of a flat plate turning on a pivot, or sliding in guides, when acted upon by the key and having a shallow notch in one edge; and b) a pivoted L-shaped member, one arm of which, either by direct engagement or indirectly, prevents movement of the bolt and the other arm of which is constrained by the notched edge of each of the detainers. When the detainers are lifted by the correct key the notches are so aligned as to permit movement of the L-shaped member and, -hence, of the bolt. 4.6 Pin Tlrmbler Mechanism - A lock mechanism having a cyclindrical plug rotating in a body and, as its principal feature, movable detainers in the form of pairs of pins and drivers ( pin tumblers ) fitting, together with their springs, in holes in the plug and body. In the secured position the drivers bridge the interface between body and plug thus preventing the plug from turning. Insertion of the correct key lifts the pins and drivers against their springs and positions them so that the joint faces between pin and driver lie on the interface between plug and body so permitting the plug to turn. The keyway is a longitudinal radial slot in the plug. 4.7 Tumbler Mechanism - A simple lock mechanism principal feature, at least one tumbler. having, as its

-

4.8 Warded Mechanism - Any lock mechanism m&king use of wards ( sea 5.72 ) in the case and ward cuts ( SGC 337 ) in the key, solely to provide additional differs. 5. LOCK PAKTS

plate, for fixing on the inside of a door, by which 5.1 Backplate -The the locking mechanism (for example, a pin tumbler cylinder) is attached to the door. 5.2 Bevelled Bolt-A latch bevelling of the vertical face. bolt shaving the outer end shaped by

5.3 Bevelled Forend ( Splayed Forend ) - A forend shaped to fit the closing edge of a door which is not at right angles to the face of the door. 9

*:7881

(Part

i)4975

5.4 B&t -The part of the lock which provides .the fastening by protruding from the lock case to engage in the staple, striking plate, link, shackle or other member. 3;s Salt Head - The portion of a bolt which protrudes beyond the case or forend. 5.6 Bolt H&e-The hole in -a lock case forend, striking plate or staple to guide or admit the bolt. 5.7 Bolt Lath - A bolt tail which is thin and flat. 5.8 Bolt Rod-A bolt tail which is circular in cross section.

5.9 Bolt Stump-The part -of bolt, usually rectangular in section and at right angles to the bolt tail, which passes through the slot or gating in the levers as the bolt moves. part of the bolt attached to the bolt head and lying 5.30 Bolt Tail -The always within the case. 5.1 Box Striking Plate - A striking plate (see 5.68) having a rectangular housing to receive and hold the head of the dead bolt (see 5.22). 1 5.12 Bush-A sleeve or ferrule replacing the metal around the keyhole and/or the follower to give additional strength or bearing. part which i.; screwed or otherwise fixed to the case to 5.13 cap -The cover the internal cohponents. 5.14 Case-The part of a lock or latch, usually box-like in form into which one or more bolts are assembled. The securitv mechanism also is usually housed in the case but certain types of mechaiism ( for example, pin tumbler cylinders ) are not. 5.15 Catch-A device to hold the spring bolt of a lock or latch in the `in' or `out' position or both. 5;16 Catch Eever - A pivoted lever operating a catch.

5.17 Claw BoltA type of dead bolt having pivoted claws which, when the bolt is shot, swing out sideways to engage with the striking plate. 5.18 Clutch Bolt -A pivoted spring bolt, with a head shaped in the form of a hook, which is displaced in a vertical plane on meeting the striking plate. 5.19 Connecting Link - A straight metal link which transmits the motion from1 the cylinder containing the key-operated mechanism to the bolt in the lock or latch case. 10

ISt788I

(P8ttI)4975

5.29 CM - A unit, separate from the lock which it operates but fixed to it on installation, which contains one of a variety of key-operated mechanisms. 5.21 Gykinder Rose -A metal ring surrounding the end of a cylinder assembly. For many rim cylinders, it forms part of the means of fixing the cylinder to the door; in other instances its other purpose is decorative. 5.22 Dead Bolt-The bolt of a lock which is moved in both directions by the key. In some locks the dead bolt may be operated in both directions by thumb turn or knob from one side and a key or knob from the other. 5.23 asc TunsUer - A movable detainer in the form of a shaped flat plate pierced by a hole through which the key passes. 5.24 Disc Tumbler mechanism.
Cylinder -A

cylinder

containing

a disc tumbler

5.25 Double BushedWhen both the keyhole and the follower hole of a lock are provided with bushes. 5.26 Double forend.
Fotend -

A combination

of an inner forend and an outer a pipe key fits and rotates to

5.27 Drill Pin - A fixed pin operate the mechanism.

on which

5.28 Driver ( Rolkr )- The upper of two small solid metal pins which together form one of the sets of movable detainers in a pin tumbler lock. 5.29 DropA swinging or sliding cover to a keyhole. 5.39 Dummy Turnbier - A flat L-shaped pivoted member, used in a double hand tumbler mechanism, the short arm of which is linked with the tumbler so that the movement of one is imparted to the other. For one hand, the long arm of the dummy tumbler is acted upon directly by the key and thus disengages the tumbler from the bolt. 5.31 Flush Slide-A sliding device, having no projection and with a recess for the finger or thumb, which operates a catch, slide bolt or the like. 5.32 Follower -The part of a lock or latch action which, when turned by the spindle or connecting bar, withdraws the spring bolt. 5.33 Forend -The part of a mortice lock or latch, or that part of the case of a rim lock or latch, through which the bolt or bolts protrude.
5.34 Hook

type of dead bolt which, when actuated, emerges Bolt -A from the forend in a circular path and, when fully shot, resembles a hook. 11

IS: 7881 ( Part I ) - 1975 5.35 Inner Forend -That forend mortice lock or latch when a double 5.36 Jumbo Bolt which is attached forend is used. to the case of a

A side bolt in a rim latch. through which the key is lock

5.37 Xeyhole a) The hole in the case, or cap, of alock inserted to operate the mechanism.

b) The keyway in the plug of a pin tumbler or a disc tumbler into which the key is inserted to operate the mechanism.

5.38 Latch Bolt -That bolt of a lock or latch which is held in the shot position by a spring or by a weight and is withdrawn by turning the handle or key or is pushed in by contact with the striking plate or staple. flat movable detainer, provided at one end and 533 Lever -A perforated by a shaped slot or gating which in the secured position prevents axial movement of the bolt of the lock but which, when lifted by its initial contact with a rotating key bit, allows the bolt stump to past through the gating, thus enabling the bolt to be thrown or withdrawn and then falls back to the secured position as the key passes out of contact. 5.46 Lever Cylinder a) A cylinder containing b) A cylinder containing a lever mechanism. a notched detainer mechanism.

flat rectangular plate, for use with cabinet locks, 5.41 Linkpiate -A having one or more notched, hooked or U-shaped projections which enter the lock and are secured by engagement of the bolt therewith. projection from the side of the 5.43 Lip (of gtriking pllte) -A striking plate, bent when fixed, which projects the frame and facilitates depression of the head of the latch bolt when door is closed. 5.43 Locking plate plate ( see 5.11). 5.44 Locking +ibEither a striking plate (see 5.68) or a box striking

A catch on a rim latch. handle, lever or knob which is turned

5.45 Locking Turn-A small manually to operate a catch.

5.46 Movable Retainer -That part of the mechanism of a lock which must first be moved by the key into a predetermined position before the key can withdraw the bolt. 5.47 Outer Forend ( Faceplate ) - That forend, often having a decorative purpose, which is fixed to the inner forend of a mortice lock or latch to form a double forend. 12

IS : 7881( Part I ) - 1975

5.48 Pin (of a Pin Tumbler Lock) -The
metal pins which together pin tumbler lock. 5.49 Pin Tumbler -A driver.

lower of two small form one of the set of movable detainers detainer A cylinder consisting containing of a pin

solid in a and a

movable

5.50 Pin Tumbler Cylinder mechanism (see 4.6). 5.51 Plate -The form a selvedge, 5.52

a pin tumbler angles to

part of a cabinet lock, flat or bent at right by which the lock is fixed to the door.

Plug
a) The part of a pin tumbler lock enters and which the key turns. b) The rotating d) A support c) The part of a cylinder which (see 6.48) into lock. which the key

part in a disc or wafer tumbler rotates

when the key is turned.

for a flat key to permit A plunger -The which

it to turn in the lock. when depressed operates lock. a catch.

5.53 5.54

Push ButtonRebated Forend

_

shaped

forend

of a rebated

5.55 Reversible Bolt-A bevelled spring bolt which is designed so that it may be turned over in the case either to make a lock or latch suitable for use in either direction of door opening or, frequently, to reverse the hand of a mortice lock or latch. 5.56 Roller incorporated BoltA latch in its head. bolt having a roller instead of a bevel with a

5.57 Roller Catch - A rotary catch having serrated edge for operation by the thumb. 5.58 Round-Ended semi-circular ends.

a pivoted of a

segment lock,

Forend-

A

forend, shaped

mortice

with edge

5.59 Rounded Forend of a swing door. 5.60 Selvedge The

A forend

to follow the rounded cabinet lock. which

forend

of a flush fitting

5.61 Shackle -The hinged or sliding part of a padlock through the staple, loop or other device on the door. 5.62 Shackle Bolt -The bolt within the body of engages with the notch in the shackle when locked. 13

passes which

a padlock,

IS:7881

(Part

I)-1975

small supplementary bolt, on a lock 5.63 Slide Bolt ( Snib Bolt ) -A or latch, which is generally operated only from the inside of the door by finger or thumb. 5.64 Slide in Forend night latch. 5.65 Spring Bolt A flush slide fixed in the forend of a mortice

A spring operated

latch bolt. fixed on a door jamb into

5.66 Staple (Keeper) - A box like fitting which the bolt or bolts of a rim latch shoot.

*

5.67 Stop Works - Any device, operated by finger or thumb but not with a key, which secures, or provides additional security for a spring bolt, either by holding the spring bolt in the ` shot out ' position or by preventing the outside handle from withdrawing the spring bolt. 5.68 Striking Plate - A plate, fixed to a door jamb or frame, with one or more bolt holes in which the bolt or bolts of a lock or latch engage. 5.69 Tumbler (Lever Tumbler ) - A pivoted plate which is used in a ,vertical plane and which has a small horizontal projection on its top edge ,to engage with either one of two notches (which correspond with the `thrown and withdrawn positions ) in the top edge of the dead bolt to prevent axial movement of the bolt. Rotating the key first lifts the tumbler, disengaging it from the notch in the bolt, and then throws the bolt and finally allows the tumbler to fall to the secured position. 5.70 Thumb Slide (Snib, Stop Slide) operates a catch or a slide bolt or the like. 5.71 Wafer Tumbler tumbler machanism. Cylinder A -A sliding ~device a which wafer

cylinder

containing

5.72 Ward - Projections inside a lock at or near the keyhole to prevent a key from entering fully, or from turning after entering, unless the bit is suitably shaped. 6. LOCK TYPES

6.1 Bathroom Lock - A lock having a spring bolt ( see 5.65 ) operated by handles on both sides and a bolt operated only from the inside of the door by means of a small knob orturn. 6.2 Box Lock - A cabinet hinged lid. The bolt of the to engage with a link plate a spring bolt withdrawn by lock for fitting to the front of a box having a lock has one or, usually, two locking points The bolt may be either fastened to the lid. a key or a dead bolt. 14

IS: 7991 ( Part I) - 1975 6.3 Budget or Cam Lock - A lock having a pivoted tongue which, when turned 90" by a key, swings into a slot in the locking plate to serve as a dead bolt.
6.4 Cabinet Lock -Any cupboards, desks, drawers directions. 6.5 Chain either: Padlocklock intended for fitting to boxes, chests, The bolt slides in one or two and the like. having permanently attached to it,

Any padlock,

a) One end of a length of stout chain for passing round and securing, for example, two stiles of a gate; or b) One end of a length of light safety chtiin to prevent the padlock from being removed or mislaid. 6.6 Claw Bolt Lock - A dead lock of which the bolt is a claw ( see 5.17 ). Claw bolt locks are frequently used on sliding doors. bolt

: 6.7 Close Shackle Padlock - A padlock having a minimum amount of shackle visible when secured so as to fit snugly over hasp or locking bar to increase the difficulty of cutting the shackle or forcing it open by an implement. 6.8 Clutch Bolt Lock - A lock for sliding doors or collapsible gates, having a clutch bolt ( see 5.18 ). The clutch bolt, being a form of spring ,bolt, engages with the striking plate on closing the door. `6.9 Coin Operated Lock (Automatic Lock ) - A rim lock, for fitting to the outside of WC doors, intended to collect a fee each time the Insertion of a coin or coins permits the bolt to be withWC is used. drawn. Coins are collected in a locked container. An additional key for opening the door from the outside in an emergency is provided. 6.10 Collapsible Gate Locks - A lock for fixing to the front vertical bars of collapsible sliding metal gates. Such locks are usually hook bolt locks, claws bolt locks or clutch bolt locks, with special provision for correct alignment of bolt and striking plate or staple. 6.11 Combination Latch-A rarely used type of rim night latch, which has external bolts or levers fastening into a staple, operated by key from outside and knob from the inside. 6.12 Combination Lock - A lock that can be opened only when its dial has been set to the proper combination of symbols in the proper sequence. 6.13 Communicating Door Lock - A lock having both operated by a handle or knob from each side of the door, bolt, the upper half of which is operated by a turn or knob ofthe door and the lower half by a turn or knob from the a bpring bolt, and a divided from one side other side.

15

fSr7SSl (Part I) - 1975
6.14 Cupboard

vertical edge

of a cupboard

Lock -

A cabinet lock for use on the inside face and door.

6.l5 Cut Cupboard Lock - A cupboard lock for recessing into a door so as to lie flush with the surrounding surfaces. The bolt may be either a spring bolt withdrawn by a key, or a dead bolt. 6.16 Cut Drawer Lock - A drawer lock for recessing into the drawer front so as to lie flush with the surrounding surfaces. 6.17 Cylinder
Lock -

Any lock having one or more cylinders. Padlock )Any padlock

6.18 Cylinder Padlock ( Pin Tumbler having a pin tumbler mechanism. 6.19 Dead Lock 6.20 Disc Tumbler mechanism (see 4.1). 6.21 Disc Tumbler mechanism.

A lock having only a dead bolt.
Lock-Any

lock lock

having having

a

disc a disc

tumbler tumbler

-Padlock

-Any

6.22 Double Hand Lock-Any lock which may be used either as a #left hand or right hand lock without alteration. `6.23 Double Throw Lock - Any lock with a dead bolt which, after the ifirst throw, can be shot out further by an extra turn of the key, thus providing a longer throw. `6.24 Draw Back Lock - A rim lock in which the spring bolt is withdrawn either by a handle fixed to an extension of the bolt tail protruding through the end of the case or by a handle sliding on the face of the case. 6.25 Duplex Lock on the same bolt. A lock with two independent pin tumbler cylinders

6.26 Flanged Rim Lock - A rim lock having flanges along the upper and lower edges of the case to receive fixing screws. 6.27 Four-Way Lock -A rim lock, having a forend without a flange, which may be used as a left-hand or right-hand lock by fixing one face or the other against the door and reversing the bolt if necessary. 6.28 Full Rebated Lock -Any mortice lock having a forend shaped for fitting~either to the edge of one of a pair of doors which overlap at the meeting edges or to a single door with a rebated vertical edge, where the rebate is at or near the centre of the door thickness.
6.29 Galley Lock - A heavy flanged rim lock or rim dead lock, usually with a hot-dip galvanized iron case.

16

IS : 7881( Part I ) 4975 lock intended to be fitted into a hinged metal 6.30 Gate Lock -Any gate. A gate lock may have either a spring bolt or a dead bolt or both, the fixed projection of which is sufficient to allow the bolt to pass through the front vertical member of the gate. 6.31 Glass Door Lock - One of a veriety of locks designed or adapted for fixing to doors constructed either wholly or mainly of plate glass. 6.32 -Half Rebated Lock - Any mortice lock having a forend shaped for fitting either to the edge of one of a pair of doors which overlap at the meeting edges or to a single door with a rebated vertical edge, where the rebate is out of centre. 6.33 Hook bolt.
Bolt Lock -

Any lock of which the dead bolt is a hook

6.34 Horizontal Bolt Lock - Any two-bolt lock of which the follower is farther from the forend than is the keyhole and the length of the case is greater than the height. 6.35 Hotel Lock - A master keyed lock, for hotel guest rooms, having one or more of the following features: A spring bolt, withdrawn by handle or knob from inside and by the guest's key or a master key or the grand master key from outside. A slide bolt or other means, operated from inside, which prevents any key other than the grand master key from opening the door. A mechanism which permits the grand master key to secure the lock so that neither guest's nor master key can open the door.
6.36 Indicator Bolt+ A bolt which is fitted to the door in a public bath or lavatory for showing whether it is engaged or vacant.

6.37 Knob Set - A form of mortice lock or mortice latch consisting of two interdependent units set in the door at right angles, the one a tubular latch having a bevelled spring bolt, the other a cylindrical unit carrying integral furniture knob and the functional mechanism. 6.38 Lever Lock Any lock having a lever mechanism. Any padlock having a lever mechanism.

6.39 Lever Padlock -

6.40 Linkplate Lock - A flush fitting cabinet lock for use on a door having its closing edge overlapping the frame or central partition~of a cupboard. A linkplate is fixed to the frame ( or central partition and on closing the door, the link passes through a slot in the lock plate and is there secured by the bolt. 17

IS t 7881( Part I ) - 1975 6.41 ,Mortice Lock edge of a door. A lock for fixing in a mortice A dead lock for fixing cut in the closing in a mortice in the

6.42 Mortice Dead Lock closing edge of a door. 6.43 Narrow Case Lock

a) A rim lock intended doors. b) Any mortice c) Any rim latch

to be fixed

to the narrow

rails

of panelled

lock or latch

for doors having narrow

narrow

stiles.

for doors having

stiles.

6.44 Night LatchA lock having a single spring bolt, withdrawn from the outside by key and from the inside by a handle or knob. Night latches are made with either pin tumbler, lever or other mechanisms and have rim or mortice fixing. A dead locking mechanism is provided which is automatically, operated as soon as the door is shut closed. 6.45 Padlock -A detachable and portable lock, usually for use with hasps and staples, having a hinged or sliding shackle to pass throu'gh,a staple, eye or similar device fixed to the door. The shackle. is locked into, and released from, the case of the padlock by the key-operated bolt. 6.46 Panic Bolt Lock - A lock used in conjunction with a panic bqlt or panic latch to provide access by the keyholder ,from outside. Several types with different methods of operation are available but under no conditions does the use of the lock prevent emergency opening of .the , door from inside. 6.47 Pedestal Lock - A cabinet lock for flush fitting to a frame or the side of a cupboard which the door overlaps. A link@late is fixed_.to the inside face of the door and on closing the door the links enter the lock and are there secured by the bolt. 6.48 Pin Tumbler tumbler mechanism. 6.49 Pin Tumbler Lock (Cylinder Lock ) Any lock having a pin

.

Padlock

see 6.18. or more in

6.50 Plate Lock length.

A heavy rim dead lock usually 200 mm

1

6.51 Press Lock - A double hand rim dead lock having forends without flanges at each end of the case and having a reciprocating dead bolt with a head at each end arranged so that, when one head projects from one forend, the other head is flush with the other forend or vice versa. 6.52 Railway Carriage Lock A lock for doors of railway 18 carriages.

. 6.53 Rim Dead Lock door. 6.54 Rim Lock face of door. 6.55 Sash Lock A dead lock designed lock ( see-666 mortice

IS : 7881 (Part I)- 1975 for fixing to the face of a for fixing on the

A two-bolt An upright

) designed

lock ( see 6.41). or finishes specially chosen

6.56 Ship Lock - Any lock using materials to resist the corrosive action of sea water. .6.57 Shop Door Lock glazed doors with narrow handles is used.

An upright lock, of short backset for fitting to stiles. Normally, a two-bolt lock with lever ~a deadlock for use ) which with can

6.58 Single Sided Lock - Any lock ( normally be operated from only one side of a door. 6.59 Sliding doors. 6.60 Spring Door Lock Any lock suitable

sliding

Lock (Slam

Lock ) -

Any lock having

a spring

bolt.

-A padlock in which the shackle 6.61 Spring Shackle Padlock springs open when the key is turned and which usually incorporates a shackle bolt under pressure of a second spring so that the shackle becomes locked without the use of a key when pushed into the closed position. 6.62 Straight inside face and preparation of either a spring double-handed. Cupboard LockA lock, designed to be fixed on the vertical edge of a cupboard door necessitating no further the door than the cutting of the keyhole. The bolt may be bolt withdrawn by the key, or a dead bolt. It is usually

drawer lock for fixing on the drawer 6.63 Straight Drawer Lock -A front necessitating no further preparation of the drawer than the cutting of the keyhole. 6.64 Three-Way LockA cabinet lock so constructed that it can be used as a left-hand or a right-hand cupboard lock or a till or drawer lock without any, or with only minor, adjustment. 6.65 Trigger Action Lock-A cabinet lock spring loaded dead bolt withdrawn by the key drawn position by a trigger projecting from the door or drawer, the trigger is depressed by the the spring loaded dead bolt. 6.66 Two-Bolt LockA lock having 6.67 Upright LockA two-bolt centres on the same vertical line. lock having a square headed and retained>n the withselvedge. On closing the striking plate and releases

both dead bolt and latch bolt. having follower lock. and keyhole

6.68 Wardrobe LockA two-bolt upright lock may be either cut or straight fixing. 6.69 Window LockA lock different window constructions. specially 19

cabinet

A wardrobe the

designed

to suit any one-of

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110062 Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,91 113239399, 91 113239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Central Laboratory: Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Regional OtYices: Central *Eastern Northern Southern Industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201010 Telephone 8-77 00 32

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : 1114 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA700054
: SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

323 76 17 337 66 62 60 38 43 235 23 15 832 92 95

: C.I.T. Campus, IVCross Road, CHENNAI 600113 *Western : Manakalaya, E9 Behind Mar01 Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),
MUMBAI 400093

Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 550 13 48 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 a-28 88 of a-71 500001 19 96 37 5411

SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, Kalaikathir 5th Floor, Bhadbhada

- Tumkur Road,

Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751001 641037 121001

Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI. Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE Road, FARIDABAD 201001 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Savitri Complex, 5-8-58C,

5315 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th -By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 L. N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Marg, C-Scheme, Nagar. KANPUR Station Road, HYDERABAD 208005 E-52, Chitaranjan JAIPUR 302001

20 10 a3 37 29 25 21 66 76 23 89 23 26 23 05 621 17

117/418 8, Sarvodaya

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial Estate, -PATNA 800013 P. 0. Palayam, 695034 440010 T. C. No. 14/1421, University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM Institution of Engineers

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR

52 51 71 32 36 35

( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
Approach, P. 0. Princep Street,

`Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA 700072

27 10 85 Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 309 65 28 222 39 71 Square,

TSales Office is at Novelty Chambers,

*Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja BANGALORE 560002

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

