атг Ah IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


faced єт99 A іга areata 
Vrealacit 
WMT 1 ater 


(Teel FRAT ) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
Builders’ Hardware 
Part 1 Locks 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.190 


©BIS 2023 


+ 91985 эч 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 SER Bre AHL AMT, Ag (8 - 110002 
w МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2023 Price Group 8 


Utensils, Cutlery and Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee, MED 33 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision)was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Utensils, Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Divisional Council. 


This standard was first published in 1975. This revision has been taken place to keep pace with the latest technological 
developments and accordingly new definitions have been added. 


This standard is published in two parts. Other part in this series is: 
Part 2 Latches 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO BUILDERS’ HARDWARE 
PART 1 LOCKS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) covers definitions of terms 
relating to locks (including locks and latches in 
one case). 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standard is necessary adjunct to this 
standard. This standard contains provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of the 
standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


7881 (Part 2): 1976 Glossary of terms 
relating to builders’ 
hardware: Part 2 Latches 


FOREND PLATE 


LATCH BOLT 


3 GENERAL TERMS 

3.1 Automatic Deadlocking 

The employment of an antithrust action, whereby a 
spring-loaded bolt, when engaged in the staple or 
striking plate, is prevented from being forced back by 
pressure applied to the bolt head. The contact of the 
auxiliary bolt or plunger with the striking plate or staple 
releases a pawl behind the spring-loaded bolt head 
thereby securing that bolt. The operation of the handle 
or key disengages the pawl and withdraws the spring- 
loaded bolt. 


3.2 Backset 


The horizontal distance from the outside face of the 
foreend of a rim or mortice lock to the centre of the 
keyhole or follower or both (see Fig.1). 


FOLLOWER 


BODY OF LOCK 


KEY HOLE 


No 


BACKSET 


KEY 


KEY HEAD 


Fic. 1 SASH LOCK 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


3.3 Deadlocking (of Night Latches) 


An operation made by a complete turn of the key to 
give additional security to a night latch by 
preventing operation of the handle. 


3.4 Differ 


The variation between locks of similar design which 
allows each lock to be operated only by its own key 
and in special circumstances, by a master key (see 
4.15), grand master key (see 4.12) and emergency 
key. 


3.5 Dimensioning of Locks 


Measuring and describing the length, height, 
thickness and size of locks and latches. 


3.6 Drop 


The vertical distance in drawer and box locks from 
the top edge to the centre of the keyhole. 


3.7 Face of Door 


The plane surface of a door on either side as 
distinct from the edges. 


3.8 Fixed Projection of Bolt 


The distance by which, in certain circumstances, the 
bolt or bolts of a lock must protrude from the case 
in 

the withdrawn position. 


3.9 Handed Locks 


Locks for which the hand must be stated when 
ordering and which cannot be readily converted 
from one hand to hand to the other. Locks which are 
supplied to the purchaser in equal numbers of each 
hand. 


3.10 Handing of Doors 
The rules for determining and describing the 


relationship of the handing and the directions of the 
opening, of doors. 


3.11 Handing of Locks 


The rules for determining and describing 
the relationship of: 


a) The direction of opening of hinges or 
sliding doors; 

b) The inside and outside of the door; and 

с) The lock which is intended to be affixed to 
the door. 


3.12 Height of Lock 


The overall vertical dimension of the case of the 
lock (when the lock is held in the plane in which it 
is intended that is shall be fixed) excluding any 
exposed bolt head but including the thickness of the 
foreend, if any. 


3.13 Latch 


A device, openable from both sides and generally 
self-engaging, for holding closed a door, gate or the 
like. It consists of a movable part falling by gravity 
or sliding or moving by means of a spring into a 
retaining member of some sort, the moving part of 
the device being operated by a handle and not by a 
removable key [see IS 7881 (Part 2) for latch related 
terms]. 


3.14 Left-Hand Lock 


a) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of 
an inward opening hinged door which is on 
the left-hand of a person viewing the door 
from the outside; 

b) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of 
a cupboard, wardrobe or locker hinged 
door (that is outward opening) which is on 
the left hand of a person viewing the door 
from the outside; and 

с) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of 
a sliding door which is on the left-hand of 
a person viewing the door from the outside 
in such a position that the door moves to 
the left in closing. 


3.15 Length of Lock 


The overall horizontal dimension of the case, of the 
lock (when the lock is held in the plane in which it 
is intended that it shall be fixed) excluding any 


exposed bolt head but including the thickness of the 
foreend, if any. 
3.16 Lock 


a) A device, for securing a door, gate, lid, 
drawer or the like, when closed, consisting 
of a bolt or a system of bolts propelled or 
withdrawn by a mechanism operated by a 
key or other means; and 

b) A mechanism combining, in one case, a 
spring bolt and a dead bolt operated 
respectively by handles and a removable 
key. 


3.17 Master-Keying of Locks 


The predetermined arrangement of the mechanism 
of a group or suite of locks so that they may all be 
operated by one common key known as master key 
(see 4.15) in addition to their own individual keys. 


3.18 Outside of Door 
Any of the following sides of a door: 


a) The external side of a door in an external 
wall; 

b) The corridor side of a room door; 

c) The side of a communicating door on 
which the hinge knuckles are not seen 
when the door is closed; 

d) The side of either of two twin doors facing 
the space between them; or 

e) The room side of a closet, cupboard or 
wardrobe door. 


Note — The outside of sliding door fitted with secret 
hinges or pivots, and a door across a corridor or 
leading into or out of a vestibule or lobby cannot be 
described in general terms as it depends on individual 
circumstances. 


3.19 Passing 
a) The operating of a lock by a key; and 


b) The arrangement of the mechanism of a 
series of locks so that all may be operated 
by the same key, other than master key. 


3.20 Reverse Bolt Lock 


A lock in which the spring bolt has the bevel set to 
suit an outward opening door. 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


3.20.1 Left-Hand Reverse Bolt Lock 


A reverse bolt lock intended to be fitted to tat edge 
of an outward opening door which is on the left- 
hand of a person viewing the door from outside. 


3.20.2 Right-Hand Reverse Bolt Lock 


A reverse bolt lock intended to be fitted to that edge 
of an outward opening door which is on the right- 
hand of a person viewing the door from outside. 


3.21 Right-Hand Lock 


a) A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of 
an inward opening hinged door which is on 
the right-hand of a person viewing the door 
from the outside; 

A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of a 
cupboard, wardrobe or locker hinged door 
(that is outward opening) which is on the 
right-hand of a person viewing the door 
from the outside; and 

A lock intended to be fitted to that edge of a 
sliding door which is on the right-hand of a 
person viewing the door from the outside in 
such a position that the door moves to the 
right in closing. 


b 


ma 


c 


wm 


3.22 Secured 


The state of a lock or mechanism or part of a lock 
when the use of the correct key or more than one 
key is a necessary preliminary to the withdrawal or 
release of the bolt. 


3.23 Shoot (of Bolt) 


The distance a spring bolt travels under the action 
of the spring. 


3.24 Thickness of Lock 
3.24.1 Overall Thickness of Lock 


The maximum dimension measured over the case 
and the cap of the lock in the horizontal plane at 
right angles to the length of the lock, including any 
raised portions of the case, or cap, or rivet heads 
projecting therefrom. 


3.24.2 Outside Thickness of Lock 


The dimension measured over the case and the cap 
of the lock in a horizontal plane at right angles to 
the length of the lock, excluding any raised portions 


1$ 7881 (Раг 1): 2023 


of the case, or cap, or rivet heads projecting 
therefrom. 


3.25 Throw (of Bolt) 


The distance a dead bolt moves in the outward 
direction under the action of the key. 


4 KEYS 
4.1 Bit/Bolt Ward 


That part of a key which is shaped or cut especially 
to operate the mechanism of its own lock. 


4.2 Bit Key 


A type of key the bit of which projects from the 
shank at right angles in the same plane. 


4.3 Blade 
The bit of a cylinder key. 
4.4 Blank Key 


A key which has been made to suit the type of lock 
but of which the bit has not been finally shaped to 
suit an individual lock. 


4.5 Flute Milled Key 


A key having longitudinal grooves and/or 
projections on the bit which corresponds with 
projections and/or grooves in the keyhole. 


4.6 Collar 


A circular flange or projecting ring on the shank of 
a key that limits distance through which the key may 
be inserted. 


4.7 Corrugated Key 


A billeted key made of sheet in which corrugations 
are pressed or stamped in the bit. 


4.8 Cylinder Key 


a) Any key to operate a cylinder; and 
b)A pin tumbler key. 


4.9 Disc Tumbler Key 


A bulleted key which is flat and has a long bit, or 
blade, in which ‘V’ cutes are made on one or both 
edges to operate the tumbler in a disc tumbler lock. 


4.10 Double Bitted Key 


A key having bit with cuts on either side of the 
shank. 


4.11 Flat Key 


A key made from sheet metal without grooves or 
corrugations in the thickness but having the edges 
shaped. 


4.12 Grand Master Key 


A key which will pass every lock in a number of 
suits of master-keyed locks. 


4.13 Key Head/Bow 


The part of the key that is held in the fingers while 
operating a lock. The key head or the crown is also 
used for branding, coding or numbering. 


4.14 Key 


A small piece of shaped metal with incisions cut to 
fit the wards of a particular lock, which is inserted 
into a lock and turned to open or close it. The lock 
can have one or multiple copies of the keys based 
on manufacturer’s judgement or as required by 
purchaser. 


4.15 Master Key 


When a set of locks can be operated by a common 
key in addition to their individual key. 


4.16 Nose 


The outer edge of the bit. 


4.17 Paracentric Key 


A pin tumbler key or a disc tumbler key having on 
both sides of the bit, or blade, bullet grooves which 
in depth, equal or exceed half the thickness of the 
key. The corresponding bullet projection in the 
keyhole thus do not admit a flat strip of metal. 


4.18 Pin Key 


A bit key having a solid pin which projects beyond 
the bit. 


4.19 Pin of Key 


That end, solid and circular in cross section, of the 
shank of the pin key from which the bit projects. 


4.20 Рїре Кеу 


A bit key having a hollow shank, to fit over а drill 
pin, and one edge of the drill bit flush with the end 
of the shank. 


4.21 Individual Key 
A key to a lock in a master-keyed suite of locks. 
4.22 Shank 


The part of a key between the head and the end, 
excluding the bit. 


4.23 Shoulder 


A projection on the edge of a cylinder key or other 
flat key that limits the distance through which the 
key may be inserted. 


4.24 Skeleton Key 


A bit key having the bit cut away to avoid fixed 
obstructions in a lock, leaving only sufficient 
material to lift movable detainers and move the bolt. 


4.25 Steps 


Those cuts on the outer edge of a bit or blade which 
operate movable detainers or the bolt, or both. 


4.26 Sub-Master Key (Sun-Suite Key) 


A key which passes only a given number of locks 
(sub-suite) in a suite of master keyed locks. 


4.27 Ward Cuts 
Those cuts in the bit to pass over the wards in a lock. 
4.28 Unidirectional Key 


The key which can be inserted into the lock or the 
plug in only one direction to operate it. 


4.29 Reversible Key 


The key which can be inserted into the lock or the 
plug in 0° and 180° to operate it. 


4.30 Two-Way Key 


The key which can operate the lock from inside as 
well as outside of the door. 


4.31 Step Difference 


The distance between two consecutive designed 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


detainers is called step difference. This is generally 
constant across the detainers/wards. 


4.32 Ferrule/Key Guide 


It is the part of the lock which guides the key to the 
key-hole. For flat keys, it serves as circular guide 
for rotation. 


4.33 Key Back Rounding 


The rounding on the back edge of the pin cylinder 
key opposite the bits to aid plug rotation and ensure 
well defined rest for key blade. 


4.34 Keyed to Differ 
When a set of lock has unique key for all lock. 
4.35 Keyed alike 


When set of locks can be operated by a common 
key. 


5 LOCK MECHANISMS 


5.1 Disc Tumbler Mechanism (Flat Tumbler 
Mechanism) 


A lock mechanism having a cylindrical plug 
rotating in a body and having, as its principle 
feature, movable detainers in the form of flat plates 
(disc tumblers) sliding generally under spring 
pressure, in transverse slots in the plug. The disc 
tumblers project from one end or the other of the 
slots except when correctly aligned by the key. 
When secured, the projecting tumblers engage in 
two or more diametrically opposite longitudinal 
grooves in the sides of the plug hole and thus 
prevent the plug from turning. 


5.2 Double Hand Tumbler Mechanism 


A lock mechanism for rim locks which can be used 
as left-hand or right-hand without alteration by 
turning the lock upside down while moving it from 
one edge of the door to the other. The mechanism 
has as its principal features: 


a) a tumbler acted upon by the key directly for 
one hand and indirectly, through an interlock 
pivoted member (the dummy tumbler), for 
the other hand; and 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


b) a double ended keyhole (so that the key may 
be inserted and turned in the conventional 
manner for either hand). 


5.3 Lever Mechanism 


A lock mechanism having, as its principal feature, 
опе or more levers to work as detainers. 


5.4 Lock Mechanism 


The arrangement of parts of locks and the way in 
which the parts perform in order to provide the 
differing and security elements in locks operated 
by one or more keys or other means. 


5.5 Notched Detainer Mechanism 
A lock mechanism having as its principal features: 


a) movable detainers, each in the form of a fat 
plate turning on a pivot, or sliding in 
guides, when acted upon by the key and 
having a shallow notch in one edge; and 

a pivoted L-shaped member, one arm of 
which, either by direct engagement or 
indirectly, prevents movement of the bolt 
and the other arm of which is constrained 
by the notched edge of each of the 
detainers. When the detainers are lifted by 
the correct key the notches are so aligned 
as to permit movement of the L-shaped 
member and, hence, of the bolt. 


b 


ma 


5.6 Pin Tumbler Mechanism 


A lock mechanism having a cylindrical plug 
rotating in a body and, as its principal feature, 
movable detainers in the form of pairs of pins and 
drivers (pin tumblers) fitting, together with their 
springs, in holes in the plug and body. In the 
secured position the drivers bridge the interface 
between body and plug thus preventing the plug 
from turning. Insertion of the correct key lifts the 
pins and drivers against their springs and positions 
them so that the joint faces between pin and driver 
lie on the interface between plug and body so 
permitting the plug to turn. The keyway is a 
longitudinal radial slot in the plug. 


5.7 Tumbler Mechanism 


A simple lock mechanism having, as its principal 
feature, at least one tumbler. 


5.8 Warded Mechanism 


Any lock mechanism making use of wards (see 
6.72) in the case and ward cuts (see 4.27) in the 
key, solely to provide additional differs. 


6 LOCK PARTS 


6.1 Back Plate 


The plate, for fixing on the inside of a door, by 
which the locking mechanism (for example, a pin 
tumbler cylinder) is attached to the door. 


6.2 Bevelled Bolt 


A latch bolt having the outer end shaped by 
beveling of the vertical face. 


6.3 Bevelled Foreend (Splayed Foreend) 
A Foreend shaped to fit the closing edge of a door 
which is not at right angles to the face of the door. 


6.4 Bolt 


The part of the lock which provides the fastening 
by protruding from the lock case to engage in the 
staple, striking plate, link shackle or other member. 


6.5 Bolt Head 
The portion of a bolt which protrudes beyond the 


case or Foreend. 


6.6 Bolt Hole 

The hole in a lock case Foreend, striking plate or 
staple to guide or admit the bolt. 

6.7 Bolt Latch 


A bolt tail which is thin and flat. 


6.8 Bolt Rod 


A bolt tail which is circular in cross section. 


6.9 Bolt Stump/Bolt Square Pin 


The part of bolt, usually rectangular in section end 
at right angles to the bolt tail, which passes through 
the slot or gating in the levers as the bolt moves. 


6.10 Bolt Tail/Bolt Plate 


The part of the bolt attached to the bolt head and 
lying always within the case. 


6.11 Box Striking Plate/Receptacle 


A striking plate (see 6.68) having a rectangular 
housing to receive and hold the head of the dead 
bolt (see 6.22). 


6.12 Bush 


A sleeve or ferrule replacing the metal around the 
keyhole and/or the follower to give additional 
strength or bearing. 


6.13 Cap 


The part which is screwed or otherwise fixed to 
the case to cover the internal components. 


6.14 Case 


The part of a lock or latch, usually box-like in 
form into which one or more bolts are assembled. 
The security mechanism also is usually housed in 
the case but certain types of mechanism (for 
example, pin tumbler cylinders) are not. 


6.15 Catch 


A device to hold the spring bolt of a lock or latch 
in the ‘in’ or ‘out’ position or both. 


6.16 Catch Lever 
A pivoted lever operating a catch. 
6.17 Claw Bolt 


A type of dead bolt having pivoted claws which, 
when the bolt is shot, swing out sideways to 
engage with the striking plate. 


6.18 Clutch Bolt 


A pivoted spring bolt, with a head shaped in the 
form of a hook, which is displaced in a vertical 
plane on meeting the striking plate. 


6.19 Connecting Link 


A straight metal link which transmits the motion 
from the cylinder connecting the key-operated 
mechanism to the bolt in the lock or latch case. 


6.20 Cylinder 


A unit, separate from the lock which it operates 
but fixed to it on installation, which contains one 
of a variety of key-operated mechanisms. 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


6.21 Cylinder Rose 


A metal ring surrounding the end of cylinder 
assembly. For many rim cylinders, it forms part 
of the means of fixing the cylinder to the door; in 
other instances its other purpose is decorative. 


6.22 Dead Bolt 


The bolt of a lock which is moved in both 
directions by the key. In some locks the dead bolt 
may be operated in both directions by thumb turn 
or knob from one side and a key or knob from the 
other. 


6.23 Disc Tumbler 


A movable detainer in the form of a shaped flat 
plate pierced by a hole through which the key 
passes. 


6.24 Disc Tumbler Cylinder 
A cylinder containing a disc tumbler mechanism. 
6.25 Double Bushed 


When both the keyhole and the follower hole of a 
lock are provided with bushes. 


6.26 Double Foreend 


A combination of an inner Foreend and an outer 
Foreend. 


6.27 Drill Pin 


A fixed pin on which a pipe key fits and rotates to 
operate the mechanism. 


6.28 Driver (Roller) 


The upper of two small solid metal pins which 
together form one of the sets of movable detainers 
in a pin tumbler lock. 


6.29 Drop 
A swinging or sliding cover to a keyhole. 
6.30 Dummy Tumbler 


A flat L-shaped pivoted member, used in a double 
hand tumbler mechanism, the short arm of which 
is linked with the tumbler so that the movement 
of one is imparted to the other. For one hand, the 
long arm of the dummy tumbler is acted upon 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


directly by the key and thus disengages the 
tumbler from the bolt. 


6.31 Flush Slide 


A sliding device, having no projection and with a 
recess for the finger or thumb, which operates a 
catch, slide bolt or the like. 


6.32 Follower 


The part of a lock or latch action which, when 
turned by the spindle or connecting bar, 
withdraws the spring bolt. 


6.33 Foreend 


The part of a mortice lock or latch, or that part of 
the case of a rim lock or latch, through which the 
bolts protrude. 


6.34 Hook Bolt 


A type of dead bolt which, when actuated, 
emerges from the Foreend in a circular path and, 
when fully shot, resembles a hook. 


6.35 Inner Foreend 


That Foreend which is attached to the case of a 
mortice lock or latch when a double Foreend is 
used. 


6.36 Jumbo Bolt 
A side bolt in a rim latch. 
6.37 Keyhole 


a) The hole in the case, or cap, of a lock 
through which the key is inserted to operate 
the mechanism; and 

b) The keyway in the plug of a pin tumbler or 
a disc tumbler lock into which the key is 
inserted to operate the mechanism. 


6.38 Latch Bolt 


That bolt of a lock or latch which is held in the 
shot position by a spring or by a weight and is 
withdrawn by turning the handle or key or is 
pushed in by contact with the striking plate or 
staple. 


6.39 Lever 


A flat movable detainer, provided at one end and 
perforated by a shaped slot or gating which in 
the secured position prevents axial movement of 
the bolt of the lock but which, when lifted by its 
initial contact with a rotating key bit, allows the 
bolt stump to past through the gating, thus 
enabling the bolt to be thrown or withdrawn and 
then falls back to the secured position as the key 
passes out of contact. 


6.40 Lever Cylinder 


a) A cylinder containing а lever mechanism; 
and 

b) A cylinder containing a notched detainer 
mechanism. 


6.41 Link Plate 
A flat rectangular plate, for use with cabinet 


locks, having one or more notched, hooked or U- 
shaped projections which enter the lock and are 
secured by engagement of the bolt therewith. 


6.42 Lip (of Striking Plate) 


A projection from the side of the striking plate, 
bent when fixed, which projects the frame and 
facilitates depression of the head of the latch bolt 
when door is closed. 


6.43 Locking Plate 


Either a striking plate (see 6.68) or a box striking 
plate (see 6.11). 


6.44 Locking Snib 
A catch on a rim latch. 
6.45 Locking Turn 


A small handle, lever or knob which is turned 
manually to operate a catch. 


6.46 Movable Detainer 


That part of the mechanism of a lock which must 
first be moved by the key into a predetermined 
position before the key can withdraw the bolt. 


6.47 Outer Foreend (Face Plate) 


That Foreend, often having a decorative 
purpose, which is fixed to the inner Foreend of 
a mortice lock or latch to form a double 
Foreend. 


6.48 Pin (of a Pin Tumbler Lock) 


The lower of two small solid metal pins which 
together form one of the set of movable detainers 
in a pin tumbler lock. 


6.49 Pin Tumbler 


A movable detainer consisting of a pin and a 
driver. 


6.50 Pin Tumbler Cylinder 


A cylinder containing a pin tumbler mechanism 
(see 5.6). 


6.51 Plate 
The part of a cabinet lock, flat or bent at right 


angles to form a selvedge, by which the lock is 
fixed to the door. 


6.52 Plug 


a) The part of a pin tumbler lock (see 7.48) 
into which the key enters and which the 
key turns; 

b) The rotating part in a disc or wafer 
tumbler lock; 

c) The part of a cylinder which rotates when 
the key is turned; and 

d) A support for a flat key to permit it to turn 
in the lock. 


6.53 Push Button 


A plunger which when depressed operates a 
catch. 


6.54 Rebated Foreend 
The shaped Foreend of a rebated lock. 


6.55 Reversible Bolt 


A bevelled spring bolt which is designed so that 
it may be turned over in the case either to make 
a lock or latch suitable for use in either 
direction of door opening or, frequently, to 
reverse the hand of a mortice lock or latch. 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


6.56 Roller Bolt 


A latch bolt having a roller instead of a bevel 
incorporated in its head. 


6.57 Roller Catch 


A rotary catch having a pivoted segment with a 
serrated edge for operation by the thumb. 


6.58 Round-Ended Foreend 


A Foreend, of a mortice lock, with semi-circular 
ends. 


6.59 Rounded Foreend 


A Foreend shaped to follow the rounded edge of 
a swing door. 


6.60 Selvedge 
The Foreend of a flush fitting cabinet lock. 
6.61 Shackle 


The hinged or sliding part of a padlock which 
passes through the staple, loop or other device 
on the door. 


6.62 Shackle Bolt 


The bolt within the body of a padlock, which 
engages with the notch in the shackle when 
locked. 


6.63 Slide Bolt (Snib Bolt) 


A small supplementary bolt, on a lock or latch, 
which is generally operated only from the inside 
of the door by finger or thumb. 


6.64 Slide in Foreend 


A flush slide fixed in the Foreend of a mortice 
night latch. 


6.65 Spring Bolt 
A spring operated latch bolt. 
6.66 Staple (Keeper) 


A metal loop both ends of which are driven into 
a surface to hold the hook, hasp, or bolt of a lock. 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


6.67 Stop Works 


Any device, operated by finger or thumb but not 
with a key, which secures, or provides additional 
security for a spring bolt, either by holding the 
spring bolt in the ‘shot out’ position or by 
preventing the outside handle from withdrawing 
the spring bolt. 


6.68 Striking Plate 


A plate, fixed to a door jamb or frame, with one 
or more bolt holes in which the bolt or bolts of a 
lock or latch engages. 


6.69 Tumbler (Lever Tumbler) 


A pivoted plate which is used in a vertical plane 
and which has a small horizontal projection on 
its top edge to engage with either one of two 
notches (which correspond with the thrown and 
withdrawn positions) in the top edge of the dead 
bolt to prevent axial movement of the bolt. 
Rotating the key first lifts the tumbler, 
disengaging it from the notch in the bolt, and 
then throws the bolt and finally allows the 
tumbler to fall to the secured position. 


6.70 Thumb Slide (Snib, Stop Slide) 


A sliding device which operates a catch or a slide 
bolt or the like. 


6.71 Wafer Tumbler Cylinder 


A cylinder containing a wafer tumbler 
mechanism. 


6.72 Ward 


Projections inside a lock at or near the keyhole 
to prevent a key from entering fully, or from 
turning after entering, unless the bit is suitably 
shaped. 


6.73 Types of Cylinders 


a) 1С means half cylinder operated by key 
from one side; 

b) 2C means operated by key from both side; 

с) ІСК means operated by key from one side 
and by knob from other side; 

d) 1K means half cylinder operated by knob 
from one side; and 

e) BK means keyless cylinder means 
operated by knob from one side and by 
coin from other side 


6.74 Hasp 


It is the slotted thing (hinges latch, door, drawer 
etc) that goes over it before we throw a padlock 
through the staple hole to secure the slotted 
thing. 


7 LOCK TYPES 
7.1 Bathroom Lock 


A lock having a spring bolt (see 6.65) operated 
by handles on both sides and a bolt operated only 
from the inside of the door by means of a small 
knob or turn. 


7.2 Box Lock 


A cabinet lock for fitting to the front of a box 
having a hinged lid. The bolt of the lock has one 
or, usually, two locking points to engage with a 
link plate fastened to the lid. The bolt may be 
either a spring bolt withdrawn by a key or a dead 
bolt. 


7.3 Budget or Cam Lock 


A lock having a pivoted tongue which, when 
turned 90° by a key, swings into a slot in the 
locking plate to serve as a dead bolt. 


7.4 Cabinet Lock 


Any lock intended for fitting to boxes, chests, 
cupboards, desks, drawers and the like. The bolt 
slides in one or two directions. 


7.5 Chain Padlock 


Any padlock, having permanently attached to it, 
either: 


a) One end of a length of stout chain for 
passing round and securing, for example, 
two stiles of a gate; or 

b) One end of a length of light safety chain 
to prevent the padlock from being 
removed or mislaid. 


7.6 Claw Bolt Lock 


A dead lock of which the bolt is a claw bolt (see 
6.17). Claw bolt locks are frequently used on 
sliding doors. 


7.7 Close Shackle Padlock 


A padlock having a minimum amount of shackle 
visible when secured so as to fit snugly over hasp 
or locking bar to increase the difficulty of cutting 
the shackle or forcing it open by an implement. 


7.8 Clutch Bolt Lock 


A lock for sliding doors or collapsible gates, 
having a clutch bolt (see 6.18). The clutch bolt, 
being a form of spring bolt, engages with the 
striking plate on closing the door. 


7.9 Coin Operated Lock (Automatic Lock) 


A rim lock, for fitting to the outside of WC 
doors, intended to collect a fee each time the WC 
is used. Insertion of a coin or coins permits the 
bolt to be withdrawn. Coins are collected in a 
locked container. An additional key for opening 
the door from the outside in an emergency is 
provided. 


7.10 Collapsible Gate Locks 


A lock for fixing to the front vertical bars of 
collapsible sliding metal gates. Such locks are 
usually hook bolt locks, claws bolt locks or 
clutch bolt locks, with special provision for 
correct alignment of bolt and striking plate or 
staple. 


7.11 Combination Latch 


A rarely used type of rim night latch, which has 
external bolts or levers fastening into a staple, 
operated by a key from outside and knob from 
the inside. 


7.12 Combination Lock 


A lock that can be opened only when its dial has 


FOREND PLATE 


DEAD BOLT 


Р 
6% ы 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


been set to the proper combination of symbols in 
the proper sequence. 


7.13 Communicating Door Lock 


A lock having both a spring bolt, operated by a 
handle or knob from each side of the door, and a 
divided bolt, the upper half of which is operated 
by a turn or knob from one side of the door and 
the lower half by a turn or knob from the other 
side. 


7.14 Cupboard Lock 


A cabinet lock for use on the inside face and 
vertical edge of a cupboard door. 


7.15 Cut Cupboard Lock 


A cupboard lock for recessing into a door so as 
to lie flush with the surrounding surfaces. The 
bolt may be either a spring bolt withdrawn by a 
key, or a dead bolt. 


7.16 Cut Drawer Lock 


A drawer lock for recessing into a drawer front 
so as to lie flush with the surrounding surfaces. 


7.17 Cylinder Lock 

Any lock having one or more cylinders. 

7.18 Cylinder Padlock (Pin Tumbler Padlock) 
Any padlock having a pin tumbler mechanism. 
7.19 Dead Lock 


A lock having only a dead bolt (see Fig. 2). 


BODY OF LOCK 


KEY HOLE 


KEY HEAD 


FIG. 2 DEAD LOCK 


11 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


7.20 Disc Tumbler Lock 


Any lock having a disc tumbler mechanism 
(see 5.1). 


7.21 Disc Tumbler Padlock 
Any lock having a disc tumbler mechanism. 
7.22 Double Hand Lock 


Any lock which may be used either as a left hand 
or right hand lock without alteration. 


7.23 Double Throw Lock 


Any lock with a dead bolt which, after the first 
throw, can be shot out further by an extra turn of 
the key, thus providing a longer throw. 


7.24 Draw Back Lock 


A rim lock in which the spring bolt is withdrawn 
either by a handle fixed to an extension of the 
bolt tail protruding through the end of the case 
or by a handle sliding on the face of the case. 


7.25 Duplex Lock 


A lock with two independent pin tumbler 
cylinders on the same bolt. 


7.26 Flanged Rim Lock 


A rim lock having flanges along the upper and 
lower edges of the case to receive fixing screws. 


7.27 Four-Way Lock 


A rim lock, having a Foreend without a flange, 
which may be used as a left-hand or right-hand 
lock by fixing one face or other against the door 
reversing the bolt is necessary. 


7.28 Full Rebated Lock 


Any mortice lock having a Foreend shaped for 
fitting either to the edge of one of a pair of doors 
which overlap at the meeting edge or to a single 
door with a rebated vertical edge, where the 
rebate is at or near the centre of the door 
thickness. 


7.29 Galley Lock 


A heavy flanged rim lock or rim dead lock, 
usually with a hot-dip galvanized iron case. 


7.30 Gate Lock 


Any lock intended to be fitted into a hinged 
metal gate. A gate lock may have either a spring 
bolt or a dead bolt or both, the fixed projection 
of which is sufficient to allow the bolt to pass 
through the front vertical member of the gate. 


7.31 Glass Door Lock 


One of a variety of locks designed or adapted 
for fixing to doors constructed either wholly or 
mainly of plate glass. 


7.32 Half Rebated Lock 


Any mortice lock having a Foreend shaped for 
fitting either to the edge of one of a pair of 
doors which overlap at the meeting edges or to 
a single door with a rebated vertical edge, 
where the rebate is out of centre. 


7.33 Hook Bolt Lock 
Any lock of which the dead bolt is a hook bolt. 
7.34 Horizontal Bolt Lock 


Any two-bolt lock of which the follower is 
farther from the Foreend than is the keyhole 
and the length of the case is greater than the 
height. 


7.35 Hotel Lock 


A master keyed lock, for hotel guest rooms, 
having one or more of the following features: 


a) A spring bolt, withdrawn by handle or 
knob from inside and by the guest’s key 
or a master key or the grand master key 
from outside; 

A slide bolt or other means, operated 
from inside, which prevents any key other 
than the grand master key from opening 
the door; and 

A mechanism which permits the grand 
master key to secure the lock so that 
neither guest’s nor master key can open 
the door. 


b 


ma 


c 


wm 


7.36 Indicator Bolt 


A bolt which is fitted to the door in a public 
bath or lavatory for showing whether it is 
engaged or vacant. 


7.37 Knob Set 


A form of mortice lock or mortice latch 
consisting of two interdependent units set in the 
door at right angles, the one a tubular latch 
having a beveled spring bolt, the other a 
cylindrical unit carrying integral furniture knob 
and the functional mechanism. 


7.38 Lever Lock 

Any lock having a lever mechanism. 
7.39 Lever Padlock 

Any padlock having a lever mechanism. 
7.40 Link Plate Lock 


A flush fitting cabinet lock for use on a door 
having its closing edge overlapping the frame 
or central partition of a cupboard. A link plate 
is fixed to the frame or central partition and on 
closing the door, the link passes through a slot 
in the lock plate and is there secured by the bolt. 


7.41 Mortice Lock 


A lock for fixing in a mortice cut in the closing 
edge of a door. 


7.42 Mortice Dead Lock 


A dead lock for fixing in a mortice in the 
closing edge of a door. 


7.43 Narrow Case Lock 


a) A rim lock intended to be fixed to the 
narrow rails of paneled doors; 

b) Any mortice lock or latch for doors 
having narrow stiles; and 

c) Any rim latch for doors having narrow 
stiles. 


7.44 Night Latch 


A lock having a single spring bolt, withdrawn 
from the outside by key and from the inside of 
a handle or knob. Night latches are made with 
either pin tumbler, lever or other mechanisms 
and have rim or mortice fixing. A dead lock 
mechanism is provided which is automatically, 
operated as soon as the door is shut closed. 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


7.45 Padlock 


A detachable and portable lock, usually for use 
with haps and staples, having a hinged or 
sliding shackle to pass through a staple, eye or 
similar device fixed to the door. The shackle is 
locked into, and release from, the case of the 
padlock by the key-operated bolt. 


7.46 Panic Bolt Lock 


A lock used in conjunction with a panic bolt or 
panic latch to provide access by the keyholder 
from outside. Several types with different 
methods of operation are available but under no 
conditions does the use of the lock prevent 
emergency opening of the door from inside. 


7.47 Pedestal Lock 


A cabinet lock for flush fitting to frame or the 
side of a cupboard which the door overlaps. A 
link plate is fixed to the inside face of the door 
and on closing the door the links enter the lock 
and are there secured by the bolt. 


7.48 Pin Tumbler Lock (Cylinder Lock) 
Any lock having a pin tumbler mechanism. 
7.49 Pin Tumbler Padlock — see 7.18. 
7.50 Plate Lock 


A heavy rim dead lock usually 200 mm or more 
in length. 


7.51 Press Lock 


A double hand rim dead lock having Foreends 
without flanges at each end of the case and 
having a reciprocating dead bolt with a head at 
each end arranged so that, when one head 
projects from one Foreend, the other head is 
flush with the other Foreend or vice versa. 


7.52 Railway Carriage Lock 
A lock for doors of railway carriages. 
7.53 Rim Dead Lock 


A dead lock designed for fixing to the face of a 
door. 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


7.54 Rim Lock 


A two-bolt lock (see 7.66) designed for fixing 
on the face of door. 


7.55 Sash Lock 
An upright mortice lock (see 7.41 and Fig 1). 
7.56 Ship Lock 


Any lock using materials or finishes specially 
chosen to resist the corrosive action of sea 
water. 


7.57 Shop Door Lock 


An upright lock, of short backset for fitting to 
glazed doors with narrow stiles. Normally, a 
two-bolt lock with lever handles is used. 


7.58 Single Sided Lock 


Any lock (normally a deadlock) which can be 
operated from only one side of a door. 


7.59 Sliding Door Lock 

Any lock suitable for use with sliding doors. 
7.60 Spring Lock (Slam Lock) 

Any lock having a spring bolt. 

7.61 Spring Shackle Padlock 


A padlock in which the shackle springs open 
when the key is turned and which usually 
incorporates a shackle bolt under pressure of a 
second spring so that the shackle becomes 
locked without the use of a key when pushed 
into the closed position. 


7.62 Straight Cupboard Lock 


A lock, designed to be fixed on the inside face 
and vertical edge of a cupboard door 
necessitating no further preparation of the door 
than the cutting of the keyhole. The bolt may be 
either a spring bolt withdrawn by the key, or a 
dead bolt. It is usually double-handed. 


7.63 Straight Drawer Lock 


A drawer lock for fixing on the drawer front 
necessitating no further preparation of the 
drawer than the cutting of the keyhole. 


7.64 Three-Way Lock 


A cabinet lock so constructed that it can be used 
as a left-hand or a right-hand cupboard lock or 
a till or drawer lock without any, or with only 
minor, adjustment. 


7.65 Trigger Action Lock 


A cabinet lock having a square headed spring 
loaded dead bolt withdrawn by the key and 
retained in the withdrawn position by a trigger 
projecting from the selvedge. On closing the 
door or drawer, the trigger is depressed by the 
striking plate and releases the spring loaded 
dead bolt. 


7.66 Two-Bolt Lock 
A lock having both dead bolt and latch bolt. 
7.67 Upright Lock 


A two-bolt lock having follower and keyhole 
centres on the same vertical line. 


7.68 Wardrobe Lock 


A two-bolt upright cabinet lock. A wardrobe 
lock may be either cut or straight fixing. 


7.69 Window Lock 


A lock specially designed to suit any one of the 
different window constructions. 


7.70 One-Way Lock 


The lock which can be operated by key only 
from one side of the door. 


7.71 Two-Way Lock 


The lock which can be operated by key from 
inside as well as outside of the door. 


IS 7881 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Utensils, Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee, MED 33 


Organisation 


In Personal Capacity (A-504, K.G Chandra Vista, OMR, 
Opposite to Satyabhama University, Sholinganallur, 
Chennai) 


Aligarh Locks Manufacturers and Traders Association, 
Aligarh 


Anna Aluminium Ltd, Cochin 


Butterfly Gandhimati Appliances Ltd, Chennai 


Central Electrochemical Materials Science Division, 
Karaikudi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Consumer Voice, New Delhi 

Delhi Test House, New Delhi 

D.P Garg and Company Pvt Ltd, Noida 

Federation of Hardware Manufacturers and Traders Welfare 
Association, Gurugram 


Godrej and Boyce Manufacturer’s Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Hamilton Housewares Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Hawkins Cookers Ltd, Thane 


Representative(s) 


SHRI G. SHANMUGANATHAN (Chairperson) 


SHRIP. L. SHIROMANI 
SHRI DHRUV MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. CHANDRASHEKRAN PILLAI 
SHRI V. THULASIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SHANMUGAVELU 
SHRI A. BASKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI A. VIJAIMIRATHARAJ (Alternate П) 


DR S. VASUDEVAN 
DR S. MURALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SURINDER KUMAR 
SHRIR. K. SARASWAT (Alternate) 


SHRIB. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRIM. A. U. KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH GOEL 
SHRI ROHIT GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDIP GARG 


SHRI TAKSHAY BANSAL 
SHRI NAVEEN HANDA (Alternate I) 
SHRI VIKAS NARWAL (Alternate П) 


SHRI K ЅНІТІ К. GAIKAR 
SHRI VINAYAK G. NALGIRKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY MORESHWAR MHATRE 
SHRI INDUPRAKASH SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI VIKAS SURENDRA KUMAR BHATIA 
(Young Professional) 


SHRIB. S. SETHI 
SHRI RAHUL PATHAK (Alternate) 
SHRI RAVINDER MALI (Young Professional) 


IS 7881 (Part 1): 2023 


Organisation 


Jindal Stainless Ltd, Hisar 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 


MSME Testing Centre, New Delhi 


National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


Pritam International, Baddi 


Royal Kitchen Appliances Pvt Ltd, Sonepat 


Sat Rattan Engineering Works, New Delhi 


Sriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India, Salem 


TTK Prestige Ltd, Bengaluru 


In Personal Capacity (179, Sri Sai, 13th Cross, Ananthnagar 


Phase 1, Electronic City Post, Bengaluru) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI BISWABASU ROY CHOWDHURY 
SMT NISHA GOEL (Alternate) 


ER M. SATYANARAYANA 
SHRIS. J. KOLARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHANT KUMAR SOM 
SHRI SUVANKAR SANTRA (Alternate) 


DR S. GHOSH CHOWDHURY 
DR K. L. SAHOO (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL KHERA 
SHRI ROHIT KHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH AGARWAL 


SHRIG. L. KHERA 
SHRI RAHUL KHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR 
SHRI ANEESH KUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PUNEET KAPOOR (Alternate II) 


SHRI L. SIVAKUMAR 
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR MURATHIA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANTO VIMAL ANAND 
SHRI RAJASEKARAN S. (Alternate) 


SHRI B VISWANATH SHENOY 
SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 


HEAD (UTENSILS, CUTLERY DOMESTIC HARDWARE) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(UTENSILS, CUTLERY DOMESTIC HARDWARE), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 33 (18970). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


