INATT HA IS 3999 : 2015 
Indian Standard 


Aa amha see aotr Sir 
nes (RAT) — ale 
au — If aña 
(TEAM FRAT) 


Casein Based Aqueous Pigments 
and Finishes — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.140.10 


© BIS 2015 


ada AMA AN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM YAA, 9 ERRE AHL art, ae faeell-110002 
oy MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2015 Price Group 3 


Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CHD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


Casein based aqueous pigments are used widely in the country along with casein based binders and synthetic 
polymeric lattices. The water dispersible pigments, that is, the basic colouring matter in aqueous finishes, are 
prepared by dispersing dry pigment colours or pulps, such as, synthetic, precipitated inorganic or organic pigments 
and earth colours in casein solutions with suitable amount of plasticizers and other ingredients, such as, thickeners, 
to impart desired gloss. To contribute some specific properties to the finish other subsidiary binders are also 
added. These pigments which are generally in thick viscous paste form are prepared in a variety of colours and 
shades. The general characteristics like viscosity; total solid; covering power; protein content; preservatives and 
oils, fats, and waxes used in the manufacture, differ from one manufacturer to another. Some manufacturers 
market these pigments in a ready-to-use form for direct application to the leather with or without extra casein 
based binders which are marketed separately for finishing different types of leather, others market pigments and 
binders separately with their own auxiliary finishing agents to be used in proportions recommended by them. 
The amounts of the binders and pigments to be used in the finishing of different types of leathers also vary 
considerably. There are still some consumers who use the commercial pigments and prepare their own binders 
for use admixed with synthetic or other types of binders. 


In all these cases, however, the pigments and binders have to be used essentially in the finishing of different types 
of leathers used for goods of daily use like shoe uppers, case sides and portfolio leathers. Essentially the finishes, 
especially the pigment pastes and binders commonly used, shall be of a standard quality. The comparison of two 
brands of pigment pastes on the basis of the analytical figures will not indicate any idea about the quality of the 
finish, as it is only the final formulation at the hands of the finisher that mostly decides the quality of the finish. 
As such, the best way to judge the performance of the finish is to finish the leather as recommended by the 
manufacturer and then test for the various finishing properties, according to the methods prescribed in this 
specification. 


In view of the complexity of the types of finishes the formulation of this standard has been approached from the 
practical point of view and stress has been laid on physical and practical tests in preference to chemical tests 
which fail to give any clue as to the satisfactory nature of the products. 


This standard was originally published in 1966. In this revision, the requirement on pentachlorophenol (PCP) 
has been introduced keeping in view of the demand for eco-friendly inputs from the leather industry. Reference 
has also been made to the latest test methods. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3999 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


CASEIN BASED AQUEOUS PIGMENTS 
AND FINISHES — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements, methods 
of sampling and test for casein based aqueous pigment 
finishes and casein based binders with or without 
dispersed pigments for leather. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the dispersed pigments 
or concentrated pigment colours which do not contain 
any casein binder and which are generally meant for 
use with synthetic resin emulsions or other 
commercially known synthetic resin binders used in 
the leather industry. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


101 Methods of sampling and test for 
paints, varnishes and related products: 


(Part 1/Sec 1): Test on liquid paints (general and 


1986 physical), Section 1 Sampling 
(Part 2/Sec 2): Test on liquid paints (chemical 
1986 examination), Section 2 Volatile 
matter 
(Part 4/Sec 2): Optical tests, Section 2 Colour 
1989 
(Part 4/Sec 4): Optical tests, Section 4 Gloss 
1988 
1640 : 2007 Glossary of terms relating to hides, 
skins and leather 
6191 : 1971 Method of micro-biological colour 
fastness and microscopical tests for 
leather 
14575 : 1999 Determination of pentachlorophenol 


(PCP) in leather — Method of test 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1640 shall apply. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Physical Appearance and Nature of the Product 


The pigment paste shall be homogeneous, uniform, of 
viscous consistency, smooth to touch when rubbed 
between two fingers or should have no undispersed or 
agglomerated particles, caking of the pigment in the 
container and shall be easily dispersible when mixed 
with water. On storage there shall be no sedimentation 
that shall not be readily dispersed by gentle stirring or 
shaking. 


4.2 Uniformity 


When tested as prescribed in IS 101 (Part 2/Sec 2) and 
IS 101 (Part 4/Sec 2) for volatile matter and colour, all 
the lots in a single consignment shall be as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 


4.3 The particle size of the pigment dispersion shall 
be of the order of 2.5 to 5 um with exception of a few 
stray agglomerates not exceeding 25 um, when 
determined using a fineness meter or when tested under 
a microscope. 


4.4 The casein binder shall be homogeneous, uniform 
in consistency without showing any signs of 
sedimentation, and shall be opalescent. The film dried 
from the binder shall be clear. 


4.4.1 The casein binder shall have a pH range 6 to 8.5 
on dilution with five times its water, determined using 
a pH meter. 


4.5 During the manufacture of the binder and the 
pigment paste, necessary quantities of preservative for 
the casein may be incorporated so as to ensure a shelf 
life of at least one year, if stored in closed containers 
in which the material had been originally received by 
the purchaser and stored in cool and dry place. 


4.5.1 Freedom from Pentachlorophenol (PCP) 


The material shall not contain more than 5 mg/kg of 
pentachlorophenol when tested in accordance with 
Annex A. 


4.6 The shade and the covering power shall be as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


IS 3999 : 2015 


4.7 The pigment finish shall be applied in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s instructions to test pieces of 
dyed crust leather and shall be tested for the various 
finishing properties as given in Table 1. 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 


5.1 Packing 


The material after manufacture shall be packed in tight 
containers which shall not develop any rust or 
deterioration of the product due to the presence of water 
in the medium or any of the ingredients used in the 
formulation. 


5.2 Marking 


Each container shall be marked with the following: 


f) 


Instructions for preparing the leather finishing 
formulation. 


5.2.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The containers may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


5.2.1.1 The use of the Standard mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which the licence for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


6 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 


CONFORMITY 


a) Name of the material and shade; 
b) Name of the manufacturer and/or trade-mark, 6.1 Scale of Sampling 
if any; Pe: i 
y . For the purpose of ascertaining the conformity of the 
c) Volume of the material; material in any consignment to this specification, the 
d) Batch number; scale of sampling and criteria for conformity shall be 
e) Month and year of manufacture; and as prescribed in 3 of IS 101 (Part 1/Sec 1). 
Table 1 Requirements for Finishing Properties of Aqueous Casein Pigments and Finishes 
(Clauses 4.7, B-1.1, B-4 and B-5) 
SI Characteristic Requirement Methods of Test, Ref to 
No. 
Clause No. of IS 6191 Clause No. of Annex B 
(1 (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Colour fastness test for finished leather LF9 — 
(contrast grading after 1024 revolutions), 
not worse than: 
a) Dry rubbing 4 
b) Wet rubbing 3 
ii) Gloss of the finished leather Shall have the same degree of gloss as agreed — B-2 
to between the purchaser and the supplier 
iii) Resistance to lasting To pass test — B-3 
iv) Fastness to day light 3-4 LF 3 — 
v) Fastness to organic solvents The finish shall not crack, peel or crumble LF 6 — 
vi) Fastness to water spotting There shall be no swelling, loss of luster or any LF 8 — 
visible change when compared with the 
original spot 
vii) Resistance to heat To pass test — B-4 
viii) Ageing To pass test — B-5 


IS 3999 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.5.1) 


DETERMINATION OF PENTACHLOROPHENOL (PCP) 


A-1 Transfer about 5 g of the casein based aqueous 
pigment or finish into a separating funnel of about 
250- ml capacity along with 100 ml water. Add 15- 
25 ml of sulphuric acid 10 percent w/v aqueous 
solution and ensure that the pH of the contents is 
acidic. Then carry out liquid — liquid extraction 
using hexane, analytical grade, as the solvent. At first 
extract with about 25 ml hexane by shaking the 
contents thoroughly for about 15 min. Then set it 
aside for clear separation of the layers (see Note). 
Transfer the aqueous layer into another separating 
funnel and carryout three more extractions of the 


aqueous layer with hexane of 25 ml each time in the 
same manner explained earlier. 
NOTE — In case of any emulsion being noticed, break the 
same with the addition of 20-30 ml saturated sodium chloride 
aqueous solution or follow the steps explained in 4.3.4.2 
of IS 14575. 
A-2 Combine the hexane extracts and dry it by passing 
through a bed of anhydrous sodium sulphate of about 
10 g. The dried hexane layer is evaporated to near 
dryness by a rotary evaporator. 


A-3 The residue is taken for acetylation. Then follow 
the procedure as detailed in Method A of IS 14575. 


ANNEX B 
(Table 1) 


TESTS ON AQUEOUS CASEIN BASED PIGMENTS AND FINISHES 


B-1 GENERAL 


B-1.1 The samples of the aqueous casein based pigment 
or finishes or both shall be tested for finishing 
properties (see Table 1) by application on dyed crust 
leather pieces, of size 30 cm x 30 cm. At least three 
test pieces shall be taken for each test. The pigments 
shall be tested using a casein binder to be supplied by 
the manufacturer or prepared according to the recipe, 
furnished by the manufacturer. 


B-1.2 The leather pieces shall be finished as per detailed 
method to be furnished by the manufacturer using the 
auxiliaries as suggested by him. All the ingredients shall 
be of the quality as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier, wherever such requirements are not 
prescribed for the ingredients in this standard. 


B-2 Gloss of the Finished Leather 


The gloss of the finished leather when tested as 
prescribed in IS 101 (Part 4/Sec 4) shall be as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


B-3 Resistance to Lasting 


A key drawn against the leather from the flesh side by 
holding the leather firm against key between the thumb 
and the first finger shall show no signs of crackiness 
or peeling of pigment film. The finished leather shall 
show no sign of crack, peel or crumble of the pigment 
film on double fold. 


B-4 Resistance to Heat 


The leather, after the application of the finish shall be 
hot plated or ironed. The finished surface shall comply 
with the requirements of Sl. No. (i), (111), (v) and (vi) 
of Table | after the hot plating or ironing. 


B-5 Ageing Test 


The leather, after the application of the finish shall be 
hot plated or ironed. The test piece shall then be kept 
for 1 hin an air oven at 70 + 1°C and subsequently 
cooled to room temperature. The test piece shall then 
be checked for compliance to SI No. (i), (iv), (v) and 
(vi) of Table 1. 


IS 3999 : 2015 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CHD 17 


Organization 
Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


A V Thomas Leather & Allied Products Pvt Ltd, Chennai 


All India Skins & Hide Tanners and Merchants Association, Chennai 


BASF India Ltd, Mumbai 


Bata India Ltd, Hathidah 


Central Footwear Training Institute, Agra 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi 


College of Leather Technology, Kolkata 


Consumer Federation of India, New Delhi 


Council for Leather Exports, Chennai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), Kanpur 


Footwear Design & Development Institute, Noida 


Harman Sales Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Finished Leather Manufacturers & Exporters Association, 
Chennai 


Indian Footwear Component Manufacturers Association, Kolkata 


Indian Leather Products Association, Kolkata 


Indian Leather Technologists Association, Kolkata 

Indian Shoe Federation, Chennai 

Indofil Chemicals Co Ltd, Mumbai 

International Institute of Saddlery Technology and Export 
Management, Kanpur 

Italab Private Ltd, Chennai 

Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Mumbai 

Kings International Ltd, Kanpur 

Leather Chemicals Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Liberty Footwear, Karnal 


Ministry of Commerce, New Delhi 


Representatives(s) 
Director (Chairman) 


SHRI HABIB HUSSAIN 
Suri K. MANIVANNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI Monan M. SREENIVAS 
Suri S. MOHAMMED Hassan (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. CHAUDHARI 
Dr S. A. NADGOUDA (Alternate) 


Dr SupuHir Kumar Das 


Suri S. N. GANGULY 
SHRI S. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr C. MURALIDHARAN 


SHRI T. VENUGOPAL 
SHRI AJAY AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr BUDDHADEV CHATTOPADHYAY 
ProF Swaran Kumar Basu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. M. HAsHim 
Dr ZackriA Sait (Alternate) 


Suri G. C. KANNAUJIA 
Suri S. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Suri B. S. KATIYAR 
SHRI NAVENDU SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. K. RAZDAN 
SHRI JEEVAN RAZDAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAFEEQUE AHMED 
Suri V. P. NAIMMUR RAHMAN (Alternate I) 
Suri M. SALAHUDDIN Bari (Alternate I) 


SHRI Mant ALMAL 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ARNAB JHA 
Dr GAUTAM MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH SUBRAMANIAM 
SHRI ABHIIT SETH (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. JHA 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. A. ETIAPPAN 
SHRI J. J. PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. VAYA KUMAR 
Suri R. LAWRENCE (Alternate) 


SHRI Tas ALAM 
Suri G. S. Kumaran (Alternate) 


SHRI VADUVUR T. SRIKANTH 
SHRI SANJEEV MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ADESH GUPTA 
Suri S. S. Lamirt (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 3999 : 2015 


Organization Representatives(s) 

National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad SHRI SHEKHAR CHATTERJEE 
National Institute of Fashion Technology, New Delhi SHRI E. SIVASAKTHI 
Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), New Delhi Suri S. K. Basu 

Suri R. K. Kapoor (Alternate) 
Planning Commission, New Delhi Dr S. C. LAHIRI 
Robinson Sports, New Delhi SHRI S. S. JOLLY 
SGS India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon SHRI P. VENKATESAN 

Ms Monika SHARMA (Alternate) 
Sports Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE 
TALTEIA, Chennai SHRI VADIVELU 
Tata International Limited, Dewas Suri O. K. KAuL 


SHRI R. G. BHIRUD (Alternate) 


The Leather Forum Calcutta for Research and Development, SHRI SANIOY DASGUPTA 
Kolkata SHRI PRASANTO BHATTACHARIEE (Alternate) 
Vishnu Chemicals, Chennai Dr P. G. PRADHAN 
Suri C. P. C. KAMALAKAR Rao (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General Scientist ‘F’ and Head (CHD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI E. DEVENDAR 
Scientist ‘F’ and Head (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 17 (1639). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


