IS 1643 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


ANGI ATP 
qa (AY) ФЇ ЭТ gen: Ma Ф "ЧФ smi 
Ф чачу — ife ea 
(чт gotero ) 


Indian Standard 


FIRE SAFETY OF BUILDINGS (GENERAL): EXPOSURE 
HAZARD — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.01 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 4 


Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A series of Indian Standards covering the fire safety of buildings in general, principles of fire grading, details of 
construction, exit requirements and exposure hazard have been formulated. This standard covering the last aspect, 
was first formulated in 1960 and revised in 1988. In the past years, useful data has become available based on 
studies conducted in countries such as USA, UK and Canada. This revision includes the values in respect of floor 
area ratio, and open space according to norms adopted by these countries. Further the provisions have been 
aligned with National Building Code of India 2005. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1643 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


FIRE SAFETY OF BUILDINGS (GENERAL): EXPOSURE 
HAZARD — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers requirements regarding spacing 
of buildings to provide adequate safety against 
exposure hazard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to invertigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 
1641 : 2013 Fire safety of building (general): 
General principles of fire grading and 
classification — Code of practice 
(second revision) 
Fire safety of buildings (general): 
Details of construction — Code of 
practice (second revision) 
Code of practice for installation and 
maintenance of internal fire hydrants 
and hose reels on premises 
Code of practice for provision and 
maintenance of water supplies for 
fire fighting 


1642 : 2013 


3884 : 1989 


9668 : 1990 


3 GENERAL 


3.1 The construction and spacing of buildings with due 
regard to their classification (see IS 1641) are the major 
factors to be considered which otherwise may lead to 
serious conflagration intensely built-up areas. Thus 
exposure hazard expressed the danger or risk of spread 
of fire through the open air in a building on fire to 
another building situated in the vicinity. 


3.2 The precautions taken by keeping proper spacing 
of the building prevent spread of fire by direct contact 
of flames and hot gases emitted from the burning 
building or by radiated heat and flying brands. 


3.3 The factors like type of construction (see IS 1642) 
based on occupancy distance between the buildings 
and size of the buildings influence the severity of 
exposure hazard. 


4 MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Maximum Height 


Every building should be restricted in its height above 
the ground level and the number of storeys, depending 
upon its occupancy and the type of construction. The 
maximum permissible height for any combination of 
occupancy and types of construction should necessarily 
be related to the width of street fronting the building 
or floor area ratio (see 5). 


4.2 General Requirements 


4.2.1 All buildings shall satisfy certain requirements 
which contribute, individually and collectively, to the 
safety of life from fire, smoke, fumes and panic arising 
from these or similar causes. There are, however, certain 
general principles and common requirements which are 
applicable to all or most of the occupancies. For details, 
reference may be made to National Building Code of 
India: Part 4 Fire and life safety. 


4.2.2 Exceptions and Deviations 


Exceptions and deviations to the general provisions of 
requirements of individual occupancies are given as 
applicable to each type of occupancy in 6.1 to 6.9 of 
National Building Code of India: Part 4 Fire and life 
safety. In case of practical difficulty or to avoid 
unnecessary hardship, without sacrificing reasonable 
safety, the Authority may grant exemptions from the 
Code. 


4.3 Occupation of Buildings under Construction 


4.3.1 A building or portion of the building may be 
occupied during construction, repairs, alterations or 
additions only if all means of exit and fire protection 
measures are in place and continuously maintained for 
the occupied part of the building. 


4.3.2 A high rise building during construction shall be 
provided with the following fire protection measures, 
which shall be maintained in good working condition 
at all the times: 


a) Dry riser with hydrant outlets on the floors 
constructed with a fire service inlet to boost 
the water in the dry riser and maintenance 


IS 1643 : 2013 


should be as per the requirements laid down 
in IS 9668 and IS 3844. 


b) Drums filled with water of 2 000 litre capacity 
with two fire buckets on each floor; and a water 
storage tank of minimum 20 000 litre capacity, 
which may be used for other construction 
purposes also. 


5 FLOOR AREA RATIO 


5.1 The comparative floor area ratios for different 
occupancies and types of construction are given in 
Table 1. 


Table 1 Comparative Floor Area Ratios for 
Occupancies Facing One Public Street of 
at Least 9 m Width 


Occupancy Classification Floor Area Ratios Type of 


Construction 


Type 1 Type2 Type3 Type 4 


(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Residential UL 2.0 14 1.0 
Educational UL 2.0 14 1.0 
Institutional UL 1.5 1.0 0.8 
Assembly UL 1.0 0.7 0.5 
Business UL 2.9 2.3 1.6 
Mercantile 8.0 1.8 14 1.0 
Industrial 7.5 1.9 1.6 1.3 
Storage (see Note 4) 6.0 1.5 1.3 1.0 
Hazardous (see Note 4) 2.8 1.1 0.9 NP 

UL — Unlimited, NP — Not permitted. 


NOTES 


1 The FAR values given in this table are subject to overall 
restrictions on the heights of buildings in the case of educational, 
institutional, assembly, storage and hazardous occupancies (see 
National Building Code of India: Part 4 Fire and life safety). 

2 This table has been prepared, taking into account the 
combustible content in the different occupancies as well as the 
fire resistance offered by the type of construction. 

3 This table should be modified by the authority, taking into 
account the other aspects as given below: 


a) Density in terms of dwelling units per hectare; 

b) Traffic considerations; 

c) Parking spaces; 

d) Local fire fighting facilities; and 

e) Water supply, drainage and sanitation requirements. 


4 The FAR values specified in this table may be increased 
20 percent for the following services: 


a) A basement or cellar; space under a building constructed 
on stilts and used as a parking space and air-conditioning 
plant room used as accessory to the principal use; 


b) Watchman's booth, pump house, garbage shaft, electric 
cabin or substation and other utility structures meant for 
the services of the building under consideration; 


c) Projections and accessory buildings as specifically 
exempted under the Code; and 


d) Staircase room and lift rooms above the topmost storey; 
architectural features; chimneys and elevated tanks of 
dimensions as permissible under the Code; the area of the 
lift shaft shall be taken only on one floor. 

5 In so far as single storey storage and hazardous occupancies 

are concerned, they would be further governed by volume to 

plot area ratio (VPR) to be decided by the authority. 


5.2 Each portion of a building, which is separated by 
one or more continuous fire resisting walls, having a 
fire resistance of not less than 4 h, extending from the 
foundation to 1 m above the roof at all points, may be 
considered to be a separate building for the calculation 
of maximum permissible height and floor area, 
provided openings, if any, in the separating wall, are 
also protected by fire assemblies of 4 h. 


6 OPEN SPACES 
6.1 General 


Every room intended for human habitation should have 
an interior or exterior open space or an open verandah 
open to such interior or exterior open space. 


6.1.1 The open space inside and around a building have 
essentially to cater for the lighting and ventilation 
requirements of the rooms abutting such open spaces, 
and in the case of buildings abutting on streets in the 
front, rear or sides, the open spaces provided should 
be sufficient for the future widening of such streets. 


6.2 Open Spaces Separate for Each Building of 
Wing 

The open spaces should be separate or distinct for each 
building and where a building has two or more wings, 
each wing should have separate or distinct open spaces 
for the purposes of lighting and ventilation of the wings. 


However, separation between accessory and main 
buildings more than 7 m in height should not be less 
than 1.5 m; for buildings up to 7 m in height, no such 
separation shall be required. 


6.3 Residential Buildings 
6.3.1 Exterior Open Space 
6.3.1.1 Front open spaces 


a) Every building fronting a street should have a 
front space, forming an integral part of the site 


as below: 
Sl Front Open Space Width of Street 
No. Min Fronting the Plot 
m m 
1) 1.5) Up to 7.5” 
ii) 3.0 7.5 to 18 
iii) 4.5 18 to 30 
iv) 6.0 Above 30 


D For buildings up to a maximum height of 7 m. 


NOTE — In case a building abuts two or more streets 
the value of open spaces is to be based on the average 
width of streets, of 1.8 m for cases (ii), (iii) and (iv). 


b) For streets less than 7.5 m in width, the 
distance of the building (building line) should 


be at least 5 m from the centre line of the street 
(see 5.3.5). 


This limiting distance has to be determined 
by the authority for individual road/street 
widths taking into account the traffic flow. 


6.3.1.2 Rear open space 


a) 


b) 


Every residential building should have a rear 
open space, forming an integral part of the 
site, of an average width of 3 m and at no place 
measuring less than 1.8 m, except that in the 
case of a back-to-back-site, the width of the 
rear open space should be 3 m throughout. 
Subject to the condition of free ventilation, 
the open space left up to half the width of the 
plot should also be taken into account for 
calculating the average width of the rear open 
space. For plots of depth less than 9 m, for 
buildings up to 7 m in height, the rear open 
space may be reduced to 1.5 m. 

Rear open space to extend throughout the rear 
wall — The rear open space should be co- 
extensive with the entire face of the rear wall. 
If a building abuts on two or more streets, such 
rear open space should be provided 
throughout the face of the rear wall. Such rear 
wall should be the wall on the opposite side 
of the face of the building abutting on the 
wider street, unless the authority directs 
otherwise. 


6.3.1.3 Side open space 


a) 


b) 


Every semi-detached and detached building 
should have a permanently open air space, 
forming an integral part of the site as below: 


1) For detached buildings, there should be 
a minimum side open space of 3 m on 
both the sides. 


NOTE — For detached residential buildings up to 
7 m in height on plots with a frontage less than 12 
m, one of the side open spaces may be reduced to 
1.5 m. 


2) Forsemi-detached buildings, there should 
be a minimum side open space of 3 m on 
one side. 


NOTE — For semi-detached buildings up to 7 m 
in height on plots with a frontage less than 9 m, 
the side open space may be reduced to 1.5 m. 


3) For row-type buildings, no side open is 
required. 

In the case of semi-detached buildings, the 

open spaces provided on one side should be 

as in (a) and all habitable rooms should abut 

either on this side open space or front and rear 

open spaces or an interior open space. 


IS 1643 : 2013 


6.3.2 The provisions of 6.3.1.2 and 6.3.1.3 are not 
applicable to parking lock-up garages up to 3 m in 
height located at a distance of 7.5 m in any street line 
or front boundary of the plot. 


6.3.3 The open spaces mentioned in 6.3.1.1 to 6.3.1.3 
should be for residential buildings up to a height of 10 m. 


6.3.3.1 For buildings of height above 10 m, the open 
spaces (side and rear) should be as given in Table 2. 


Table 2 Side and Rear Open Spaces for Different 


Heights of Buildings 
SI Height of Buildings Side and Rear Open 
No. Spaces to be Left Around 
Building 
m m 
(1) Q) (3) 
1) 10 3 
ii) 15 5 
iii) 18 6 
iv) 21 7 
v) 24 8 
vi) 27 9 
vii) 30 10 
viii) 35 11 
ix) 40 12 
x) 45 13 
xi) 50 14 
xii) 53 and above 16 
NOTES 


1 For buildings above 24 m in height, there should be a 
minimum front open space of 6 m. 


2 Where rooms do not derive light and ventilation from the 
exterior open space, the width of such exterior open space as 
given in col 3 may be reduced by 1 m subject to a minimum 
of 3 m and a maximum of 8 m. No further projections shall be 
permitted. 


3 If the length or depth of the building exceeds 40 m, add to 
col 3 ten percent of length or depth of building minus 4.0 m. 


6.3.3.2 For tower-like structures, as an alternative 
to 6.3.3.1, open spaces should be as below: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


d) 


Up to a height of 24 m, with one set-back, the 
open spaces at the ground level, should be not 
less than 6 m; 

For heights between 24 m and 37.5 m with 
one set-back, the open spaces at the ground 
level should not be less than 9 m; 

For heights above 37.5 m with two setbacks, 
the open spaces at the ground level should not 
be less than 12 m; and 

The deficiency in the open spaces should be 
made good to satisfy 6.3.3.1 through the set- 
backs at the upper levels; these set-backs 
should not be accessible from individual 
rooms/flats at these levels. 


6.3.4 The front open space would govern the height of 
the building. 


IS 1643 : 2013 


6.3.5 Interior Open Spaces 


a) 


b) 


Inner courtyard — In case the whole of one 
side of every room excepting bath, WC and 
store room is not abutting on either the front, 
rear or side(s) open spaces, it should abut on 
an inner courtyard where minimum width 
should be 3 m. 


Further, the inner courtyard should have an 
area, throughout its height of not less than the 
square of one-fifth the height of the highest 
wall abutting the courtyard. Provided that 
when any room (excluding staircase bay, 
bathroom and water-closet) is dependent for 
its light and ventilation on an inner courtyard, 
the dimension should be such as is required 
for each wing of the building. 


Where only water-closet and bathroom are 
abutting on the interior courtyard the size of 
the interior courtyard should be in line with 
the provision for ventilation shaft as given 
in 6.3.5 (b). 

Ventilation shaft — For ventilating spaces for 
water-closets and bathrooms, if not opening 
on to front, side, rear and interior open spaces, 
these should open on to the ventilation shaft, 
the size of which should not be less than the 
values given below: 


Height of Size of Minimum 

Building Ventilation Shaft Size of Shaft 
m m? m 

Up to 10 1.2 0.9 

12 2.8 1.2 

18 4.0 1.5 

24 5.4 1.8 

30 8.0 2.4 

Above 30 9.0 3.0 

NOTES 


1 For buildings of height above 30 m, a mechanical 
ventilation system should be installed besides the 
provision of minimum ventilation shaft. 


2 For fully air-conditioned residential buildings for 
lodging purposes, the ventilation shaft need not be 
insisted upon, provided the air-conditioning system 
works in an uninterrupted manner, also, provided 
there is an alternative source of power supply. 


Outer courtyard — The minimum width of the 
outer courtyard (as distinguished from its 
depth) should be not less than 2.4 m. If the 
width of the outer courtyard is less than 2.4 m, 
it should be treated as a notch and the 
provisions of outer courtyard should not apply. 
However, if the depth of the outer courtyard 


is more than the width, the provisions of 6.2 
should apply for the open spaces to be left 
between the wings. 


6.3.6 Joint Open Air Space 


Every such interior or exterior open air space, unless 
the latter is a street, should be maintained for the benefit 
of such building exclusively and should be entirely 
within the owner's own premises. 


6.3.6.1 If such interior or exterior open air space is 
intended to be used for the benefit of more than one 
building belonging to the same owner, the width of such 
open air space should be the one specified for the tallest 
building as specified in 6.3.3 abutting on such open air 
space. 


6.3.6.2 If such interior or exterior open air space is 
jointly owned by more than one person, its width should 
also be as specified in 6.3, provided every such person 
agrees to allow his portion of such joint open air space 
to be used for the benefit of every building abutting on 
such joint open air space and provided he sends such 
written consent to the authority for record. Such 
common open air space should thenceforth be treated 
as a permanently open air space required for the 
purposes of the Code. No boundary wall between such 
joint open air space should be erected or raised to a 
height of more than 2.0 m. 


6.4 Other Occupancies 


6.4.1 Open spaces for other occupancies should be as 
below: 


a) Educational buildings — Except for nursery 
schools, the open spaces around the building 
should be not less than 6 m; 


b) Institutional buildings — The open space at 
front should not be less than 12 m and the other 
open spaces around the building should be not 
less than 6 m; 


c) Assembly building — The open space at front 
should be not less than 12 m and other spaces 
not less than 6 m; 


NOTE — However, if assembly buildings are permitted 
in purely residential zones, the open spaces around the 
building should be not less than 12 m. 


d) Business, mercantile and storage buildings — 
The open spaces around the building should be 
not less than 4.5 m. Where these occur in purely 
residential zone or in a residential with shops 
line zone the open spaces may be relaxed; 

e) Industrial buildings — The open spaces 
around the building should be not less than 
4.5 m for heights up to 16 m, with an increase 
in the open spaces of 0.25 m for every increase 
of 1 m or fraction thereof in height above 
16 m; and 


NOTE — Special rules for narrow industrial plots in 
the city, namely, plots less than 15 m in width, and with 
appropriate set-backs from certain streets and, highways, 
should be applicable. 


f) Hazardous occupancies — The open spaces 
around the building should be as specified for 
industrial buildings [see 6.4.1 (e)]. 


6.5 Exemption to Open Spaces 
6.5.1 Projections into Open Spaces 


Every open space provided either interior or exterior 
should be kept free from any erection thereon and 
should be open to the sky, except as below: 


a) Cornice, roof or weather shade not more than 
0.75 m wide; 

b) Sunshades over windows/ventilators or other 
openings not more than 0.75 m wide; 


c) Canopy at first level, but not to be used as sit 
out with clearance of 1.5 m between the plot 
boundary and the canopy; 


d) Projected balcony at higher floors of width 
not more than 0.9 m; and 

e) Projecting rooms/balconies [see 6.5.1(d)] at 
alternate floors such that rooms of the lower 
two floors get light and air and the projection 
being not more than the height of the storey 
immediately below. 


However, these projections into open spaces should 
not reduce the minimum required open spaces. 


6.5.1.1 Accessory building 


The following accessory buildings may be permitted 
in the open spaces: 


a) In an existing building, sanitary block of 
2.4 m in height subject to a maximum of 4 m 
in the rear open space at a distance of 1.5 m 
from the rear boundary may be permitted, 
where facilities are not adequate; 


b) Parking lock-up garages not exceeding 2.4 m 
in height should be permitted in the side or rear 
open spaces at a distance of 7.5 m from any 
road line or the front boundary of the plot; and 

c) Suction tank and pump room each up to 2.5 m 
in area. 


6.5.2 Projection into Street 


6.5.2.1 In existing built-up or congested areas, no 
projection of any sort whatsoever, except sunshades 
(see 6.5.2.3) extending more than 23 cm below a height 
of 4.3 m, should project over the road or over any drain 
or over any portion outside the boundaries of the site, 
provided the projection arising out of the vertical part 
of the rain-water spouts projection at the road level or 


IS 1643 : 2013 


the water pipe may be permitted in accordance with 
the drainage plan. 


6.5.2.2 Porticos in existing developed area 


Porticos in bazaar areas of existing developed areas 
may be permitted to project on road and subject to the 
following limitations: 


a) Porticos may be allowed on such roads 
leaving a minimum clear space of 18 m 
between kerbs; 

b) The porticos should not be less than 3 m wide; 

c) Nothing should be allowed to be constructed 
on the portico which should be used as open 
terrace; 

d) Nothing should be allowed to project beyond 
the line of arcades; and 

e) The space under the portico should be paved 
and channelled as required. 


6.5.2.3 Sunshades over windows and ventilators 


Projections of sunshades over windows or ventilators 
in existing built-up or congested areas, when 
permitted by the authority should fulfil the following 
conditions: 


a) No sunshade should be permitted over the 
road or over any drain or over any portion 
outside the boundaries of the site below a 
height of 2.8 m from the road level; 

b) Sunshades provided above a height of 2.8 m 
from the ground level should be permitted to 
project up to a maximum width of 60 cm, if 
the road over which they project exceeds 9 m 
in width; and 

c) No sunshade should be permitted on roads 
less than 9 m in width or on roads having no 
footpaths. 


6.6 Limitations to Open Space 
6.6.1 Safeguard Against Reduction of Open Space 


No construction work on a building should be allowed 
if such work operates to reduce an open air space of 
any other adjoining building, belonging to the same 
owner to an extent less than what is prescribed at the 
time of the proposed work or to reduce further such 
open space, if it is already less than that prescribed. 


6.6.2 Additions or Extensions to a Building 


Additions or extensions to a building should be 
allowed, provided the open spaces for the additions/ 
extensions satisfy 6.3 after such additions/extensions 
are made. 


7 HIGH RISE BUILDINGS 
7.1 For high rise buildings, the following additional 


IS 1643 : 2013 


provisions of means of access to the building should 
be ensured: 


a) The width of the main street on which the 
building abuts should not be less than 12 m 
and one end of this street should join another 
street not less than 12 m in width; 


b) The road should not end in a dead end; 
c) The compulsory open spaces around the 
building should not be used for parking; and 


d) Adequate passageway and clearances required 
for fire fighting vehicles to enter the premises 
should be provided at the main entrance; the 


width of such entrance should be not less than 
4.5 m. If an arch or covered gate is 
constructed, it should have a clear head-room 
of not less than 5 m. 


7.2 Mixed Occupancy 


When any building is used for more than one type of 
occupancy, it should conform to the requirements for 
the most hazardous the occupancies. If mixed 
occupancies are separated by a separating wall of 4 h 
fire rating, the occupancies should be treated 
individually. 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


Organization 


Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corp Ltd, Chennai 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Pune 


Council of Architecture, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & Labour 
Institute, Mumbai 


Electricity Consumer Grievances Redressal Forum, New Delhi 


Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, New Delhi 


Engineering Industrial Technical Section, Ministry of Industry, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri К. C. SHARMA (Chairman) 
Suri A. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TANDLE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr M. P. SINGH 
Dn Suvir Snan (Alternate) 


Suri C. S. KASANA 
Suri P. C. Кокев. (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Deputy INSPECTOR GENERAL (FIRE) 
Suri S. L. NAGARKAR (Alternate) 


Suri SATYA PRAKASH BARNWAL 
Suni ASHOK Kumar GOEL (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Dn К. C. WapHwa (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. Hepat 


Lr-Cor B. T. MANJUNATH 
Suri M. B. PARADKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. R. RAMANATHAN 
Suri GIRISH Misura (Alternate) 


SRIMATI TRIPTA KHURANA 


Suri A. K. GANGULY 
Suri S. P. BANboPADHYAYA (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


Suri A. K. Ray 
Suri S. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. SUNKARIA 
Suri К. C. Maruur (Alternate) 


Organization 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


GAIL, New Delhi 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Lloyd Insulations (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 


Reliance Refineries Limited, Jamnagar 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, Delhi 

State Bank of India, Mumbai 

In personal capacity (P/4 Belgacuta, Kolkata) 

In personal capacity (K-33-A Green Park, New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (C-127 Kendriya Vihar, Noida) 


In personal capacity (305, SJR Verity, Amrita College Road, 


Kasavanahalli, Bangalore) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 1643 : 2013 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ARVIND KUMAR 
Ms ALPANA SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT CHAKRABORTY 
Suri T. K. KUMAR 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


Suri K. К. Mirra 
SHRI SANJEEV ANGRA (Alternate) 


SHRI OM PRAKASH 
Suri D. K. Suami (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy CHIEF Еве OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri D. К. SURYANARAYAN 


Suri S. C. Gupta 
Suri В. R. GADEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VARADENDRA КОТ! 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 

Suri J. S. GAHLAUT 
Suri S. N. Kunpu 
Suri S. K. DHERI 
Suri H. S. KAPARWAN 


Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


Suri A. К. Saini, Scientist ‘F’ & Head (Civ Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri S. CHATURVEDI 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civ Engg), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 36 (7664). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1100002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


