IS 13366:1992

( (Reaffirmed ) Reaffirmed2002 1997)
*-

Iiuiz'an Standard

RESUSCITATORS INTENDED FOR USE WITH HUMANS -- SPECIFICATION

UDC

614'894

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 7 ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI
April \992

Industrial

Safety Sectional

Committee,

CHD 08

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft tinalired Industrial Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. by the

This standard applies to ventilatory resuscitator. that is, small portable ventilators designed to be used in emergencies both outside and inside hospitals. These devices are intended for use by trained personnel for emergency use. The effective and safe use of a resuscitator is determined not only by the performance of the resuscitator, but also by the skill of the operator. This standard does not describe the content of the training programmes to develop such skill and does not state who should or should not use a resuscitator. This will be determined by the organizations involved in teaching resuscitation. Annexure A details test methods and forms an integral part of this standard. Annexure B provides tables of resistances and compliances required to set up the test lung. Annexure C gives a rationale for various clauses in this standard and is included to provide additional insight into the reasoning that led to the requirements and recommendations that have been given. Annexures D and F provide advice concerning materials to be used in resuscitators and face masks. For'the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the in this standard. this standard is complied with, the or analysis, shall be rounded off values (revised)`. The number of same as that of the specified value

IS 13346: 1992

Indian Standard

RESUSCITATORSINTENDEDFORUSE WITHHUMANS-SPECIFICATION
1 SCOPE

conditions under which measurement is made should be given. 3.1.7 Stroke Volume Volume of gas deliverable from the resuscitator to the endofthepatientconnectorduringaninspiratoryphase of ventilatory cycle. 3.1.8 Airway Passageway for gas into and out of the lungs.

This standard specifies minimum performance and safety requirements of ventilatory resuscitators intended for use with industrial workers. It specifies the performance of gas-powered ventilatory resuscitators which are portable and'designed for use in emergency situations to provide lung ventilation to individuals whose breathing is inadequate. Resuscitators are designed for adults. 2 REFERENCES IS 3745 : 1978 `Yoke type value connections for medical gas cylinders (first revision )' is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1.1 Resuscitator Portable device used in emergency situations to provide lung ventilation to individuals whose breathing is inadequate. 3.1.2

3.1.9 Demand Valve

Device delivering a flow of gas when actuated by a change in pressure created by the inspiratory efforts of the patient.
3.1.10 Patient Valve

Valve that directs gas into the lungs for the inspiratory phase and into the atmosphere during the expiratory phase. 3.1.11 2atient Connectors
That part ofthe resuscitationapparatus which connects directly to a face mask or an appropriate mating airway device. 3.1.12

Static Compliance, C

Patient Connection Port

Volume change of gases in the compartment produced by a unit of pressure change, expressed in litres per
kilopascal (l&Pa). 3.1.3

Opening at the patient end of the resuscitator which is connected either to a tracheal tube or a face mask. 3.1.13 Expiratory Port Opening through which gases and/or vapours from the patient during exhalation. 3.1.14 pass

Resistance

Pressure drop per unit of flow at a specified flow,
expressed in kilopascals per litre per second &Pa/l/s).
NOTE! -According to conventional practice, thishasgenerally been expressed in centimetres of water per like per second (cm H,O/s).

Delivered~Oxygen Concentration

Average concentration of oxygen in the gas delivered from the resuscitator.
3.1.15

3.1.4 Cycle

Ventilatory Cycle the inspiratory phase plus the Apparatus D&&Space, V,. app
That volume of previously exhaled gas which is delivered from the resuscitator in the succeeding inspiratory phase. 3.1.16 Gas-powered Resuscitator

comprising expiratory phase.

3.1.3 Tidal Volume, V, Volume of gas, expressed in millilltres, entering or leaving the patient or the lung model during the
inspiratory or expiratory phase time. The physical conditions under which gas volumes are measured should be given. 3.1.6 Minute Volume, V,t

Resuscitation device powered by the energy of compressed gas. 3.1.17 Automatic Resuscitator

Volume of gas expressed in litres per minute, entering or leaving the patient or the lung model. The physical 1

Apparatus in which the cyclic flow of gas for inflation of the lungs is independent of any inspirapry effort of the patient or repetitive action of the operator.

IS 13366 : 1992,
NOTE cycled. The expiratory phase may also be automatically

6.2 Dismantling Annex C)

and

Reassembly

(see

also

3.1.18 Back Leak Volume of exhaled gas which does notpass through the expiratory port but returns to the resuscitator.
3.1.19 Forward Leak

The manufacturershall recommend a functional test of operation to be carried out after reassembly.
NOTE - A resuscitator intended to be dismantled by the user, for example for cleaning, etc, should be designed so as to minimize the risk of incorrect reassembly when all parts are mated.

Volume of gas produced by the resuscitator during the inspiratory phase which does not pass through the patient port to the patient but passes to the atmosphere. 3.1.20 Maximum Delivery Pressure Highest gauge pressure that can be attained at the patient comtectionportwhenthe apparatus is functioning normally. 3.1.21 Ventilatory Frequency
The number of ventilatory cycles per minute.

6.3 Valve Function After Contamination Vomitus ( see also Annex C )

with

After the resuscitator has been tested in accordance with the test described in A-52 it shall meet all the requirements for the resuscitator being tested as laid down in 8.
NOTE-It is preferable that the valve housing be constructed so that operation of the mechanism may be observed by the operator. Observation of the functioning mechanism of the patient valve may assist the operator in detecting abnormal operation.

4 SYMBOLS 4.1 In addition to the symbols given in3, the following symbols are used in this standard: System dead space V,, system Oxygen concentration in bottle FO,, bottle 5 CONNECTORS 5.1 Patient Connection Port (see also Annex C ) The patient connection port of the resuscitator shall have 15 mm female and 22 mm male coaxial fittings. 5.2 Exhaust Port for Expired Air-Breathing Gases (see also Annex C ) If a tapered connector is provided at the exhaust port, it shall be a 30 mm male conical fittings or a 19 mm male conical fitting. The fitting shall incorporate a baulk, for example ridges in the internal lumen of the fitting.
NOTE - Such a baulk should not significantly increase the resistance to gas flow through the fitting.

6.4 Mechanical Shock 6.4.1 Drop Test (see also Annex C ) If the resuscitator is intended to be operated outside of its carrying case, plastic bag, mounting bracket, etc, it shall meet all the requirements for the category of resuscitator being tested as laid down in 8, following the drop test described in A-5.3. If the resuscitator is intended for operation only inside its carrying case, it may be so tested, but the case shall be open and in its `ready-for-use' condition. 6.5 Immersion in Water (see also Annex C ) After immersion in water by the method described in A-5.4, the resuscitator shall comply with all the requirements for the category of resuscitator being tested, laid down in 8, after 10 s of immersion in water. 7 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS 7.1 Size (see also Annex C ) A container, if provided, shall have a carrying handle or other device for lifting, and shall pass through a rectangular opening 300 mm x 400 mm in size. 7.2 Resuscitator Mass The mass of the resuscitator container and contents (including any full gas cylinders) shall not exceed 14 kg. 8 PERFORMANCE

5.3 Face Mask Fittings (see also Annex C ) Face masks shall have either a 22 mm female fittings or a 15 mm male fitting which will mate the corresponding fittings. 6 OPERATIONAL 6.1 General All performance requirements in this standard should be satisfied when the resuscitator is operated by one person, since frequently only one person is likely to be available to operate the resuscitator. This should be attainable when the resuscitator is used with either a face mask or an artificial airway device. 2 REQUIREMENTS

8.1 Supplementary Oxygen and Delivered Oxygen Concentration ( For Gas-powered Resuscitators) (see Annex C ) When tested by the methods described in A-5.5, a gaspowered resuscitator shall deliver an oxygen concentration of at least 85 percent. If the resuscitator is capable of delivering other oxygen concentrations, the manufacturer shall state the conditions under which the various concentrations may be delivered..

IS 13366 : 1992
8.2 Resistance to Breathing See the requirement laid down by the manufacturer

the range of pressures specified in 10.6, the airway pressure shall not exceed 4.5 kPa (45 cm 40).
NOTE - A higher setting may be made available for certain patients, although the selection of such a setting requires experienced medical advice.

under 11.3.2(c). 8.3 Expiratory
Resistance (see also Annex C )

When tested by the method described in A-5.6, the pressure generated at the Patient connection port shall not exceed 0.5 kPa (= 5 c*O) [see also 113.2(c)] 8.4 Insplratory Resistance (see also Annex C )

8.9.2 Manually-cycled Gas-powered Resuscitators Manually-cycled, gas-powered resuscitators shall meet the requirements laid down in 8.13,8.8.1 and 8.9.1, when tested by the methods described in A-55, A-5.10 and A-5.11. 8.9.3 Automatic Resuscitators Pressure-cycle4 Gas-powered

When tested by the method described in A-5.7, the pressure at the patient connection portshall not exceed 0.5 kPa (5 cm $0) below atmospheric pressure [see also 113.2 (c)9].
8.5 Patient Valve Malfunction (see also Annex B )

8.9.3.1 Manufacturer's warning (see also Annex C) See 11.1.1. a.9.3.2 Pressure-cycling system (see also Annex C)

When tested by the method described in A-58, the patient valve of the resuscitator shall not jam in the inspiratory position at an added input flow of up to 30 l/min when this flow is added in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 8.6 Patient Valve Leakage - Forward (see also Annex C )
Leakage

Automatic pressure-cycled resuscitators shall have positive cycling pressures in the range of 2 to 3 kPa (20to 30cm $0) when tested by the method described in A-5.12.
NOTE - A negative-pressure phase may cause a decrease in arterial oxygen partial pressure (PO3 or Functional Residual Capacity (FRC).

Where forward leakage is a design feature, it shall be so stated in the instruction manual. 8.7 Apparatus
Dead Space (see also Annex C )

8.9.4 Automatic Time-cycled Gas-powered Resuscitators Automatic time-cycled,,ps-powered resuscitators shall meet the requirements laid down in 8.1, 8.8.1 and 8.9.1, when tested by the methods described in A-5.5, A-5.10 and A-5.11. 8.9.5 Volume-cycled Gas-powered Resuscitators Volume-cycled, gas-powered resuscitators shall meet the requirements laid down in 8.1.2, 8.8.1 apd 8.9.1,when tested by the methods described in A-5.5, A-5.10 and A-5.11.
8.10 Demand Valves

When tested by the test method described in A-5.9, the apparatus dead space shall not exceed 5 ml t 10 percent of the tidal volume specified for the resuscitator (see 8.8.x).
a.8 Ventilation Performance

8.8.1 Tidal Volume (see also Annex C)

The tidal volumes specified shall be delivered under the test conditions listed on Table 1 using the methods described in A-5.10, without the use of the override mechanism on any pressure-limiting system.
Table 1 Test Conditions

(Clause 8.8.1)
nation
Desig-

YXE? - These devices are subject to the requirements of this standard only when they are included as an integral part of a resuscitator.

Complluee Res&tancc Inspir8. vent& MinImum c%ssutCINMUI- tory latory tidal
CcrtiOll~ UtiOlll Expira tow Ekequency vo1umc

8.10.1 Pressure for Initiation (see also Annex C )

PllasC Time
Ratio

V, min ml

When tested in accordance with the method described in A-5.17, the pressure drop needed to initiate gas flow shall be no more than a negative 0.2 kPa (2 cm $0). 8.102 Peak Inspiratory Flow (see also Annex C)

Adult

c20

R20

1:2

20

600

I) See Annex B for a complete listing of compliance and resistance required for test.

Demand flow shall terminate when airway pressure equals atmospheric pressure or at a pressure stated by the manufacturer, when tested by the methods described in A-5.15. 9 RESISTANCE TO ENVIRONMENT
9.1 Storage The resuscitator
and the resuscitator kit

8.9 Gas-powered

Resuscitators

8.9.1 Pressure-limiting System (see Annex C)

A pressure-limiting system shall be incorporated in gas powered resuscitators which is supplied with gas at 3

[if provided)

IS 13366 : 1992

shallafterstorageat temperaturesof-40cCand+60cC and at any relative humidity between 40 percent and 9.5percent meet all the requirements for the category of resuscitator being tested as laid down in 8. 9.2 Operating Conditions (see also Annex C ) When tested by the methods described in A-5.16, the resuscitator shall meet all the requirements for the category of resuscitator being tested as laid down in 8, throughout the temperature range from -18 to + 5O"C and a humidity range from 40 to 95 percent relative humidity.
10 GAS SUPPLY 10.1 Gas Cylinders, Connections Cylinder Valves and Yoke

instructions for use that the unit is not designed to be used with closed-chest cardiac compression.
NOTE - Where possible, simple operating instructions be provided on the resuwitator or the container. should

11.1.2 Range of Supply Pressures

4s

The range of supply pressures through which the resuscitator will operate shall be marked on the resuscitator.
11.13 Gus Source for

Spontaneously

Breathing

Patient The gas source supplying the spontaneously breathing patient, if it is other than the reservoir, shall be marked on the resuscitator.
11.2 Training The instructions provided shall include a warning that the unit should only be used by persons who have received adequate training inresuscitation techniques.

Gas cylinders, cylinder valves and yoke connections of the pin index type shall meet the requirements given in IS 3745 : 1978.
NOTE! - Small cylinders used in special situations. with special fittings are frequently

10.2 Indication of Contents

11.3 Information Manufacturer in Instructions
11.3.1 General

to be Provided by the Operating and Maintenance

Each gas supplied at cylinders pressure shall be monitored by a cylinder pressure gauge or contents indicator.
10.3 Captive Valve Key

A detachable, hand wheel, key or other device shall be made captive by means of a retaining chain or similar attachment capable of withstanding a static load of not less than 200 N (20 kg) without breaking. 10.4 Duration of Gas Supply (see also Annex C )
10.5 Connections Annex C ) for Compressed Gas (see also

The manufacturer shall provide a manual of operating and maintenance instructions. The size and shape of this (these) manual(s) shall be such that it (they) may be enclosed within or attached to the resuscitator container. Additional copies shall be available on request. 113.2 Contents The manual shall be divided into sections to facilitate understandingofthe instructions and shall;nclude the following information: A warningthat the resuscitator should be used ouly by persons who have received adequate training; Instructions on how to make the resuscitator operational inall intended modes of operation; A specification detailing the following~information:

Gas connections between different gas services shall

be non-interchangeable and shall not allow parts of the resuscitator to be incorrectly connected.
NOTE - If provided, a press-fit connection should give an easy and reliable conoection with 6 mm internal diameter elastomeric tubing.

10.6 Supply Pressures

(see also Annex C )

When supplied with gas at pressures between 270 and 550 kPa, the resuscitator shall meet all the requirements for the type of resuscitator being tested as laiddown in 8. Testing shall be as described in A-5.
11 INFORMATION MANUFACTURER 11.1 Marking TO BE SUPPLIED BY

1)
3)

Range of ventilatory frequency;

-2) Attainable delivery pressures;
Operating environmental limits; 4) Storage environmental limits; 5) Delivered oxygen concentrations various test conditions;

under

6) Characteristics and/or dimensions of the gas inlet connection; Warning 7) Apparatus dead space (backward leakage and forward leakage, where appropriate); 8) 4 Expiratory resistance and in'&ratory

11.1.1Munufucfurer's

For automatic pressure-cycled, gas-powered resuscitators, the manufacturer shall provide a warning on the resuscitator and the resuscitator case, and in

IS 13366: 1992

resistance and any special fittings which impose such resistance; 9) The value of end-expiratory pressure generated by the resuscitation in normal use, if greater than 0.2 kPa (2 cm H,O); 10) Details of the pressure - limitingsystem and override mechanism operation, if any; 11) External dimensions of the resuscitator and, ifprovided, the resuscitatorcase; and 12) Mass of the resuscitator and, if provided, the resuscitator case. Instructions for dismantling and reassembly of components for cleaning and sterilization ( if applicable ). This shall include an illustration of the parts in their correct relationship. The manufacturer shall recommend a functional test of operation to be carried out after reassembly.

4

Recommendations for use in hazardous or explosive atmospheres, including a warning that if the resuscitator will entrain or permit the patient to inhale gas from the atmosphere, its use in containment is prevented - if applicable, the manufacturer shall describe how to prevent such entrainment or inhalation; Oxygen fire prevention - warn@ shall be provided that in the presence of high oxygen concentrations there is danger from smoking or open flames and that oil should not be used with the resuscitator; manual;

4

4

4 Date of publication and/or revision of the
P) Duration of gas supply - the approximate duration of gas supply, expressed as time per litre cylinder volume when charged to the maximum nationally approved filling pressure and when the resuscitator is delivering a minute volume of 10 l/min (of the nearest setting to this): - at least 85 percent oxygen, and -the manufacturer selected value less than 85 percent oxygen, if the resuscitator is so capable. 4) Range of supply pressures - the manufacturer shall state the range of supply pressures with which the resuscitator meets the applicable requirements laid down in 7 and shall describe any necessary adjustments for particular supply pressures.

Recommendations for the preferred methods e> of cleaning and disinfection or sterilization of the resuscitator and its components; A 0 recommended functional test for operation to be carried out immediately prior to use; f3)A list of operator replaceable parts;

)

h) Recommendation

for frequency of approved
also be stated in

or factory service.

NOTE - If no service is required, this should the manual.

j) Resuscitator flow capabilities at 2kPa (20 cm %O) and at 4 kPa (40 cm %O) airway pressure;

IS 13366 : 1992

ANNEX A and 8.10.2) (Clauses 6.3, 6.4,6.5,8.1,8.3,8.4,8.5,8.7,8.8.1,8.9.2,8.9.4,8.9.5
TEST METHODS A-l GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS The ambient temperature for the duration of the tests shall be between 25 and 29 OC, except where otherwise stated. The relative humidity shall be within the range from 60 - 70 percent, except where otherwise stated. A-2 APPARATUS A-2.0 Typical test apparatus is shown in Fig. 1 to 5; alternative test apparatus of equivalent or greater accuracy may be used (see A-3). A-2.1 Test Lung
(See Fig. 3 and 4 for example), with appropriate compliance and resistance characteristics (see Table 1).

270 to 550 kPa and of producing a flow rate of at least 30 l/min. A-2.14 Vacuum Source Capable of producing flow rates from 5 to 50 l/mm. A-2.15 Gas Source
Capable of varying through the range of pressures from 270 to 550 kPa.

A-3 TEST APPARATUS TOLERANCES A-3.1 Test apparatus shall have the following minimum tolerances:

a) Plug andRing b) Oxygen

Gauges - 15 mm, 22 mm sizes and 32 mm size (see Fig. 1).

A-2.2 Plug and Ring Gauges 15 mm, 22 mm and 32 mm sixes (see Fig. 1 for 32 mm gauge). A-2.3 Resistors If not provided with the test lung. A-2A Pressu~p, Flow and Voiume-Measuring
Recording Apparatus and

Including a pneumotachograph. A-25 Temperature
A-2.6 Deadspace - Measurement Measurement Apparatus Apparatus

(.See Fig. 2 for typical example).

A-2.7 Negative Pressure Generator (See Fig. 5 for typical example). A-2.8 Graduated
Cylinder

analyser - +,l percent (v/v) of the being measured with a concentration response time of greater than 90 percent in 10 seconds. 4 Compliunces - 25 percent of required compliance value throughout a range of inspiratory phase times from 0.1 to 6.0 s (see Annex C). 4 Pressure, Flow and Volume - 22.5 percent of the reading plus 22.5 percent of the full scale reading. The reading accuracy of the associated recording device shall be maintained at a frequency of up to 10 Hz. f 20 percent for linear Resistances e) resistances and k10 percent for parabolic resistances within the designated flow range (see Annex B). fj Temperature Measurement - kO.5OC. A-4 CONDITIONING
CONDITIONS A-4.1 Conditioning Apparatus of the Resuscitator and Test AND REFERENCE

Of at least 200 ml capacity. A-2.9 Oxygen Analyser
A-2.10 Water Reservoir 0.5 m deep. j

Unless otherwise specified inparticulartests, place the resuscitator and test apparatus in the test location and allow sufficient time for the resuscitator and apparatus to equilibrate with ambient conditons.
A-4.2 Reference Coaditons

A-2.1 1 Template

- 300 mm x 400 mm. Chamber

A-2.12 Environmental

Capable of maintaining temperatures from - 40 to t6OT and relative humidity from 40 to 95 percent for periods of up to seven days.
A-2.13 Oxygen Supply

Correct all test readings to the reference conditions'of NTPD (27 OC, 1 atm, 0 percent relative humidity). A-5 TEST PROCEDURES A-5.1 Dismantling and Reassembly Verify by inspection of the resuscitator afidaccom6

Capable of varying over the pressure range from

IS 13366 : 1992 panying documents that a functional test has been provided to test operation after reassembly. A-S.2 Valve Function Vomitus A-5.2.1 A-5.2.1.1 Test Material Simulated vomitus After Contamination with A-S.6 Expiratory Resistance

Connect the patient connection portto the air/O, source and introduce air/O flow rate of 50 I/min. Record the resistance generate d at the patient connection port. A-5.7 Inspiratory Resistance

Prepared by mixing two parts of baby meal meat with vegetable meal and one part water. A-5.2.2 Procedure

Connect the patient connection port to a vacuum source producing an air/O, flow rate of 50/l min. Record the inspiratory resistance generated at the patient connection port. A-5S Patient Valve Mahnction Connect the resusciator to the test lung (A-2.1) set at C 20 and R 20 characteristics. Ventilate the test lung at a frequency of 12 breaths/m.in and a tidal volume of 600 ml. Using the oxygen supply (A-2.13), pass oxygen, as recommended by the manufacturer, at a flow rate of30 l/min. Verify that the valve does not jam in the inspiratory position. A-5.9 Apparatus A-5.9.1 Principle Ventilation by the resuscitator of a `bag-in-bottle' reservoir with 100 percent (v/v) oxygen as tracer gas. Calculate total dead space of the resuscitator from the volume of ventilation and the oxygen concentration of the inspired gas captured inside the bag. A-5.9.2 Preparation Resuscitator ofApparatus Prior to Testing the Dead Space

Pour 175 ml of simulated vomitus into the patient connection port and begin with 30 s, to operate the resuscitator for 30 cycles into the test lung (A-2.1) in order to disperse the vomitus. Clean the resuscitator of the mixture in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions for removal of vomitus. Ventilate the test lung (see Fig. 3 and 4 for typical illustrations of active and passive test lung) at a frequency of 12 breaths/min for adult resuscitators and at a frequency of 30 breaths/ min for infant resuscitators.
NOTE - Some of the test solutions may spill over when poured into the patient connection port.

A-5.3 Dnq-Test Drop ihe resuscitator from a height of at least 1 m on to a concrete floor in the worst case mode. For the purposes of this test, the resuscitator shall be a complete unit, including the face mask, valve, hose, regulator and cylinder, as appropriate. Perform the test with the cylinder empty. A-5.4 Immersion in Water

Droptheresuscitatorfromaheightoflmintothewater reservoir (A-2.10)..Take the resuscitator out after 10 s and shake out the water for not more than 30 s. Begin ventilating the test lung (A-2.1) immediately. A-5.5 Delivered Oxygen Powered Resuscitators Concentration for Gas-

Connect the resuscitator to the test lung (A-2.1) set at C 20 and R 20 characteristics. Connect the oxygen analyser (A-2.9) at a site in the compliance chamber as far away as possible from the patient connection port. Ventilate the test lung at a frequency of 12 breaths/minanda tidalvolumeof6OOmLContinue this procedure until a stable value for oxygenconcentration is reached. Confirm that the resuscitator delivers an oxygen concentration of at least 85 percent (v/v). If the resuscitator is capable of delivering other oxygenconcentrations, test the device at those settings recommended by the manufacturer and confiml that the oxygen concentration delivered to the test lung is within 210 percent of the set control value on the resuscitator. This test shall be performed at the maximum and minimum flow settings recommended for the resuscitator.

Set up the dead space measurement apparatus (A-2.6; see Fig. 2). C'iose the tap to the oxygen analyser (A-2.9). Open the ball valve. Connect the resuscitator and ventilate until the balloon fills the bottle completelyand is pressed against the innerwalls. Close the ball valve. Open the oxygen analyser tap. Open the flowmeter and fill the bottle with 100 percent (I*/\*) oxygen. Close the oxygen flowmeterwhen the pressure gauge reads approximately 1 kPa (10 cm H,O). Connect the 22 nun/15 mm test connector to thk 22 mm female socket and supply the appropriate flow .of atmospheric air to the side nipple (see Table 2). Open the ball valve, whereby the expiratory flow path is flushed with 100 percent (~.YY) oxygen. Ventilate the lung by covering and opening 10 mm diameter hole with a finger. Hold the tidal volume constant by means of the rcspirometer (V) and pressure guage (P). The minimum number of ventilating cycles is given in Table 2. Close the ball valve and open the analyser tap. Adjust the 100 perrent (I.+/Y) oxygen flow to approsimately 5 Vnlin. Record the reading for the oxygen concentration in the FO, bag of the oxygen analyser. Close off the oxygen flow when the pressure puge reads 1 kPa (10 cm l-&O) again. This detenninatlon of internal dead space -of the test apparatus shall t*, performed for every combination of test parameters. used. The apparatus is now ready for testing the resuscitator. . 7

ES 13366 .: M4Q Table 2 Test,Parameters (Chse A-5.9.2) .W ce
C Z-L mlikPa (2) 200 100

Vahame V, ml (1) 600 100

EIphrtory
Ihz&tnce ReyP I kPa/(l.s) (4) 0.5 2 I [cm %O/(l.s)] 0 PI

Test Flow for Imtarrl Dtad space l/min (6) 30 5

Test CYh

(muan %O) (3) (20) (10)

(7) > 15 > 50

1201

A-5.93

Prtwedure

Test the resuscitator using the same procedure as described &r .the test connector (see A-5.9.2). A-5-9.4 Eqmssion

pressure at which the device cycles from inspirator to expiration. A-S.13 Pressure for
Initiation

(Demand Valves)

of Results

Calculate the system dead space, that is, with test connection using the followingequation: Vn system = FO, bag (test connection) - 21 Xv, 79

Connect the patient port of the resuscitator to the negative pressure generator (A-2.7; see Fig. 5). Measure the pressure between the demand valve and the negative pressure generator. Record the point at which flow from the demand valve begins. A-5.14 Peak Inspiratory Flow Connect the demand valve to be tested as shown in Fig. 5 and carry out the test procedure described in A-5.14.1 to A-5.14.3. A-5.14.1 Flow Threshold Set the negative pressure, P , by adjusting the regulator which controls the nesive input pressure, P until the output flow, q+ is between 0 and 10 l/&z The reading on the negatrve pressure gauge (P) should be between - 0.2 and 0 kPa (2.0 and 0 cm H,O). A-5.14.2 Peak Flow Set thenegative pressure, Pm,, by adjusting the regulator which controls the negative input pressure, Pm* until the output flow, q,,, is 100 l/mm. The reading on the negative pressure gauge (P) should be between - 0.5 and OkPa (- 5.0 and 0 cm 50). A-5.14.3 Flow Termination Set the negative pressure, P, by adjusting the regulator which controls negative Input pressure P,@ until the outpout flow q is between 0 and 0.5 l/mm. Read and record the rea&g on the nagative pressure gauge (P). A-S.15
TemiBatiOB -PreSsure

NOTE - The apparatus shouldbc so designed that VD,system is 20 ml. The oxygen atilyser should be calibrated to read 21 percent with atmospheric air and be accurate within 21 percent (v/v) oxygen up to 30 percent (v/v) oxygen. z

'

Calculate the apparatus dead space of the resuscitator being tested using the following equation: Apparatus dead space, V,.app = FO, bag 79 21 XV, - V, system

A-S.10 TkIal Volumes Connect the resuscitator to the appropriate test lung (A-2.1; see Fig. 3 and 4) having the characteristics stated.inTable 1. Measure the volumeby recordingthe flow resulting from compression of the compressible unit by means of a pneumotachograph (A-24) connected between the simulated resistance and compliance of the standard lung and integrating the recorded flow (other equivalent method may be used). Use only one hand to compress the compressible unit. Perform these tests without the use of an over ride mechanism if one is .provided.
A-5.11 Pressure-limiting -1Resuscitntors) System (Gas-Powered

For resuscitators for use with adults and equipped ~*withpressure-limiting systems, occlude the adult connection port-and pass airat a flow rate of 60 l/mitt or at the maximum flow rate .which the resuscitator is cepable of, whichever is greater. A-5-12 htSSUIWJ'C~iBg System (Automatic, Pressure-e~ckd, Ges-Powered Resuscitators) Connect the resuscitator to the appropriate test lung (A-221; seePig. 3 and 4) having the stated characteristics inTable 1. Activate the resuscitator and record the

Using the method described in A-5.13, determine the airway pressure at which the demand flow ceases and record that pressure. A-5.16 ~rati@hnditkm A-5.16.1 General Following completion of each phase of this test, the resuscitator shall be operated under the conditions described in the-general requirements and a&o under

the specific conditions for the category of resuscitator beingtested, thatisgas-poweredvolume cycled, handPowered, etc, laid-down in 9.2. A-5.16.2 Procedure A-5.16.2.1 Prepare the test resuscitator in accordance with the general requirements. Place the resuscitator system in the environmental chamber (A-2.12) set at 50 oCandatleast95percentrelativehumidity.Maintain these conditions for nofewerthansevendays.Atthe end of this Period, operate and test the resuscitator. Once testing has been completed, return the resuscitator, within 5 min, to ambient conditions of 18 to 22OC and 40 to 70 Percent relative humidity for a Period of no fewer than seven days. At the end of this Period, operate and test the resuscitator. A-5.16.2.2 Place the resuscitator system in the environmental chamber set at -40�Cforaperiodofat least 4 h or until the test item stabilizes. At the end of this Period, return the resuscitator, within 5 min, to an ambient temperature between 18 and 22 OC.Allow the resuscitatortostabilize foratleast4h.Attheendofthis Period, operate and test the resuscitator.

A-5.16.2.3 Place the resuscitator system in the environmental chamber at +60 OC and at 40 to 70 Percent -relative humidity for a Period of not&s than 4 h. At the end of this Period, return the resuscitator, within 5 min, to ambient conditions of 18 to 220C.and 40 to 7Opcrcent relative humidity. Allow.the resuscitator to stabilize for 4 h. At the end of this Period, operate and test the resuscitator. A-5.16.2.4 Place the resuscitator system in the environmental chamber set at -18 OC for 4 h. At the end of this Period, operate and test the resuscitator. Once testing haa been compkted, return the resuscitator to ambient conditions of 18 to 22 OC.Within 5 min, operate and test the resuscitator.
In each of the operational tests prescribe& the resuscitator should be operated continuously for a period of at least 10 min. NOTE -

A-5.17 Supply Pressures Connect the resuscitator to the gas source (A-2.15) and test its Performance at source pressures of 270 kPa and 550 kPa using the test methods described for the general requirements and any specific requirementa for the type of resuscitator being tested as laid down in 8.10.1.

NOTES 1 Basic

taperis 1 : 28on diameter.

2

Engagement is9.5NOM. Au dimalshs

inmiuimetres.

FIG. 1 PLWG GAUGES

9

TEST CONNECTOR FOR vu SYSTEM TEST

ESPIROMETER

WATER FOR ADJUSTMENT OF COMPLIANCE

FIG. 2

BST SET-UPFOR ~&WRING

TOTAL APPARATUS DFAD SPACE

1 RESUSCITATOR

1

1

I

II

-

PRESSURE TAPPING POINT

RIG10

TUBING

HOOEL RESISTANCE (RS TO R 1000)

r THERMOMETER COPPER WIRE

f

&i. 3

kPRL?3ENTATIVEPASSIVE %-zSThNGSYSTEM 10

IS 13366: 1992

PRESSURETAPPING POINT bLYEOCAl? PRESSURE P&l PRESSURE TAPPING (AIRWAY PRESSURE PC I-\ B.ST Lrnv~ SYSTEM

FIG. 4 REPRESENTATIVE ACINE

PNEUMOTACHOGRAPH (0 TO lSGl/min) -NEGATIVE PRESSURE GAUGE CP,q FOR-1 TO 0 kPab -10 10 Ocm HI0 M

Pnrg CONTROLLED BY REGULATOR

NEGATIVE PRESSURE GENERATOR

REGULATOR

Pnq

By ADJUSTING REGULATOR
h

I
FIG. 5 TEST

/
\

1

I
\

v

INPUT PRESSURE, Pn 170 TO MO kfi

SET-UP IQR

`&STING

DEMAND

VALVES

(l'hs~o~l)

AND PEAK

FLOWS)

11

IS 13366 : 1992

ANNEX B (Clauses 8.5 and A-3.1)
COMPLIANCES AND RESISTANCES REQUIRED TO SET UP TEST LUNG Table 3 Required Compliances clwiricalion'~
F
ml&Pa c 50 c20 c 10 500 200 100 (ml/cmf-$O) (50) (20) (10)

compHulc4!

r) The classification was originally based on conventional centimetres of water.

Table 4 Required Resistances class&
6CJltiOd /

Re&tance
A .

Range of Air Flow"
(for Ihear or

Linear

ParaboW

puabolic IXSlStaJlaS)

2kPa/ (1s) R5 R20 R50 R400 0.5 2 5 40 (c$CJ .s (5) (20) (50) (400)

A-Y
kPaJ1.s) (l-s) 0.77 0.56 0.39 0.14 (cn%O/ (1s) (7.7) (5.6) (3.9) (1.4) Us 0 to 2.0 0.5 to 1.0 0.25 to 0.5 0.05 to 0.07

`1 The classification was originally based on conventional centimetrea of water. *) The values for parabolic resistance refer to the nominal inside diameter of tin plate, sharp-cornered orifices needed to achieve these resistance values. Other geometric shapes may be used, for example, thicker orifkes with rounded cornets but nominal diameters would be different. ,) The tolerances for the flow range values are t20 percent for linear resistances and t10 percent for parabolic resistances.

ANNEX C (Clauses 5.1,5.2,5.3,6.2,6.?,6.4. 1, 6.5, 7.1,8.1,8.3,8.4,8.6,8.7,8.9.1, 8.102, 10.4, 10.5 and10.6)
RATIONALE STATEMENT C-l PATIENT CONNECTOR C-l.1 The patient connector dimensions permit connection with standard 15 mm tracheal tube connectors and face mask fittings having a 22 mm female socket or 15 mm male fittings. C-l.2 ExhaustPortforExpiredAir/BreathingGases The exhaust connection described is that used for connection to the transfer tubes of anaesthetic gas scavenging systems. It is essential that breathing system conical fittings are not compatible with this port. It is also important that the exhaust port be designed 12 C-2 DISMANTLING AND REASSEMBLY Wrongly assembling a resuscitator so that it causes incorrect operation or complete malfunction which may result in inadequate ventilation of the patient. such that it cannot be confused with the inspiratory port during use of the resuscitator. C-l.3 Face Mask Fittings It is important that resuscitator face masks should be generally interchangeable.

IS 13366 : 1992' C-2.1 Valve Vomitus Function after Contamination with

It is important that vomit can be quickly and effectively cleared from a resuscitator so that resuscitation can be continued with a minimum of interruption. C-2.2 Drop Test
It is important that resuscitators can withstand severe

pressures to the patient. Resuscitators are commonly used at oxygen input flows of 15 l/min, but flowmeter valves are often capable of permitting flows of over 30 l/min. It is essential to follow the manufacturer's instructions and to use only attachments recommended for use with the resuscitator. C-4.6 Patient Valve Leakage - Forward Leakage If forward leakage is a design feature of a resuscitator, it should be disclosed so that the user does not confuse this leakage with a malfunction. C-4.7 Apparatus
Dead Space

shock caused by falls from ambulances, hospital beds, etc. C-23 Immersion
in Water

Resuscitators are often used in areas where the device may be inadvertently dropped into water during the resuscitation. If the unit is recovered quickly from the water, it should still function. C-3 SIZE C-3.1 Resuscitators may be required where access to patients is difficult, suchas incrawl spaces and through manholes. C-4 OPERATOR-POWEREDRESUSCITATORS (v/v) oxygen concentration is adequate under some circumstances, 85 percent (v/v) or liigher oxygen concentrations are preferable for the treatment of severely hypoxemic patients duringresuscitation. This concentrationshould beachievable at supplementary oxygen flows of 15 l/min or less because to specify greater than 15 l/min would exceed the normal calibration to standard, clinically used flowmeters for adult use and could potentially lead to inaccurate control of oxygen flows and jamming cf the patient valve in the inspiratory position. C-4.2 Gas-Powered
Resuscitators C-4.1 Altough 40 percent

It is essential to minimize apparatus dead space in order to limit rebreathing of expired gases. C-4.8 Tidal Volume For adult ventilation a typical tidal volume is approximately 600 ml. The compliances and resistances listed in Table 1 are representative of the possible compliances and resistances found in adults needing resuscitation. The ventilatory frequency is a typical value used in adult resuscitation. C-4.8.1 Pressure Resuscitators )
Limitation ( Operator-Powered

High qxygen concentrations are important in resuscitating patients who are extremely hypoxemic. Lower percefitages of oxygen will lengthen the duration of oxygen supply. The performance of air-entrainment, "mixing" devices is influenced by the flow settings of the resuscitator and the compliance and resistance of the patient. C=43 Expiratory
Resistance .

Experience with infant resuscitation suggests that a maximum inspiratory pressure of 4.5 kPa (45 cm 0) will not produce lung damage and will permit a % equate tidal volumes in most patients weighing under 10 kg. Pressure-limiting systems are not mandatory on operator-powered resuscitatofi designated for use with patients weighing over 10 h+ However, it is essential that resuscitators with s,:ch systems satisfy the tidal volume requirements laid down in this standard(see Table 1) without the useofanyoverride mechanism. When airway pressure is limited to below 6 kPa (60 cm H;O), it was felt than an override mechanism is essential in order to ventilate those patients with low lungcomplianceand/orhigh airways resistance. C-4.8.2 Pressure-Limiting System It is essential that maximum delivery pressure is limited on all gas powered resuscitators. Airway pressure at 4.5 kPa (45 cm 30) was considered adequate for ventilation of the lungs, but unlikely to produce barotrauma. The selection of higher setting for difficult clinical problems necessitates risk of barotrauma. C-4.8.2.1 Manufacturer's warning
These resuscitators are unacceptable for use during closed cardiopulmonary resuscitation because the increased intrathoracic pressure caused during chest compression causes the resuscitator to cycle from the inspiratory mode to the expiratory mode prior to adequate ventilation of the lung. C-4.8.2.2 Pressure-cycling system

.-

To facilitate exhalation, expiratory resistance should be minimized unless there are special clinical indications to impose such resistance. C-4.4 Inspiratory
Resistance

The design of a resuscitator,shoyld be such that it is possible for the patient to breath spontaneously without excessive sub-atmospheric pressure when the resuscitator is applied to the patient's airway but is not activated by the operator.

C-45 Patient Valve Malfunction Valve malfunction or jamming in the inspiratory position at high supplementary oxygen flow may lead to failure ofthe resuscitatorand transmissionofexcessive 13

It is required that pressure cycled resuscititors meet the performance requirements of this International

IS 13366 : 1992 Standard, but they are of limited use on patients with poor lung compliance and/or high airways resistance because the cycling pressure is achieved without adequate ventilation. A `negative' pressure phase should not be used as it is associated with a fall in functional residual capacity (FRC)and arterial oxygen partial pressure (p,2). C-4.9 Pressure for Initiation It is important that the patient should not have to generate large amounts of negative pressure to initiate gas flow from the demand valve in order to minimize respiratory work. A negative pressureof - 0.2 kPa (2 cm %O) is physiologically acceptable.
.

C-4.12 Operating Conditions Resuscitators can be expected to be exposed to the temperature extremes outlined in 9.2 since such temperatures frequently occur throughout the world in environments where resuscitators are used. C-4.13 Duration of Gas Supply Small, easily portable cylinders are commonly used
with resuscitators. It is important that the operator have

"

some idea of the duration of this size of oxygen supply
under simulated conditions of use. In case of mines the

duration shall not be less than 40 minutes. C-4.14 Connections for Compressed Gas The fresh gas nipple are intended to minimize disconnections. It is essential to be able to easily connect resuscitator oxygen tubing, for example while the resuscitator is in use. c-4.15 Supply Pressure

C-4.10 Peak Inspiratory Flow Peak flows as outlined in this cause are necessary in order to satisfy the inspiratory needs of the typical patient; large amounts of negative pressure should not be required to generate these flows as it would cause fatigue in a spontaneously breathing patient. C-4.11 Termination Pressure

Positive pressure indicates that adequate tidal volume hasbeendelivered. Whenthepressurebecomes slightly positive it indicates that the patient should be allowed to exhale and hence flow should stop.

The range of supply pressures reflect the variety of pressures used internationally and the tolerances of pressure-regulating systems.

ANNEXD (Foreword )
MATED-l CLEANING AND DISINFECTION OR STERILIZATION D-l.l'Components which are subject to contamination should withstand the methods of cleaning and disinfection or sterilization recommended by the manufacturer or be labelled `for single use only' (disposable). .' D-2 OXYGEN COMPATIBILITY D-2.1 All resuscitator components should be compatible with and resistant to ignition with oxygen concentrations and pressures to which the component is exposed. D-3 RESISTANCE DETERIORATION TO CORROSION AND D-5 RATIONALE D-5.1 Cleanjag and Dlsinfectlon or Sterilization Resuscitators are likely to become contaminated by bacteria and foreign matter during use. It is therefore essential that manufacturer's recommended suitable methods of cleaning and disinfection or sterlization for many applications, cleaning and dis-infection alone is adequate. However, in certain situations, the user may require resuscitators which can withstand steam or ethylene oxide gas sterilization of the contaminated components. The user should appreciate that some methods of disinfection and sterilization may shorten the usable life of the resuscitator. D-S.2 Oxygen Compatibility Selection of materials for use in high oxygen concentrations, especially at elevated supply pressures, involves consideration of both compatibility and ease of ignition. Materials that bum in air will bum violently in high concentrations of oxygen at atmospheric pressure and may explode at higher pressures. Many materials, including metals, will not bum in air but may do so in pure oxygen, particularly underpressure. Materials maybe ignited by the friction of a valve seat or stem packing or by the adiabatic compression produced when oxygen at high pressure is 14

D-3.1 Resuscitator performance should not be degraded because of corn&ion during a period of 12 months after being stored in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. D-4 PATIENT VALVE HOUSING D-4.1 The valve housing should be constructed of materialssuchthatthefunctioningmechanismisreadily visible to the operator.

IS 13366 : 1992 suddenly introduced into a system at low pressure. Therefore, easily ignitable materials, such as some rubber and plastics, should be avoided in valves and fittings, especially in high-pressure oxygen systems, unless tested or experience-rated for such service. These conditions and requirements also apply to the use of nitrous oxide. D-S.3 Resistance to Corrosion and Deterioration Since resuscitators are often stored and used in the proximity of sea water, it is important that resuscitators are capable of meeting the performance requirements of this standard after being used and stored in,such an environment.

ANNEXE (Foreword )
FACE MASKS A face mask provided with or recommended for use with a resuscitator should comprise a body and a face seal, and a port to receive the patient connector of the resuscitator. The face seal should be capable of provided a fit which minimizes leaks at the operating pressures and temperatures specified in this standard. Thebodyofthemaskshouldbe transparenttoallowthe operator to observe the patient's nose and mouth for breath condensation as evidence of breathing and also for the possible appearance of vomitus.

15

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark IS governed by the provts~ons of the Bureau of Indian T'he Standard Mark on Standmds Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence for the to that standard as a further safeguard. use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of harmonious development of the activities of standardization. and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and siyes, type or grade course of implementing designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards I
Indian Starldurds Act,

marking

and quality

1986 to promote certification of goods

if any, are Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Dot : No. CHD 08 ( 9438 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Mauaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

I 331 331 01 13 75 31

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Maniktola

37 86 62

Northern Southern Western

160036 600113 )

53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus,

MADRAS (East

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 1`

Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India

