**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9866 (1981): Marking system for valves [MED 17: Chemical 
Engineering Plants and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621-646-2:621-777 IS : 98661981 



(Reaffirmed 2003) 




Indian Standard 

MARKING SYSTEM FOR VALVES 



1. Scope — Covers the mandatory and optional marking of industrial valves and states the manner of 
applying the marking, namely, on the body, on the flange and on an identification plate. Markings on 
the body may be integral with the body or on a plate distinct from the identification plate mentioned 
above and securely fixed to the body, 

These specified markings serve to identify the manufacturer and the valve, as well as to 
assist in proper application. 

2. Required Markings — The data for which markings are normally provided on the valves and 
identification plates are listed in Appendix A, 

3. Mandatory Marking on Body 

a) Nominal size designation, 

b) Rating designation, 

c) Body material identification, 

d) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

e) Melt identification, 

f) Arrow to indicate direction of flow ( unidirectional valves only ), and 

g) Ring joint numbers ( for flanges grooved for ring joints ) . 

3.1 Mandatory Marking on identification Plate 

a) Nominal size designation, 

b) Rating designation, 

c) Body material identification, 

d) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

e) Valve trim identification, 

f) Manufacturer's catalogue number or code number, and 

g) Additional markings permitted. 

3.2 Optional Markings — All markings listed in Appendix A other than those mentioned under 3 are 
optional unless specified otherwise in the standard appropriate to the individual type of valve. 

4. Method of Applying the Markings — The mandatory body markings shall be cast, forged, stamped 
or shown on a plate permanently attached or securely fastened to the valve bodies. 

Mote 1 — Where steel stamps are used care should be taken to ensure that the marking does not cause cracks or 
reduce the wall thickness of the valve below minimum required thickness. 

Note 2 — Cast lettering on steel valves that is obliterated during manufacture may be replaced by weld deposition or 
stamping at the option of the manufacturer. When stamping is used care must be taken to ensure that the requirements of 
Note 1 are met. 

4.1 All other markings may be provided either on the body or on identification plate or both at the 
option of the manufacturer. 



Adopted 10 July 7981 



@ December 1981, ISt 






?G» 3 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110 002 



IS: 9866 -1981 

5. Guidelines for Marking — Steel valves, except bar stock valves, are required to have identifica- 
tion plates. Steel bar stock valves may have all the required markings stamped on body or indicated 
in a suitable manner. 

5.1 Nominal Size Designation 

5.1.1 NumeraK s ) denoting the nominal size valve: Numeral(s) can also be prefixed by the 
letters DIM, for example, DN 100 for 100 mm valve. 

5.2 Rating Designation 

5.2.1 Rating designation for valves may be designated by class numbers alone or pressure class 
designations, for example, A CI. 300 valve fully complying with the standard's requirements. 

Body Identification Plate 

300 CI. 300 

5.2.2 Rating designation for valves which conform to the recognized standards but are not 
suitable for full range of pressures or temperatures ( as, for example, usage of elastomers, PTFE, etc, for 
parts) of these standards may be marked as prescribed in 5.2.1 as appropriate and shall also show 
the limiting pressure and temperatures for which the valves are suitable for example, CI. 300 valve 
conforming to the recognized standard but suitable for use up to 200° C. 

Body Identification Plate 

300 CI. 300/44 bar at 200°C Max 

or 
300 CI. 300/44 bar/200°C Max 

or 
300 44 bar at 200°C/51 bar at 38°C 

5.3 Body Material Designation — Carbon steel valves shall be marked with words STEEL or with 
relevant specification number and grade. Alloy steel valves shall be marked with relevant grade identi- 
fication symbol. 

5.3.1 Austenitic steel valves (stainless steel) shall be marked with symbols designated in appro- 
priate material standards to indicate the grade of steels. Use of symbols description of the chemical 
content of the alloy may also be used at the option of the manufacturer. 

5.3.2 Body material identification 

a) Cast Iron — Material marking is not required for grey cast iron. Alloyed cast iron may be 
identified by a manufacturer's symbol provided that confusion with standard symbol is 
avoided. 

b) Non-ferrous Metals— Material identification is not required for brass or bronze. Other 
non-ferrous alloys may be identified by using symbols listed in Appendix B. 

c) Non-Metallic Material — Non-metallic materials may be identified by using symbols listed 
in Appendix C. 

5.3.3 Malleable iron valves shall be marked with the letters 'Ml'. 

5.3.4 Ductile cast iron valves shall be marked with the word 'DUCTILE'. On valves of small size or 
shape which will not permit the use of the word 'DUCTILE' the letters 'Dl' may be used. 

5.4 Ring Joint Number — Valve and flanges and body/bonnet flanges grooved for ring joints shall be 
marked with the corresponding ring numbers. In the case of non-standard ring joints for body/bonnet 
flanges, the flanges shall be marked 'R spl\ 

5.5 Thread Identification — Screwed and valves threaded with other than standard pipe threads shall 
be marked to indicate the type of thread. The style of marking may be the manufacturer's own symbols 
provided that confusion with standard symbols are avoided. Left hand threads shall be marked LH 
on the outside wall of the appropriate opening. 

5.6 Limiting Pressure Rating — Valves whose construction limits its use to pressures less than those 
permissible for the rating marked on the valves shall carry marking of such limitations on an identifi- 
cation plate. 



IS: 9866 -1981 



Example 



Valve with closure elements designed for closed pressure differentials lower than the basic 
rated pressure of the valve. 

5.7 Identification Number — The identification number marking shall indicate the manufacturer's 
figure or number which identifies the valve in all respects. The same figure or number shall therefore 
only be used for valves which are identical in design, detail, dimensions and material and which have 
interchangeable parts. 

5-8 Indian Standard Specification Number — Indian Standard number marking when applied shall 
indicate the IS number appropriate to the individual type of valve. 

5.9 Meltj Heat Identification — All pressure containing castings and forgings shall be marked with melt/ 
heat number or melt/heat identification in an unmachined location. 

5.10 Trim Identification — The symbols that are to be used to identify the different trim materials are 
listed in Appendix B and Appendix C. 

5.10.1 For gate, globe and angle valves, the trim markings shall consist of three symbols. The first 
shall indicate the material of the stem, the second shall indicate the material of the gate disc face and 
the third shall indicate the material of the seat face. 

Symbols may either be preceded by the words 'STEM' 'GATE DISC 'SEAT or used along, 
but must appear in the order given. 

Example : 

Steel gate valve, 13 percent chromium steel stem, 13 percent chromium steel disc face, 
cobalt-chromium-tungsten alloy seat face: 

STEMCR 13 
DISC CR 13 
SEAT HF 

or 
CR13 CR13 HF 

or 
CR 13 
CR 13 
HF 

5.10.2 For check and other types of valves having no stem, the trim marking shall consist of two 
symbols. The first shall indicate the material of the disc face and second shall indicate the material 
of the seat face: 

Example : 

Steel check valve 13 percent chromium steel disc face, 13 percent chromium steel seat 
face : 

DISC CR 13 
SEAT CR 13 

or CR13 CR13 

or CR13 

CR13 

5.10.3 Plug, ball and butterfly valves or other quarter-turn valves require no trim identification 
marking unless the plug, disc, or closure member, or stem or both are of different material than the 
body. In such cases, trim identification symbols on the nameplate will first indicate the material of the 
stem, second indicate the material of plug, ball, disc or closure member. These valves with seating or 
sealing material different than the body material shall add a thrid symbol to indicate the material of the 
seat, In these cases, symbol identification shall be preceded by the words STEM, DISC ( or 
PLUG, BALL, or GATE, as appropriate ) and the word 'SEAT'. If used alone, symbols must appear 
in the order given. 

5.11 Service Symbols — When service symbols are required the following letters shall be used. These 
symbols may be used in any order. 

A to signify AIR 

G to signify GAS 

Lto signify LIQUID 

to signify OIL 

S to signify STEAM 

W to signify WATER 

D-M-V to signify DRAINAGE, WASTE and VENT 



18:9866:1981 

5.12 Valves Lining — Valves made one of material and lined with another shall carry the regular mark- 
ings specified by this standard and additional marking which will indicate whether partially or completely 
lined and the material used for lining. These additional shall be cast ( see 4, Note 2 ) forged or 
stamped ( see 4, Note 1 ) on the valves or marked on plates securely fastened to the valves. 

Note — A manufacturer having complied with the requirements specified above is not precluded from providing any 
other marking which may be mandatorily required by the standard appropriate to the individual type of valve. 

6. Additional Markings — Additional markings given in Appendix A may be used at the option of the 
manufacturers, provided they do not conflict with any other markings specified in this standard. 

7. Omission of Markings — On valves whose size or shape limiting the body and/or identification 
plate markings, they may be omitted to the degree which conditions required. The sequences of 
omission shall be: 

a) Size designation, 

b) Thread identification, 

c) Valve trim identification, 

d) Melt identification, 

e) Rating designation, and 

f) Material designation. 



APPENDIX A 



( Clauses 2, 6 ) 



TABLE OF VALVE MARKINGS 



Item 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
13 



Markings 

Size Designation 

Nomina! Pressure Rating 

Material for Pressure Containing Parts 

Manufacturer's Name or Trade-mark 

Arrow for Director of Flow 

Ring Joint Number 

Limiting Temperature Rating 

Thread Identification 

Limiting Pressure Rating 

Identification Number 

Standard Number 

Melt/Heat Identification 

Trim Identification 

Service Symbols 

Valve Lining 

Quality and Test Labels 

Inspector's Stamp 

Year of Manufacture 

Flow Characteristic 



IS: 9866 -1981 
APPENDIX B 

[ Clauses 5.3.2 (A), 5.10] 

COMMON SYMBOLS FOR METALLIC MATERIALS 

Material Symbol 

Aluminium AL 

Brass BRS 

Bronze BRZ 

Carbon steel CS 

Cast iron CI 

Hard facing material HF 

Copper-nickel alloy CuNi 

Ductile iron Dl 

Melleable iron Ml 

Nickel-copper alloy NiCu 

Soft Metal ( lead, babbitt, copper, etc ) SM 

Steel, 13 chromium CR 13 

Steel, 18 chromium CR 18 

Steel, 28 chromium CR 28 

Steel, 18-8 18-8 

Steel, 18-8 with columbium 18-8 SCB 

Steel, 18-8 with molybdenum 18-8 SMo 

Steel, 18-8 with titanium 18-8 STI 

Surface hardened steel SH 

Note — For valves in which the body seat face is integral with the body, the grade or symbol applicable to the body 
material shall be used to indicate the body seat face in the trim markings. 



APPENDIX C 

[ Clauses 5.3.2 (c),5.10] 
COMMON SYMBOLS FOR NON-METALLIC MATERIALS 



Material 

Asbestos 

Butadiene rubber 

Butyle rubber 

Chloroprene or neoprene 

Chlorosulfonated polyethylene 

Chi orotrifluoro ethylene 

Ethylene-propylene diene monomer 

Ethylene-propylene rubber 

Ethylene-propylene ter polymer 

Fluorocarbon or viton rubber 

Fluorinated ethylene propylene 

Isoprene rubber 

Natural rubber 

Nitrile or buna N rubber 

Nylon 

Polyacrylic rubber 

Poly vinyl chloride 

Silicone rubber 

Styrene butadiene rubber 

Polytetrafluoroethylene 

Tetrafluoroethylene 

Thermoplastic material 

Thermosetting material 



Symbol 

ASB 

BR 

IIR 

CR 

CCM 

CIFE 

EPDM 

EPR 

EPT 

FPM 

FEP 

IR 

NR 

NBR 

NYL 

ACM 

PVC 

SI 

SBR 

PTFE 

TFE 

T PLAS 

T SET 



IS: 9866 -1981 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been taken from ISO/DIS, 
5209, MSS-SP 25, ANSI B 16.34, BS 1873 and BS 759. 



Printed at Kapoor Art Press, New Delhi-64 



