UDC

621'922'025

: 614'8

IS : 1991 ( Part 8) - 1987

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE, CARE AND PROTECTION OF ABRASIVE GRINDING WHEELS
PART ( 8 SPECIAL SPEEDS

Second

Revision

)

1. Scope - This standard ( Part 8) covers the maximum safe operating speeds. This standard also defines the responsibility of the wheel manufacturers, machine builders ( including one who converts, changes or otherwise alters a grinding or cutting off machine from the design or Purpose originally supplied by the builder ), and the users of the wheels and machines. It may be noted that these areas of responsibility apply to those wheels and machines operated at special speeds, that is, those speeds which are specified in this part of the standard.
The grinding or cutting-off operations performed with bonded abrasive wheels on many different tYPes of machines are extremely important factors in industrial productivity. It is essential that wheels be operated and that machines be designed in accordance with the sections of this standard and that the users of wheels and machines observe the safety measures as applicable to them. The cooperation of all the parties should materially aid in Promoting the safe use, care and protection of abrasive wheels.

2. Requirements for Special Speeds - Special high speeds as listed in Table 1 for specially designed and fully protected machines have been established for cutting-off wheels, tread grinding, crank grinding and cam grinding. These special applications and others not listed in Table 1 are subject to the following three conditions A, B and C and are not approved except on adequate fully protected machines. 2.1 Condition A - The Wheel Manufacturer - The wheel manufacturer shall make certain that the wheels are of adequate strength, have been tested at a suitable overspeed in accordance with 3.1, and bear the wheel manufacturer's approval of the higher speed.
The wheel manufacturer should do such testing as he deems necessary to establish an adequate factor of safety before approving the wheel for the higher speed. The wheel should be marked that it has been approved for high speed application under specific conditions of use. Note - The safe operating of the wheel and the overhang. speed of a mounted wheel depends upon the diameter and length of mandrel, the size

2.2 Condition manufacture question.

B - The Machine Builder - The machine builder shall make certain at the time that the machine is of suitable design and adequately guarded for the operation

of in

It shall be the machine builder's responsibility to consult a wheel manufacturer to determine that a wheel for the special speed application can be manufactured and tested in accordance with the requirements established at 3.1.
The machine builder should be sure that the components of the machine such as flanges, horsepower, etc, are adequate for the grinding operation in question. Because limitations, certain abrasive wheels will not be suitable for special speed operations. It the machine builder and the abrasive wheels manufacturer cooperate to make certain that can be manufactured for the operation in question. spindle, bearings, guards, of design and composition is, therefore, important that a wheel of adequate strength

2.3 Condition C - The User - The machine user shall make certain that the machine is operated with approved safety guards and that the machine is maintained in a satisfactory condition.
The minimum guard requirements of Part 4 of this standard should be met. Where guard data for the wheel size and operating speed to be used is not available, requirements should be established by actual test. The machine user should alSO maintain machines in good condition for continuing safety ( see Part 3 of this standard ).
3. Wheel speed test

Manufacturer's Responsibility - It shall be the wheel manufacturer's responsibility wheels required for special speeds and so identify them as given in 3.1 and 3.2.
be tested and identified for use at the proper maximum

to
oper-

It is important that wheels used at special speeds
ating speed. Adopted 23 November 1987

I

@ April

1989, BIS

Gr 2, I

BUREAU OF INDIAN MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 1991(

Part 8 ) - 1987
TABLE 1 SPECIAL MAXIMUM SPEEDS

( Clause2

) t
Maximum Vitrified Bond High Strength Speed (m/s) Organic Low Strength 48 Bond High Strength 71

Classification No. Type of Wheel

_
1 Cutting-off wheels: Larger than 400 mm dia forced organic ) Cutting off wheels: 400 mm dia and smaller forced organic ) Thread and flute grinding and camshaft ( including rein-

Low Strength -

Medium Strength -

Medium Strength 60

2

-

48

60

80

( including
wheels

rein40 33 50 40

3 4

40 wheels 28

50 40

60 43

60 49

/ Crankshaft

grinding

manufacturer's responsibility 3.1 Manufacturer's Test - It shall be the wheel wheels operated at speeds higher `than the standard speeds as listed in Tables of this standard.
For wheels higher speeds. not subject to the speed test, other means should be used to ensure

to speed test all 1 and 2 of Part 7
strength for the

adequate

Exceptions Wheels that need not be speed tested are: than 150 mm whose product of diameter times

4 b) c)

Wheels less than 100 mm in diameter, Wheels with 100 mm diameter but less thickness is one or less, Segments, and whe%.

d) Mounted

3.2 /denfification - It shall be the wheel may be run at special speeds.
Wheels approved for special speed applications accompanying tags, stickers or container.

manufacturer's
should

responsibility

to identify

wheels

which
blotters,

have the special

speed indicated

on the wheels,

of the machine builder to 4. Machine Builder's Responsibility - It shall be the responsibility design and construct those machine components which `are concerned with the proper and safe operation of the grinding or cutting off wheels for the speed and the type of operation of which the machine is intended. Particular attention shall be given to the design of the wheel safety guards, wheel flanges and wheel mounting spindle as indicated in 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.
The machine builder should decide upon the fitness of the machine for the proposed operation. If it becomes necessary or desirable to convert, change or alter the machine from the design or purpose for which it was originally made by the builder, it is important that the components involved with the use of the abrasive wheel be designed in accordance with theappropriate parts of this standard.

- If an existing machine is to be adapted for use at a special 4.1 General Machine Conditions speed, the general machine conditions given in Part 3 of this standard shall be observed and all component parts of the grinding machine shall be checked and, if necessary, modified or adjusted prior IO operating at the special speed.
It is important to remember that the abrasive wheel is only one part of the grinding operation. of the wheel is increased, changes may be necessary in the machine ( bearings, table traverse rates, devices, power, etc ) so that the entire unit will operate safely at the special speed. When the speed guards, sensing

4.2 Safety Guards - Grinding and cutting off machines shall be equipped with safety guards in conformity with the requirements contained in Part 4 of this standard when applicable. When the operation is beyond the conditions for which guards in Part 4 ot this standard were designed, the machine builder shall establish by test or ca!cuJation the adequacy of the guard. 2

IS : 1991 ( Part 8 ) - 1987
Guards built in conformance with the instructions contained in Part 4 of this standard will have a safety factor which satisfies good engineering practice. When speeds in excess of those shown in Part 4 of the standard are used, either a stronger guard material or thicker guard members must be used. The increase in strength should be sufftcient to maintain the proper safety factor. 4.3

be of such a design as to satisfactorily transmit the driving torque Flanges - Flanges shall from the spindle to the abrasive wheel and conform to all requirements given in Part5 of the standard.
The driving torque is transmitted from the spindle through bearing area specified in Part 5 of this standard may be inadequate determine by test that his design is adequate to perform its intended the flange to the in these cases. operation. wheel. Therefore, the minimum The machine builder should

5. User's Responsibility - The user shall be responsible for proper handling, storage, and inspection of abrasive wheels after receipt, in accordance with the requirements given in Part 2 and 6 of this standard. It shall ing condition builder shall be the responsibility of the user to maintain his grinding equipment in a safe operatat all times. Rules of safe operation of this equipment submitted by the machine be observed as well as those rules specified in other parts of this standard. by the user to operate at special speeds, the user shall builder as outlined in Part 3 of this standard. at be

When an existing machine is altered assume all the responsibilities of a mchine

The user shall fully inform all operating personnel that only wheels identified for operation special speeds shall be used and that at no time shall the maximum speed of the wheel exceeded. Protection to operating personnel, as well as adjacent areas, shall be maintained

at all times.

The maximum operating speed as determined by the manufacturer The strength of a bonded abrasive wheel may be defined as the ability Under no condition should a wheel be operated faster manufacturer. This is the responsibility of the wheel user. than

is dependent on the wheel shape and strength. of the wheel to withstand rotational stress. operating speed established by the

the maximum

It is an important responsibility of the user to maintain grinding machines in a safe operating condition. Machine builders usually issue rules for the safe operation of their machines calling attention to areas that could be unsafe if the rules or signs are disregarded. The user should recognize the importance of instructing personnel concerning these safety warnings. Furthermore, grinding machines are usually designed to perform certain recommended that the machine should be used only on these types of operations specified operations. It is strongly for which they are designed.

5.1 Handling, requirements

be the Storage, and Inspection - It shall given in Parts 2 and 6 of this standard.

user's

responsibility

to adhere to all the
It is recommended will be aware that that they

It is important that all wheels be handled and stored correctly, and inspected carefully. wheels for special high speeds be stored in a separate or special area so that the personnel are for special applications. 5.2 General Machine Conditions - It shall be the user's maintained in such a condition that all the requirements be adequate.
It is important that the maintenance originally furnished. of the machine

responsibility to see that the machine is of Part 3 of this standard will continue to
remains in the same condition as

be such that the equipment

to maintain 5.3 Safety Guards - It shall be the user's responsibility devices in good condition. The user shall also make provisions personnel in the operating area ( see Part 4 of this standard ).
When operating at special those broken at lower speeds. good condition and correctly barriers, booths or segregated 5.4 the pieces of an accidentially high speeds, It is, therefore, imperative that all guards replaced when removed. It is also important work areas.

the guards and other protection for adequate protection of the
broken wheel will have more force than and pretective devices be maintained in that adjacent personnel be protected by

to maintain flanges Flanges - It shall be the user's responsibility to Part 5 of this standard. A primary function of flanges is to transfer the machine power to the abrasive
is, therefore, important that flanges be maintained warped or sprung can contribute to wheel breakage. as defined in Part 5 of this

in good condition

according

wheel and grinding operation. It standard. Flanges which are worn,

5.5 Mounting - It shall be the user's standard which apply to the particular

responsibility to see that all the rules operation, are observed.

given

in

Part 6 of this

regardless of speed of operation or the type of machine involved, be It is extremely important that all wheels, inspected before mounting and that all rules for safe mounting practices be observed ( see Part 6 of this standard ).

3

IS : 1991(

Part 8 ) - 1987

5.6 General Operating Roles -

It shall be the user's responsibility to see that all general operating rules ( see Part 9 of the this standard) that are applicable to the special high speed operation are observed. It shall also be the user's responsibility to follow any special operating instructions furnished by the machine builder. In some instances, the machine builder will provide on his machines. These, as well as the general operating to ensure a safe grinding operation.
special
rules listed

operating instructions in Part 9 of this

and/or place warning signs standard should be followed

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

The safe operation of abrasive wheels requires the understanding and cooperation of many diverse groups and of all individuals concerned with their use or operation. This has been the basic viewpoint in establishing these safety requirements for the guidance of manufacturers, users and others involved in handling these products. A thorough knowledge of nature and characteristics of abrasive wheels, the grinding machines on which they are used and the safety and protection devices which can and shall be used to limit, if not eliminate, injury or damage in case of accidental wheel breakage, is necessary for proper understanding of thess safety requirements. These safety requirements may be used as a guide and not as an alternative to constant educational programmes at all levels which are the best insurance against those unforeseen conditions or circumstances which result in an industrial accident. The mandatory requirements are printed in normal ( 10 points ) type and the explanatory information in smaller ( 8 point ) type. This is intended to facilitate a condensed document of mandatory requirements together with supporting tables and a figure. The explanatory information gives the basic reasons for the rules to encourage fheir implementation in practice. However, it may not be termed as part of the standard. The explanatory material has been included to encourage compliance and it is given only where it amplifies or clarifies a requirement. Operating rules are not included in these safety requirements unless they are of such a nature as to be important safety requirements equal in imPOrk3nCe to other requirements included in this standard. This standard was first issued in 1962 and its first revision was taken up in 1973, based on ANSI B 7.1-1970. In order to review the individual section at any time and also for technical alike, this standard has been split up in the following ten parts: Part Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 Scope and definitions Handling and storage 3 General machine requirements and drafting reasons

2

4 Safety guards 5 Flanges and mounting 6 Inspection

7 Standard speeds Part 8 Special speeds Part 9 General operating Part 10 Mounted wheels

rules

While splitting, this part ( Part 8 > of the standard has aiso been revised been made more explicit. More data has also been included. While revising this standard, assistance

and the details

have

has also been taken from the following of abrasive ( FEPA ).

publications: issued
wheels',

`European safety requirement the Federatibn of European

for the use, care and protection Producers of Abrasive Products

Iwheels'
Of abrasive

by

ANSI B 7.1-1978 `Safety requirement for the issued by the American National Standards 4

use, care and protection Institute, USA.

Printed at New India Printing

Press, Khurja, India

