Indian Standard dolia 


des + Aaa HUT gr WIN 
Fara q — tfe fear 
(HAT FRAT) 


Magnetic Particle Flaw Detection 
of Welds — Code of Practice 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 25.160.40; 77.040.20 


© BIS 2014 


ada res em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
® "IW HAT, 9 SERRA WAL Art, ae feeeit-110002 
aisi mf MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2014 Price Group 3 


Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council (MTDC). 


This standard was first published in 1971 and subsequently revised in 1981 and 2003. While reviewing this 
standard in the light of experience gained during these years, the Committee felt the need to revise this standard. 
While revising this standard International practices have been duly considered along with Indian scenario. 


In this revision following modifications have been carried out: 


a) Method of magnetization has been revised by adding new clauses. 
b) Adequacy of magnetization has been added. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5334 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


MAGNETIC PARTICLE FLAW DETECTION OF 
WELDS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Third Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the recommended 
procedure for detection of surface and sub-surface 
discontinuities in welds by the magnetic particle 
inspection method. The method is applicable only to 
materials in which the weld metal is ferromagnetic. 


1.2 This standard does not lay down any requirements 
for the acceptance or rejection of welds which shall be 
the subject of mutual agreement between the 
contracting parties. This agreement may provide 
details with regard to: 


a) welds or sections of welds to be inspected, 
b) techniques to be used, 
c) type of discontinuities to be accepted, and 


d) re-working and subsequent retesting which 
may be permissible. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 


3415 : 1998 Glossary of terms used in magnetic 
particle flaw detection (second 
revision) 

3703 : 2004 Code of practice for magnetic particle 
flaw detection (second revision) 

13805 : 2004 Guidelines for certification for 


personnel for non-destructive testing 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 3415 shall apply. 


4 PRINCIPLE OF METHOD 


This method of flaw detection consists of magnetizing 
the weld and the heat affected zone, applying magnetic 
particles to the surface and observing the particle 


pattern. The particles retained on the surface due to 
the leakage field form patterns that are characteristic 
of the type of flaws present. This method is suitable 
for surface and sub-surface flaws only and is not 
suitable for deep-seated flaws, since the sensitivity 
decreases sharply with the depth of location of the 
flaws. 


5 SURFACE CONDITION 


The surface to be examined shall be clean, dry and 
free from rust, oil, scale, excessive slag and other 
extraneous matter which may interfere with the 
sensitivity of examination. In general, satisfactory 
results may be obtained when the surface is in the as 
welded condition. However, rough surfaces hamper the 
mobility of magnetic particles due to mechanical 
trapping which in turn produces false indications. In 
such cases, surface preparation by wire brushing, shot 
blasting and grit blasting, machining or any other 
suitable method is necessary. To reveal fine defects, 
the surfaces to be inspected should be smooth machined 
to at least a 6.3 microns finish. However, a thin layer 
of paint of 0.05 mm maximum thickness does not 
interfere with the formation of indications, but must 
be removed at points where electrical contact is to be 
made. 


6 TYPES OF PARTICLES 


Magnetic particles used for detection of flaws may be 
of the dry or wet type in either visible (colour contrast) 
or fluorescent form. 


6.1 If dry particles are used as the examination 
medium, they shall be of high magnetic permeability 
and low magnetic retentivity and shall be of such size 
and shape as will produce suitable indications. It is 
desirable that the colour be such as to provide adequate 
contrast with the background of the surface being 
examined. 


6.2. If wet particles are used, the particles shall be red, 
black, grey or yellow, or of fluorescent type when 
viewed under ultraviolet illumination. These particles 
would be suspended in a liquid medium, the bath 
strength of which shall be as given in IS 3703. The 
bath shall be thoroughly stirred and the strength 


IS 5334 : 2014 


(concentration) and condition checked at frequent 
intervals. 


6.3 The dry powder method is more sensitive than the 
wet method in the detection of near surface 
discontinuities, but is less sensitive in detecting fine 
surface discontinuities. It is also convenient to use in 
conjunction with portable equipment for the inspection 
of large areas or for field operation. It is, therefore, 
often used for the examination of heavy weldments 
and parts with rough surfaces. In comparison, wet 
method is good for parts with rough surfaces and for 
parts which are small in size and tested with stationary 
equipment. 


7 METHODS OF MAGNETIZATION 


A suitable and appropriate means for establishing the 
necessary magnetic flux in the job, as described below, 
may be used. 


7.1 Local Circular Magnetization (or Prod 
Magnetization) 


7.1.1 Local circular magnetization is achieved by the 
use of portable prod type electrical contacts pressed 
against the surface in the area to be examined 
(see Fig. 1). 


7.1.2 The prod spacing is usually kept between 
150-200 mm. Shorter spacing may be used to meet the 
limitation of geometry and dimensions of area being 
examined, or to increase the sensitivity, but prod 
spacing less than 50 mm is not recommended as it will 
result into banding of the particles around the prods. 


7.1.3 Alternating or one half wave rectified 
magnetizing current shall be used. The current shall 


Thickness Range 


Under 20 mm 
20 mm and over 


be selected as below (see Fig. 1) depending upon the 
thickness of the jobs being tested. 


7.1.4 A suitable instrument shall be used to measure 
the current. The equipment shall be calibrated 
periodically once in a year or immediately after it has 
undergone major overhaul to ensure that the equipment 
has the required sensitivity and delivers the specified 
current as shown by the ammeter. 


7.1.5 In order to avoid damage as a result of burning 
and to improve the contact efficiency, both test material 
and the tip of the electrode must be kept well ground. 
If necessary, electrodes may be provided with contact 
pads. Elimination of arcing is very important for testing 
high carbon steels and alloy steels as this can cause 
hard spots or cracks. 


7.1.6 To eliminate arcing, magnetizing current should 
not be turned on until after the prods have been properly 
positioned in contact with the surface and the current 
shall be turned off before the prods are removed. For 
this purpose it is further desirable to have a remote 
control switch built into the prod handles. 


7.1.7 Lead or steel-tipped rather than copper-tipped 
prods are recommended where the magnetizing voltage 
is over 25 V, in order to avoid copper penetration. 


7.1.8 For circular magnetization of complete parts 
having a weld as an integral part using stationary type 
equipment the following methods of magnetization 
may also be used. 


a) Direct current of head shot method. 
b) Central conductor method of magnetization 


7.1.8.1 The current level is for the above method shall 


Current Requirement per 25 mm 
of Prod Spacing 
90 to 110 ampere 
100 to 125 ampere 


MAGNETIZING 
CURRENT 


MAGNETIC 
FIELD 


Fic. 1 PROD MAGNETIZATION 


2 


be 300 to 800 Amp per inch of port diameter (D) of the 
part shall be taken as the greatest distance between 
any two points on the outside circumferences of the 
part. 


7.1.8.2 For circular magnetization using offset central 
conductor where the contactor inside the part is towards 
the inside wall of the part the current level in 7.1.8.1 
shall apply except that the total diameter (D) shall be 
taken as the sum of the diameter of central conductor 
added to twice the wall thickness of the part. 


7.2 Longitudinal Magnetization (Yoke Method) 


7.2.1 Alternating current electromagnetic yokes shall 
be used provided the sensitivity to detect surface cracks 
is at least equivalent to that of the prod when a direct 
or rectified magnetizing current of 25 to 30 A/25 mm 
of prod spacing is used and the lifting power of yoke 
is at least 5 kg with a pole spacing of 75-150 mm. 


7.2.2 Alternatively direct current electromagnet or 
permanent magnet yoke may be used if it has got a 
lifting power of 20 kg with a pole spacing of 
75-150 mm, other conditions remaining the same. 


7.3 A suitable instrument, such as magnetic field 
indicator, as shown in Fig. 2 should be used, whenever 
necessary, to establish the adequacy of magnetic field. 


8 CARBON STEEL 
SECTIONS BRAZED 
TOGETHER 


BRAZED WELDED OR MECHANICALLY 
ATTACHED NON-FERROUS . TRUNIONS 


COPPER SHEET OF ABOUT 0:25mm THICKNESS 


IS 5334 : 2014 


The indicator should be positioned on the weld being 
examined while applying the required current and 
ferromagnetic particles. The formulation of particles 
indicates that adequate field strength has been 
generated in the welding to be examined. When a 
clearly defined pattern of particles is not formed, or 
not formed in the desired direction, the magnetizing 
technique shall be changed or adjusted to obtain it. 


7.3.1 For longitudinal magnetization of weld which 
forms an integral part of a component using stationery 
type equipment the coil magnetization method may 
be employed. 


7.4 Direction of Magnetization 


Since proper indications are obtained, when the 
discontinuities are perpendicular to the direction of 
magnetic field, at least two seperate examinations shall 
be carried out on each area. The prod or yoke shall be 
placed such that the magnetic field during one case is 
approximately perpendicular to that during the other. 


7.5 Examination shall be done by the continuous 
method, that is, the magnetization current must remain 
on while the examination medium is applied and while 
excess of examination medium is being removed. 
Residual method shall be used only if approved by the 
purchaser. 


NON-FERROUS HANDLE 
OF CONVENIENT LENGTH 


Fic. 2 MAGNETIC FIELD INDICATOR 


IS 5334 : 2014 


7.6 Examination shall be conducted with sufficient 
overlap to ensure cent percent coverage. 


7.7 For the examination of welds, care must be taken 
on the following items: 


a) When the heat treatment is done on a welded 
part after welding, the examination for the 
determination of acceptance or otherwise 
shall be conducted after heat treatment; and 

b) The magnetic particle examination after heat 
treatment of welded part, of after completion 
of pressure test of pressure vessel shall, as a 
rule, be of yoke type. 


7.3 Adequacy of Magnetic Field 


A suitable instrument such as magnetic field indicator, 
as shown in Fig. 2 should be used whenever necessary 
to establish the adequacy of magnetic field. The 
indicator should be positioned on the weld being 
examined while applying the required current and 
ferromagnetic particles. The formulation of particles 
indicates that adequate field strength has been 
generated in the welding to be examined. 


7.8.1 The adequacy of magnetic field may also be 
established by any one of the following means in 
conjunction with either given below. 


a) Using Pie field indicator as specified in 7.8, 
b) Using slotted shims, 


c) Using tangential field hall eject gauss meter. 
The tangentional field strength shall have a 
minimum valve of 30G (2.5 KA/M) 


8 APPLICATION OF MAGNETIC PARTICLES 


The magnetic particles shall be applied immediately 
prior to the application of magnetizing current or while 
the magnetizing current is on by spraying the liquid 
suspension, or by lightly dusting dry powder over the 
job. An applicator may be used for rapid and uniform 
application of dry powder and any excess powder may 
be removed with a gentle air stream. The air system 
should not disturb or remove lightly held particle 
patterns. In order to recognize the broad, fuzzy 
indication it is essential to observe carefully the 
formation of indications, while the particles are being 
applied and also while any excess is being removed. 
Proper lighting will facilitate the observation of these 
patterns. The temperature of the dry particles and of 
the surface of the part shall not exceed the Curie 
temperature 315°C. 


9 EXAMINATION 


9.1 Discontinuities are indicated by retention of the 
magnetic particles. 


9.2 The lighting used for the purpose shall be adequate 


without creating shadows and highlights. During 
visible magnetic particle inspection the intensity of the 
visible light at the surface shall be minimum 1 000 lux. 
When using fluorescent powders, the inspection area 
should be darkened. The intensity of ambient visible 
light in the darkened should not exceed 20 lux. Black 
light provided with filter to pass mainly near ultraviolet 
rays of (3 300-3 900°A) and having the strength to 
discriminate the fluorescent magnetic particle 
indications shall be used. 


9.3 A low powered optical magnifier is a desirable 
inspection aid, particularly when very small flaws are 
to be examined. 


9.4 Flaws requiring repair or investigation should be 
marked out clearly using grease, pencil, coloured, 
crayon or paint. 


9.5 Permanent record can also maintained in written 
form by recording location, length, orientation, number 
and type of indications. 


10 ASSESSMENT OF FLAWS 


10.1 If the indication is caused by the surface 
discontinuities, the particles are usually tightly held to 
the surface by a relatively strong magnetic field. The 
line of particles shall be sharp and well defined. But, if 
the indication is caused by sub-surface discontinuity, 
the particles are held in a broad fuzzy accumulation 
rather than in sharp and well defined patterns. 


10.2 Relevant indications are those which results from 
mechanical discontinuities. 


10.3 Non-relevant indications are caused by distortion 
of magnetic field resulting from magnetic writing, cold 
working, hard and soft spots, boundaries of heat 
affected zones, abrupt change of section, etc. Care shall 
be taken to identify and eliminate them, as they may 
mask the actual defects. 


10.4 Any indication suggested to be non-relevant is 
to be considered relevant till it is proved otherwise. 


10.5 Broad areas of particle accumulation which could 
mask indications of discontinuities are unacceptable 
and these areas shall be cleaned and re-examined. 


10.6 Linear indications are those in which the length 
is more than three times the width. 


10.7 Rounded indications are those which are circular 
or elliptical with the length less than three times the 
width. 


11 DEMAGNETIZATION 


11.1 Demagnetization is unnecessary unless the 
residual field interferes with subsequent machining, 
arc-welding operations, or with structures, such as 
aircraft, where sensitive electrical instruments may be 


affected by the residual magnetic field. 


11.2 Demagnetization, if required, shall be clearly 
specified in drawing/purchase orders. The level of 
residual magnetism and the measuring method shall 
also be specified. 


12 PROTECTION 


Since the weld had been cleaned prior to magnetic 
particle inspection, it is liable to rusting unless protected. 
Temporary corrosion protectives may be applied over 
the component after magnetic particle inspection. 


13 RECORD OF TEST DATA 


Magnetic particle flaw detection of welds shall be 
carried out by qualified personnel (see IS 13805). 


IS 5334 : 2014 


13.1 The following data shall be recorded at the time 
of each test for further reference: 

a) Name and reference number of the part; 

b) material sectional thickness, type of weld; 

c) method used, dry or wet; 

d) type of magnetization; 

e) type of current; 

f) amount of current; 

g) location and nature of defects; 

h) details of the machine; 


j) name and certification level of the operator 
conducting the test; and 


k) other information, if necessary. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


*BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (5037). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IIT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


