IS13325

:1992

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indicm Standard
DETERMINATION OF TENSILE PROPERTIES OF EXTRUDED POLYMER GEOGRTDS USING THE WIDE STRIP - TEST METHOD

UDC

624.13 [ 677.06 ] : 620.17

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

February

1992

Price Group 3

Geosynthetics

Sectional

Committee,

CED 52

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Use of Geosynthetics in the form of geotextiles, geogrid, geomembrane and geocomposites, etc, are becoming popular in civil engineering applications mainly to improve or modify soil/rock behaviour .
With a view to encourage the use of geosynthetic in the civil engineering problems, a number of Indian Standards are under preparation, based on the limited experience gained so far. This standard is one of this series.

In the formulation

of this standard,

assistance

has been derived from the following: equipments: Part 1 Specitesting machines. British American Society

BS 1610 : 1985 Material testing machines and force verification fication for the grading of the forces applied by materials Standards Institution. ASTM D 76 : 1990 Specification for Testing and Materials. for tensile testing machine

for textiles.

ASTM D 4595 : 1986 Standard test method for tensile properties strip method. American Society for Testing and materials.

of geotextiles

by wide-width

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded oti in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rev&d)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13325 : 1992

Indian Standard

DETERMINATION OFTENSILE PROPERTIES OF EXTRUDED POLYMER GEOGRIDS USING THE WIDE STRIP-TEST METHOD
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the test method for the measurement of tensile properties of extruded polymer geogrids using a wide strip specimen. 1.1.1 Measurement of load and elongation characteristics and procedures for calculations of secant modulus; maximum load, breaking load, elastic limit, strain at maximum load and strain at breaking load are also cove&d in the test method prescribed. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 IS 13321 ( Part 1) : 1992 &Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: Part 1 Terms used in materials and properties' is the necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 The terms defined 1992 shall apply. 4 PRINCIPLE METHOD OF in IS 13321 ( Part 1 ) : WIDE STRIP TEST 5.2 Jaws Jaws shall be sufficiently wide to hold the entire width of the specimen and shall have appropriate means to prevent slippage damage. Each jaw shall have face measuring at least the width of the specimen, 200 mm, or greater ( Fig. 1 ). 5.3 Jig Plates For conducting the index tensile strength test it is required to hold the geogrids between the clamps. For this it is necessary to cement upper and lower ribs of geogrid specimen metal strips with the help of a binder before their placement in the clamps. In order to ensure that the metal strips are perfectly parallel to one another special jig plates are required and should be fabricated for a particular geogrid. In this the geogrids are placed between the aluminium ( Fig. 2 ) strips ( 200 x 30 x 6 mm) coated with epoxy resin and curved for 24 hours under a dead load of 20 kg. This is found to provide support proper bond between the strip and the geogrid. 5.3.1 An assembly diagram is shown in Pig. 3. 6 TEST SPECIMENS 6.1 Number of Test Specimens At least five test specimens in both the machine direction and the cross machine direction are required. 6.2 Selection of Test Specimens Specimens shall be selected at random from the Choose those for the laboratory samples. measurement of the machine-direction tensile properties from different positions across the width of the sample and those for the measurement of the cross-machine-direction tensile strength from different positions along the length of the sample, unless otherwise agreed. shall be taken nearer than No specimen 100 mm from the selvedge or edge of the sample. 1

4.1 A test specimen is held across the entire width in the jaws of a tensile testing machine which operates at a specified constant rate of extension and which applied a longitudinal force to the test specimen until the specimen ruptures. The tensile properties of the test specimen are calculated from machine scale, dials, autogracharts or an interfaced recording phic computer. 5 APPARATUS AND REAGENTS 5.1 Tensile Testing Machine A constant rate of extension tensile testing machine which produces a rate of increase of specimen length that is uniform with time. While using the constant rate of extension type tensile tester, recorder must have adequate pen response to properly record the force elongation curve as specified.

JS l3325 : 19!&

-_ __ _ -f -_

~

1,
L FIG.

200 All dimensions in millimetres.

:$
10

30.5

1

TYPICALWIDE-WIDTH JAWS

6.3 For extruded geogrids, prepare specimen atleast 200 mm wide and sufficiently long to ensure a gauge length of at least 100 mm, measuring within f 3 mm. NOTE -The
distance between the centre-line be contained within the jaws.

gauge

length of

of the

geogrids is the
elements to

at the start of the test to give a gauge length of loo+/-3 mm or as appropriate for geogrids. Select the force range of the tensile testing machine such that the break occurs between 10 percent and 90 percent of full-scale force. Set the machine to a strain rate of 7 percent per minute to 13 percent per minute. 7.2 Insertion of Test Specimen in Jaws/Clamps Mount the test specimen centrally in the jaws with approximately the same length of test specimen extending beyond the jaws at each end, ensuring that the specimen length in the machine and cross-machine direction tests is paralled to the direction of applied force. This shall be done by having the two lines, which are previously drawn at 100 +/-3 mm apart across the width of the specimen positioned adjacent to the inner edges of upper and lower jaws. 2

6.4 The test specimen shall contain at least five complete tensile elements within the width of the test specimen and atleast one row of nodes or cross-members, excluding the nodes or cross-members by which the test specimen is held in the jaws. Cut all ribs at least 10 mm away from any node. 7 PROCEDIJRE 7.1 Setting up of Tensrle Testing lkIachine Adjust the distance between the jaws/clamps

IsJ332!4:1992

-30-1_-1204*30*

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 2A TYPICALJIG PLATE-BOSOM

!
I

I
I

I

I

I
_L,oI20

I
1

I

I

20 I-30-I_-120

I

1

1

m

+

4L5---220'

All dimensions in millimetres.
FIG. 2B TYPICALJIG PLATE-TOP

3

IS 13325 : 1992

'

(a)

WITHOUT

GEOGRID ,-20 kq WEIGHT

1BOTTOM
(b) FIG. WITH GEOGRID

PLATE

3

TYPICALASSEMBLY OF JIG PLATES

7.3 Measurement of Tensile Strength 7.3.1 Start the tensile testing machine and the area measuring device, if used. Continue Stop the machine and running test to rupture. reset the initial gauge position. Record the load to the nearest 0.1 kN/m and the strain to the nearest 0.1 percent. 7.3.2 For fixed clamping systems such as compressive or profiled jaw, or where specimens are set in epoxy resin or metal, determine the strain from the transverse head movement. 7.3.3 For frictional clamping systems, measure the strain by extensometer and adjust the transverse head movement to give a strain rate of 7 percent per minute to 13 percent per minute. 7.3.4 If the test specimen slips at the edge of/ or in the jaws, for any reason attributed to faulty operation, the result fails markedly below average for the set of specimens, discard the result and test another specimen. Continue until the required number of acceptable break have been obtained. Do not discard any other break unless the test is known to be faulty. 7.3.5 If a test specimen slips in the jaws or if more than one-quarter of the specimens break at a point within 5 mm of the edge of the jaw, then it is permissible for the jaws to be padded; the test specimen to be coated under the jaw face area; or the jaw face to be modified. If any of these modifications are used, state the method of modifications in the test report. 4

7.4 Measurement of Strain 7.4.1 Measure the strain at any stated force by means of a suitable autographic recording device, at the same time as the breaking load is determined, unless otherwise agreed upon. Measure the increase in length to an accuracy of 0.1 percent. 7.4.2 A measured strain within the specimen can be obtained from jaw to jaw measurement by gauging along the central axis between the jaws across the central 76 mm of the specimen. These measurements can be made using a scaled rule taped on a line on the upper end of the specimen, in the gauge area, and recording the change in length as measured from a line spaced 76 mm below the upper line. In addition, the centre portion of the specimen can be gauged U$g Gz&X?~~r~~~ Y~~+&hI9~$X%W, XGUQXr&~&~$( LVDT ) or mechanical gauges. By comparing it can be determined if slippage is occurring in the clamps. 8 CALCULATION 8.1 Maximum Load Calculate the maximum load per unit width cLIexpressed in kN/m directly from the information obtained from the tensile testing machine using the following equation: ai = Ff x C where Ff is the observed maximum load in kN. C is a constant obtained as: C = ( XlINs )

IS 13325 : 1992' where N,,, is the within being Ns is the within 8.2 Breaking Load Calculate the breaking load per unit width W, expressed in kN/m directly from the information obtained from the tensile testing machine using the following equation: Q = &, x C where &, is the observed breaking as at point G in Fig. 4. C is a constant 8.3 Elastic Limit Record the elastic limit in kN/m strain in percent at the elastic limit. 8.4 Offset strain Calculate Fig. 4 ). the offset strain in percent ( see and the obtained load in kN, as in 8.1. number of tensile elements 1 m width of the product tested. number of tensile elements the test specimen. 8.8 Secant Modulus For geosynthetics with a non-linear load-strain the relationship [see Fig. 4(b) ] determine load for the specified strain. If not specified, determine the secant modulus at a strain of 10 percent. Calculate the secant modulus using the following equation: J=z where J is the secant modulus ( in kN/m ) at the specified strain e; F is the determined load at strain e in kN. e is the corresponding strain ( in percent [ e is equal to AN in Fig. 4(b) 1; and W is the specimen width ( in m ). 9 TEST REPORT 9.1 The test report particulars: shall include the following exW x 100 percent

a) the number and date of this standard; b) identifica.tion of the sample tested and
size;

4 the mean elastic limit, breaking load and
at the maximum maximum load in both the machine direction and cross-machine direction, expressed as in 8;

8.5 Strain at Maximum Load Record the strain in percent load ( see Fig. 4 ). 8.6 Strain at Breaking Load Calculate Fig. 4 ). the offset strain in percent ( see

d) the

mean strain and offset strain at a specified load in both the machine direction and cross-machine direction, expressed as in 8; mean in 8; offset modulus and/or the secant modulus expressed as it of the test specimens, i.e.

e) the mean
linear load-strain 1. Extrapolate the zero load axis (B). from the following

8.7 Offset Modulus For geosynthetics with a relationship [ see Fig. 4(a) linear region ( CD ) to the Calculate the offset modulus equation:

f)

the condition wet or dry; each direction;

8) the number of test specimens
machine;

tested in

J = r-Xc-W- x 100 percent where J is the offset strain e. modulus ( in kN/m ) at at strain e

h) the make and model of tensile testing

3
load

the type of jaw, including sions of the jaws and the faces used;

the dimentype of jaw of

F is the determined ( in kN ).

k) the standard

deviation or coefficient any of the properties determined;

e is the corresponding strain ( in percent ) [ e is equal to BH in Fig. 4(a) 1. W is the specimen width ( in m ). 5

ml a load-strain curve; and n) details of any deviations
specified procedure.

from

the

STRAIN (a) L IREAR BE HAViOUR

(%)

(b)

NON-LINEAR Pm. 4

STRAIN h'd BEHAVIOUR

TYFWAL LOAD-STRAINGRAPHS

6

Standard Mark Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

by the provisions of the Bureau oj Zndiun made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed

Bureau of Indian Standard

established under the Bureau oj Indian Standards Act, 1986 to BIS is a statutory institution of the activities of standardization, marking and quality promote harmonious development certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIF. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS.
Revision

Enquiries

relating

to

copyrlght

be

addressed

to

the

Director

of Indian Standards

if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments. any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot 1 No. CED 52 ( 5052 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
Manak :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone I 311 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHl 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Priuted at PrIntwell Printers,

Aligarh, India

