**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 5555 (1970) : Code of procedure for conducting field 
studies on atmospheric corrosion of metals [MTD 7: Light 
Metals and their Alloys] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISx555S-1970 

(Reaffirmed 2002) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PROCEDURE FOR 

CONDUCTING HELD STUDIES ON 

ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION OF METALS 

Corrosion Protection Sectional Committee, SMDC 29 

Chairman Represtming 

Dr B. Sakval Defence Research & Development Organisation, 

New DeUit 

Mmbert 
Sunt T. R. Ananthaaamah Htnduitan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri S. N. Wazir ( AlttmaU ) 
Shm N. C. Baqchi National Test House, Calcutta 

Shki D. D. Bhuptami Indian Tube Go Ltd, Jamshcdpur 

SHRt C. P. De Naval Chemical & Metallurgical Laboratory, Bombay 

Swj»i D. V. Badnwas ( AUtmatt ) 
Joint Director ( M & C ), RDSO^Ministry of Railways 

Chittaranjan 
Joint Director, Standards Ministry of Railways 

( Garriaqe ), RDSO, Li;cknow 
Dr A. K. Lahiri National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), 

Jamshedpur 
Dr S. S. Malhotra The Metal Box Co of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri K. S. Narasiuhan ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri T. K. S. Mani Indian Paint Association, Calcutta 

Shri G. C. Mathur National Buildings Organisation, New Delhi 

Shri Ravinder Lal ( AlttrnaU ) 
Shri H.J. Mistry The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, 

PO Rishra, Dist Hooghly 
Shri V. R. Krishnan ( AlUmatt ) 
Shri S. Panchapakesan Tube Products of India, Madras 

Shri K. R. Anant Ram ( AlUnaU) 
Dr K. S. Rajagopalan Central Electrochemical Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Karaikudi 
Shri N. Svbrauahvas ( AlttrnaU ) 
Shri M. B. Satvanarayana Addisons Paints & Chemicals Ltd, Madras 

Shri Shumshsr Sinor Defence Institute of Stores Preservation & Pacliaging, 

DISPP ( Ministry of Defence ) 
Shri J. Banbrjee (Alttrnatt) 
Shri C. V. TrxEKAR Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri G. RAUAinmTHY ( AlUmau ) 
Shri R. K. Srivastava, Director General, ISI ( £jc-offieio Mtmbir ) 

Deputy Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Sierttarus 

Shri Sant Singh 

Senior Technical Assistant ( Struc & Met ), ISI 

Shri P. K. Jain 

Auiftant Director ( Metals ), ISI 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI U0002 



IS 1 5555 - 1970 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PROCEDURE tOR 

CONDUCTING FIELD STUDIES ON 

ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION OF METALS 

0. FOREWORD 

O.l This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 30 November 1970, after the draft finalized by the Corrosion 
Protection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and 
Metals Division Council. 

0.2 This code has been prepared to provide a systematic and uniform 
procedure for conducting exposure tests of metals and alloys for collection 
of corrosion and pollution data. 

0.3 This code has emerged as a result of detailed investigations instituted 
by the Corrosion Sites Panel of the Metals Research Committee of Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research ( CSIR ). In the formulation of this 
code considerable assistance has been derived from the publication 
' Instruction manual for conducting field studies on atmospheric corrosion 
of metals ', prepared by B. Sanyal and G. K. Singhania, and published 
by the Defence Research Laboratory ( Materials), Kanpur. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
13:2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code deals with the procedure of conducting indoor and outdoor 
exposure tests on metals and alloys for collection of corrosion and pollution 
data. 

1.2 Recommended methods for determination of atmospheric sulphur 
dioxide; salinity; air pollution, solid materials; temperature; humidity, 
rainfall and dew have also been described in the Appendices A to E. 

*Ru]e3 for rounding off numerical values ( reoiud ). 

2 



IS I 5555- 1970 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this code, the following definitions, in addition to 
those given in IS : 3531-1966*, shall apply. 

2.1 Dew Day — A day on which at least i ml of dew is collected over- 
night on an area of 1 00 cm*. 

2.2 Monthly Corrosion Rate — The loss in thickness, calculated on the 
weight loss per unit area of panel exposed for a period of one month and 
expressed in mm/dm". 

2.3 Panel — A rectangular piece of metal of speciRcd size, used for 
conducting exposure tests for corrosion studies. 

2.4 Rainy Day — A day on which the rainfall exceeds 2'5 mm. 

2.5 Yearly Corrosion Rate — The loss in thickness, calculated on the 
weight loss per unit area of panel exposed for a period of one year of 
12 successive months and expressed in mm/dm*. 

3. EXPOSURE SITE 

3.1 For the purpose of selection of exposure site, the country has been 
divided into eight climatic regions as indicated in Fig. 1 ( j« P 5 ), 

3.2 The site shall be so selected as to appropriately represent one of these 
climatic regions. 

3.3 In the location of the site care shall be taken against any obstructions 
to the free passage of air to the site, 

4. MATERIAL OF PANELS 

4.1 The test panels to be cxjwsed shall be of mild steel and zinc. Other 
metals like galvanized steel, copper, aluminium, tinplatc and stainless 
steel, may also be exposed if required. All metals used shall conform to 
appropriate Indian Standards. 

5. SIZE OF PANELS 

5.1 The size of panels shall be 150 x 100 mm for outdoor exposure and 
150 X 50 mm for indoor exposure. A thickness of 1*25 mm is recommended 
for mild steel and zinc panels. For other metals and alloys any convenient 
thickness may be used. 

*Gloiiary of terms relating to corrosion of metals. 

3 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



THE CLIMATIC MAP OF INDIA 




tnti upon %itrym'f of ln«)i mip with tht ptrmltiion of tbi Surviyor G«ntril ol India 
T(i< urrxorul wictrt o( In^ii t«t<n<l mta ini wi to t tftiUnc* ci tw«W* mutlut ikiIm 
nmturcd from tht 9p9ropriait baic hii« 



© 



Goy«rnm»iM of Irdii copyrlttM. 1*71. 



93 



Vn 



Fio. 1 



o 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS: 5555 -1970 
6. IDENTinCATION AND MARKING OF PANELS 

6.1 Identification marks shall not be stamped on the specimens as they arc 
likely to be obliterated by corrosion. Instead, notches ( at 1 cm distances ) 
shall be cut at different distances from the comer along the edges of short 
and long sides of the specimens. With two notches on two sides on each 
specimen at different distances from a comer, large number of combina- 
tions will be available for identification. As an example, Fig. 2 shows the 
positionsof notches for different specimens. Specimens {Aa,Ab, Ac j shall 
be denoted in records as M, 1*2 and 13, respectively and specimens 
( Ba, Bb, Be) as 2-1, 2-2 and 2-3, respectively. 




«M 



• too- 



All dimensioni in miUimetm. 

FiQ. 2 Metal Specihen 



7. PREPARATION OF TEST PANELS 

7.1 The metal panels shall be cut to size from a single sheet or from sheets 
manufactured in the same batch. The specimens shall be burabhed with 
emery cloth of IS grit No, 80 on both sides and then finally with emery 
cloth of IS grit No. 1 80, first lengthwise and then breadthwise, finishing with 
circular motions until the whole surface is covered with circular burnishing 



IS t 5555 -1970 

marks. No treatment shall be given to galvanized steel, tinplate and 
stainless steel. These will be exposed in ' as received ' condition after 
properly degrcasing in accordance with 7,2. In case of aluminium, 
pumice powder or alumina abrasives shall be used instead of emery. 

7.2 All metal panels shall then be degrcased by swabbing vigorously with 
cotton soaked in sulphur-free toluene, benzene or acetone. The panels 
shall be finally cleaned by rinsing in methanol to remove sweat and finger 
prints. The panels shall be dried in a stream of dry air ( a hair drier is 
suitable for this purpose). During and after degrcasing, the panels shall 
not be handled with bare hands bitt with a pair of clean forceps. 

8. EXPOSURE OF PANELS 

8.1 The panels shall be exposed both under outdoor as well as indoor 
conditions. All panels shall be weighed before exposure. 

8.1.1 Meteorological observations, like determination of atmospheric 
sulphur dioxide; salinity; air pollution; solid materials; temperature; 
humidity; rainfall and dew; shall be made as described in Appendices A 
toE. 

8.2 Outdoor exposures shall be carried out on suitable wooden, aluminium 
or moncl racks as shown in Fig. 3 ( jm P 29 ). The recommended method 
of grouting the frame to the ground is shown in Fig. 4 (see f 30). 

8.2.1 The panels shall be held at em angle of 45° to the horizontal. 
Subject to the facilities available, exposure tests may also be carried out at 
90' angle ( vertical ). Specimens shall face south and shall be exposed at 
1 to 1'5 metres above the ground level. The panels shall be held in 
position by ceramic or perspcx cleats. 

8.2.2 The panels shall be so arranged and fuced to the frame that 
corrosion products or Icachings from one panel do not contaminate the 
other and minimum area of the panels is shielded during exposure. Any 
bimetallic contact with bolts, nuts or frames shall be avoided. 

8.3 Indoor exposures shall be carried out in Stevenson's screen. Figure 5 
{ see P 31 ) and Figure 4 show details of the screen and method of 
grouting it in the ground respectively. 

8.3.1 The screen shall be so placed that one of its longer sides shall face 
south. The panels shall be equally spaced inside the screen and be held 
at an angle of 90** to the horizontal. 

9. DURATION OF EXPOSURE 

9.1 The following data shall be collected: 

a) Monthly corrosion rate, and 

b) Yearly corrosion rate. 

8 



15:5555-1970 

9.1.1 For monthly corrosion rate, two fresh panels of the metal under 
test shall be exposed every month. That is, if a test is initiated on a 
certain date, the panels shall be removed from the exposure rack on the 
same date of the following month. 

9.1.2 For yearly corrosion rate, two fresh panels of the metal under test 
shall be exposed in each successive month of the year and shall be 
withdrawn after completion of one year's exposure. 

10. INSPECTION DURING EXPOSURE 

10.1 The exposed panels shall be periodically examined for nature and 
extent of corrosion. 

10.2 One of the two panels in each set exposed for one year shall be 
weighed every month and the monthly weight increments shall be record- 
ed. These paneb shall be put back for continued exposure for a total 
period of one year. Pitting and perforation of specimens shall be noted. 

lOJ For uniformity of record, a recommended method is shown in 
Pro forma A of Appcndbc F. This shall be filled every month during 
exposure. 

11. ASSESSMENT OF CORROSION ON CONCLUSION OF 
EXPOSURE 

11.1 For monthly corrosion rates, the panels shall be removed from the 
exposure rack and the Stevenson's screen and shall be weighed, and the 
weight increments recorded. 

11.1.1 The corrosion products on the panels shall be removed as 
mentioned in 12 and the losses in weight of panels shall be determined by 
substracting the weights of the panels after derusting from the initial 
weights of the panels. 

11.2 For yearly corrosion rates, one of the panels in each set shall be 
weighed ( see 1Q.2 ) every month and both panels at the end of one year to 
record the weight increments. They shall then be derusted by appropriate 
solutions mentioned in Table 1 and the losses in weight shall be 
reco''ded. 



12. REMOVAL OF CORROSION PRODUCTS 

12.1 The exposed panels shall be treated chemically by appropriate 
method as indicated in Table 1 for removal of corrosion products. The 
panels shall then be thoroughly washed with distilled water and dried with 
hot air. 




3 


s 


•• 


s? 





lO 


u 


g 


J 


i? 








.a 



0*0 



111 



to 

•I 



■ai 



>■ 

jQ 



=3 



.9 

5 

it 

Ml 

>• 



=3 



se* .ga e| ssa 
880 •I? 8l §§8 






a o 



s 3D5 2. 



11 

■OCM 



s 

8 5-i 



'S 

Ion 










lOO o 









1 

9 







10 



IS: 5355 -1970 

APPENDIX A 

{Clauses 1.2 and S.IA) 

DETERMINATION OF ATMOSPHERIC SULPHUR DIOXIDE 

A-0. GENERAL 

A-0.1 Sulphur dioxide content of atmosphere shall be determined at each 
site every month for one year, 

A>0.2 Oaality of Reagents — Unless otherwise specified, pure chemicals 
and disalled water ( see IS : 1070-1960* ) shall be employed in the tests. 

Note — ' Pure chemicals ' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which 
affect the results of analysis. 

A-1. MEASUREMENT OF SULPHUR DiOXIDE BY THE LEAD 
PEROXIDE METHOD 

A-1.1 Equipment and Materials — The equipment required for the 
estimation is a louvered box. Full details of the equipment are given in 
Fig. 6 {see P 32 ). Method of grouting the equipment to the ground is 
shown in Fig. 4. The other materials required for the estimation arc glass 
tubing of 10 cm circumference, surgical gauze of 1 mm mesh, quality lead 
peroxide, gum arable and gum tragacanth. 

A-1 .2 Procedure 

A-1.2.I Estimation of sulphur dioxide by the lead peroxide method 
shall be carried out in the open air at ground level for a period of one 
year. 

A>1.2.2 The wooden post of the louvered box shall be buried vertically 
in the ground so that top is about 1-5 m above the ground. The equipment 
may also be exposed on a roof. In such cases the post shall be at least 
0*46 m high. Figure 6 shows the details of the posts used in two types of 
exposures. At the top of each post a headless nail shall be fixed over which 
the glass tubing shall be placed. The louvered box shall be fitted to the 
projection at the post and padlocked in position with the glass tubing 
inside. 

A-L2.3 Two or three days before the beginning of each month two lead- 
peroxide coated * candles ' shall be prepared, out of which one lead per- 
oxide ' candle ' will serve as control. 



*Specification for water, distilled quality ( umstd). ( Since revised ). 

11 



IS {5555-1970 

A-1.3 Lead Peroxide Paste 

A-1 .3.1 A paste of lead peroxide shall be made by mixing 8 g of lead per- 
oxide and about 5 ml gum solution ( 1 percent solution containing 0-5 percent 
gum arable and 05 percent gum tragacanth dissolved in 5 percent absolute 
alcohol/water mixture ) with a spatula to produce a paste of suitable 
consistency. This quantity is sufficient for one candle. When a number of 
candles arc to be prepared it will be convenient to make the paste for four 
determinations at a time on a ground-glass plate with a spatula and divide 
it equally. 

A-1 .4 Preparation of Lead Peroxide * Candles * 

A-1.4.1 A 10 cm square of the cotton gauze shall be tied or sewn round 
the glass or porcelain tubing ( candle ), the prepared paste shall be applied 
evenly to cover the gauze and finally worked smooth with the pad of the 
little finger. The prepared ' candles ' shall be dried slowly in a desiccator 
or a bell-jar containing quicklime and shall be stored there until required. 

A-1 .4.2 On the first day of each month, one lead peroxide 'candle' 
shall be transferred from the desiccator and exposed inside the louvercd 
box. On the first day of the next month the lead peroxide ' candle ' shall be 
replaced by another freshly prepared * candle ' and the former removed to 
the laboratory for analysis. To make sure that none of the materials has 
been contaminated by sulphur dioxide and that a negligible amount of 
sulphur dioxide has been collected during handling, a control ' candle ' 
treated in exactly the same way as the other shall be stored in a desiccator, 
or in a sulphur-free airtight container for one month. 

A-1 .5 Analysis 

A-l.5.1 The surface area of each ' candle ' shall be measured and the 
period of its exposure shall be noted. The coaled gauze shall be stripped off 
and treated wiih 5 g of sodium carbonate in about 100 ml of distilled water. 
After standing with occasional stirring for at least 3 hours, the whole shall 
be boiled for half an hour the volume being kept nearly constant. The 
solution shall be filtered through appropriate filter paper and finally the 
filtrate shall be acidified with hydrochloric acid and sulphate precipitated 
with barium chloride. The precipitate shall be filtered off, washed, ignited 
and weighed. 

A-1 .5.2 The weight of barium sulphate from the control ' candle * 
should not exceed 2 mg and is usually as low as 1 rog. This weight shall 
be substracted from the weight of barium sulphate from each exposed 
candle. 

A-1 .5.3 The result of each analysis shall be reported as mg of SO, per 
100 cm'/day and recorded in Pro forma B given in Appendix F. 

12 



IS: 3555 -1970 

APPENDIX B 

[Clauses 1.2 an^ 8.1.1 ) 

MEASUREMENT OF ATMOSPHERIC SALINITY 

B4i. GENERAL 

B-0.1 Salinity shall be determined in a pent roof shed by the wet ' candle ' 
method every month for one year. The shed shall be of such construction 
as to allow free passage of air inside the shed but no wetting of ' candle ' 
due to rain. 

B-l. EQUIPMENT 

B-1.1 The apparatus is illustrated in Fig. 7 (see P 33). It consists of 
the following parts: 

a) A wide mouth glass bottle of one litre capacity with a bakclitc 
lid which serves as a water reservoir. 

b) A glass boiling tube of about 25 mm internal diameter with a side 
hole at a height of 37 mm from the open end. The inverted 
glass tube is passed through a hole in the cork fitted to the 
bakelite lid of the reservoir. 

B-2. METHOD OF PREPARATION OF THE ' WET CANDLE' 

B-2.1 A roll pf surgical gauze 37 mm wide shall be cut into two pieces 
' 1 ' and ' 2 ', each of 105 cm length. These shall be boiled in distilled water 
to remove starch and other impurities. The test-tube shall be held with 
its open end down. One end of the gauze ' 1 ' shall be pushed through 
the hole to a length of 9 cm. The remaining length of the gauze shall be 
wound ( clockwise or anticlockwise ) in an upward direction starting from 
the upper edge of the side hole in the test-tube. After winding the gauze 
to a height of 10 cm the winding shall be made in the downward direction 
until the upper edge of the side hole is reached. The remaining length of 
gauze { approximately 9 cm ) shall be pushed through the side liole of the 
test-tube. The other piece ' 2 ' shall be wrapped round the test-tube 
similarly. 

B-3. EXPOSURE OF CANDLE 

B-3.1 The diameter of the tube with wrapped gauze shall be measured at 
three or four places and the mean value D shall be determined. The 
length L of the gauze shall be determined by taking mean length of the 

13 



IS : 5555 - 1970 

tube with wrapped gauze at three or four places. The total area of the 
gauze surface shall be calculated with the help of formula nDL. 

B-3.2 The gauze shall be soaked in distilled water and the reservoir shall 
be filled to half its capacity with distilled water. The bakelite lid shall 
be screwed on the bottle. It shall be ensured that the four ends of gauze 
strips remain dipped in the water. 

B-3.3 The apparatus ( bottle containing gauze ) shall be exposed in a pent 
roof shed [see Fig. B, P 34) for a period of one month. Care shall be 
taken that ihe gauze always ren\ains moist and as such shall be examined 
at least twice a week and the water shall be replenished, if necessary. 
At the end of exposure period the portion of gauze inside the bottle will 
be cut with a pair of scissors to avoid losses due to dripping. The lid 
shall be removed and the remaining gauze on the test-tube shall be cut 
open by means of a sharp blade and shall be transferred to a beaker by 
means of a glass rod. The contents ( gauze and water ) of the bottle shall 
be transferred into the same beaker. Sodium chloride content of the water 
in the reservoir shall be determined by volumetric analysis and the salinity 
calculated cis in B-4. 

B^. DETERMINATION OF SODIUM CHLORIDE CONTENT 

B-4.I The gauze in the beaker shall be boiled in distilled water and the 
water shall be transferred to a 1 000 ml measuring flask and made up to 
the mark. An aliquot volume from the measuring flask shall be taken 
and titrated with standard N/10 silver nitrate using potassium chromate 
as indicator. The result shall be calculated as follows: 

Salinity = r? 5 77 — mg of NaCI per m' per day 

where 

T= volume in ml of standard silver nitrate solution required 

for titration, 
V =3 volume in ml of solution from which aliquot has been 

drawn, 

^=! strength in terms of normality of standard silvcrnitrate 

solution, 
K, = volume in ml of aliquot, 
A == area in m* of the exposed gauze, and 
H = number of days for which the ' candle * was exposed. 

NoTR — The test shall be conducted with chloride free distilled waiter. Appropriate 
con-cction shall be made in the calculation if chloride ii present in the distilled water. 

B.4.2 The value shall be reported as mg of NaCl/m*/day and recorded in 
Pro forma B as shown in Appendix F. 

14 



ISi 5555. 1970 

APPENDIX C 

[Clauses \.2andU.\) 

MEASUREMENT OF AIR POLLUTION — SOUD MATERIALS 

C«. GENERAL 

C-0.1 Dust particles, grit and other atmospheric solid impurities shall 
be measured with the help of a deposit gauge every month for one year. 

C-l. APPARATUS 

C-1.1 The complete deposit gauge shall comprise of the following: 

a) Stand; 

b) Collecting bowl; 

c) Collecting bottles, three; 

d) Inverted funnel; 

c) Brush and plug; and 

f) Rubber squeegee and flexible tubing. 

C'1.2 Stand — The stand shall be made of mild steel to the dimensions 
shown in Fig. 9 ( jee P 35 & 36 ), and shall be galvanized after the com- 
ponents have been joined together. The bird-guard shall be of about 
25 mm mesh and shall be attached to the body of the stand. It shall be 
constructed of a corrosio^j resistant material, for example, plastics or 
galvanized iron, 

C-1.3 Collecting Bowl — The collecting bowl shall be made of chemi- 
cally resistant glass or of a suitable plastics material not prone to the 
accumulation of electrostatic charge and shall be of the dimensions shown 
in Fig. 9. 

C-1.4 Collecting Bottles ^ — The bottles shall be made rf a suitable 
plastics material, such as polythene, preferably with shoulders sloping at 
45°, and shall be of the following dimensions: 

Dimension Requirement 

Height 45 cm maximum 

Diameter of neck: 

External 8-9 cm Max 

Internal 38 to 76 cm 

Capacity 10 to 20 litres 

0*1.5 Inverted Fannel — Inverted funnel shall be made of polythene to 
the dimensions shown in Fig. 9A. 

15 



ISi5555.1»70 

Crl.6 Flexible Tablng — Tubing connecting the collecting bowl and the 
inverted funnel shall preferably be of a suitable plastics material or of good 
quality rubber, and of such bore that it will effectively grip the outlet 
nozzle of the bowl and the inverted funnel. 

&1.7 Bm»h and Ping and Sqneegee — A test-tube or short burette 
brush with a rubber bung fixed on the handle is suitable. The squeegee 
may be made by fuung a strip of hard rubber in a suitable holder. 

C-1.8 The apparatus shall be assembled as shown in Fig. 9, 

C.2. OPERATION 

C-2.1 The gauge shall be placed in a suitable open place; care shall be 
taken that the rim of the collecting bowl is horizontal. 

CS-2.2 A fungicide consisting of 10 ml of 0*02 N copper sulphate solution 
( 2-50 g of CuSOi, 5H,0 per litre ) shall be placed in the clean collecting 
bottle. This is ncces.^ary to prevent the growth of algae which would alter 
the chemical nature of the collected deposit. 

G»2.3 On completion of one month the collecting bowl shall be inspected 
and identifiable foreign matter, such as leaves or insects should be removed 
from the collecting bowl. 

C*2.4 The brush shall then be inserted in the outlet of the collecting bowl 
and passed downwards through the inside of the tubing and inverted 
funnel until the outlet of the bowl is securely closed by the plug attached 
to the top of the brush. 

C-2.5 About 500 ml of the liquid in the bottle shall be poured into the 
bowl and any deposited matter adhering to the bowl dislodged with the 
squeegee. 

G-2.6 If the liquid collected in the bottle is insufficient for this cleansing 
process a measured quantity of distilled water shall be used. This 
additional water shall not be added unless it is impossible to wash out the 
bowl with the rain-water collected. 

CS-2.7 The plug shall then be removed and the contents of the bowl run, 
without loss, into the bottle. During this operation the inside of the 
tubing and the inside of the inverted funnel shall be cleaned by means of 
the brush. 

C-3. ANALYSIS OF DEPOSITED MATTER 

G3.1 Analysis shall be carried out of the deposited matter and the follow- 
ing information shall be obtained: 

a) pH value of the liquid, except where distilled water has been 
added, and 

16 



UtSSSS'lVJP 

b) weight of the insoluble matter. This shall be further analysed 
for ash, portion soluble in CSf and combustible matter insoluble 
in carbon disulphide. The filtrate from these tests shall be 
analysed for calcium, chloride, sulphate and total water soluble 
solids. 

C-3.2 The data shall be recorded in Pro forma B as shown in Appendix F. 



APPENDIX D 

( Clauses 1.2, C-3.1 and Z.l.l) 
METHODS FOR THE ANALYSIS OF DEPOSITED MATTER 

D-l. VOLUME OF WATER 

D^l.l The volume of water shall be determined either: 

a] by weighing the bottle ( or bottles ) on receipt, and again after 
emptying at the end of the analysis, making allowance for the 
weight of the undissolved matter present, or 

b) by measuring the volume of the decanted and filtered water. 

D-I.2 The accuracy of measurement shall be of the order of 1 in 100. 

D-I.3 Allowamce shall be made for any distilled water added in accordance 
with C-2.6. A note shall be made in the report of results when this 
special procedure has been followed. 

D-2. WATER-INSOLUBLE MATTER 

D.2.1 Total Water-Iaaolnble Matter 

D»2.1.1 The whole of the deposit collected (see D.2.1.2) shall be used 
to determine the total water-insoluble matter. 

D-2.1.2 The insoluble matter shall be filtered off and dried to constant 
weight. Suitable filtering media are as follows: 

a) A layer of asbestos in a porcelain Gooch crucible; the prepared 
crucible shall be ignited before use; and 

b) A sintered silica Gooch crucible, p<HQsity 4. 

D-2.13 If the water is allowed to stand undisturbed for at least three 
days prior to filtration the water-insoluble matter %vill have setded at the 
bottom of the botde. In this case the clear supernatant liquid shall be 
decanted or syphoned off without filtration, without any appreciable loss 

17 



IS 1 5555 -1970 

of solid matter. A syphon, with an upturned end or with a closed end 
and a hole blown in the side about 25 mm from the bottom is suitable for 
withdrawing the clear liquid. 

D-2.1.4 After decantation or syphoning, the residue shall be transferred 
to a beaker of suitable size and the bottle (or bottles) rinsed thoroughly 
with some of the decanted liquid, removing any adhering particles by 
means of a stiff feather, a clean test-tube brush or other suitable means. 
The residue shall be filtered through the filtering medium and the filteratc 
added to the clear decanted liquid. 

D-2.1.5 Finally, all the water-insoluble matter shall be washed from the 
beaker to the filter, using distilled water. The filtrate shall be discarded. 

D-2.1.6 The filter and water-insoluble matter shall be dried at lOO'C to 
constant weight. 

D>2.2 Tarry Matter 

D<2.2.1 The total water-insoluble matter shall be extracted with freshly 
distilled carbon disulphidc in a suitable apparatus. The extraction shall 
be continued to completion as shown by the colour of the carbon disul- 
phide. The time for extraction will vary with the type and amount of 
watei -insoluble matter, but normally about 10 minutes is sufficient. 

D-2.2.2 After extraction crucible or filter paper shall be dried and 
weighed. The loss in weight shall be recorded as ' tarry matter '. Ghnfir- 
mation of the figure can be obtained by evaporatioa of carbon disulphidc 
used for extraction and weighing the residual tarry matter. 

D-2.3 Microscopic Examinatioii 

D-2.3.1 If desired, a representative sample of known weight of th? 
extracted water-insoluble matter shall be subjected to microscopic 
examination. 

D-2.4 Ash 

D«2.4.1 The extracted water-insoluble matter siiall be ignited at 
775 ± 25°C to constant weight in an atmosphere free from sulphur, for 
example, in an electrically heated muflSe. 

D-2.4.2 If a Gooch crucible has been used, the diflTcrcncc between the 
final and initial weights is the weight of ash. If filtei paper has been used, 
allowance should be made for the weight of ash of the filter paper. 

D-2.5 Combustible Matter Insoluble in Carbon Disnlphite 

D-2.5.1 The difference between the total water-insoluble matter and 
the sum of the tarry matter and ash is the combustible matter insoluble in 
carbon disuiphide. 

18 



IS I 5555.1970 

D.3. WATER-SOLUBLE MATTER 

D-3.1 pH Value — Ten millilitres of the clear liquid shall be taken in a 
clean test-tube and 02 ml of Universal Indicator added. The colour 
produced shall be compared with standard charts or by means of a 
comparator. Alternatively, the pH value may be determined by an 
electrometric method. 

D>3.2 Total Disaolved Matter 

D-3.2.1 A known volume of clear liquid shall be evaporated to dryness 
on a water-bath in a weighed or counterpoised platinum, silica or glazed 
porcelain dish. This shall be dried to constant weight at 100''C. 

D-3.2.2 The actual volume taken will depend upon the total volume 
available for analysis and the anticipated amount of dissolved matter 
present. 

D-3.3 Calcium 

D-3.3.1 A suitable volume of the clear liquid shall be acidified with 
hydrochloric acid and evaporated to a small bulk. This shall be heated to 
boiling and, whilst stirring a hot saturated solution of ammonium oxalate 
[ about 42 g of ( NH^ )2C204. Hj,0 per litre ] shall be added, drop by 
drop until there is an excess. The solution shall be made just alkaline 
with 0880 ammonia and shall be allowed to boil for 5 to JO minutes. 
Afterwards the solution shall be allowed to stand for a minimum period of 
4 hours, or until the precipitate has settled completely. 

0-3.3.2 The liquid shall be filtered through a fine filter paper or 
preferably through asbestos in a Gooch crucible. The precipitate shall be 
transferred to the filter, washed with dilute ammonium oxalate solution 
[ I volume of saturated solution ( 42 grams per litre ) diluted to 1 000 
volumes] and then five times with 5-ml portions of water. 

D-33i3 The precipitate shall be transferred into a beaker, using 100 ml 
of dilute ( 10 percent) sulphuric acid. If asbestos has been used as the 
filtering medium the whole contents of the crucible shall be transferred to 
the beaker; if filter paper has been used, a small hole in the apex of the 
cone shall be made and the precipitate rinsed into the beaker with the 
sulphuric acid solution. 

The solution shall be warmed to about 70°C and titrated with 0-1 N 
potassium permanganate solution. If filter paper has been used, it shall 
be dropped into the solution. 

1 ml 0-1 N KMnO, = 0-002 00 g Ca 

D-3.4 Chloride — A suitable volume of the clear liquid shall be 
evaporated to about 50 ml in a 250-ml conical flask. A measured excess 
of 0'02 N silver nitrate solution shall be added to the hot, but not boiling, 
liquid. This shall be allowed to cool, covered with a watch-glass, 
in a dark place free from chlorine. To the cold solution it shall be 

19 



ISi 5355. 1970 

added 2 ml of an iron alum indicator solution, prepared by adding 
sufficient cold concentrated nitric acid to a cold saturated solution of ferric 
ammonium alum to remove the brown colour. The indicator shall not 
be deeper in colour than pale straw. The mixture shall be titrated with 
0*02 N potassium or ammonium thiocyanate solution. 

1 ml 0-02 N AgNO, used = 0-000 709 g of chloride 

D-3.5 Sulphate — A suitable volume of the clear liquid shall be acidified 
with hydrochloric acid after the addition of a sulphur-free oxidizing agent, 
for example perhydrol. If required, this shall be concentrated to a 
convenient bulk, about 250 ml. The solution shall be neutralized with 
0-880 ammonia and 2 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid added. The 
sulphur shall be precipitated using barium chloride solution, filtered and 
weighed as bariimi sulphate. 

I g barium sulphate s 0-412 g of sulphate 

D-3.6 Prmence of * Foreign Matter * — If the bottle is found to contain 
foreign matter, for example, insects or pollution from birds, or to have 
been tampered with, an analysis shall be conducted if possible, at the 
discretion of the analyst, and a note explaining the circumstances added to 
the report. 

APPENDIX E 

{Clauses L2 and S.li] 

MEASUIUEMENT OF TEMPERATURE, HUMIDITY, RAINFALL 

AND DEW 

E-1. TEMPERATURE AND HUMTOITY 

£•1.1 Measurement of maximum and minimum temperatures and 
humidity shall be done by means of a thcrmohygrograph daily for a period 
of one year. 

E.2. RAINFALL 

E-2.1 Amount of rainfall shall be measured with the help of a rain gauge 
and the number of rainy days recorded. 

£-3. DEW 

E-3.1 Dew shall be collected on a glass funnel of known maximum 
diameter. The funnel shall pass through a cork fitted to a cylinder or a 
botde. The whole assembly shall be kept in an open yard in the evening 
and shall be removed in the morning so that no evaporation of dew takes 
place. The number of dew days shall be recorded. 

&4. RECORDING 

E^4.1 The data shall be reported in Pro forma A as shown in Appendix F. 

20 



IS: 5555 -1970 
APPENDIX F 

( Clauses 10.3, A-1.5.3, B-4.2, C-3.2 andE-AA ) 

PRO FORMA A 
Meteorological Observations 

Station Month 19 

Latitude Longitude Height above mean sea level,.. 



Date 



Tempera- 


Relative 


ture, "C 


HUMTOITY 




( prrccnt) 


Max 


Aim 


Max 


Mh 



1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 



Wind 



0830 h 



Direc- 
tion 



Speed 
km/h 



1730 h 



Direc- 
tion 



Speed 
km/h 



Preva- 


Rain- 


lent 
Wind 
Direc- 


fall 

( mm ) 


tion 
During 




the 
Day 





Dew 

{ ml/100 

cm») 



21 



lSt5S55.1970 

1) Ttrr^trature III) Average of mean humidity 
I) Average maximum temp. 



II) Average minimum temp. 3) Rainfall 



III) Average of mean temp. Total rain 

No. of rainy days. 

2) Humidity ^^ j^^^ 

I) Average maximum humidity Total dew 



II) Average minimum humidity 5) Average wind velocity 
(km/h) 

Form for Reporting Atmospheric Corrosion and PoUotion Data 

Exposure Station Month Year 

1 ) Metal and size of panel 

2) Identification mark on panel 

3) Conditions of exposure ( indoor ♦/outdoor; monthly/yearly, 
vertical /at 45° ) 

4) Date of exposure of fresh panel ( x ) 

5) Date of re-weighing of panel after exposure {y ) 

6) No. of days of exposure (jv — x ) 

7) Weight in g of freshly prepared panel ( initial weight ) ( a ) 

8) Weight in g of panel after exposure ( b ) 

9) Weight incrcment| in g ( i — a ) 

10) Change in appearance of the panel during the month under 
report t 

1 1 ) Weight in g after derusting (c) 

12) Loss in g of metal on derusting of unrusted and unexposed panel 
id) 

13) Actual loss in g of metal [a — {e -\- d)] 

14) Sulphur dioxide content of the atmosphere 
{ mg SO3/IOO cm^/month ) 

15) Salinity content ( mg ofNaCl/m*/month ) 

•If indoor, clarify whether in Stcvenion screen or in What improvized arrangement. 

f If ' o ' happen! to be higher than ' b ', show a negative figure. 

XHtre record the change in colour, and nature of the corrosion products spots, patches, 
etc, their location and percentage of area affected as compared to the previous month. 

22 



IS:5S59-1970 

PRO FORMA B 



Form for Reporting Test Specimen and Site Detaib for 
Atmospheric Corrosion and Foliation Data 



1) Mttal: 
Composition 

2) Test Spidmen: 

a) Shape 

b) Size ( mm ) 

c) Thickness ( mm ) 

3) Preparation ofSptcimeiu: 

a) Removal of mill scale by acid treatment: 



i) HCl "1 
ii HjSO« \ 
iij) Other J 



State concentration and temperature of acid and 
period of treatment 



b) Surface finish. ( Mention grade of emery used ) 

c) Method of degreasing and cleaning of specimen. 
By solvents. ( Give detaUs ) 

4) Exposure Site: 

a) Name of station 

b) Nature of exposure site ( marine, industrial, rural, etc ) 

c) Description of site: 

i) Distance and height of neighbouring buildings from 
exposure site 

ii) Proximity of site to source of pollution ( industrial or 
marine ). ( Preferably include a sketch showing location 
of exposure site and the environments ) 

23 



IS 1 5555. 1970 

5) Corrosion Data ( Type of Exposure ) 

I) Average monthly corrosion rate ( 30 days exposure ) 



Month and Year 


Corrosion Rate ( Loss of Metal ) 




Angle of Expoiure 




45' 


90» 


January 

February 

March 

Aprii 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Scptcmbci 

October 

November 

December 


mg/dm* 


mm/dm* 

1 


mg/dm* 


mm/dm* 



II) Average yearly corrosion rate ( 1 year's exposure ) 



Period op Exposure 
AND Year 


Corrosion Rate ( Losi of Metal ) 
Angle of Expoiure 




♦5" 


90° 


January-December 

February-January 

March-February 

April-March 

May-April 

June-May 

July-June 

August-July 

September-August 

October-September 

November-October 

December-No vem bcr 


mg/dm' 


mm/dm' 


mg/dm^ 


mm/dm» 



24 



18:5555-1970 

6) Any Other Relevant Information [for Example, Method of Derusiing ) 

7) Atmospheric Pollution ( Sulphur Dioxide Content of Atmosphere ) 



Month and Year 



Sulphur Dioxide Contxnt ( mg of SOj/lOOcm^/naontb) 




Above Ground Level 
( Show Height ) 



January 

February 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 



8) Atmospheric Salinity 



Month and Yiar 



Atmospheric Saunity ( mg of Naa/m'/monih ) 



Distance from Sea ( Metre ) 



January 

February 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 



25 



ISt 5555. 1970 

9) Analysis of Atmospheric Impurities in Deposit Gauze 



Month and Ybar 


Watbr 


Total Water Insolu- 


Total Watbr 






ble Matter ( g ) 


SOLUSLB Matrr ( g ) 




WAter 


^H 


Tarry 


Aih 


Other 


Ca 


CI 


SO« 




(mm) 


Value 


Matter 




Combus- 










(Rain) 




Soluble 
inCS, 




tible 
Matter 
Inso- 
luble 


















inCSi 









January 

February 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 



10) Dew 



Montr and Ybar 



No. Of Dxw Days* 



Total AMOtnrr o» Dew (ml/ 100 cm* of 
collecting surface/month ) 



January 
February 
March 
April 
May 
"unc 
uly 

Aug\i3t 
September 
October 
Novpnber 
December 



I 



*No. of dayi when more than I ml dew u foUnctrd on 100 «a< lorfike. 

26 



Bs 5555- 1979 



11) Rainf/Ul 



Month and Ybar 



No. OF Rajny Dayi 



Radoaix (mm) 



January 

February 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 



12) Madot Humidity 


MOHTB Mm YXAR 


— 


Fekcsnt Rzlativk Humsiry 




Daily Avxbaob, Max 


Daily Avkiiaoe, Min 



January 

February 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 



27 



IS 15555 -1970 

13) Temperature 



MoifTH AND Year 



TeUPERATURt ( °C ) 



Daily Averaoe, Max 



Daily Avekaob, Min 



January 

February 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 



14) Wind Velocity 



Month and Year 



January 

February 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 



Wind Velocity 

(Average of Daily Mean ) 

km/h 



Predominant Wind 

DiRtCTlON 



28 



e 

9» 



e 




CO 




IF 






LOCATION OF HOIES 
FOR NAIIS 
-MS HWQE , X PER SET DETAIL OF LOUVER A.8.C 
(FIXED AT CONVENIENT POSITON) 



rWOOD SCREW 



-2J0 
-180 



NAIl- 

SmTABlE 
HASP ANI^ 
STAPIE- 





r~(ss2az=EssaT 



-01 SHEET 

)'6mm 



0CTA111L0UVERE0 BOX 



*''-i4 wso U— 
-1M- 






TT 



+ 



k7!- 



7+ 



IM 



'HnT^?' 



170 



MATERIAL -TEAK WOOD* 

OETAt 6 MS WIRE DETAIL 3 LEG 




3* HOLE 



K-H-50Sa rt8 

rA 

y 



7SSQ 



f^ 



NAIL 



CO 



W 



&60 



-3*0 - 



to4-4 



t. 




MATERUL-TEAK WOOD 

OETAL 2 STAND 



ASSEMBLY 



All dimenjions in millimetres. 

Fio. 6 LouvERED Box 



ISi 5555.1970 



C3RK SECURED 
ra THE CAP WITH 
$yNTHETIC RESIN- 



01. ASS CANOie 

(TEST tuBE> 





METHOD OF 

MSERTION OF 

SUKUCAl GAUZE ENDS 



OlASS DESERVDD 

FOR W5TIUED 

WATER 



All dimentlont in millimetres. 

Fio. 7 Salinity Apparatus ( Wet Candle Method ) 



33 



ISt 5555- 1970 




34 



IS ! 5S59 . 1970 




(D 

z 

UJ 

(/) 

< 

ut 
O 

•< 
O 



o 

0. 
UJ 

a 



u. o 
i/> ft, 



O 

M 

3 









•? 


' 5 




UJ 


\ 


° 


* 


o 

o 

z 


»^ 35 i 

• UJ ** - ~^ 


\ 




? J 


u 


Z" ti O p- 


T^ 


aJ 


k-) 


UJ 

-1 




« 


UJ 


♦A^rr 


o 
(J 


ii 1 v 




-J 

5 


/ 1 ^ •0 
ac 


u. 
o 

-I 
< 


^iS 


- 


s 






UJ 

o 






^ 





3 
h 



^ 



o 

6 

fa 



35 



I8t5S55-lt79 






CMCUMFCWnTIAI 
BIKD-auARD 



Ljm OF I 

TOP OF B0WL->1 



JS_-K 1 



■NO 




OCTAIS OF STAND WITH IMO OUARO 
All dimcMioiu in milliaietre*. 
FlO. 9 ApPARATUI for MEAtURUIENT OF AlR PoLLtmoN, 

Souo Matbriau 
36 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MARCH 1989 
TO 
IS : 5555 - 1970 CODE OF PROCEDURE FOR 

CONDUCTING FIELD STUDIES ON 
ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION OF METALS 

( Page 7, clause 6.1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

'6.1 Identiiication marks shall not be stamped on the specimens as they are 
likely to be obliterated by corrosion. Instead holes can be made at any 
one of the nine places lengthwise in each of the three rows. First row 
indicates the units I to 9, second row indicates 10 to 90 and third row 
indicates 100 to 900. As an example Fig. 2 shows specimens No. 59. It 
has a hole at the fifth place in tens ( second row ) and a hole at the ninth 
place in units ( first row ). The specimen number can be identified with 
the help of master panel sheet.' 

( Page 7, Fig. 2 ) — Substitute the figure on page 2 for the existing 
figure: 



