IS 3861:2002 m'lfh?wmWlai$-fwQT, *a*Ma

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF PLINTH, CARPET AND RENTABLE AREAS OF BUILDINGS (Second Revision )

ICS 91.060.01; 91.200

@ BIS 2002

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 May 2002
Price Group 2

Methods of Measurement Committee, CED 44

of Works of Civil Engineering

( Excluding River Valley Projects ) Sectional

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering ( Excluding River Valley Projects ) Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Different methods for calculating plinth/carpet areas of buildings were being followed by various departments. This standard was, therefore formulated in 1966 to provide a basis for uniform method of measurement of such areas of buildings. First revision of the standard was brought out in 1975 to include rentable area of the bui Iding on the basis of recommendations of Central Public Works Department; also, provisions relating to cubical contents were deleted as these are generally not followed. This second revision of the standard has been taken up in light of experience gained with the use of the standard and feedback received from time to time. Following are the principal modifications incorporated in this revision: a) the list of the items whose areas can not be clubbed together has been made more exhaustive by including additional items where it was found desirable to measure their areas separately;

b) the areas to be included in case of verandah, balcony and alcove for measurement of plinth area have been detailed; c) d) provision for measurement of areas of walls owned jointly by different owners has been added, for the purpose of measurement of plinth area; and details on various types of internal shafls/ducts, for the purpose of inclusion of their areas in the calculation of plinth areas has been made exhaustive.

This standard disallows the use of non-standard terminologies like super built areas. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 3861:2002

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF PLINTH, CARPET AND RENTABLE AREAS OF BUILDINGS

(Second Revision )
1 SCOPE

2.8 Porch It is a covered structure supported on pillars or otherwise for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular approach to a building. 3 GENERAL
3.1 Linear measurement shall be measured to nearest 0.01 m, and areas shall be worked out to the nearest 0.01 m2.

This standard covers method of measurement of plinth, carpet and rentable areas of old and new buildings. 2 TERMINOLOGY
2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 Plinth Area Plinth area shall mean the built-up covered measured at the floor level of the basement or of any storey ( see 4 ). 2.2 Carpet Area Carpet area shall mean the floor area of the usable rooms at any floor level ( see 5 ). 2.3 Rentable Area Rentable area shall mean the carpet area at any floor level including areas as detained in 6. 2.4 Balcony A horizontal projection with a hand-rail, balustrade or a parapet, to serve as passage or sitting out place. 2.5 Mezzanine
Floor

3.2 The areas of each of the following categories shall be measured separately and shall not be clubbed together: a) b) c) d) Basement; Floor without cladding ( stilted floor); Floors including top floor which may be partly covered; Mezzanine floor including additional floor for seating in assembly building/theatre, auditorium, etc; Garage; Accommodation for service staffi Stair cover ( mumty ); Machine room; Porch; and Towers, turrets, domes projecting above the terrace level at terrace.

e) 9 g) h) -0 k)

An intermediate floor in between two main floors having minimum height of 2.2 m from the floor and having a proper and permanent access to it. NOTE -- Where
rules of the local bodies permit intermediate floor of minimum 1.8 m clear height, these be also considered as mezzanine floor for the purpose of measurement.

4 MEASUREMENT OF PLINTH AREA 4.1 Plinth area shall be the built up covered areas measured for the categories mentioned in 3.2 and shall include such areas as given in 4.1.1 and exclude the areas given in 4.1.2. 4.1.1 For the purpose of plinth area, following shall be included: a) Area of the wall at the floor level excluding plinth offsets, if any; when the building consists of columns projecting beyond cladding, the plinth area shall be taken up to the external face of cladding ( in case of

2.6

Stair Cover ( Mumty )

Itis a structure with a roof over a staircase and its

landing, built to enclose only the stairs for the purpose of providing protection from weather and not used for human habitation. 2.7 Loft A structure providing intermediate storage space in between two main floors without having a permanent access and at a height not less than 2.0 m from the floor below. 1

IS 3861 :2002 corrugated sheet cladding outer edge of corrugation shall be considered );
NOTE -- In case. a common wall is owned jointly by two owners, only half the area of such walls shall be included in the plinth area of one owner.

a) b)

Door and other openings in the wall; Pillars, intermediate pillars, supports or any other such obstruction within the plinth area irrespective of their location; Pilaster along wall exceeding 300 cm2 in area; Flues which are within the wall; Built-in cupboard, almirah and shelf appearing within a height of 2.2 m from floor; and Fire place projecting beyond the face of the wall in living or bed room.

b)

Shafts for sanitary, water supply installations, garbage chute, telecommunication, electrical, fire fighting, air-conditioning and lifts; Stair case; In case of open verandah with parapets: 1) 2) 100 percent areas for the portion protected by the projections above, and 50 percent area for the unprotected from above. portion

c) d) e) o

c) d)

5.1.2 The following shall be excluded from the wall area: a) b) Pilaster along wall not exceeding 300 cm2 in area, and Chullah platform projecting beyond the face of the wall.

e)

100 percent area of the balcony protected by projection above and 50 percent area of the unprotected balcony; and In case of alcove made by cantilevering a slab beyond external wall: 1) 25 percent of the area for the alcove of height up to 1 m, 2) 3) 50 percent of the area for the alcove of height more than 1 m and upto 2 m, and 100 percent of the area for the alcove of height more than 2 m.

9

5.2 The carpet area shall be the area worked out as in 5.1 excluding the area of the following portion: a) Verandah;

b) Corridor and passage; c) d) e) f) Entrance hall and porch; Staircase and ( see Note); stair-cover ( mumty )

4.1.2 The following shall not be included in the plinth area ( see 2.1 ):

Shaft and machine room for lift; Bathroom and lavatory;

a) b) c)

Area of loft; Area of architectural band, cornice, etc; Area of vertical sun breaker or box louver projecting out and other architectural features, for example slab projection for flower pot, etc; Open platform; Terrace; Open spiral/service stair cases; and Area of mumty, machine room, towers, turrets, domes projecting above terrace level.
OF CARPET AREA

@ Kitchen and pantry; h) Jo k) Store; Canteen; Air-conditioning duct and plant room; and

d) e) O g)

m) Shaft for sanitary/water supply installations and garbage chute, electrical and fire fighting, air-conditioning, telecommunication, lift.
NOTE -- In a hall or basement, areas of portion I m beyond last step shall be part of the staircase.

5 MEASUREMENT

5. I From the plinth area as worked out in 4, the area of the wall shall be deducted ( see also 5.1.1, 5.1.2

5.2.1 The carpet areas of category mentioned in 3.2 b), e), g), h), k) and m) are not required to be calculated. 6 MEASUREMENT
6.1 Residential OF RENTABLE AREA

and 5.2 ). Thickness of wall shall be inclusive of finishes.
NOTE -- The various dimensions internally or externally.

Buildings

could be measured

6.1.1 The rentable area shall be carpet area as worked out in 5 but shall further include the following:

5.].1 area:

The following shall be included in the wall 2

a)

The carpet area of kitchen, pantry, store, lavatory, bath room; and

IS 3861:2002

b)

Fifty percent of carpet area of unglazed and 100 percent of glazed verandah.

6.2 Non-Residential

Buildings

6.1.1.1 It shall, however, exclude the carpet area of the covered portion of the building specified in 5.1 such as storage space on top landings of staircase, under first landing and waist slab on floor one. 6.1.2 While accounting the rentable area for category mentioned in 3.2 b), one-fourth carpet area shall be accounted for.

The rentable area shall be carpet area as worked out in 5 increased by the carpet area of the canteen including store, kitchen and pantry attached to it. 6.2.1 It shall, however, not include carpet areas of bathroom and lavatory. 6.2.2 While accounting the rentable area for the category mentioned in 3.2 b), one-fourth carpet area shall be accounted for.

1S3861

:2002

ANNEX A ( Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Methods of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering ( Excluding Water Resources Development Division) Sectional Committee, CED 44
Organ izalinn Representative(s)

In Personal Capacity ( B-X/,

809{, Vasant

Kunj,

New Delhi

)

SHRI O. P. Gorx ( SHIG B. G. AHUIA

Chairman )

Builders Association of India, Mumbai Calcutta Port Trust, Kolkata

SHRI BINAY KUMAR RAY SHR[ AMAR NATH RAY ( Alternate

)

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi

SUPt]RINT~NDINti EN~IN~ER ( S & S ) EXtZUTW~ ENCiINEER ( S & S ) ( Alternate DtR~CTOR( COST ENGINEERHYDROPOWER ) Dnwcmm ( COST ENGINEERIRRIGATION ) ( Alternate ) CHIIT ( CIVIL ENGINIXR-iRRIGATION) ) SHIU S. K. MITRA ( Alternate SHRI A. K. TANMN SHRI J. S. KHANNA SHRI G. S. MEHTA( Alternate SHRI A. D. ALAWANI SHRi S. N. SANYAL( Alternate

)

Central Water Commission, New Delhi

Coal India Limited,

Kolkata

Engineers India Limited, Engineer-in-chief's

New Delhi

Branch, New Delhi

)

Gammon India Limited,

Mumbai

)

Haryana Irrigation

Department,

Manimajra

CHW EN~INFiIIK( R & D ) SUIWRINT~NtNNG ENGtNEER( Alternate SHRI D. M. RAO SHR1S. K. SAGAR( Alternate
Lucknow

)

Hindustan Steel Works Construction, Kolkata

)

[n Personal Capacity ( MD/70,
~261)&? )

Sector

C, Aliganj,

DR R. B. SINGH

In Personal Capacity ( E-39A,
I1OO6I )

East

qf Kailash,

New Delhi

SHRI BAI.IHRV~RMA

In Personal Capacity (
New Delhi 110019

Ist,flmm
)

1/1801

Chitranjan

Park,

SHRI R. P. LAHIRI

Indian Roads Congress. New Delhi

Smu DEtWAKNARAYAN SHR[ PRAtSHAT KRISHNA( Alternate SHRI K. S. KHARI Kolkata SHRI N. K. BASU SHRI S. K. GUHA ( Alrernate SHRI S. C. SHARMA SHRI A. S. SRWASTAVA ( Alternate CHUZF ENtNNEH?

)

Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi M. N. Dastur & Company Limited,

)

Ministry

of Surface Transport ( R. W. ), New Delhi

)

Public Works Department, Public Works Department,

New Delhi Navi Mumbai

SHRI P. K. NINAVE SUPERiNTENIXNG Erw3tm3R ( 13UlLDINCi) ( Afrernate ) Smu S. K. JAIN, Director and Head ( Civ Engg ) [ Representing Director General ( Ex-o~ficio ) ],

B IS Directorate General

Member-Secretary

SHRI R. K. GUrTA Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

4

Bureau of Indian Standards
B IS

is a

statutory

institution

established

under

the

Bureau

of Indian
marking

Standards

Act,

harmonious

development

of the activities

of standardization,

and quality

certification

1986 to promote of goods and

attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright
the prior permission of all its publications. in writing of No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without

BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 44 ( 5230 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern: 1/14 C. 1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841 { 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

