NAT HA IS 5313 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


alt fetert stacttend & fore amtasi 


ESE 


Guide for Core Drilling Observations 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 3 


Geological Investigation and Subsurface Exploration, WRD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Geological Investigation and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water 
Resources Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1969 and subsequently revised in 1980. In the first revision provisions had 
been added for keeping the sludge samples in cases of poor core recovery. Some additional drilling information to 
be recorded like types of barrels and bits and depth at which in situ tests were done had been included. Standard 
proforma given in Annex A had been modified by adding more items and indicating the units of various recordings. 
The present revision has been made to reflect the experience gained in the field since then. 


This standard forms a part of a series of complementary standards. Other standards in this series are: 


IS No. Title 
4078 : 1980 Code of practice for indexing and storage of drill cores ( first revision ) 


4464 : 1985 Code of practice for presentation of drilling information and core description in foundation 
investigation (first revision ) 


6926 : 1996 Diamond core drilling for site investigation for river valley projects — Code of practice ( first 
revision ) 


With the increased number of river valley projects and other major civil engineering works being undertaken in 
the wake of planned development of the country, a good amount of core drilling (including calyx, diamond and 
other types of drillings) is being carried out. Each organization handling the individual projects maintains a record 
of drilling data in its own way. In some cases (especially in the case of small works) it also happens that no record 
of the drilling data is maintained at all. As drilling is a very costly process, it is of utmost importance that complete 
observations should be made during a drilling operation. In order to keep a faithful and complete record of the 
drilling operations, the officer-in-charge of any river valley project should be assisted by competent drilling and 
core observers/engineering geologists. It is, therefore, necessary that the drilling and core observers/engineering 
geologists observe and record relevant data that would be subsequently useful in interpretation of drilling data. 
This standard has, therefore, been prepared to give the necessary guidance in observations to be recorded at the 
time of drilling operation. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the “same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5313 : 2020 


Indian Standard 
GUIDE FOR CORE DRILLING OBSERVATIONS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard gives guidance in carrying out drilling 
observations while drilling for investigations of river 
valley projects. A standard proforma is given for the 
record of the general observations. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


IS No. 
4078 : 1980 


Title 


Code of practice for indexing and 
storage of drill cores ( first revision ) 


5529 (Part 1) Code of practice for in-situ 


: 2013 permeability test: Part 1 Test in 
overburden ( second revision ) 
5529 (Part 2) In-situ permeability tests: Part 2 
: 2006 Tests in bedrock ( second revision ) 


3 DRILLING OBSERVATIONS 


3.1 Behaviour of Drill Water 


3.1.1 The colour of the return drill water should be 
recorded continuously and the depth at which changes 
in regard to these characteristics occur. The return water 
brings with it the cuttings of the strata through which 
the drilling is in progress and provides information 
with regard to the lithology and the general nature of 
the strata through which the drill bit is progressing. For 
example, drilling through hard and structurally sound 
quartzite may generally give clean water with only a 
few particles. Whereas, return drill water thickly laden 
with cuttings may be recovered while drilling through 
comparatively soft interbedded shale strata or clay 
filled seams or shear zones. Excessively mud laden 
water containing a lot of cuttings may also correlate 
with poor recovery of core at that depth and indicate 
probable reason for the core loss. 


3.1.2 The depth at which drill water is lost or returned 
fully or partially should also be recorded as it may 
indicate the existence of open joints or any other 
special geological feature, such as cavities and faults 
which may have caused the loss of water in the drill 
hole at the specified depths; subsequent recovery of 
drill water, especially upon placement of casing and/or 
grouting across the leaky zone, may indicate the extent 
of the leaky zones. 


3.1.3 Where hot water is encountered during drilling, 
the temperature of the water, depth of occurrence and 
amount of flow should be recorded. 


3.2 Rate of Penetration 


3.2.1 The rate of penetration gives indication as to the 
comparative physical nature of the strata through which 
the bit is passing. For example, in hard quartzite bands, 
the rate of penetration is generally slow compared to 
the progress in shale bands. Rate of penetration shall 
be determined for each jack length or every 30 cm. The 
depth through which a uniform rate of penetration was 
maintained and the depth at which it showed a marked 
change should be noted as this would help in locating 
the depth at which the actual change of strata occurred, 
although, due to the loss of core in the softer formation, 
it may not be possible to precisely locate its vertical 
extent from the examination of the core alone. 


3.2.2 Any sudden fall of the drill rod and the depth 
at which such a fall occurs should also be carefully 
recorded. This may give an indication of the existence 
of any open seam or cavity in the drilled strata or of any 
markedly weak or softer zone therein, if the fall of the 
drill rod is also accompanied by highly muddy return 
drill water. The type of bit used and condition of the bit 
whether old or new should be specified. 


3.3 Core Loss 


3.3.1 The depth at which a core loss might have taken 
place, as adjudged by the behavior of the drill machine 
while drilling should be recorded. This will enable the 
geologist interpreting the observations to give probable 
reason for the loss. In this connection, blockage of drill 
bit during drilling and the recovery of re-drilled and 
rounded core pieces should be recorded in the daily 
drill report. 


IS 5313 : 2020 


3.3.1.1 Poor core recovery may be due to various 
causes such as, poorly consolidated nature of 
the rock, presence of highly sheared zones, clay- 
filled seams, as well as inclination of the hole with 
respect to the foliation of the rock and even due to 
the technique of drilling. The length of the drilling 
should be restricted to 30 cm while drilling through 
softer formation where there is an apprehension of 
poor core recovery. 


3.3.1.2 Sludge samples often give important clues to 
adjudge causes for poor core recovery. These samples 
shall be kept for all runs where poor core recovery is 
anticipated (see IS 4078). 


3.3.1.3 Core recovery may be ruined by careless 
operation by drilling too fast, over drilling a run, 
dropping core and grinding it or not pulling out the 
tools when the barrel is jammed and thereby grinding 
the core. Vibration in the drill string also causes poor 
core recovery. 


3.4 Vibration and Torque 


Any heavy vibration or torque noted during the drilling 
should be recorded together with the depth of drilling 
at which these phenomena are noticed. Any remedial 
measures taken and their effect on vibration and torque 
should also be recorded. The record of vibration and 
torque should be integrated with the type of formation 
crossed, nature of core breakage and the amount of core 
recovered. 


3.5 Ground Water Level in the Hole 


The ground water level in the drill holes should 
be recorded every day, both before and after the 
drilling and any fluctuations in the levels observed 
therein should be noted. In cases where considerable 
divergence in the levels is noticed it may be 
necessary to bail out the water and record the level 
as recuperated to equilibrium value. This information 
will give an indication as to the ground water table 
condition, if this is intercepted by the drill hole. It may 
also indicate the degree of tightness or otherwise of 
the rocks drilled through, when studied in conjunction 
with the pressure percolation test data. 


3.6 Other Special Conditions to be Noted 


Any other conditions which may be peculiar to 
individual cases should be noted. Some of the special 
conditions which are likely to occur are given in 3.6.1 
to 3.6.5 (see also drilling and core observer’s remarks 
under Annex A). 


3.6.1 Depth at which Hole was Grouted 


The depth at which grouting of the hole had to be done 
should be recorded for effectively interpreting the 
foundation conditions under an engineering structure. 
Grouting of the hole may sometimes be necessary 


while the drilling is being done through broken strata, 
as the sides of the hole collapse frequently due to the 
poor physical condition of the substrata. Also, in those 
cases where the drill water is continuously being lost 
and a flushing of the cuttings from the drill hole is not 
observed, grouting of the hole may have to be resorted 
to avoid the jamming of the bit inside the hole. In 
either case, the necessity for grouting is an important 
indication of the lithological and the physical nature 
of rock being drilled through. If the hole is grouted or 
stabilized by using bentonite slurry, this fact should be 
recorded. 


3.6.2 Artesian Conditions 


Wherever artesian conditions are observed, they should 
be recorded carefully. As far as possible, accurate 
observations should be made with regard to the depth, 
the pressure and the volume of outflow of water 
from such artesian horizons, by using water meters 
or by diverting the flow to a measured container. The 
piezometric head of each horizon as observed at the 
ground surface at each drilling point should also be 
noted. 


3.6.2.1 The piezometric head should be determined 
by using a sensitive pressure gauge to the drill pipe 
or casing. The alternative, but approximate, method 
of determining the piezometric head by fixing a pipe 
above the top of the hole as soon as an artesian horizon 
is encountered and recording the rise of water level 
in the pipe may also be used. In order to accurately 
determine the piezometric head of individual artesian 
horizons pierced by the hole, packers should be fixed 
at the top and bottom of the horizon in the hole prior 
to the recording of the piezometric head above the 
ground surface at the drilling point. 


3.6.3 Gas Discharge 


Where subterranean gases like methane are encountered 
either with the return water or gas bubbles or as gas 
shows at specific depths this information should be 
recorded. Samples of gas should be collected and 
preferably analyzed at site. Where this is not possible 
special precautions should be taken to send the samples 
in hermetically sealed containers for subsequent 
chemical analysis. 


3.6.4 Permeability Tests 


These tests are necessary for properly evaluating 
the permeability of strata over which the proposed 
engineering structure will be founded and to plan 
seepage control measures. These tests shall be 
conducted in accordance with IS 5529 (Part 1) and 
IS 5529 (Part 2). 


3.6.5 Deviation of Inclined Drill Holes 


The deviation survey of all vertical or inclined drill 
holes of depth more than 60 m if any, during drilling 


should be recorded in each run by using a bore 
hole clinometer. This is especially required in over 
burden cover and also in the geological formation 
which are characterized by alternating competent/ 
non-competent layers. In the absence of a bore hole 
clinometer, measuring of inclination of the hole 
with the help of etching by hydrofluoric acid of a 
glass tube lowered suitably in the hole, should be 
undertaken. 


3.7 Other Observations 


Details of casings and bits used, depth at which 
blasting was done, if any, for driving of casing, types 
of barrel (single, double or triple) and bits, depth at 
which in situ tests were done, mineralization, if any, 
encountered, supplies like petrol, diesel, etc, used 
and other details given in Annex A should also be 
recorded. 


IS 5313 : 2020 


4 RECORD OF OBSERVATIONS 


4.1 The observations and other details should be 
recorded in the pro forma given in Annex A. Suitable 
notes shall be recorded for special observations. 


4.2 One sheet ofthe pro forma given in Annex A should 
be used for one shift of drilling only. Drilling observers 
should be present whole time on the drilling job. 
Copies of the proforma, duly filled in, should be kept 
with the cores and may also be sent to the concerned 
engineering geologist. 


4.3 Systematic photographs of the core should be 
undertaken from top view using a wide angle digital 
colour camera. Each photographs should indicate the 
drill hole no., start-end depths and scale for reference. 
A sample photograph is enclosed as Annex B. 


A-1 DAILY DRILL REPORT 


ANNEX A 


( Clauses 3.6, 3.7, 4.1 and 4.2 ) 


Project 
Location 
Drilling i. Machine No Hole No Date 
Machine 
ii. | Machine Type Co-ordinates Shift From (h) To (h) 
Feed: Screw/ Bearing of hole Collar 
hydraulic elevation 
Pump i. Pump No Angle with Ground 
horizontal elevation 
ii. | Capacity Depth drilled From (m) | To (m) | Depth of water At start of shift (m): At end of 
during the shift level in the shift (m): 
iii. | Pressure Used (N/mm?) hole 
CASING RUN LENGTH | GEAR/ RATE OF TYPE | WATER | COLOUR SR. SIZE OF | CORE RECOVERY | TYPE | REMARKS 
LOWERED DRILLED | Rpm | PENETRATION | AND LOSS OF NOOF | CORE OF 
(m) (mm/minute) SIZE | (see Drill |RETURN | CORE | PIECES ROCK 
OF | observer’s | WATER | PIECES (mm) 
Size | From | To | From | To HOLE | remark 1) Length | Percentage 
(mm) | depth | depth | (m) | (m) (mm) (m) of Core 
(m) | (m) recovery 
SUPPLIES BITS USED 
Petrol Diesel Motor Misc Type and Size Depth Old/New with Carat load, and make Stones per Carat 
From To 
(m) (m) 
Drilling and Core Observer Operator/Drilling ForemanOffice-in-Charge/Engineering Geologist 


0707 : EIES SI 


A-2 DRILLING OBSERVER’S REMARKS 


a) Water loss during drilling may either be recorded 


b 


c 


) 


wa 


as: 


1) complete, when no water is coming out, partial 
or nil water loss; or 


2) in percentage of return water (100 percent loss 
when no water is coming back and no water 
loss or 0 percent when all the drilling water is 
coming back) (see 2.1.2). 

Rate of penetration in special zones (soft or broken 

zones) (see 2.2) and other details of drilling like 

heavy vibration and torque see 2.4 ) recorded 
during drilling. 

Reasons for heavy core loss (see 2.3) as integrated 

with rate of penetration. 


d) 


e 


wm 


f) 


g) 


IS 5313 : 2020 


Any special conditions not recorded, for 
example, depth at which blasting was done 
while driving casing, depth at which hole was 
grouted (see 2.6.1), artesian water conditions 
(if any observed) during drilling (see 2.6.2), gas 
discharge (see 2.6.3). 


If water flows are encountered at the collar of the 
drill, then the pressure head and discharge at the 
collar should be recorded. On completion of the 
hole, the pressure decline over a period of time 
should also be recorded. 


Other details given at 2.7 should also be observed 
and recorded. 

The feel of the driller may be suitably recorded in 
remarks column. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 05 (605). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


