тт Ah IS 18188 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


wer ТТА A Haifaa Hat 
nAra — утватагей 


Service Activities Relating to 
Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater 
and Stormwater Systems — 
Vocabulary 


ICS 01.040.13, 03.080.30, 13.060.20, 13.060.30 


© BIS 2023 


+ н э 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR War, 9 TER ME эГъ HUT, ag (Й - 110002 
w МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 8 


Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Drinking 
Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Service Sector Division Council. 


This standard is intended to: 


a) help stakeholders understand the fundamental concepts and vocabulary of water services provision, in 
order to effectively and efficiently influence such provision; and 

b) facilitate dialogue between the stakeholders, enabling their mutual understanding of the functions and 
tasks that fall within the scope of water utilities. 


This standard contains a vocabulary of management concepts for water services provision and applicable to all 
such organizations, regardless of size, complexity or business model. As there are several technical terms in 
use in the field of drinking water supply, wastewater and stormwater system, the standardization of 
terminology would be useful to water utilities such as Jal Boards of State and Union Territory, Municipal 
Corporation and Public Health Engineering Departments in India. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this 
country. 


This standard is generic and is compiled to encompass the terms related to types and volumes of water, water 
usage, assets and asset systems, processes, requirement, and performance in context to the drinking water supply, 
wastewater and stormwater services. 


While preparing this standard, assistance has been taken from ISO 24513 : 2019 on ‘Service 
Activities Relating to Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems — Vocabulary’. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


IS 18188 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


SERVICE ACTIVITIES RELATING TO DRINKING WATER 
SUPPLY,WASTEWATER AND STORMWATER SYSTEMS — 
VOCABULARY 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines terms common to the different 
stakeholders of the water utility with regards to, 


a) key elements and characteristics of the 
service to users; and 

b) the components of drinking water supply, 
wastewater and stormwater management 
systems. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contains provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the listed edition was valid. The 
standard is subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of the standard listed below: 


IS No. Title 


ISMSO 19011 Guidelines for auditing 
2018 management systems 
(second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Terms with Context to Organization 


3.1.1 Business Activity — Umbrella term 
covering all the functions, processes, activities and 
transactions of an organization and its employees. 


NOTE — Includes public administration as well as 
commercial business. 


3.1.2 Business Activity Indicator (BAI) — Measure 
of business activity that considers core business 
operations specific to the application site. 


NOTE — Depending on the BAI, water use (including any 
water consumed) vary with need and requirement of end 
users. 


3.1.3 Capability — Quality of being able to perform 
a given activity. 


NOTE — The terms competency and capability are often 
used synonymously. Competence is defined as the ability 
to apply knowledge and skills to achieve intended results. 
In the context of either an organization or an individual 
the ‘ability to apply’ indicates the existence of the 
necessary resources, (the capacity to apply) such 
knowledge and skills. 


3.1.4 Community — One or more natural or legal 
persons and, in accordance with national legislation 


or practice, their associations, organizations or 
groups, with interests in the area where the service 
is provided. 


3.1.5 Competence — Ability to apply knowledge 
and skills to achieve intended results. 


NOTE — Demonstrated competence is sometimes referred 
to as qualification. 


3.1.6 Customer/End User — Person, group or 
organization that benefits from drinking water 
delivery and related services, wastewater, 
stormwater service activities or from reclaimed 
water delivery and related services. 


NOTES 


1 End users are a category of stakeholder. 

2 End users can belong to various economic sectors like 
domestic, commercial, industrial, tertiary activities, 
agricultural etc. 


3.1.7 Documented Information — Information 
required to be controlled and maintained by an 
organization and the medium on which it is 
contained. 


NOTES 


1 Documented information can be in any format and 
media, and from any source. 


2 Documented information can refer to: 
a) the management system, including related 
processes; 
b) information created in order, for the organization 
to operate (documentation); and 
c) evidence of results achieved (records). 


3.1.8 Environment — Surroundings in which an 
organization operates, including air, water, land, 
natural resources, flora, fauna, humans and their 
interrelation. 


NOTES 


1 Surroundings can extend from within an organization 
to the local, regional and global system. 

2 Surroundings can be described in terms of 
biodiversity, ecosystems, climate or other characteristics. 
3 For the application of this document, environment is 
considered as a specific stakeholder. The interests of this 
specific stakeholder can be represented by relevant 
authorities, by the communities or by other groups, such as 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). 


3.1.9 Full-Time Equivalent — Ratio of the total 

number of personnel hours spent in the facility 

divided by the standard working hours per day. 
NOTE — The ratio provides an estimation of actual 
facility occupancy in terms of hours occupied per day and 


is used to determine the number of occupants for the 
facility. 


IS 18188 : 2023 


3.1.10 Infrastructure — System of facilities, 
structures, installations, equipment and services 
needed for the operation and management of the 
piped water supply constructed and managed by the 
water utility. 


3.1.11 Information — Knowledge concerning 
objects, such as facts, events, things, processes, or 
ideas, including concepts, that within a certain 
context has a particular meaning. 


NOTE — Information can be data, indicators or 
estimations. 
3.1.12 Management — Coordinated activities to 


direct and control a water utility. 


NOTE — Management here includes establishing policies 
and objectives, and process guidelines to achieve the aims 
and objectives. 


3.1.13 Management System — Set of interrelated 
or interacting elements of a water utility to establish 
policies and objectives, and processes to achieve 
those objectives. 
NOTE — The management system elements establish the 
organization's structure, roles and responsibilities, planning, 


operation, policies, practices, rules, beliefs, objectives and 
processes to achieve those objectives. 


3.1.14 Objective — The end points of the defined 
set goals with intended results. 


NOTES 


1 An objective can be strategic, tactical or operational. 

2 Objectives can relate to different disciplines (such as 
financial, health and safety, quality and environmental) and 
can apply at different levels such as strategic, within 
organization, product and processes. 

3 In the context of amanagement systems, the objectives 
are set by the organization, consistent with the policy, to 
achieve specific results. 


3.1.15 Operator/Service Provider — Person or 
organization performing day-to-day processes and 
activities necessary for the provision of the service. 

NOTE — There сап be one or several operators for 


operation activities like billing, recovering services etc., in 
a water utility. 


3.1.16 Operational Plan — Documented collection 
of procedures and information that is developed, 
compiled and maintained in readiness for the 
conduct of operations. 


3.1.17 Organization — Person or group of people 
that has its defined functions with responsibilities, 
authorities and relationships to achieve its aims and 
objectives. 


NOTES 


1 The concept of organization includes, but is not limited to, 
sole-trader, company, corporation, firm, enterprise, 
authority, partnership, charity or institution, or part or 
combination thereof, whether incorporated or not, public 
or private. 

2 For the purposes of this document the organization will 
usually be a water utility. 


3.1.18 Outsource — An arrangement where an 
external organization performs part of an 


organization's function or process. 


NOTE — An external organization is outside the scope 
of the management system, although the outsourced 
function or process is within the scope. 


3.1.19 Policy — Intentions and directives of 
organization/regulatory body as formally expressed 
by its top management to meet _ the 
regulatory/statutory requirement and customer 
satisfaction. 


3.1.20 Registered User — Users registered for 

service from whom relevant information is 

recorded by the responsible body or operator. 
NOTE — The term ‘customer’ can be considered as a 
synonym, given that a customer has a commercial 
relationship, for example a service agreement, with the 


water utility. The term ‘customer’ is currently used in such 
expressions as customer relations. 


3.1.21 Relevant Authority — Public body at 
national, regional or local levels empowered to set 
general acts, or rules, or policies, or plans or 
guidelines or to check compliance with the rules, to 
assist in response plan of water utilities that are 
located under their area of jurisdiction. 


3.1.22 Reliability of Information — Degree of 
confidence in the information for representing or 
for qualifying the relevant subject matter. 


3.1.23 Responsible Body — A society or an 
organization or a public body that has the overall 
legal responsibility for providing drinking water 
services for a given geographic area. 


3.1.24 Risk — Combination of the likelihood of a 
hazardous event and the severity of consequences. 


NOTES 


1 Here risk deals with the hazard occurs in the drinking 
water supply, wastewater or stormwater management 
systems. 


2 Risk is often characterized by reference to potential 
events and consequences or a combination of these. 


3 The English term ‘likelihood’ does not have a direct 
equivalent in some languages; instead, the equivalent of the 
term ‘probability’ is often used. 


4 Risk can also be defined as the effect of socio-economy 
of the water utility, uncertainty of objectives, where 
uncertainty is the state, even partial, of deficiency of 
information, related to understanding or knowledge of an 
event, its consequence or likelihood or can affect human 
health. 


3.1.25 Stakeholder/Interested Party — A person or 
a group or a society or an organization having an 
interest and concerns and involved in the services or 
performance of water utility. 


3.1.26 Strategic Plan — Document identifying 
goals and objectives to be pursued by an 
organization over a long-term period in support of 
its mission and being consistent with its values. 


3.1.27 Sustainable Development — Development 
that meets the environmental, social and economic 


needs of Ше present generation without 
compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs. 


3.1.28 Tactical Plan — Document identifying 
objectives to be pursued by an organization over the 
medium term, on the basis of priorities derived from 
influencing factors/indicators on performance, 
costs, risk and failure probability and scale of 
failure. 


3.1.29 Technology — Application of specific 
knowledge for practical purposes, machinery, 
advance equipment and methods developed to cater 
utility services. 


3.1.30 Top Management — Person or group of 
people who directs and overall controls of an 
organization at the highest level and has the 
decision-making capacity. 

NOTES 


1 Top management has the power to delegate authority and 
provide resources within the organization. 
2 If the scope of the management system covers only part 
of an organization, then top management refers to those 
who direct and control that part of the organization. 
3.2 Terms Related to Types and Volumes of 
Water 


3.2.1 Black Water — Water discharged from water 
closet and urinals. 


3.2.2 Coastal Flood/Storm Surge — Coastal 
flooding is the inundation of land areas along the 
coast by seawater. 

NOTE — Common causes of coastal flooding are intense 


windstorm events occurring at the same time as high tide 
(storm surge), and tsunamis. 


3.2.3 Drinking Water — Water intended for human 
consumption for drinking, cooking or domestic 
purposes from any safe and secure source including 
treated water supplied for human consumption. 


3.2.4 Excreta — Waste products of human 
metabolism, in solid or liquid form, generally urine 
and/or faeces. 


3.2.5 Flooding — Condition where water flows 
onto a surface or enters a structure or area where it 
is not intended (crosses the HFV) and logged into 
low lying areas. 


3.2.6 Flushable Product — Materials considered 
suitable for disposal through sewer networks, 
wastewater collection and treatment systems. 


3.2.7 Grey Water — Wastewater from bathtubs and 
showers, hand basins, kitchen sinks, clothes 
washing andlaundry tubs but excluding excreta and 


IS 18188 : 2023 


trade effluent. 
NOTES 


1 It excludes used water from urinals or toilet bowls. 

2 Wastewater from kitchen sinks, food waste grinders or 
dishwashers can be excluded, subject to local 
requirements. 


3.2.8 High Flood Volume (HFV) — Volume of 
runoff to be captured safely within the catchment to 
prevent the high flow conveyance system capacity 
being exceeded in extreme rainfall events. 


3.2.9 Integrated River Basin/Watershed 
Management — Process of coordinating 
conservation, management and development of 
rainwater, land and related resources across sectors 
within a river basin. 


3.2.10 Rainwater — The water arising from 
atmospheric precipitation, which has not yet 
contacted the surface. 


3.2.11 Reclaimed Water — Wastewater that has 
been treated to meet specific water quality 
requirements to reuse or recycle or other purposes 
for intended beneficial use. 

NOTE — Examples of treatment technologies include 


microfiltration, reverse osmosis and/or ultraviolet 
disinfection or any other advance treatment technology. 


3.2.12 Residuals — Byproduct resulting from the 
different processes applied for treatment of water 
and wastewater. 

NOTE — Residues can be liquid, solid, gaseous or 


mixtures such as sludge, septage, sand or grit, grease, 
debris. 


3.2.13 Surface Runoff — Rainwater that flows off 
a surface to reach a drain, sewer or receiving water. 
NOTE — Examples of a receiving water include an aquifer, 


a sustainable drainage system, a pond, a stream, a river, a 
lake, an estuary or a sea. 


3.2.14 Sewage — Wastewater emanating from 
domestic consumption which comprising of grey 
and/or black water. 


3.2.15 Stormwater — Surface water arising 
through any mode of precipitation like rain, 
snowmelt etc. 


NOTES 


1 Depending on volumes, stormwater can be stored, routed 
or conveyed into a collection system or used (for irrigation 
or fire-fighting purposes) resulting in it ultimately finding 
its way back into the environment (adsorbed by soil, 
absorbed into subsurface, discharged to a natural water 
body). 

2 Stormwater may be contaminated. 


3.2.16 Trade Effluent — Liquid, including particles 
of matter and other substances in suspension in the 


IS 18188 : 2023 


liquid, which is the outflow from any trade, business 
or manufacture or of any works of engineering or 
building construction. 


NOTE — Trade effluent is also referred to as trade waste. 


3.2.17 Wastewater — Used water arising from any 
combination of domestic, institutional, commercial, 
industrial activities that discharged to the 
environment or sewer. 


NOTES 


1 Wastewater can flow in separate or combined sewer 
systems. 

2 The definition of wastewater in this document also 
includes sanitary waste in undiluted form. 


3.2.18 Wetland — Area of land such as bog, pond, 
fen, estuary, or marsh naturally covered with 


shallow water or constructed, lined and media-filled 
bed which contains suitable flora and fauna. 


3.3 Terms Related to Water Utility 


3.3.1 Affordability — Ability to be economically 
bearable for the users. 


NOTE — The affordability can be estimated through the 
degree to which charges for services can be paid by 
targeted social groups of users without significant adverse 
economic or social impact, considering allowances for 
subsidies and payment assistance programs for low-income 
users. 

3.3.2 Availability of Resources — Extent to which 

the infrastructure, assets and employees of a water 

utility enable effective provision of services to users 


according to specified performances. 


3.3.3 Alternative Drinking Water Service (ADWS) 
— Drinking water provided to users by means other 
than through the normal piped drinking water 
system. 


3.3.4 Alternative Wastewater Service (AWWS) — 
Wastewater service provided to users by means 
other than through the normal collection or 


treatment system. 
NOTE — AWWS can be required due to damage to 
components of the collection system or the treatment plant 


that would result in impairment to the environment or a 
risk to public health and safety. 


3.3.5 Consequence — Outcome of an event 
affecting objectives. 


NOTES 


1 An event can lead to a range of consequences. 

2 A consequence can be certain or uncertain and can have 
positive or negative effects on objectives. 

3 Consequences can be expressed qualitatively ог 
quantitatively. 


3.3.6 Coverage — Extent to which the assets of a 
water utility provide services to users, within its 
defined area of responsibility. 


3.3.7 Connection — Set of physical components 
ensuring the link between a consumer point of 
distribution and the local water main in case of 
drinking water and the point-of-discharge and the 
point of collection in case of wastewater. 


3.3.8 Classification — Categorization of the 
relevant parameters. 


3.3.9 Containerized Drinking Water — Packaged 
drinking water deployed in containers for alternative 
drinking water service provision. 


Examples: 
1 Bottled water, pre-prepared and hygienically 
sealed, with a predetermined shelf-life. 
2 Water tankers containing drinking water. 


3.3.10 Customer Point of Distribution — The point 
where water utility supplies the piped water to the 
individual/individual household/gated community/ 
institutions/organizations after water meter in piped 
water supply network. 


NOTES 


1 The customer point of distribution is generally defined in 
the service agreement. 

2 Іа general, water utility employees have no legal 
empowerment for obtaining direct physical access to the 
installations downstream of the customer point of 
distribution. 

3 Customer point of distribution can also be referred to as 
the point-of-supply or the point-of-connection. 


3.3.11 Crisis — Event or situation which adversely 
affects the organization and impact its services 
which requires more than the usual means of 
operation and/or organizational structure to deal 
with it. 


3.3.12 Emergency Operation Plan — Document 
specifying the procedures and associated resources 
to be applied by whom and where during a particular 
type of emergency. 


3.3.13 Effectiveness — Extent to which planned 
activities/level of services are realized and achieved. 


3.3.14 Efficiency — Relationship between the 
results achieved and the resources used. 


3.3.15 Event/Incident — Situation when a 
behaviour deviates from the normal. 


NOTES 


1 An event can be one or more occurrences and can have 
several causes. 

2 An event can sometimes be referred to as an ‘incident’ or 
‘accident’. 

3 An event without consequences can also be referred to as 
a ‘near miss’, ‘incident’, ‘near hit’ or ‘close call’. 

4 For the purposes of this document, ‘normal’ refers to 
what is expected. 


3.3.16 Event Detection — Recognition of event 
indicator and/or information about a new situation. 

NOTE — New situations can be sorted into one of the 

following: 

a) event indicator and/or situation are considered known 
and non-hazardous; 

b) event indicator and/or situation are considered hazardous, 
but a procedure to handle them already exists with the 
water utility; and 

c) event indicator and situation are considered unknown, 
and a procedure for them does not yet exist with the 
water utility. 


3.3.17 Event Identification Table — Table 
containing historical data on the past events and their 
causes. 


3.3.18 Event Indicator — Signal to the water utility 
or one or more stakeholders that an event can have 
occurred with the potential to cause a significant 
deviation from the users' expectations of service 
performance. 


3.3.19 Hazard — Source of potential harm. 
NOTES 


1 Harm in the context of a water utility can include injury 
to stakeholders, compromising of public health, degradation 
of the environment, a deterioration in service quality, 
reputational and/or socio-economic damage that can be 
natural or anthropogenic. 

2 Capacity for harm can also arise from compromised 
service provision. In this context a hazard can be 
considered to be a biological, chemical, physical or 
radiological agent in, or condition of, water with the 
potential to cause harm to public health or the environment. 
3 Other sources of potential harm exist within the water 
utility's organizational context. These hazards can be 
internal or external to the organization. Internal hazards 
could be a toxic chemical store; potential energy stored 
behind a dam perched on a hillside above a town; a chamber 
potentially containing a hazardous atmosphere, poorly 
documented procedures; inadequate training; an 
inappropriate organizational culture). External hazards 
could be earthquake; flooding; forest fire such as 
cybercrime. 


3.3.20 Hazardous Event — Event that can cause 
harm to the water utility. 


3.3.21 Influence Matrix Table — Tabulated chart 
developed by the water utility that contains 
relationship between event indicators апа 
performance measurements based on scientific 
knowledge and past experiences. 


3.3.22 Interruption — Situation where the service 
is not available or only partially available. 

NOTE — Interruptions can be planned or unplanned. 
3.3.23 Level of Service — Parameter, or group of 
parameters, which reflect social, political, 
environmental and economicoutcomes regarding 


the service to end users that the water utility 
delivers. 


NOTES 


1 The service to users can include any of the following 


IS 18188 : 2023 


parameters: health, safety, user satisfaction, quality, 
quantity, capacity, reliability, responsiveness, 
environmental acceptability, cost and availability. 

2 A defined level of service can include any combination of 
the aforementioned parameters deemed important by the 
asset owner, users or relevant stakeholders. 


3.3.24 Measurement — Process to determine a 
value of any tangible or intangible parameters. 


3.3.25 Point-of-Use — Physically fixed interface 
to draw water for the intended use such as a tap, a 
public drinking fountain, public stand post, fire 
hydrants etc. 

NOTES 

1 The point-of-use can be in private or public property. 

2 The point-of-use can be the same as the customer point 


of distribution, for example in the case of a public drinking 
fountain, public stand post, fire hydrants etc. 


3.3.26 Point-of-Collection — Physically fixed 
interface, upstream of which the water utility does 
not have the overall legal responsibility for the 
wastewater service or infrastructure such as the limit 
boundary between private and public property. 


NOTES 


1 The point-of-collection is generally defined іп the 
service agreement. 

2 In general, the water utility employees have no 
responsibility to the installations upstream of the point-of- 
collection. 


3.3.27 Point-of-Discharge — Physically fixed 
interface where the user discharges wastewater 
for its collection and disposal such as a sink, toilet, 
septic tank, gully trap etc. 
NOTE — For drinking water systems, the term ‘service 
pipe’ is currently used, but the connection can include 


components other than the service pipe, such as valves and 
meters 


3.3.28 Price — Counterpart in cash or kind 


(monetary or non-monetary) for the supply or 
provision of a product or service. 


3.3.29 Quality — Degree to which a set of inherent 
characteristics fulfils requirements. 


NOTES 


1 The term ‘quality’ can be used with adjectives such as 
poor, good or excellent. 

2 ‘Inherent’, as opposed to ‘assigned’, means existing in the 
object. 

З There is a clear distinction between quality of the product 
and quality of the service. This document does not give 
technical specifications for product quality. 


3.3.30 Recovery Plan — Provision of policies, 
procedures and processes that are necessary to 
restore operations critical to the resumption of 
service. 

NOTE — Recovery represents the last stage to be carried 


out during the crisis phase and the post- crisis phase prior 
to the changeover to routine operations. 


IS 18188 : 2023 


3.3.31 Restriction — Situation where the service 
does not meet the availability conditions specified 
in the service agreement. 

NOTE — ADWS can be required due to the loss of supply 


or due to the fact that the water currently being supplied is 
believed unfit for the intended use. 


3.3.32 Service — Output of water utility in terms of 
an activity or set of activities necessarily performed 
between the water utility and the end users. 


NOTES 


1 The dominant elements of a service are generally 
intangible. 

2 Service involves activities and processes within an 
organization (water utility), at the interface with the user, 
to establish user requirements as well as upon delivery of 
the service and can involve a continuing relationship. 

3 Provision of a service can involve, for example: 

a) an activity performed оп а user-supplied tangible 
product such as wastewater; 

b) an activity performed on а user-supplied 
intangible product like processing new 
connection requests; 

c) delivery of an intangible product like the delivery 
of information in the context of knowledge 
transmission; and 

d) the creation of ambience for the user in reception 
offices. 

4 A service is generally experienced by the user and can 
be monitored by one or more stakeholders. 


3.3.33 Service Area — Local geographic area where 


a water utility has the legal or contractual 
responsibility to provide a service. 


NOTE — The service area can be established, for 
example, by political boundaries (citywide utility); by 
legislative action (formation of a utility district); or by inter- 
jurisdictional agreements (intercity agreements to provide 
water or wastewater services). 
3.3.34 Service Agreement — Establishment of an 
accord between the user and the service provider 
on the conditions of service provision such as a 


contract. 


NOTE — It can be implicit or explicit. 


3.3.35 Tariff — Price to be charged for a product or 
service. 


NOTES 


1 The tariff structure can contain fixed and variable 
elements. 
2 The tariff's period of applicability should be defined. 


3.3.36 Water Utility — Whole set of society, or a 
body or an organization dealing with water and has 
processes, activities, means апа resources 
necessarily for abstracting, treating, distributing or 
supplying drinking water; or for collecting, 
conveying, treating, disposing of ог reusing 
wastewater; or for the control, collection, storage, 
transport and use or disposal of stormwater, and for 


providing the associated services. 
NOTES 


1 Some key features for a water utility are: 

a) its mission, to provide drinking water services 
or wastewater services or the control, 
collection, storage, transport and use of 
stormwater services, or a combination thereof; 

b) its physical area of responsibility and the 
population within this area; 

c) its responsible body; 

d) the general organization with the function of 
operator being carried out by the responsible 
body, or by legally distinct operators; and 

e) the type of physical systems used to provide the 
services, with various degrees of centralization. 

2 Drinking water utility addresses a utility dealing only 
with drinking water; wastewater utility addresses a utility 
dealing only with wastewater; stormwater utility addresses 
a utility dealing only with stormwater. 


3.3.37 Water Utility (Drinking) — Whole set of a 
society or a body or an organization dealing with 
drinking water and has processes, activities, means 
and resources necessarily for abstracting, 
transporting, treating, distributing the drinking water 
and providing the associated services including risk 
and disaster management. 


NOTES 


1 Some key features for a drinking water utility are: 

a) its mission, to provide drinking water services; 

b) its physical area of responsibility and the 
population within this area; 

c) its responsible body; 

d) the general organization with the function of 
operator being carried out by the responsible 
body, or by legally distinct operators; and 

e) the type of physical systems used to provide the 
services, with various degrees of centralization. 

2 The term drinking water utility addresses а utility 
dealing only with drinking water. 


3.3.38 Water Utility (Stormwater) — Whole set of 
society, or a body or an organization dealing with 
stormwater and has processes, activities, means and 
resources necessarily for the control, collection, 
storage, transport and use or disposal of stormwater, 
and for providing the associated services. 


NOTES 


1 Some key features for a stormwater utility are: 

a) its mission, to provide stormwater services; 

b) its physical area of responsibility and the 
population within this area; 

c) its responsible body; 

d) the general organization with the function of 
operator being carried out by the responsible 
body, or by legally distinct operators; and 

e) the type of physical systems used to provide the 
services, with various degrees of centralization. 

2 The term stormwater utility addresses a utility dealing 
only with stormwater. 


3.3.39 Water Utility (Wastewater) — Whole set of 
society, ог а body or ап organization dealing with 


wastewater and has processes, activities, means and 
resources necessarily for collecting, conveying, 
treating, disposing of or reusing wastewater and for 
providing the associated services. 


NOTES 


1 Some key features for a wastewater utility are: 

a) its mission, to provide wastewater services; 

b) its physical area of responsibility and the 
population within this area; 

c) its responsible body; 

d) the general organization with the function of 
operator being carried out by the responsible 
body, or by legally distinct operators; and 

e) the type of physical systems used to provide the 
services, with various degrees of centralization. 

2 The term wastewater utility addresses a utility dealing 
only with wastewater. 


3.4 Terms Related to Water Usage 


3.4.1 Baseline Water Efficiency Indicator — 
Reference level of water used per ВАТ. 


NOTES 


1 ‘Used’ in the context of this indicator means the net 

amount of water used (including any water consumed) in 

the course of the business activity. 

2 The indicator can be established in the initial water use 

review considering a data period suitable to the 

organization’s water use (including any water consumed). 
3.4.2 Non-revenue Water — It is the difference 
between the volumes of water supplied and billed 
authorized use. 

NOTE — Non-revenue water includes not only the direct 


and apparent water loss, but also the unbilled authorized 
use. 


3.4.3 Water Consumption — The portion of water 
use that is withdrawn for different business 
activities. 


3.4.4 Water Efficiency — Accomplishment of a 
function, task, process, service or result, with the 
minimum amount of water loss. 


3.4.5 Water Efficiency Indicator — Actual amount 
of water used per unit of BAI. 


3.4.6 Water Efficiency Management Plan — 
Document specifying the means of identifying the 
potential scope, measures, actions and priorities 
for achieving efficiencies in the organization's 
current water use 


3.4.7 Water Efficiency Management System 
(WEMS) — Part of the water utility management 
system used to manage water efficiency aspects, 
fulfil requirements and address risks апа 
opportunities. 


3.4.8 Water Efficiency Performance — 
Measurable result related to water efficiency or 


IS 18188 : 2023 


water use. 
NOTES 


1 In the context of WEMS, results can be measured inline 
with the organization’s water efficiency policy, objectives, 
targets and other water efficiency performance 
requirements. 

2 Water efficiency performance is one of the components 
of the performance of the WEMS. 


3.4.9 Water Efficiency Policy — Intentions and 
direction of an organization related to its water 
efficiency performance as formally expressed by top 
management. 

NOTE — The water efficiency policy provides a framework 


for action and for the setting of water efficiency 
performance objectives and targets. 


3.4.10 Water Meter — Instrument to measure 
continuously and display the volume of water 
passing through the measurement transducer at 
metering conditions. 


NOTE — A transducer could be a sensor or an actuator. 


3.4.11 Water Used — Amount of water used by the 
end users. 
NOTE — The amount of water used can be described and 
quantified by one or more business activity indicator(s), for 
example m3 of water/kg of product; liters/person supplied; 
m3 of water/guestroom. 


3.4.12 Water Use Review — Determination of the 
organization’s water efficiency performance based 
on data and other information, leading to 
identification of opportunities for improvement. 


3.5 Terms Related to Assets and Asset Systems 


3.5.1 Asset— Any entity that has potential or actual 
value to a water utility. 


NOTES 


1 Assets are used in a water utility for the provision of the 
service. 

2 Value can be tangible or intangible, financial or non- 
financial, and includes consideration of risks and liabilities. 
It can be positive or negative at different stages of the asset 
life. 

З Physical assets usually refer to equipment, inventory and 
properties for examples land, buildings, pipes, valves, 
wells, tanks, treatment plants, equipment, water meter, 
hardware etc. Intangible assets are the non-physical assets 
such as leases, brands, digital assets, use rights, licenses, 
intellectual property rights, water rights, software, 
databases, reputation or agreements. 

4 Contrary to consumables, assets can be depreciated in 
accounting systems. 


3.5.2 Asset System — Set of assets that interact or 
are interrelated. 


NOTE — A grouping of assets referred to as an asset 


system, could also be considered as an asset. 


3.5.3 Asset Type — Grouping of assets having 
common characteristics that distinguish those assets 


IS 18188 : 2023 


as a group or class. 
NOTES 


1 Examples of asset types include, but are not limited to, 
physical assets, information assets,intangible assets, critical 
assets, enabling assets, linear assets, information and 
communications technology (ICT) assets, infrastructure 
assets and moveable assets. 

2 Examples of physical asset types in the water sector are 
pipes, valves, pumping stations and reservoirs/tanks of the 
same type, size, materials etc. 


3.5.4 Analysis — Systematic examination in which 

the physical, chemical or biological parameters are 

monitored and evaluated using standard methods. 
NOTE — Analysis also includes operations carried out 
after sample preparation to determine the amount of 


concentration of the analyte(s) of interest present in the 
sample. 


3.5.5 Combined Sewer System — Collecting and 
conveying sewage and stormwater in the same 
system. 


3.5.6 Drinking Water Distribution Network — 
Asset systems for distributing drinking water. 
NOTE — Drinking water distribution network can include 
pipes, valves, hydrants, washouts, pumping stations and 


storage reservoirs, and other metering and ancillary 
infrastructure and components. 


3.5.7 Drinking Water Supply System — System 
providing the functions of abstraction, 
transportation, treatment, storage, distribution and 
supply of drinking water. 


3.5.8 Failure — Local inadmissible impairment of 
the operability of an asset within an asset system at 
a certain point in time. 


3.5.9 Failure Data — Data describing Ше 
characteristics of the failure caused at a certain point 
in time on a certain asset. 


3.5.10 Failure Rate — Ratio of the number of 
failures of a given category to a given unit of 
measure such as failures per unit of assets and time, 
failures per number of actions. 


NOTE — The entity to define failure rate for different 
category of assets could be different such as: 

a) for pipelines, expressed as failure per kilometer within a 
year; 

b) for pumps it is number of times pump fails per year; 

c) for connections and valves in relation to drinking water 
distribution networks, expressed as failure per thousand 
per year; 

а) for treatment plants, pumping stations and similar 
facilities, expressed instances per year; and 

e) for wastewater systems in the case of connections, 
expressed as failure per kilometer within a year. 


3.5.11 Inspection — Determination of conformity to 
specified requirements by observation/investigation 
and judgement accompanied by visual control, 
handling, measurement, testing or gauging. 


3.5.12 Investigation — Gathering of all necessary 


information and process for decision-makers. 


NOTE — This include both qualitative and quantitative 
information. 


3.5.13 Life Cycle Cost — Total cost of an asset as 
a whole or its parts throughout its life cycle. 


NOTES 


1 Total cost can include planning, design, construction, 
acquisition, operation, maintenance, rehabilitation and 
disposal costs. 

2 Total cost excludes any residual value obtained during 
disposal. 


3.5.14 Low-flow Conveyance System = — 
Stormwater conveyance system where flow is 
confined within the system. 


3.5.15 Management of Asset — Processes during 
the life cycle of an asset necessary to derive value 
from existing assets while ensuring an agreed level 
of service and function of the system. 


NOTE —Processes include: 

a) all necessary activities for planning, design, 
procurement, construction/installation, commissioning, 
operation, maintenance, rehabilitation and disposal of 
assets of drinking water systems, wastewater systems 
and stormwater systems as a functional activity, 
including their review; 

b) setting objectives and functional and performance 
requirements: 

c) establishing strategic plans, tactical plans and 
operational plans; and 

d) undertaking investigations, including establishing 
necessary databases, to assess the actual condition of 
assets during the lifecycle of the asset system. 

3.5.16 Maintenance — Combination of all 
technical, administrative and managerial actions 
during the life cycle of an asset intended to retain it 
in, or restore it to, a state in which it can perform the 


required function. 


3.5.17 On-site System — Set of physical assets 
necessary for supplying drinking water or collecting, 
treating, disposing and reusing wastewater. In case 
of wastewater, treatment system located on or near 
the site where the wastewater is generated such as 
Septic tank etc. 


NOTE — It a standalone system and not connected to a 
centralized water utility. 


3.5.18 Operation — Activities undertaken to 
maintain the normal functioning of the system. 


3.5.19 Overflow Conveyance System — 
Stormwater conveyance system where exceedance 
of flows from the system within defined pathways, 
including overland flows. 


3.5.20 Quality Assurance — Assurance of quality 
in relation to stated references to ensure that 
specified requirements are being met. 


3.5.21 Quality Control — Processes carried out at 
a technical level for the purpose of maintaining and 
documenting quality of water and wastewater. 


3.5.22 Quality Surveillance — The continuous 
monitoring and verification of procedures, methods, 
conditions, processes, products, and services, and 
analysis of records. 


3.5.23 Rate of Return — Percentage measure of 
project profitability, equal to project income divided 
by project investment. 


NOTE — The time period of measurement can be annual 
or design period or over the lifetime of the investment. 


3.5.24 Rehabilitation — Measures for restoring or 
upgrading the performance of existing assets, 
including renovation, repair and replacement. 


3.5.25 Reliability of Asset/Process — Probability 
that a device, system, or process will perform its 
prescribed function without failure for a given time 
when operated correctly in a specified environment. 


3.5.26 Repair — Rectification of a breakdown or 
damage and action taken to prevent breakdown. 


NOTE — Repair can be planned like preventive 
maintenance or unplanned in the case of damage. 


3.5.27 Replacement — Installation of a new asset 
in place of existing asset, which incorporates the 
function of the existing asset. 


3.5.28 Service Life — Period of time after 
installation during which an asset or an asset 
system meets the expected technical and functional 
requirements. 


3.5.29 Stormwater Management — Co-ordinated 
activities to achieve the objectives of stormwater 
systems in acatchment area. 


NOTE — Storm water systems are not designed for the 
calamities like cloud burst, dam break, tsunami etc. 


3.5.30 Stormwater System — System for the 
collection, storage and conveyance of stormwater 
including sustainable drainage systems. 


NOTES 


1 А stormwater system can include combined sewer 
systems or separate sewer systems, which can incorporate 
green infrastructure or source controls. 

2 A catchment can contain more than one stormwater 
system. 

3 A stormwater system does not include separate sewers, 
river basins or receiving waters. 

4 Interactions can exist between the stormwater system and 
sewers, river basins or receiving waters. 


3.5.31 Sustainable Stormwater System — 
Solution(s) to manage stormwater which mimic(s) 
natural hydrological processes such as wetland, 
pond, infiltration trench, swale, rain water 


IS 18188 : 2023 


harvesting structures etc. 


NOTE — Sustainable drainage systems are a type of green 
infrastructure and a drainage management approach 
included within integrated planning strategies such as 
water-sensitive design and low- impact design. 


3.5.32 Transmission Main — Asset system for 
transportation of water from a source to an area 
where the water is treated, stored, or distributed. 


3.5.33 Wastewater Collection System — Systems 
that collect, transport the wastewater from the 
source to the wastewater facilities. 


3.5.34 Wastewater Conveyance System/Wastewater 
Transport System — Wastewater network system of 
conduits including pumping station used to transport 
wastewater. 


NOTES 


1A system typically begins with connecting pipes from 
buildings to one or more levels of larger sewer pipes, 
which terminate at a wastewater treatment plant. 

2 Flow in sewer pipes can be by gravity flow, pumped flow 
or a combination of the two. 


3.5.35 Wastewater System — Systems providing 
the functions of collection, transportation, treatment 
of wastewater and discharge of treated effluent and 
safe disposal of waste residues. 


3.5.36 Wastewater Treatment Plant — Asset 
systems to treat wastewater upto specified level by 
physical, biological and/or chemical means. 
NOTE — The wastewater treatment plant can contain 
primary, secondary, tertiary facilities like, screens, 
sedimentation tanks, aeration tanks, filters, lagoons, sludge 


treatment facilities, chemical facilities, odour control and 
outflow facilities. 


3.5.37 Waterworks — Asset system for collection, 
treatment, pumping, transportation, storage, and 
distribution of drinking water. 


NOTE — Water works for public water supply include a 
lake, river, spring, well, pump with or without motor and 
accessories, impounding reservoir, cistern tank, filters, 
tanks, dosing equipment, conveyance systems whether 
covered or open sluice, water main, pipe, culvert, engine 
and any machinery, land, building etc. for supply or used 
for storing, treating and supplying water. 


3.6 Terms Related to Process 


3.6.1 Accuracy — Closeness of agreement between 
a measured and the accepted reference value. 
NOTE — The term accuracy, when applied to a set of 


measures, involves a combination of random components 
and a common systematic error or bias component. 


3.6.2 Assessment — Process, or result of this 
process, comparing a specified subject matter under 
specified scope with relevant references. 


3.6.3 Audit — Systematic, independent and 
documented process for obtaining audit evidence 
and evaluating it objectively to determine the extent 


IS 18188 : 2023 


to which the audit criteria are fulfilled. 
NOTES 


1 An audit can be an internal audit (first party) or an 
external audit (second party or third party), and it can be a 
combined audit (combining two or more disciplines). 

2 An internal audit is conducted by the organization itself, 
or by an external party on its behalf. 

3 ‘Audit evidence’ and ‘audit criteria’ are defined in 
IS/ISO 19011. 


3.6.4 Basic Technology — Basic equipment or 
processes required to treat water and wastewater to 
meet the quality requirements as per the specified 
standards. 


3.6.5 Benchmark — Single value, representing an 
accepted reference value derived either from 
comparisons among participants or from literature, 
used for orientation. 

NOTES 

1 The benchmark can be determined collaboratively or 

individually. 


2 By clustering, different benchmarks can occur for 
different peer groups. 


3.6.6 Benchmarking — Systematic and continual 
process for the identification of, becoming 
acquainted with and adoption of successful practices 
to be attained or performed. 
NOTE — Benchmarking at utility level means that the 
object of benchmarking is the water utility and the main 


tasks are, for example, drinking water and wastewater 
services. 


3.6.7 Benchmarking Object — Public or private 
utilities, utility sectors, functions, processes, tasks, 
services or other products, which are the subject of 
benchmarking and, with clear-cut interfaces, are 
dissociated from each other and from non- 
investigated objects such as Sewer construction, 
pipe network operation etc. 


3.6.8 Biodegradation — Degradation of organic 
matter (either natural or synthetic) into elements 
like water, carbon dioxide, biomass etc., as a result 
of enzymatic action of micro-organisms (aerobic 
and anaerobic). 


3.6.9 Clustering — Grouping of benchmarking 
objects according to different kinds of criteria 
(context information or explanatory factors) in order 
to create rather homogenous sets of peers. Such as 
Clustering by performance indicators, utility 
size, delivered volume, served population, network 
delivery rate (m*/ km/year). 


3.6.10 Confidence Grade — Assessment of the 
quality in terms of accuracy, repeatability and 
reliability. 


3.6.11 Deviation from Benchmark — Result of the 
comparison of performance indicators, as the 


10 


difference of an observed value from the benchmark 
applied. 


3.6.12 Disintegration — Physical breakdown of a 
material into simpler fragments. 


3.6.13 Dispersion — 
organic/inorganic matter in 
matrices after disintegration. 


Distribution of 
the environmental 


3.6.14 Event Detection Process — Detection of set 
of interrelated or interacting activities which 
transforms inputs such as data or information on 
an actual or catastrophic event into outputs (to 
rectify the operational activities). 


3.6.15 Land Treatment — Process in which the 
organic waste/digested sludge is applied onto a land 
surface for bacterial breakdown under natural 
conditions in the environment. 


3.6.16 Monitoring — Determining the status of a 
system, a process or an activity. 


3.6.17 Process — Set of interrelated or interacting 
and continuous activities that use inputs to deliver 
an intended result. 


NOTES 

1 Whether the ‘intended result’ of a process is called an 
output, product or service depends on the context of the 
reference. 

2 Inputs to a process may be the outputs of other processes 
and outputs of a process may be the inputs to other 
processes. 

3 Two or more interrelated and interacting processes in 
series can also be referred to as a process. 

4 Processes in an organization are generally planned and 
carried out under controlled conditions to add value. 

5 А process where the conformity of the resulting output 
cannot be readily or economically validated is frequently 
referred to as a ‘special process’. 

6 ш benchmarking, organizational and technical 
processes and combinations of both of them аге 
considered. А process within the meaning of 
benchmarking comprises a combination of one task with 
one plant/one object (operate sewer network, treat 
wastewater, treat drinking water, provide domestic 
connection, further train staff, purchase material). 

7 In service standards the term ‘process’ can have a 
broader meaning than its narrower interpretation in 
management system standards. For example, an asset 
system (a water/wastewater treatment system) can contain a 
set of assets that interact or are interrelated and can be called 
a ‘process’. So, in service standards the term ‘process’ can 
be interpreted more widely than simply meaning 
‘activities’. 


3.6.18 Procedure — Specified way to carry out an 
activity or a process. 


3.6.19 Settling — Process by which discharged 
dispersed material gets deposited at lower levels of 
water column (still and flowing) under gravity. 


3.7 Terms Related to Requirement 


3.7.1 Corrective Action — Action such as rework or 
repair to eliminate a detected nonconformity and to 


prevent its recurrence. 


NOTE — Corrective action is taken to prevent recurrence 
whereas preventive action is taken to prevent occurrence. 


3.7.2 Compliance Obligation — Legal or other 
requirement that an organization has to or chooses to 
comply with. 

3.7.3 Conformity — Fulfilment of a requirement 


under a specified scope. 


3.7.4 Nonconformity — Non-fulfilment of a 


requirement under a specified scope. 


3.7.5 Requirement — Need or expectation that is 
stated and implied. 


3.7.6 Specification — Document 
requirements for performance of a product. 


defining 


3.8 Terms Related to Performance 


3.8.1 Continual Improvement — Recurring activity 
to enhance performance through the use of audit 
findings, analysis of data, management reviews or 
other means. 


NOTES 

1 Process includes finding opportunities and measures for 
enhancement of performance. 

2 The nature of the activity can differ between cycles of 
recurrence. 


3.8.2 Data Variable — Technical or economic 
parameter for the description of benchmarking 
objects as a basis for thecalculation of performance 
indicators such as Energy іп  (kWh/year), 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)/Chemical 
Oxygen Demand (COD) in (mg/litre or ppm) or any 
other relevant water quality parameter, costs in 
(Rs/year) or treated water quantities in (m?/year). 


NOTES 


1 The basis for resilient performance indicators is a clear 
definition of the parameters within a structured data model 
considering the data confidence like reliability, accuracy. 

2 Each variable should: 

a) fit the definition of the performance indicator or 
context information it is used for, 

b) refer to the same geographical area and the 
same period or reference date as the 
performance indicator or context information it will 
be used for, and 

c) be as reliable and accurate as the decisions based 
on it require. 


3.8.3 Explanatory Factor — Reason for deviations 
of performance indicators. 


NOTE — Explanatory factors can be differentiated into 
modifiable components (energy consumption) and non- or 
only long-term modifiable components (water source). 
Non- or only long-term modifiable components result from 
the context information of the water utilities. For the 
interpretationof performance indicator results, explanatory 
factors are essential. 


3.8.4 Improvement Potential — Deviation of a 


11 


IS 18188 : 2023 


performance indicator from the benchmark. 


3.8.5 Indicator — Parameter, or a value derived 
from parameters, which provides information 
about a subject matter with a significance extending 
beyond that directly associated with a parameter 
value. 


NOTE — Indicators can refer to context, conditions, 
means, activities or performances. 
3.8.6 Performance — Measurable result of 


qualitative or quantitative findings. 


NOTE — Performance can relate to the management of 
activities, processes, products including services, systems 
or organizations. 


3.8.7 Performance Category — Classification of the 
general objectives of processes/activities of drinking 
water, wastewater and stormwater services. 


NOTES 


1 The main categories are reliability, quality, customer 
service, sustainability, and economic efficiency. 

2 Assessment criteria can be grouped by performance 
categories. 


3.8.8 Performance Indicator — Process parameters 
with set and prescribed goals of water utility to 
achieve accuracy. 


NOTE — Performance indicators are means to measure the 
efficiency and effectiveness of process. 


3.8.9 Performance Indicator Comparison — 
Comparison of values of performance indicators 
against a target value; previous values of the same 
indicator; or values of the same indicator from other 
utilities. 


3.8.10 Performance Indicator System — 
Controlled compilation of performance indicators, 
which are related to each other either logically or 
mathematically and which, overall, are aimed at a 
common, superior objective or benchmarking object. 


3.8.11 Reference Parameter — Data variable used 
in the denominator of a performance indicator. 


NOTES 


1 The reference parameter is aligned with the specific 
benchmarking object described by the specific performance 
indicator (treated (waste)water quantity, influent loading, 
influent or connected inhabitants plus population 
equivalents). 

2 In the case of benchmarking of the whole drinking 
water, wastewater or stormwater service, the denominator 
should represent one dimension of the system (number 
of service connections, total water main length, annual 
costs). This allows for comparisons through time, or 
between systems. 


3.8.12 Service Assessment Criteria — Relationship 
between objectives and performance indicators. 


IS 18188 : 2023 


АММЕХ А 
(Foreword) 


IS 18188 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Organization 
Military Engineer Services, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organization, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 

Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board, Chennai 

Delhi Jal Board, New Delhi 

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indian Water Works Association, Mumbai 


Institute of Engineers India, New Delhi 


L&T-Sargent & Lundy Limited, Vadodara 


Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Bengaluru 


Drinking Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SUNEEL KUMAR ARORA (Chairperson) 


SHRI VISHAL GANDHI 
SHRI DANISH MEENA (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL 
SHRI CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD (Alternate) 


DR SUMITA SINGHAL 


Ms N. MANIMEGALAI 
Ms G. MAGARAJOTHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SHARMA 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


Ms MONIKA BAHL 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI PARVEEN KUMAR GOEL 
Ms ANTARA DAS (Alternate) 


PROF ARUN KUMAR 
PROF V. ARYA (Alternate) 


DR K. S. HARI PRASAD 
PROF ZULFEQUAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


DR PREETI CHATURVEDI BHARGAVA 
DR SATYAKAM PATNAIK (Alternate) 


SHRI KANWARJIT SINGH 
SHRI J. C. SINGHAL 
SHRI KARTHICK BELLIGUNDU 
SHRI AKASH KUMAR DINESHBHAI SHAH 


(Alternate) 


MS MOHUA SALILKANTI BANERJEE 
Ms PALLAVI P. CHOUGULE (Alternate) 


SHRI PADMANABH MANIYAR 


IS 18188 : 2023 


Organization 


Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation, New Delhi 


National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute (NEERI), Nagpur 

National Institute of Disaster 

New Delhi 


Management, 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Public Health Engineering Department, 
West Bengal 


Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Private Limited, 
Civil Engineering Department, Noida 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, 
Gurugram 


In personal capacity (House no 7 Northex Model 
Town Extension, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (C/o ‘A’ Mess, Near Div Chowk, 
Durpin Dhara, Kalimpong, West Bengal) 

In personal capacity (Flat No 103, H. No.3-3- 
108/K1/103, Sv Enclave, New Friends 
Colony-2, Attapur, Hyderabad) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


Representative(s) 


DR DHARMENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 
Ms BHAWNA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR 


DR PRANAV NAGARNAIK 
DR P. K. LABHASETWAR (Alternate) 


PROF CHANDAN GHOSH 
PROF AMIR ALI KHAN (Alternate I) 
PROF AJINDER WALIA (Alternate II) 


DR MUKESH KUMAR SHARMA 
DR RAJESH SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANTA KOLEY 
SHRI SOUMITRA 
(Alternate) 


CHAKRABORTY 


Ms ANUJA ANAND 
SHRI GIRISH CHANDRA MISHRA 
DR SONIA GROVER 

Ms NIYATI SETH (Alternate) 


SHRI В. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAT JAIN 


SHRIR. S. TYAGI 


СОГА. K. CHAUBEY 


SHRI RAJESHWAR RAO BANDARI 


SHRI S. К. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (SERVICE SECTOR) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)] 


MS PRIYANKA SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(SERVICE SECTOR DEPARTMENT), BIS 


IS 18188 : 2023 


Panel For Drafting Standard on Distribution Network and Vocabulary, SSD 14/P3 


Organization Representative(s) 


Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering DR RAMAKANT (Convener) 
Organization, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
New Delhi 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow DR PREETI CHATURVEDI BHARGAVA 


Military Engineer Services, Bengaluru SHRI PADMANABH MANIYAR 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee DR RAJESH SINGH 
The Institution of Engineers, New Delhi SHRI J. C. SINGHAL 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, SHRIRAJAT JAIN 
Gurugram 


In Personal Capacity, (House No. 7 Northex, Model Town SHRIR. S. TYAGI 
Extension, New Delhi) 


IS 18188 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


Organization 
Military Engineer Services, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organization, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 

Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board, Chennai 

Delhi Jal Board, New Delhi 

Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indian Water Works Association, Mumbai 


Institute of Engineers India, New Delhi 


L&T-Sargent & Lundy Limited, Vadodara 


Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SUNEEL KUMAR ARORA (Chairperson) 


SHRI VISHAL GANDHI 
SHRI DANISH MEENA (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
SHRIMATI CHAITRA DEVOOR (Alternate Т) 


SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL 
SHRI CHANDRA 
(Alternate) 


SHEKHAR AZAD 


DR SUMITA SINGHAL 


MSN. MANIMEGALAI 
М5 G. MAGARAJOTHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SHARMA 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


Ms MONIKA BAHL 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI PARVEEN KUMAR GOEL 
MS ANTARA DAS (Alternate) 


PROF ARUN KUMAR 
PROF V. ARYA (Alternate) 


DR K. S. HARI PRASAD 
PROF ZULFEQUAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


DR PREETI CHATURVEDI BHARGAVA 
DR SATYAKAM PATNAIK (Alternate) 


SHRI KANWARJIT SINGH 
SHRI J. C. SINGHAL 
SHRI KARTHICK BELLIGUNDU 
SHRI AKASH KUMAR DINESHBHAI SHAH 


(Alternate) 


MS MOHUA SALILKANTI BANERJEE 
MS PALLAVI P. CHOUGULE (Alternate) 


SHRI PADMANABH MANIYAR 


Organization 


Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation, New Delhi 


National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute (NEERI), Nagpur 


National Institute of Disaster 


New Delhi 


Management, 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Public Health Engineering Department, Kolkata 


Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Private Limited, 
Noida 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, 
Gurugram 


In personal capacity (House no 7 Northex Model 
Town Extension, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (C/o ‘A’ Mess, Near Div Chowk, 
Durpin Dhara, Kalimpong) 


In personal capacity (Flat No 103, H. No.3-3-108/ 
Kr/103, Sv Enclave, New Friends Colony - 2 
Attapur, Hyderabad) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


IS 18188 : 2023 
Representative(s) 


DR DHARMENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 
Ms BHAWNA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR 


DR PRANAV NAGARNAIK 
DRP. К. LABHASETWAR (Alternate) 


PROF CHANDAN GHOSH 
PROF AMIR ALI KHAN (Alternate I) 
PROF AJINDER WALIA (Alternate II) 


DR MUKESH KUMAR SHARMA 
DR RAJESH SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANTA KOLEY 
SHRI SOUMITRA 
(Alternate) 


CHAKRABORTY 


М5 ANUJA ANAND 
SHRI GIRISH CHANDRA MISHRA 
DR SONIA GROVER 

MS NIYATI SETH (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAT JAIN 


SHRI R. S. TYAGI 


СОГА. K. CHAUBEY 


SHRI RAJESHWAR RAO BANDARI 


SHRI S. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (SERVICE SECTOR) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)] 


MS PRIYANKA SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(SERVICE SECTOR), BIS 


IS 18188 : 2023 


Panel for drafting standard on Distribution Network and Vocabulary, SSD 14/P3 


Organization Representative(s) 


Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering DR RAMAKANT(Convener) 
Organization, New Delhi 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow DR PREETI CHATURVEDI BHARGAVA 


Military Engineer Services, Bengaluru SHRI PADMANABH MANIYAR 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee DR RAJESH SINGH 
The Institution of Engineers, New Delhi SHRI J. C. SINGHAL 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, SHRI RAJAT JAIN 
Gurugram 


In Personal Capacity, (House No. 7 Northex, Model Town SHRIR.S. TYAGI 
Extension, New Delhi) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD 14 (20622). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


