( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 9692 ( Part III) - 1981

Indian
PART

Standard
OF EQUH'MENT
PROGRAMME

GUIDE ON MAlNTAlNABlLlTY
111 MAINTAINABILITY

Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC 3
Cliaiman
PKOF S. SAMPATH

and

Union

Public

Service

Commission,

New

Delhi

Members
BRIG: R. C. DHINGRA Lr-CAL V. K. KHANNA ( Alferrtate ) DIRIZCTOK, S~AN~AIWS ( S & T J, Railway RUSO JOINT DWECTOR STANUARDS ( S SrT)-II, RDSO ( Alrerrmfe 1 )
JOINT DIRECWR ELECTRICALS ( MKS ), KDSO ( AIternrr~e II )

Representing
Ministry of Defence Board ( DGI

)
of Railways

( Ministry

)

Ptxo Electronics and Electricals Ltd, DR P. K. DUITA SHN S. P. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH SHRI B. C. MUKHEIWE ( Alternure ) Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SRRI A. P. GUPTA SHIU 1. S. SWAKH ( Alternare ) All India Radio, New Delhi SHKl H. s. JOLLY SHRI N. J. NAIR ( AIternate ) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad SHKI K. KRISHNASWAMY
SQN-LDR 1. M. GANIIOTRA SHRI S. P. KIJLKARNI

Bombay

( Alternute )
The

Kadlo Electronic & Television Association, Bombay
Engineering Br

Manufacturers'
Co

SHRI S. M. KHURSALE ( AItermfe ) Tata MANAGER ( STANDARDIZATION ) ASSISTANT MANAGER

Locomotive

Ltd,

Jamshcdpur

(STANDand Telegraphs Board, New Delhi

AI~DIZATION ) ( Alterfmre ) Posts SHRI H. C. MATHUK SWU U. K. G. AC~IARYA ( Alternote

) i Conrimed un p0g.z 2 1

INI)IAN
This

SC) C0pYrlXht STANDARDS

1981 INSTITUTION

publlcatlon is protected under the I~zdicm Copy&& Acr ( XIV of 1937 ) and rcproductron in whole or in part by any means except with writtrn permIssion 01 the publisher shall be deemed to be an infrmgement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981
( Conrinrredfio/n puge 1 ) Members 511~ S. R. MEHTA SRIII T. C. COSALIA ( Alternnte DR K. B. MISRA ~
Indian

Representing
Electrical Manufacturers' Association,

Bombay

I
in personal capacity

( Department
Institute of

of Electrical
Technology,

Engineering, Khuragpur

Indian

Department of Electronics. New Delhi SHRI E. 0. NAGARAJAN SHICI K. R. ANANUAKUMARAN NAIR Lucas-TVS Ltd. Madl-aa SIHI(I C. RANGANA.I.HAN ( Alrc,rrrrrre ) Ilhabha .Aromic Rescarch Centre. Trombay, Bombay SHRI D. V. PE.IKAll SIIRI A. K. BAUAR ( AItermre : Fllcctronics Corporation of India Ltd. Hyderabad SHI~IK. S. I'RAKASA RAO SHRI S. S. S~NWALKAR ( Alrernare ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalorc SHRL 1'. S. K. PRASALI ISliO Satellite Centre ( ISAC: ), Llangalore SIIRI K. RAMG~PAL SIIRI SIHARAN DE C .4iterrratr ) Drrectorrttc of TechnIcal Develotvnznt and ProStrnr R. SOMASUNUARAM ductron ( Alli ), Mrnistry of D~fence SHRI 1. C. MAWUR ( Altermrte ) Ministry of Defence (K & D) SIIRI K. N. TIWARI SHRI I'. K. SII~JKLA f A/remote 1 `Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI B. VIWSALINGAM ' SIIRI V. M~JTIIAIAII ( AIfernare I t)rrcctorate Goneral of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SllRl VISWA NATH
SIlR1 DR SHRI K. c. c. 11. JAIN. C;CIPTA (

)

Alternate

)

R. P. WADHWA Head ( Electronics ),

National

Physical

Laboratory

( CSIR

), New

Delhi

I)irector

General,

ISI ( Ex-&icio

lllemhev

)

( Secrefary

)

IS : 9692 ( Part III)

- 1981

Indian
PART III

Standard
OF EQUIPMENT
PROGRAMME

GUIDE ON MAlNTAINAHILlTY
MAINTAINABILITY

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part III ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 17 February 1981, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This guide is intended to make recommendations for the standardization of maintainability practices, and to stimulate ideas in the marntainability field. Organizations acquiring items will find the guide useful in assisting them in defining maintainability requirements and associated programmes. Item suppliers will benelit from use of the guide, gaining an understanding of the requirements for achieving and verrfyrng maintainability objectives. 0.3 The present Guide is intended to be Part 111 of the Guide on Maintainability. Final publication of the complete series is expected to take some time but since each Part is able to make a contribution to the needs of other IS1 Technical Committees it has been decided to circulate The other Parts of this standard would each Part as a separate document. be as follows: Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 II IV V VI VII Introduction Maintainability to maintainability requirements procedures in specifications and contracts

Test and diagnostic Maiutainability Maintainability

design studies verification and presentation of data related to

Collection, analysis maintainability.

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the IEC Document 56 (Central Office) 70 Draft-Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part 3 Maintainability Programme' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

JS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on reliability of electronic and electrical components and equipment. A list of standards published so far in this series is given on page 16.

1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard programme. 2. GENERAL

( Part III ) covers

the

contents

of a maintainability

ASPECTS

OF A MAINTAINABII~ITY

PROGRAMME

2.1 Introduction - This Guide is applicable where a contractual relationship exists between the contractor and the customer with a stated maintainability requirement. However, a maintainabihty programme may also be required in other cases when the same mail1 principles will apply---for example where an item is produced for general sale, where the contractor and customer belong to the same organization or where the cuslomrr requires an evaluation of the achieved maintainability for some reason. The reader may have to consult other parts of the guide for further details. 2.2 Purpose - The cost of maintenance of an item will vary with its size complexity as well as with its nature and the seriousness of the failures to which it is subject but m:iy f\)rni a large proportion of the total cost of ownership. As It shall be an important target of a customer to minimize the total cost, whilst ensuring that all other requirements are met. it is essential that attention is paid to the maintainability of an item in the perspective of its whole life. It is also of great importance to achieve a high availability of the item. This can best bc done by a formal maintainability programme, prepared at the definition phase, but flexible enough to be modified with experience of the project. The extent of the programme and hence its cost will vary with each and every project. However, the programme should be planned with due regard being paid to each of the steps described in 2 and 3, setting a suitable level for each step.
and

NOIF - The definition phase of the system 11fe cycle is devoted to trxnslating svstem fu~~cl~o~ral requirements gzllcrated during rhe conceptual phase in10 dclailed system and system element rrquircmcnts that ~111 govern subsequent acquisitive cRourts. During this phase, the reliability programme includes both ;~SL~I-UIK~ and achievement actlvltirs. 2.3

General Characteristics - The maintainability programme is governed tasks and responsibilities by a detailed plan which includes procedures, necessary to fulfil the maintainability requirements and to give a timely development of the maintenance support system. A formal programme is required for the following reasons: a) To integrate effort, the maintainability effort into the overall engineering

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 b) To identify the various maintainability for carrying out these tasks, c) To integrate the maintainability and other outside organizations, d) To evaluate tasks and the responsibilities

effort with that of sub-contractors and itself for funding purposes.

the cost of the programme

The contractor is responsible for carrying out the maintainability usually as a contractual responsibility. He will develop a programme, maintainability programme plan, which will be the master management document for control, for the approval of the customer as early as possible in the acquisition programme. A good maintainability programme can also benefits to the contractor in terms of reduced costs repair, replacement and warranties and in improved goodwill. lead to overall cost of technical support, competitiveness and

2.4 Integration of the Maintainability Programme with Other Activities - A maintainability programme can~lot be carried out in isolation from other activities ( particularly the reliability programme ), and indeed it is an essential part of the whole enpineerlng programme. It is neccssury that reviews should be held to consider the status of the maintainability programme. MaIntainability data should be gathered from all trials of the item jsre KS:9692 (Part VII)] `Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part Vll Collection, analysis and presentation of data related to maintaillability'. There may also be conflictiilg demnads on the design and these shall be resolved by appropriate compromises.
NOTE -

shail be as agreed

T1l1 such time the standard under preparation to between the purchsser and the seller.

is published,

the matter

2.5 Qualitative and Quantitative Measurement of Maintainability - The aim of a maintainability programme IS to ensure that the customer's requirements are met. These requirements WIII usually be stated in a formal sp-clfication and it is the responsibility of the contractor to illtcrpret them into specific: design features. Whether there are qualitative or quantitative requirements or both, a formal maintainability programme is the best way to secure customer satisfaction. IS:9692 maintainability ( Part II )-1980* of this guide discusses the various characteristics which may be established. PROGRAMME types of

3. MAINTAINABILITY

3.1 Nature of the Maintainability Programme - Throughout the life of an item, the maintainability programme brings together all the maintainability activities in an ordered and logical way and assures full documentation and integration with other engineering activities. *Crulde on maintainability
specifications and contracts. 5 of equipment: Part I1 Maintainability requirements in

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 3.2 Summary of the Programme - The essential ability programme are listed below and then paragraphs. Each element the final programme. a) Preparation should be carefully considered programme elements of the maintainexpanded in subsequent in the formulation plan ( see 3.3 ) reviews ( including the to of

of a maintainability

b) Establishment of a system cost aspect ) ( see 3.4 ) c) Determination sub-divisions d) Maintainability

for programme

of design criteria and allocation of the item ( see 3.5 ) evaluation and prediction

of requirements

( see 3.6 ) in subcontractor and corrective and action

e) Inclusion of maintainability requirements vendor specifications ( see 3.7 ) f) Establishment of a data system ( see 3.8 ) g) Participation in design collection, analysis

reviews (see 3.9 ) ( see 3.10 ) planning for design (see 3.11 ) or process changes

h) Ease of maintenance j) Preparation k) Establishment ( see 3.12 ) m) Maintainability
NOTE-This

studies

of data for maintenance of a control verification
is not

system

( see 3.13 )
complete and some elements may be

list

necessarily

sub-divided.

3.3 Maintainability Programme Plan - The plan is a document describing in some detail how the contractor intends to manage his maintainability effort and to supervise that of his sub-contractors. 3.3.1 Scope of the Programme Plan -The programme plan shall interpret the specified requirements in terms of tasks and responsibilities and will enable the programme to be integrated into the whole effort. It shall also describe the procedures to be followed to enable to contractor to establish control of the programme. 3.3.2 Organization - The plan shall contain details of the overall organization responsible for the maintainability effort. In particular it shall: a) identify the elements of the organization responsible for managing the maintainability
6

and the key personnel programme;

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981

b) define their responsibilities ships; and c) stipulate their authority.

and functions and their interrelation-

3.3.3 Tasks and Responsibilities - The plan shall detail tasks which have to be carried out. For each of these tasks, the plan should include the following information: a) A detailed description of the task including the specific objectives which shall be met at various stages of the programme; b) The stages of the task related to the total plan. The number of stages shall be sufficient to ensure satisfactory control of the task. Each stage should be described in terms of the information to be made available for review purposes; c) The procedures to be used to evaluate the stages of the task and to establish control. It shall include details of the organizational elements responsible for executing the task and their authority; and d) Identification of problems which are expected from prior knowledge of the task and the proposed actions to be taken for their solutions. 3.3.4 Maintainability Status Reporting - At intervals determined or approved by the customer, the contractor shall prepare maintainability status reports which provide a current accounting of required, allocated, predicted and observed values for the item and the sub-divisions into which it has been broken down for maintainability analysis. The reports shall include a narative and graphical treatment of trends, problems encountered or anticipated, and action taken or proposed. These reports may be combined with other programme documentation but maintainability information should be summarized in a separate section. 3.3.5 Associated Activities - The maintainability programme shall be co-ordinated with other activities, and the programme plan shall detail the procedures necessary to assure that this is done. The following is a list of the common activities concernep but in some cases some of them may combined: a) Design engineering; b) Reliability engineering; c) Maintenance planning; d) Human engineering, human factors and training; e) Safety engineering; f) Quality assurance;
7

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 g) Production engineering;

h) Standardization; j) Configuration management; and support.

k) Value engineering; m) Integrated logistic

3.4 Programme Reviews - An estimate of the costs of the maintainability should be made at the contract stage and constantly be programme updated. They shall include the costs of any extra effort required in design and production in support of the programme. These estimates which should be the basis for the funding of the programme shall be used by the customer to decide whether the programme is cost effective, that is, whether the extra expenditure shall bring benefits in the form of reduced maintenance costs and higher availability and in other forms of intangible benefits to the customer. Programme reviews should be held at regular intervals to consider the achievements of the programme and to approve any changes. 3.5 Determination of Design Criteria and Allocation of Requirements to Sub-Divisions of the Item - In the flrst phase of design, an analysis of the qualitative and quantitative maintainability requirements should be carried out. The analysis will translate these inputs into qualitative design criteria and into detailed quantitative maintainability requirements for the subdivisions of the item through an allocation process. The outputs of this analysis shall be used during design, development and test to assess the degree of achievement of the maintainability design requirements. This analysis shall take into account: a) The overall maintainability requirements; the operating and

b) The environmental conditions of use including maintenance support conditions;

c) The facilities available for maintenance, training programme, the personnel skills, the maintenance equipment and tools at each level of support; d) Any cost or other restraints; e) Design studies already carried and out. are given in Appendix A.

3.5.1 The maintainability

design guidelines

3.6 Maintainability Evaluation and Prediction - This activity is directly related to the one described in 3.5 but it is carried out in greater depth and at a later point in the design phase. 8

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 Study efforts during this phase are directed towards assuring a design satisfying the allocated design requirements and the design crrteria for maintainability. This is done through a continuous participation, by the maintainability engineer, in the design process performing analysis, seeking opportunities for improvement. Another effort during this phase is a periodic prediction of maintainabrlity characteristics thus assessing fulfilment of overall item maintainability requirements. The predictron technique used shall be specified or approved by the procuring organization. Deviations shall be transferred into new allocated requirements and trade-offs. The latter effort shall also give a basis for status reporting ( see 3.3.4 J and submittal of maintenance planning data ( see 3.10 ). 3.7 Maintainability Requirements in Sub-Contractor and Vendor Specifications - The main contractor is responsible for maintainability of the entire item, thus he shall ensure that maintainability programmes as appropriates are carried out by his sub-contractors and vendors. Based on the results of maintainability analysis ( see 3.5), he shall include appropriate quantitative maintainability requirements in specifications for designated sub-contractor and vendor supplied sub-items procured for the item. These requirements shall be stipulated in terms surtable for demonstration. Specitications for sub-contractor and vendor sub-items shall include, where applicable, such information as: a) Item constraints b) Maintenance c) Standardization d) Maintainability and requirements; concepts and support requirements; requirements; and

and interchangeability demonstration

requirements

and procedures.

The main contractor shall stipulate the procedures for assuring that the sub-contractor's and vendor's maintainability procedures are consistent with overall item requirements and that adequate surveillance of the subcontractor's and vendor's will be maintained to enforce compliance with all maintainability requirements specified. 3.8 Data Collection, Analysis and Corrective Action System - The contractor shall establish a maintainability data collection system for prediction during design and for evaluation of demonstration results. Data should be collected from all tests and trials, whether design, development or customer trials to assist in verifying that the maintainability requiremerlts are being met and to reduce the need for special maintainability trials which may be expensive. Care shall be taken when using such data to ensure that the conditions of the trial are related to the conditions of use and the maintenance organization of the customer.

IS : 9692 ( Part 111) - 1981 The contractor shall analyse the data against maintainability, quantitative and qualitative requirements, identify problems, recommend solutions, record corrective actions, and include data collected which confirm the effectiveness of the corrective action. Consideration should be given to the use of the same data collection system during the early use period. 3.9 Design programme points may be stated in Reviews - The appropriate elements of the maintainability should be considered at each design review. Additional review be required for the maintainability programme and this should the programme plan.

Ail design changes shall be reviewed and their effects on the achievement of maintainability requirements evaluated. A final review shall be made prior to release of drawings and specifications for production. Formal review procedures shall be established and scheduled in the maintainability programme plan. 3.10 Ease of Maintenance Studies - At appropriate times when items are available, the contractor should carry out experimental studies on the maintenance tasks which he has defined as necessary. Priority shall be given to those tasks which are expected to be more frequent, that is, areas of low reliability, areas where wear-out is expected and routine preventive maintenance tasks. These studies may lead to design changes for improvement of maintainability and may also identify any requirements for special facilities, maintenance equipment and tools to reduce the maintenance downtime. The studies may also result in recommendations on the skills required for maintenance personnel and hence their training. 3.11 Data for Maintenance Planning - The contractor shall prepare inputs for establishing a maintenance concept and for establishing an item maintenance plan. The initial step in the development of inputs to the plan shall be the preparation of inputs to a detailed maintenance concept, which shall evolve through repetitive maintainability analysis ( see 3.6 ) into ;L maintenance plan for supporting the operation of the item in the planned operational environment. Typical outputs of the analysis which are included in the maintenance plan are: a) b) c) d) e) f) Depth and frequency of maintenance at various levels of support;

Requirements Requirements Requirements

for special facilities; for special maintenance for spares; of maintenance personnel required; and equipment and tools;

Skill levels and numbers Predicted

costs of maintenance. 10

1S : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 3.12 Control System for Design or Process Changes - Through the maintainability programme it should be ensured that the design features which affect maintainability are faithfully reproduced in production aud quality assurance documents. Any changes to these documents which are proposed dunng the manufacturing phase should be examined for their effect on maintainability. Any change should be notified to the engineer responsible for maintainability in design, who should examine the implication of the change on the maintainability of the item. Similarly any change he proposes to improve maintainability should be examined for its effect on performance, reliability and costs. An integrated procedure to process such changes shall be included in the programme plan. 3.13 Maintainability Verification - The achievement of maintainability requirements shall be verified as specified in the contract. The verification shall normally be accomplished in accordance with IS :9692 ( Part VI ) `Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part VI Maintainabiltty verification' which includes contractor preparation and submission of a detnottstration plan and report to the customer. The demonstration plan shall be responsive to the maintainability programme plan established by this Guide. Maintainability demonstratton efforts shall be integrated with other system testing requirements such as proof of design, bread board, prototype, environmental, production and acceptance. Maintainability demonstration data shall be used to verify the achievement of maintainability design requirements and to update the maintainability parameter values from the maintainability analysis and prediction. The formal maintainability demonstration performed to determine contract compliance shall be conducted in an operational or simulated operational environment as specilied in the contract. Maintainability verification data shall be used to verify by successive approaches the achievement of maintainability design requirements and to update the assessed maintainability characteristics.
NOTE - Till such time the standard under preparation shall be as agreed to between tile purchaser and the seller. is pubhshed, the matter

4. CONTRACTOR'S

RESPONSIBILITIES

4.1 The contractor is responsible for producing the maintainability programme plan and executing the programme. He shall constantly review it as development proceeds; in particular at each review point he shall report on the status of the programme. 4.2 The contractor shall report at once to the customer when he believes that the maintainability requirements may not be met or where there is a conflict with another requirement such as operational performance, reliability and costs. Where possible he should propose other solutions.
11

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 5. CUSTOMER'S RESPONSIBILITY

5.1 The customer's responsibility begins with his preparation of a maintainability specification that clearly details the maintainability characteristics ( requirements ) to be met by the item to be acquired. Further, the scope of the maintainability programme required to be performed by the contractor should be identified. Constraints that customer's intended use environment will place on the item's maintainability design and maintenance support planning shall be communicated to the potential contractor(s) ( see Appendix B ). 5.2 During negotiation for the item's acquisition, the customer shall receive the potential contractor's proposed maintainability programme to assure that his requirements have been properly understood. Clarifications should be requested from the contractor(s) for any points of concern. 5.3 After initiation of the item's acquisition the customer shall receive and the contractor's detailed maintainability programme plan. approve Participatioii by the customer may be required in the periodic maintainability design reviews along with his observance of verification i acceptance) tests. The customer may also be required to review contractor's prediction and other maintainability analysis reports.

6. DIALOGUE

BETWEEN

CUSTOMER

AND CONTRACTOR

6.1 In formulating a maintainability programme and executing, it is essential that there should be continuous liaison between the maintenance support planning staff of the customer and the maintainability engineering stalf of the contractor. The customer's staff shall be aware of and have experience in the problems of design for maintainability and its interface with that of other requirements. The contractor's staff shall be aware of the problems of maintenance support, particularly of the skill levels of maintenance personnel, facilities, equipments and tools already available and the environment in which maintenance work is to be carried out. As fdr as possible, data should bc passed between them in a way in which it may readily be used without requiring interpretation or reprocessing. These communication procedures shall be defined in the programme plan, particularly in respect of specific data items, the timing and the channels of communication.

7. FURTHER

DETAILS

RELATED

TO THIS

PART

OF THE GUIDE are described

7.1 This part has necessarily been kept concise. The activities in more detail in later parts of this standard ( sre 0.3 ). 12

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981

APPENDIX ( Cluuse 3.5.1 )
MAINTAINABILITY DESIGN

A

GUIDELINES which

A-l. The following are some of the maintainability design guidelines should be considered for incorporation into the design: a) Reduce the complexity adequate of maintenance accessibility, by:

i) Providing

work space, and work clearance. materials and

ii) Providing for interchangeability of like components, parts within the system/equipment. iii) Utilizing standard parts and items. and variety of tools, accessories

iv) Limiting the number equipment. v) Insuring compatibility

and support

amon g system equipment

and facilities. maintenance

b) Reduce the need for and frequency activrties by using: i) Fail-bare features. which require

of design-dictated

ii) Components iii) Tolerances iv) Adequate c) Reduce

little or no preventive

maintenance. fife.

which allow for use and wear throughout corrosion prevention/control downtime detection features. for:

maintenance

by designing of malfunction

i) Rapid and positive ii) Rapid alid complete

or degradation.

preparation

to begin maintenance.

iii) Rapid and positive localization of malfunctions to the repair level for which skulls, spares and test equipment are planned. iv) Ease of fault correction. v) Rapid and positive vi) Rapid d) Reduce
and

adjustment

and cahbration. of correction. support costs by limiting: support equipment

positrve verification maintenance

d&n-dictated

i) The need for specialized and facilities.

maintenance

tools,

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 ii) The requirements with system/cost for depot effectiveness. or factory maintenance, data. by applying human consistent

iii) The need for extensive

maintenance

technical

e) Limit maintenance personnel engineering principles such as: i) Identification and accessibility and connections. ii) Easy handling, iii) Logically iv) A feasible f) Reduce the eliminate: mobility,

requirements of parts,

test points, and storability.

adjustments

transportability tasks.

sequenced

maintenance

range of relevant potential for

personnel maintenance

physiological error by

parameters. designing to

i) The possibility ii) Dirty, awkward, iii) Ambiguity

of incorrect

connection/assembly/installation. labelling, coding and technical data.

and tedious job elements.

in maintenance

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.1 )

B

EXAMPLES OF THE INFORMATION THE CUSTOMER SHOULD GIVE TO THE CONTRACTOR B-l. REFERENCES DOCUMENTS TO APPROPRIATE SPECIFICATION OR

B-2. GENERAL B-2.1 Definition B-2.1.1

INFORMATION or Description of the Item

Mission Pmjle of the differents of each phase. modes of operation. sub-items if any. and their relative importance.

a) Functions c) Duration d) Different

b) Phases to be considered,

e) All other constraint. 14

IS : 9692 ( Part III ) - 1981 B-2.1.2 CJiaracteriJtics of the Item cllaractenstics. constraints ).

a) Operational b) Periods

of usages ( duration, characteristics. of service. ON THE

c) Reliability d) Duration

B-3. INFORMATION a) Number b) Delivery

PRODUCTION

to be deployed. plan. POLICY

B-4. MAINTENANCE a) Level of use. b) Maintenance c) Maintenance d) Number e) Procurement f) Technical B-5. DESIGN

organization. levels. points. lead times. assistance requested. AND CONSTRAINTS

of storage

REQUIREMENTS

B-6. MAINTAINABILITY B-7. MAINTAINABILITY B-8. MAINTENANCE B-9. MAINTAINABILITY

REQUIREMENTS REPORTS REQUIRED

DOCUMENTATION VERIFICATION

1.5

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

RELIABILITY OF ELECTRONIC AND EQUIPMENT IS:

AND ELECTRICAL

COMPONENTS

1885 (Part XxX1X)-1979 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Pact XXXIX Reliability of electronic and electrical items ( first revision ) 2612-1965 Recommendation for type approval and sampling procedures for electronic components 7354 Guide on reliability of electronic and electrical items: (Part I)-1975 Preliminary reliability considerations (Part II)-1975 Managerial aspects of reliability (Part III)-1975 Presentation of reliability data on electronic and electrical components ( or parts ) data (Part IV)-1974 Collection of reliability, availability and maintainability from field performance Inclusion of lot-by-lot and periodic inspection procedures in (Part V)-1975 and electrical specifications for electronic components ( or parts ) of reliability clauses into the specifications for (Part VI)-1975 Inclusion components ( or parts ) 7690-1975 Mathematical guide to the terms and definitions for reliability of electronic equipment and components ( or parts ) used therein 8161 Guide for equipment reliability testing: Principles and procedures (Part I)-1976 (Part VII)-1977 Compliance test plans for failure rate and mean time between failures assuming constant failure rate 9185 Endurance ( life ) test for electronic and electrical components: Thermal endurance (Part I)-1979 (Part II)-1979 Mechanical endurance 9186-1979 Guide for screening of electronic and electrical items 9692 Guide on maintainability of equipment: (Part I)-1980 Introduction to maintainability (Part II)-1980 Maintainability requirements in specifications and contracts

