( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 11315 ( Part

8 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR

QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART Rock Mechanics
ChaiWUln DR BEAWANI SINCH Members ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICER Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee ( IRI ) DIREUTOR ( CW & PRS ) Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune SHRI S. L. MOKHASHI ( Altcraufc ) DIRECTOR Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi Karnataka DIRECTOR ( CHIEF ENGINEER ) Engineering Research Station, Krishnarajasagara SHRI R. NARA SIMRA IYEN~AR ( Alternuts ) DR A. K. DUBE Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad SHRI P. S. GOSAL Irrigation and Power Department, Government of Punjab, Amritsar DR UDAY V. KULKARNI Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay DR G. S. MEHROTRA Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee &RI A. GEOSH ( Alternate ) SHRI M. D. NAIR Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi PROF T. S. NA~ARAJ ( Alternate ) SHXI P. L. NARULA Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alfcrnatc) PROF T. RAMAMURTEY Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR G. V. RAO ( Altcrnatc) DR Y. V. RAMANA National Geophysical Research Institute ( CSIR ). Hyderabad. DR G. V. RAO Indian Geotechnical Society, Delhi ( Continued on page 2 )

8

SEEPAGE Committee, BDC 73
Repcscnting Roorkee

Sectional

University of Roorkee,

@ Colryrighr 1987
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the In&n Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:11315(Part8)-1987 ( Continued from page 1 )
Membws RESEARCH OFFICER ( MERI ) Representing Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nasik Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, Ahmadabad Director General, BIS ( Ex-oficio Member )
Secretury

SECRETARY DIRECTOR (C) ( Alternate) SHRI C. D. THATTE SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

SHRI K. M. MATHUR Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

Rock Slope Engineering, Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee, BDC 73 : 4
Convener PXOF L. S. SRIVASTAVA Members DR R. K. BHANDARI
SHRI B. D. BALI~A

University

of Roorkee,

Roorkee Institute Institute ( CSIR ), ( CSIR ),

Central Building Roorkee Central Mining Dhanbad Cemindia Company

Research Research

SHRI A. GHOSH ( Alternate )

Limited, Bombay SHRI A. P. BANERJEE SHRI D. J. KETKAR ( Alternate ) Jaiprakash Associates Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRI R., K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Central Road Research Institute SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN ( CSIR )t New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR T. RAMAMURTHY Da K. G. SHARXA ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur DR YUDHBIR

IS : 11315( Part 8 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART 8 SEEPAGE

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 8 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 6 April 1987, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In view of the advancement in the field of rock mechanics, a number of methods for assessing the strength characteristics of rocks and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Slope Engineering and Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee, of the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee. The majority of rock masses, in particular those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that the structure of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified description of rock masses and discontiruities, and it may be possible to design engineering structures in rock with a minimum of expense in-situ testing. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 0.3 Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistocity planes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number of sets, and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 0.4 It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard covering various parameters to 3

IS : 11315 ( Part

8 ) - 1987
in rock masses one parameter. is being formulated in various This part covers seepage. visible in individual

describe discontinuities parts each part covering

0.5 Seepage describes water flow and free moisture discontinuities or in the rock mass as a whole.

0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if thr! final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2- 1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the method for the quantitative seepage in the discontinuities in rock mass.
2. TERMINOLOGY description of

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 11358-l 986t shall apply.
3. GENERAL

the

definitions

of terms

given

in

3.1 Water

seepage through rock masses results mainly from flow through water conducting discontinuities ( secondary permeability ). In the case of certain sedimentary rocks, the ' primary ' permeability of the rock material may be significant such that a proportion of the total seepage occurs through the pores. The rate of seepage is roughly proportional to the local hydraulic gradient and to the relevant directional permeability proportionality being dependent on laminar flow. High velocity flow through open discontinuities may result in increased head losses due to turbulence. prediction of groundwater levels, likely seepage paths and approximate water pressures may often give advance warning of stability or construction difficulties. The field description of rock masses should inevitably precede any recommendation for field permeability tests so these factors should be carefully assessed at this early stage. 3.3 Irregular groundwater levels and perched water tables may be encountered in rock masses that are partitioned by persistent impermeable features such as dykes, clay filled discontinuities or permeable beds. The prediction of these potential flow-barriers and associated irregular water tables is of considerable importance especially for engineering projects where such barriers might be penetrated at depth by tunnelling, resulting in high pressure inflows. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( r&sad ). tGlossary of terms and symbols relating to rock mechanics. 4

3.2 The

IS : 11315( Part 8 ) - 1987 3.4 Seepage of water caused by drainage into an engineering excavation in cases where a sinking ground may have far reaching consequences water level would cause settlement of structures founded on overlying clay deposits.
3.5 The approximate description of the local hydrogeology should be supplemented with detailed observations of seepage from individual discontinuities or particular sets, according to their relative importance to stability. A short comment concerning recent precipitation in the area, will be helpful in the interpretation of these observations. if known, Additional data concerning groundwater trends and rainfall and temperature records will be useful supplementary information. 3.6 In the case of rock slopes, the preliminary design estimates will be based on assumed values of effective normal stress. If, as a result of field observations one has to conclude that pessimistic assumptions of water pressure are justified ( that is, a tension crack full of water with zero exit pressure at the toe of the unfavourable discontinuity ) then this will clearly have the greatest consequences for design. So also will the field observation that ice formation is possible or probable, Deterioration of rock slopes and tunnel portals through ice weding and/or increased water pressure caused by ice-blocked drainage paths are serious seasonal problems in many countries. 3.7 Seepage describe water flow and free moisture visible in discontinuity planes and the information is collected by visual observations ( in underground excavations good lighting is essential ). Air photographs, rainfall, spring flow, and temperature records assist in evaluation of seepage. 4. PROCEDURE

4.1 Available

air photograph should be studied to obtain an overall view of the local drainage pattern and likely groundwater levels. ( Groundwater may be indicated by growth of vegetation along faults and basic Information on seasonal variations of groundwater levels, and dykes ). on rainfall and temperature records should be obtained where possible. 4.2 Description of the local hydrogeology will usually be limited in the preliminary stages of field mapping. There will probably be no boreholes for pumping tests, no wells for water level determination and drawdown tests, no tracer tests, and no piezometer installations. The hydrogeology will therefore have to be assessed from geological predictions of the likely locations of acquifers, from predictions of the likely orientation and location of impermeable flow barriers, and from predictions of the likely resultant seepage directions and groundwater levels. The need for exploratory boreholes for water level determination, tracer testing,

5

IS : 11315( Part 8 ) - 1987 piezometer installation and pumping or drawdown tests assessed, and their optimum location indicated on appropriate should plans. be

NOTE - Local rainfall records should be obtained where possible, to help in the This is especially important in the case of interpretation of seepage observations. observation of surface outcrops, slopes, and tunnels at shallow depth.

4.3 The mutual interaction of the planned engineering project and the assumed groundwater flow regime should be assessed and important conThe effect of seepage towards or into a planned sequences summarized. excavation such as a tunnel or slope should be described with a view to The predicted effect of any resultant drawdown preliminary analysis. of groundwater levels on existing installations, and on the settlement of clay foundations should be summarized. 4.4 Seepage from individual unjlled and filled discontinuities or from specific sets exposed in a tunnel or in a surface exposure, can be assessed according to the following descriptive scheme:
Unjlled Discontinuities

Seepage Rating I II III IV V VI

Description The discontinuity is tight and dry, water not appear possible. The discontinuity The discontinuity like rust staining, The discontinuity The discontinuity but no continuous is dry with no evidence flow along it does of water flow. flow,

is dry but shows evidence etc. . is damp

of water

but no free water is present. occasional drops of water,

shows seepage, flow.

The discontinuity shows a continuous I/min and describe pressure ).

flow of water ( estimate

Filled Discontinuities

Seepage Rating I II III IV

Description The filling materials are heavily consolidated and dry, significant flow appears unlikely due to very low permeability. The filling The filling materials materials are damp, but no free water is present. drops of water. continuous flow

are wet, occasional

The filling materials show signs of outwash, of water (estimate l/min ). 6

IS : 11315( Part 8 ) - 1987 V The filling materials are washed out locally, considerable water flow along out-wash channels ( estimate l/min and describe pressure, that is, low, medium, high ). The filling materials are washed out completely, very high water pressures experienced, especially on first exposure ( est.imate l/Knin and describe pressure ).

VI

4.5 In the case of a rock engineering construction which acts as a drain for the rock mass, for example a tunnel, it is helpful if the overall flow into individual sections of the structure are described. This should ideally he performed immediately a%er excavation since groundwater levels or the rock mass storage may be depleted rapidly. Descriptions may be based on the following scheme:
Rock Mass ( Tunnel Wall )

Seepage Rating I II III IV V

Description Dry walls and roof, no detectable seepage.

Minor seepage, specify dripping discontinuities. Medium inflow, specify discontinuities with continuous flow ( estimate in flow of water l/min/lO m length of excavation ).
(

Major inflow, specify discontinuities with strong flows estimate in flow of water l/min/lO m length of excavation ).

Exceptionally high inflow, specify source of exceptional flows ( estimate in flow of water l/min/lO m length of' excavation ).

4.6 A field assessment of the likely effectiveness of surface drains, inclined drill holes, or drainage galleries shouId be made in the case of major rock slopes. This assessment will depend on the orientation, spacing and apertures of the relevant discontinuities.
NOTE 1 - In the case of open pit mines, boreholes are drilled for mineral exploration and rock mechanics is commonly entertained only at a subsequent stage, if mineral evaluation is encouraging. The preexistence of boreholes will allow a comprehensive hydrogeological study to be performed, including tracer tests, piezometcr installation, falling-head and pumping tests. Boreholes walls can be surveyed for seepage horizons by means of periscopes, borehole cameras and TV equ.pment. NOTE 2 - Testing performed in drill holes ( as falling head and Lugeon tests ) for estimating rock mass permeability forms the subject of a separate Indian Standard. The description of any available lugeon values is obviously an important supplement to the present suggested methods for description of rock masses and discontinuities. NATE 3 - Bedding joints and beds of sedimentary rocks having high `primary' permeability tend to be persistent features with the potential for hydraulically connecting large areas of sedimentary rock masses. Such efficient hydraulic connection will be inherently less marked in igneous and metamorphic environments if major regional joints and faults are absent.

IS : 11315 ( Part

8 ) - 1987

NOTE 4 - Faults sometimes contain highly permeable breccia adjacent to highly impermeable clay gouge. The hydraulic conductivity may therefore be strongly anisotropic, and may even be confined to flow parallel to the plane of the fault. It may be premature to describe a fault zone as dry if at tunnel or exploratory adit has not completely penetrated the feature. NOTE 5 - The highest location of seeping joints on a rock slope may be important indirect input for preliminary stability analysis. Likewise the depth of a tunnel or its location relative to major weakness zones will be important, since this may imply potentially serious inflows.

4.7 The potential influence of frost and ice on the seepage paths through the rock mass should be assessed. Observations of seepage from the surface trace of discontinuities may be misleading in freezing temperatures. The possibility of ice blocked drainage paths should be assessed from the point of view of surface deterioration of a rock excavation, and from the point of view of overall stability. 5. PRESENTATION 5.1 Air OF RESULTS

photos, geological maps, or plans of suitable scale should be marked with arrows to indicate the general groundwater flow pattern that has been interpreted as a result of available hydrogeological data. If appropriate, rainfall and temperature records can be appended. 5.2 Anticipated impermeable flow barriers such as dykes, major clayfilled discontinuities and impermeable beds, should be drawn on simplified geological maps and vertical cross-sections, together with anticipated groundwater levels. Optimum locations for investigatory boreholes ( and any existing boreholes ), should be indicated as appropriate. 5.3 The anticipated mutual interaction of the planned engineering project and the assumed groundwater flow regime should be described where possible. If sufficient data are available for reliable predictions, anticipated pre-construction and post-construction phreatic surfaces should be sketched. The likely effect of extreme weather conditions should be indicated if possible. Possible effects of frost and of artificial drainage measures should be appended. 5.4 Local seepage observations for individual discontinuities for specific sets, or for the rock mass as a whole can be presented as seepage ratings I-VI. If enough observations are available, sketches showing the distributions of ratings can be contoured, drawn as histograms, or, in the case of tunnels, presented on longitudinal sections in parallel with structural data, in the same way that Lugeon values are presented parallel with borehole geology.

8

