**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 979 (1988) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to mercerizing [TXD 5: Chemical 
Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 : 979 - 1988 
r j« r»^ J J (Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO MERCERIZING 

{First Revision) 



UDG 677016-473-4:535-684-34 



® Co^yr^ht 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

^ * January 1989 



IS : 979 - 1988 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO MERCERIZING 

{ First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
31 August 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 

0*2 This standard was first published in 1957 
and has been revised to align it with ISO 
105/X-1984 Textiles — Tests for colour fastness 
X04-Colour fastness to mercerizing, issued by 
the International Organization for Standardiza- 
tion ( ISO ) and also to incorporate changes in 
line with other standards on colour fastness tests. 



0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of 
considerable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and 
depth of shade of the dyestufF used but also 
upon the nature of the fibre and the method of 
dyeing or printing employed; the same colouring 
matter, when used in dyeing or printing 
different fibres or when applied by different 
methods upon the same fibre, may give vastly 
different results. Formulation of standard 
methods of test for determining colour fastness 
of textile materials to different agencies, likely 
to effect change in colour is, therefore, 
necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for the 
determination of colour fastness of textile 
fabrics, yarns or threads of all kinds to the 
action of concentrated solutions of sodium 
hydroxide used in mercerizing. 

1.2 The method is mainly applicable to cotton 
and mixtures containing cotton. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile, in contact with 
specified adjacent fabrics, is treated with 
sodium hydroxide solution, rinsed, acidified, 
again rinsed and dried. The change in colour 
of ^ the specimen and the staining of the 
adjacent fabric are assessed with grey scales. 

2.2 As completely resistant specimens may show 
an apparent increase in depth of colour, these 
would not be rated 5 by the normal method of 
assessment. In such cases, therefore, only the 
changes in hue and brightness should be 
assessed using grey scale, without consideration 
of the increase in depth, and such assessments 
should be marked with an asterisk ( * ). The 
meaning of the asterisk has to be explained in a 
footnote. 

Examples 

5* : Increase in depth ( not considered ); 
no change in hue and brightness. 



3-4 redder* : Increase in depth ( not 
considered ); the hue became redder 
matching grey scale rating 3-4. 

2 bluer, duller*: Increase in depth ( not 
considered); the shade changed in hue 
and brightness according to grey scale 
rating 2. 

2.3 Specimens which do not increase in depth 
shall be assessed in the normal manner and the 
results shall not be marked with an asterisk. 

Example 

2 weaker, bluer, dixller: Loss in depth 
( considered ) and change in both hue and 
brightness according to grey scale 
rating 2. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot of 
coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the 
relevant material specification or as agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller to evaluate 
colour fastness of the material in the lot shall be 

representative of the lot. 



4. COMPOSITE SPECIMEN 

4.1 Cotton Adjacent Fabric- 

10 X 10 cm for evaluating staining. 



At least 



I 



IS 1 979 - 1988 



4*2 Preparation of Composite Specimen 

4.2.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, sew 
a specimen of at least 10 X 10 cm to an equal 
sized piece of the cotton adjacent fabric 
( see 4.1 ) around all four sides. Fasten this 
composite specimen to a frame firmly, but 
without excessive tension. 

4.2.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn or 
thread, wind an amount of it equal to the mass 
of adjacent fabric on a rigid frame firmly, but 
without excessive tension, with the strands close 
together and parallel to provide an area at 
least 10 X 10 cm. Sew an equal size piece of 
the adjacent fabric ( see 4.1 ) to this area along 
the two sides across the strands. 

5. APPARATUS 

5.1 Frame — A metal frame for holding 
specimen. It consists of two folding wings 
which, in closed position, can be locked by a 
wing nut. The two wings have fitting open 
squares of about 8 x 3 cm. All four sides of 
the frame are corrugated or contain needle 
bars in order to fix the composite specimen 
during the treatment. The rigid frame for 
yarns and threads should be a little larger than 
the corrugated frame or the needle bar and 
fitted into the metal frame. 

6. REAGENTS 

6.0 Qjaality of Reagents — Unless otherwise 
specified, pure chemicals shall be employed in 
tests and distilled water (j(f^IS: 1070-1977*) 
shall be used where the use of water as a 
reagent is intended. 

NoTB 1 — Pure chemicals shall mean chemicab 
that do not contain impurities which affect the test 
results. 

Note 2 — In the case of a dispute, chemicals of 
analytical reagent grade shall be used for the test. 

6.1 Sodium Hydroxide ( NaOH ) Solution — 

300 g/1. 

6.2 Sulphuric Acid Solution — containing 
5 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid 
(sp gr r84) per litre. 

6.3 Acetic Acid Solution — containing 10 ml 
of glacial acetic acid per litre. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Immerse the composite specimen with the 
coloured material uppermost in sodium 



hydroxide solution at 27 ± 2**G for 5 minutes so 
as to cover the specimen completely. Rinse the 
specimen first by pouring on it one litre of 
water at 70 ± 2**C over a period of one minute 
and then rinse in cold running tap water for 
5 minutes. Remove it from, the frame and 
immerse it in sulphuric acid solution or in 
acetic acid solution for five minutes at a liquor 
ratio of 1 : 50. Rinse it in cold running tap 
water until neutral. Remove the stitching 
along three sides ( or along one side in case the 
test piece is in the form of yarns or threads ) 
and dry in air in shade at a temperature not 
exceeding 60° C taking care that the adjacent 
fabric and the test specimen are kept apart 
except at the remaining line of stitching. 

7.2 If the treated specimen shows increased 
depth of colour, evaluate its change in hue 
and/or brightness only, by the method 
prescribed in IS : 768-1982* and the degree of 
staining of the two pieces of adjacent fabrics by 
the method prescribed in IS : 769-1982!- 

Note 1 — Treated test specimen and the piece of 
adjacent fabric should have cooled after drying, and 
should have regained their normal moisture content 
before evaluation. 

Note 2 — In cases of doubt in the assessment of 
colour fastness ratings as assessed by a single observer, 
the assessment should be done by at least three 
observers and the overall average rating should be 
reported. 

7.3 If the treated test piece does not show 
increased depth of colour, evaluate its change 
in colour as an overall contrast by the method 
prescribed in IS : 768-1982* and the degree of 
staining of the piece of adjacent fabric by the 
method prescribed in IS : 769-19821 {see Notes 
under 7.2). 

8. REPORT 

8.1 In the case of evaluation in accordance 
with 7.2, report the numerical rating for change 
in hue and/or brightness of the specimen and 
mark the rating with an asterisk, and the 
numerical rating for staining of the piece of 
adjacent fabric used in the preparation of the 
composite specimen. 

8.2 In the case of evaluation in accordance 
with 7.3, report the numerical rating for change 
in colour of the specimen and the numerical 
rating for staining of the piece of adjacent 
fabric used in the preparation of the composite 
specimen. 



•Specification for water for general laboratory use 
{second revision ). 



•Method for evaluating change in colour {first revision), 
t Method for evaluating staining {first revision ), 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



