( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS:10564-1983

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR MINIMIZATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE FROM RADIO FREQUENCY HEATING EQUIPMENT
Electromagnetic
Chairman SARI T. V. SRIRANGAN Members Shri T. V. Srirangan ) DR S. K. AQQARWAL SRRI S. K. ANEJA
DR M. K. RAO ( Alternate to

Interference

Suppression LTDC 22

Sectional

Committee,

Representing Planning and Wireless Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry of Communication ), New Delhi

Indian Radiological Association, New Delhi Electrical Appliances Manufacturers Association, Delhi

SHRI Y. P. SURI ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi COL T. R. BHALOTRA LT-COL KRISHAN LAL ( Alternate ) SHRI K. B. BORKER The Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation SHRI J. B. DANWAR SERI R. MAHESRWARI ( Alternate ) SHRI S. DESIKAMANI Directorate of Technical Development and Production ( Air ), Ministry of Defence, New Delhi SQN LDR K. N. SAMPATH KU~AR ( AZternate ) DIRECTOR Central Electricity Authortiy, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) SHRI K. L. GARB Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, Ntw Delhi SHRI R. N. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) SERI J. GUPTA Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay ; and The Radio Electronics and Television Manufacturers Association ( RETMA ), Bombay SHRI S. P. AHLUWALIA The Radio Electronics and Television Manufacturers ( Alternate I ) Association ( RETMA ), Bombay SERI P. K. BANDHOPeico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay ' PADHYAYA ( Alter&c 11 ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Co&right 1983 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:10564-1983
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHR,I S. JANAKIRAMAN

Representing Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ) ( Ministry of Home Affairs ), New Delhi Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New Delhi

JOINT DIRECTOR JOINT DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) Eastern Electronics Ltd, Faridabad SHRI B. C. MATHUR SHRI 0. S. KHANNA ( Alternate ) Institute of Electronics and Telecommunication PROF S. N. MITRA Engineer ( IETE ), New Delhi COL J. C. AXAND ( Alternate ) Post and Telegraphs, New Delhi SHRI S. MUTRUSWAYY SHRI G. S. RAJU (Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR S. M. PRASAD Da R. K. ARORA ( Alternate) Overseas Communication Service, Bombay SHRI S. K. RAICHAND SHRI K. RAMACHANDRAN Automotive Research Association of India, Pune SH~I Z. A. MUJAWAR ( Alter&e ) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore DR N. RAMESH SHRI ROY ABRAHAM ( Alternate ) Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi DR C. S. R. RAO Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI M. L. SRAHMA SKRI N. KRISHNAN KUTTY ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI SUHESH CHANDRA Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicicio Member ) SHKI R. C. JAIN Head ( Electronics ) Secretary
SHRI B. K. SHARMA Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1

2

IS :10564 - 1983

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR MINIMIZATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE FROM RADIO FREQUENCY HEATING EQUIPMENT
0. 0.1
This Institution magnetic approved

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards on 31 March 1983, after the draft finalized by the Elect'roSectional Committee had been Interference Suppression by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council.

0.2 The object of this standard is to give the information on recommended practices which will minimize or reduce electromagnetic interference. It reviews the theoretical aspects of the electromagnetic interference problem and the outlines of recommended practices which may be followed. 0.3 The recommended practices described in this standard may be applied both in construction and as remedial measures where electromagnetic interference limits specified in IS : 6842-1977" are exceeded. It is emphasized, however, that foresight is much superior to hindsight and that attempts to correct mistakes in initial design are always expensive and troublesome. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from IEEE 140-1950 ` Recommended practice for minimization of interference from radio frequency heating equipment `, issued by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, USA.
Though IEEE 140-1950 is thirty-two NOTEthe standard are still being followed. years old but the practices given in

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether standard is complied with, the final expressing the result of a test, shall be IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant off value should be the same as that standard.

a particular requirement of this value, observed or caIculated, rounded off in accordance with places retained in the iounded of the specified value in this

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

*Specification for limits for electromagnetic interference (&t

revision ).

3

IS : 10564 - 1983 1. SCOPE 1.1 This minimize frequency
standard lays down the recommended or reduce electromagnetic interference heating equipment. practices caused which will by radio

2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions by IS : 1885 ( Part 36 )-1972* shall apply. SECTION 3. NEED FOR SHIELDING 1 GENERAL

covered

Electrical behaviour of high-frequency power often gives the impression that it does not follow electrical laws applicable at lower frequencies. Actually, there is no fundamental difference. The difficulty lies only in the fact that effects which were negligible at 50 cycles become very important as the frequency is raised. It becomes increasingly difficult to confine electric currents to desired circuits. Dangerous potentials may exist between apparatus cases which may cause burns to operators. High-frequency currents may circulate in control devices and make them inoperative or otherwise impair their functions, Circuits in any way such hazards apparatus to and apparatus which are not associated may pick up high-frequency currents. is the use of adequate shielding about confine the currents to safe channels. with the equipment The solution to all the high-frequency

3.1 Local Effects -

3.2 Remote Effects - The ability of high-frequency power to propagate itself through free space without conventional guides, for example wires, leads to electromagnetic interference with apparatus at great distances from the installation. The energy may travel along the earth's surface or be conducted on wires directly to the remote point, or it may be reflected from the ionosphere to be returned to earth at tremendous distances from its source. Again, the solution lies in adequate shielding of the radio circuits. Surprisingly, small amounts of radiated power ( of the order of microwatt ) may cause troubles of this nature. 4. NATURE

OF RADIATION However, The oldest type of generating this device is not generally

4.1 Types of Generating Equipment
equipment is the rotating machine. used above 10 KHz per second.
`Electrotechnical vocabulary

: Part 36 Radio interference.
4

IS:10564-

1983

4.1.1 In the range 10 KHz to 500 KHz, common power sources are the spark gap and Poulsen arc. Electromagnetic interference from spark equipment is distributed over a very wide frequency range. For example, a 20 MHz generator will radiate a continuous spectrum of noise very similar to automobile ignition interference and which may extend well into the very-high-frequency regions. 4.1.2 Vacuum tube oscillators are used extensively between 200 KHz The frequency spectrum of such a generator consists of and 200 MHz. a fundamental and other frequencies which may be detected with decreasing intensity up to and beyond the 300th harmonic. 4.1.3 Essentially, the generation of frequencies other than the fundamental is a resuIt of waveform and modulation effects. These produce frequencies which are harmonics, plus sideband frequencies which bear no harmonic relation to the fundamental. At times, such phenomena as moding and parasites cause trouble. Moding is manifested as a sudden frequency shift or skip of the generator during the loading procedure. Parasites are spurious frequencies generated by a path other than the normal tank circuit in the generator. Moding, on the other hand, is a normal tank circuit characteristic which is prezent when a tuned load is tightly coupled to the tank. 4.2 Electric Circuit Representations - It has been pointed out that high-frequency energy leaks readily into stray paths where it may produce undesirable local and remote effects, unless it is confined to proper circuits. High-frequency electric currents cause radiation when they flow along conductors having dimensions which are an appreciable fraction of the wavelength of the current. The total power loss by radiation from a conductor may be represented at any selected point along its length as a product of an effective radiation resistance and the square of the current at that point. The total impedance measured at the point contains additional components, due to the self resistance and reactance of the conductor. It is often possible to calculate the effective impedance such as stray path will offer to a radio frequency voltage source and reduce it to a simple electric circuit. 4.2.1 An alternative to this circuit concept is the wave concept, which pictures the fiow of electric energy in terms of electric and magnetic This view is more fundamental but more difficult to visualize fields. and more complicated mathematically. - Frame currents along the edges and over 4.3 Sources of Radiation the surfaces of metallic enclosures surrounding the apparatus are serious sources of radiation. For exampIe, in Fig. 1, the necessity for shielding has been recognized by the designer, but due to faulty construction, the shielding is far from perfect. At the applicator, the shielding has been made of large-mesh iron screen having a high surface reactance and a 5

IS:10564-

1983

high loss due to the resistance of the iron. This produces excessive penetration of the circulating currents from the inside face of the screen to the outside faces and the results in currents 11 and 12. A large opening to admit a conveyor belt gives rise to currents 13 around the periphery of the opening. The thickness and conductivity of the generator shield are adequate but poor contact around the door causes current Is. Similarly, a slit in the side panel results in an external current 17. Some additional leaks might be due to poorly screened windows, open floors and poor joints around panels.

1 )CONTROL

WIRES

t

GNO. BUS
EARTH

WATER PIPE

\\\\\`\\\v4-u \
FIG. 1

u \- I:

FRAME CURRENTS ALONG THE EDGESAND OVER THE SURFACE
OFMETALLICENCLOSURES

4.3.1 Currents on power and control wires occur in two ways. Fig. 2a shows a transverse ( wire-to-wire ) current wave. Fig. 2b shows a longitudinal ( wire-to-ground ) wave. Both waves are transmitted on the inside of a shielding conduit from the installation to a point where the wires may be exposed to free space and cause radiation. The magnitude of radiation per ampere is apt to be much greater for longitudinal current than for transverse current. On the other hand, currents such as 14, 15, I& Ig and I11 ( see Fig. 1 ) may be induced on the outside 6

IS :I0564 -1983
of power conduits due to shielding leaks. A similar current Ig may occur on the outside of pipes connected to the unit for supplying water, gas or air to the installation. 4.3.2 A common fallacy is the belief that connecting the apparatus to ground is a convenient cure for high frequency troubles. Some installers have gone to great pains only to discover that no improvement has been obtained. Such a connection with current Ilo is shown. It usually has considerable radiation resistance and may actually increase interference instead of reducing it.

2~ TRANSVERSE wAvE ON A POWER LINE

28

LONGlTUOlNAL ON A POWER

WAVE LINE

I' _t_

LOW
INOUCIANCE LEADS

2c PI-SECTION LINE FILTER

__.
1

FIG. 2

CURRENTS ON POWER AND CONTROL WIRES

4.3.3 Finally, an installation that initially may have been satisfactory eventually may start to leak high-frequency power. Factors contributing to this condition are corrosion of metal parts and carelessness on the part of the operators. A poor choice of metals from an electrochemical standpoint may weaken a joint or contact in time. 7

IS:10564-

1983

4.4 Equipment Potentials - The various paths in Fig. 1 may be reduced to simple electric circuits as discussed in 4.2. Voltages are induced across the equivalent impedances by direct conduction, by capacity coupling ( for example, stray capacities Cl and C s), by inductive coupling, or by direct radiation. One such voltage is El between the generator and applicator, due to the impedance of various current paths between them. 4.4.1 In the interference may This may result higher than the case of spark generators, the complex form' of such shock-excite a number of paths at their resonant lengths. in radiation peaks as certain frequencies which are general level of interference.

4.5 The Electromagnetic Interference Field in Space - Once the high-frequency energy leaves its conventional circuits, it enters free space, where it contmues to travel outward by a sort of self-propagation. In this medium, the "\`ave concept is useful. It is found that the electromagnetic field has two components - an induction field which attenuates very rapidly ( within one or two wavelengths ), to leave only a radiation field which continues to great distances, depending on its intensity. The radiation field may further be separated into a ground wave, which follows the surface of the earth, and a sky wave which is reflected from the ionosphere. The ground wave is greatly affected by the conductivity and dielectric properties of the earth and attenuates rather rapidly. The sky wave attenuates only very slowly. 4.5.1 The multiplicity of radiation sources in Fig. 1 are found to have different relative phases at the various points in space, in such a way that at certain points they tend to add and at other nearby points they tend to subtract. Reflections from metallic objects or electrical discontinuities in the neighbourhood will proauce similar effects. This gives rise to pronounced interference patterns or standing wave patterns, that is up and down variations of the field strength over relatively short distances. 4.6 Effect of Frequency - The ability of a conductor to radiate energy from its surface increases with increasing frequency up to a certain point. This is entirely due to its increasing electrical length ( length in terms of a fraction of the wavelength of the current it carries ), and its increasing electrical spacing from a ground or other reflection plane. At frequencies used for induction heating, electrical lengths are short and radiation is Design practices which would be intolerable at not a serious problem. dielectric heating frequencies may cause little trouble at lower frequencies. However, the possibility of harmonic or spark interference makes such practices questionable in general. At lower frequencies the conduction of currents along power line is a considerable source of electromagnetic interference at a distance from the equipment.

8

IS:105645. LOCATION AND MEASUREMENT OF RADIATION

1983

made to determine 5.1 Rules and Regulations - The measurements, whether the limits for industrial heating equipment are met, consist essentially of first obtaining a polar plot of the field intensity at 305 m, Following this, readings are taken for example, around the equipment. along a radial in the direction of the strongest lobe of radiation,.as determined from the polar plot, to determine the maximum intensity at 1.6 km. The strongest field reading at that distance ( antenna vertical or horizontal ) at a height of 4 m shall show whether the limit of 10 This limitation applies to microvolts per meter at 1.6 km is exceeded. all fundamental, harmonic, and spurious emissions. Radiation from a power line must be less than 10 microvolts per meter, 1.6 km from the equipment and 15 m from the line. 5.2 Field Intensity Meters - Field intensity meters are merely Below 10 MHz, the meter shall refined and calibrated receivers. employ a loop antenna. Above 10 MHz, the antenna is a doublet ( rod ), mounted on an appropriate support. Data taken with such meters at close spacings ( within one wavelength ) should recognize the presence of a strong induction field. 5.3 Other Instruments - For such purposes as identifying the frequencies of interfering sources, locating leaks in shields and so forth, Such instruments include various instruments may be found useful. interference locators, radio noise meters with rod antenna or loop probe A very simple type of current probe, using shielded inducand others. tive coupling to the circuit, is shown in Fig. 3. When the pick-up loop L3 of Fig. 3 is brought close to a current leak in the shielding or filtering, a voltage is transmitted to the tuned circuit LrCl and thence to the rectifier circuit, consisting of the crystal x, a filter RlCs and a microammeter M. The rectifier converts the high-frequency current to direct The tuned circuit function both as current for deflecting the meter M. Leakage currents induce a variable sensitivity and selectivity control. voltages in the pickup loop by mutual induction. The entire unit is shielded in order to minimize body capacity effects. Such a probe also has directional characteristics which are useful in plotting the main current paths, illustrated in Fig. 1. This feature is best utilized by turning the loop for a minimum reading of the meter. The path of the stray current will then by perpendicular to the plane of the loop. 5.4 Operating Conditions for Tests - It is very desirable that all radiation tests be made with tuning conditions and applicator and generator voltages as for normal operation. In some cases, it may be If this is done, it is necessary necessary to operate at reduced power. that all the various sources of radiation retain their relative amplitudes A conversion factor may then be and phase with respect to each other. obtained for translating the data to normal conditions. 9

,

IS : 10564 - 1983

COPPER lUBE,CUT
ror;,RATEO lNSULA7ED FLEXIBLE WIRE TUBING Al lHlf

AN0 3466nmt Al llllb

tONNEClE0 POINT

10 WG!LD

i

f

"Ti
X

E

D.

,I

I

I

Parts Lnt turn insulated wire, inside A 7'94 mm Dia. copper tube bent into A 76 mm I.D. circle. C,-15200 PF variable capacity. Cs-005 pF fixed capacity, MICA RX-19.000 ohms, 4 watt. X-type IN 34 crystal rectifier. ilcc-0-200 a meter. Ls, _&s&s Coil Table Bare, Tinned Wire, spaced to proper length. COIL Freq. Range ~____-_-Turns

L,-one

TABLE -A---_Turns (No.) 1 3 5 5 8 Ls ____ Coil Dia. (mm) 38 44 44 44 44 ------_Y Coil Lg. (mm) 476 9.52 9.52 15.88

L1 Coil Dia. (mm) 32 38 38 38 38

(No.) 13-42 MHz 6'5-20 MHz 412 2'5-8 MHz MHz 5 I2 20 34 54

-_____._ Coil Lg. (mm) 32 51 54 54 54

Wire (mm) 1.6 I.6 1.2 1.2 0'7

Wire (mm) I.6 1.2 l-2 1'2 1.2

1'6-5 MHz

FIG. 3

SIMPLE

TYPE OF CURRENTPROBE

5.5 Natural Noise Levels - The weakest field that may be expIored with a fieId intensity meter is determined by the natural noise level in Such noise tends to mask the signal and give the vicinity of the meter. erroneous readings. 5.6 Conducted Electromagnetic Interference - Stray energy may travel along metallic paths ( wires, etc ) to a remote point where It may i0

IS:

10564-1983

cause electromagnetic interference with the operation of other apparatus. The This is known as conducted electromagnetic interference. conducted electromagnetic interference may be recognised indirectly by specifying radiation field measurements along power lines at 1:6 km distance. rate at which a ground wave 5.7 Antenna Polarization - The attenuates depends largely upon its polarization in space. The earth acts as a loosy dielectric which is alternately charged and discharged by the The net effect is attenuation of the ground wave advancing energy. which is very high for horizontal polarization (electric vector horizontal ), but less for vertical polarization. 6. REMEDIAL METHODS

6.1 Physical Separation - The electromagnetic wave in free space Hence, physical attenuates inversely as the distance from the source. In most isolation from any receiving point is one method of attenuation. cases, it is not practical. - Restricting bandwidth of emission to 6.2 Reduction of Bandwidth the minimum necessary value may be termed as reduction in bandwidth and would result in a reduction in interference to other services. An example of this would be the replacement of spark generators with tube equipment. Another example would be the substitution of a filtered direct-current supply in self-rectified vacuum tube generators. of suppression is to cancel one field 6.3 Cancellation - A principle with another of equal amplitude and opposite phase approximately. This is what occurs when a current-carrying conductor is brought close to a parallel nodal plane ( reflecting surface ). Similarly, when a conductor carrying an equal and opposite return current is brought close to the transmitting conductor approximate cancellation takes place. Open-wire transmission lines use this principle The radiation efficiency of a closed loop may be reduced,in general, by reducing the enclosed As another example, the balanced operation of a tuned area or volume. reduce its effect on other circuits by circuit may, in some instances, cancellation. 6.4 Reflection - A very efficient reflector is a shield made of a good The lower the surface resistance conductor about the radiation source. and reactance of such a shield, the more efficient it becomes as a reflector. Such shields form a nodal surface, which completely surrounds the highfrequency circuits. 6.4.1 A second shield surrounding the first, and insulated from it, gives approximately twice the attenuation ( in decibels ) of a single When the shields are placed in parallel by a systematic shortshield. circuiting device ( such as cell type construction ), the attenuation is somewhat reduced but still higher than for a single shield. 11

IS :10564 - 1983

6.4.2 Attenuation may be impaired by slits, poor joints, excessive current penetration due to the use of iron wire, too large a mesh of screen, high shield currents due to undue proximity of internal circuits, too small a shield size, or unscreened openings of one sort or another.
6.4.3 As pointed out previously, an attempt is often made to use the earth as ar+ equipotential plane by connecting each piece of apparatus to a good earth ground ( multiple grounding ). At best, this yields only mediocre results, since in practice, it is generally impossible to place apparatus cases at true ground potential because of ground bus and shield impedances. 6.4.4 Nodal ( reflection ) points in wire conductors may be obtained by line filters or shielded transformers. Fig. 2c shows a low-pass pi-section filter which is effective against the transmission of both longitudinal and transverse current waves. It is desirable to choose the image impedance of such a filter as low as possible. The cut-off frequency should be well below the lowest frequency present in the generator output. Low-loss impedances should be used. Additional precautions to ensure high attenuation at fundamental and harmonic frequencies include low capacitor inductance, low ground wire impedances, low capacity between input and output terminals, shielded assembly and mounting of the filter shield directly on the wall of the main apparatus shield, at the point where the filtered wires leave the main shield. Such line filters are generally used in wire circuits which eventually reach open space where they can radiate energy. In place of a line filter, it is often possible to insert a transformer with a grounded ( electrostatic ) shield between primary And secondary, in series with a wire circuit. The ground return from this shield should have negligible impedance. 6.5 Absorption - A considerable amount of attenuation may be introduced by surrounding an interference source with an absorbing material. Iron, with its high resistance, is fairly effective for this purpose. A laminated shield consisting of steel sheet with a copper plating impedances the progress of a radio wave in two ways: (a) The copper surface reflects electric energy. (b) The steel core attenuates by absorption any energy which may penetrate the copper barrier.

SECTION

2

GOOD

ENGINEERING

PRACTICE

7. DESIGN OF EQUIPMENT
Choice of frequency for dielectric heating should be the assigned bands. Among the channels to be avoided are those assigned to distress, navigation, and domestic sound and television broadcasting. The possibility of harmonics, sidebands or spark noise occurring in these bands should be considered. 12

7.1 Choice of Frequency -

_

IS : 10564 - 1983 7.2 Suppression of Spurious Frequencies - Well-know0 engineering practices should be followed to avoid harmonics, parasites and moding. Reduction of bandwidth through the use of filtered directcurrent plate supplies with tube equipment is advocated. The waveform of the generated frequency should be as undistorted as is consistent with economical design. Jn the case of spark equipment, very little may be done along these lines. 7.3 Shielding - The generator should be housed in an effective shield. Louvers, windows or other openings should be screened, the edges of such screening being securely bonded to the main shield. Plating to improve the conductivity of shielding and improving the corrosion resistance of joints is advisable. Sufficient thickness of metal should be used to avoid current penetration. Contacting surfaces should be free of paint, dirt or corrosion. Door should be continuously bonded to the main shield around their entire periphery by contacting fingers or other suitable means. Door interlocks should be incorporated to prevent operation of the set when opened, as well as for reasons of safety. 7.3.1 It is good practice to protect internal components not associated with the generating circuits from high-frequency currents. This applies to control wires, meters, relays, low-frequency and direct-current supply circuits, etc. Shielding and filtering of the gelierator is often simplified by the use of a separate internal shield, containing the high-frequency circuits only. 7.3.2 Where Fenerators require transmission lines, it is suggested that they may be deslgned for use with coaxial line. Other types of lines are (a) single shielded pair, (b) two-wire individually shielded pair, (c) twowire open line. In cases where the work circuit may be unshielded ( some induction heating installations ) such circuits should be as compact as possible and located close to the generator. Open wire feed lines should be short and closely spaced. If possible, they should be balanced to ground when practicable, the work area should be enclosed in a screened booth. 7.4 Filtering - A power line filter should be incorporated in the generator. Unshielded auxiliary circuits should be avoided, or else be effectively filtered. 7.5 Plumbing, Grounding, Conduits - All metal pipes associated with water cooling, power supply, grounding and similar connections should enter the installation at a single point. If this is not done, potentials across the shield surfaces, due to various small leaks, will cause currents, such as 18, 19 and 110 to flow ( see Fig. 1 ). Such piping should be bonded to the shielding at the point of entry in order that high-frequency currents will be effectively short-circuited and not be conducted from the .inside to the outside of the shield. Preferably such connections should approach from underground. 13

IS:10564

- 1983

7.6 Performance Tests - Before a design is released for production, one of the tests should be a thorough check for high-frequency leakage with a sensitive probe such as is illustrated in Fig. 3. Such tests should be made over as wide a frequency range as possible, in order to locate harmonic or other spurious frequency radiation.

7.6.1 If possible, the life expectancy should be checked.

and reliability

of shielding devices

7.6.2 If appreciable radiation or poor design is discovered by such tests, every effort should be made at improvement, since this shall lessen the problem of interference reduction for every installation that is made. 8. INSTALLATION
8.1 Location - A preferred location for high-frequency equipment is on the first floor or in the basement of a building. The equipment should be as remote as possible from metallic ducts and flues, steam pipes or power circuits which may pick up energy but capacitive or inductive coupling.

8.1.1 It is very desirable to have the entire equipment housed in a shielded room, although this is seldom practical. In any case, the installation should be as compact as possible, with emphasis on short, direct connections between units. Placing components of an installation on a large metal sheet is helpful. 8.2 The Transmission Line - The transmission line should be on the concentric or shielded duct type. The outer conductor may be fabricated of copper, copper-plated steel, or aluminium. It is essential that the outer conductor be continuous, for exmaple, where two sections of fabricated sheet metal outer conductor are bolted together. Such joints and access covers must be fastened with screws, spaced not more than 75 mm to 100 mm apart. Large radiating loop circuits may be avoided by running the line between units along the metal base of the installation. 8.3 The Applicator - If the generator has been properly designed, the major source of interference will be the applicator, for the radiofrequency current and voltage here are apt to be -quite large. Therefore, extreme care must be taken in its shielding. 8.3.1 The applicator shield may be fabricated from copper, copperplated steel, aluminium or copper or bronze screening ( 16-mesh ). If the latter is used, a double-wall shield will give better results than a single-wall shield. However, adequate shielding can frequently be attained with a single-wall shield at a lower cost if proper attention is paid to the details of construction. Shield currents may usually be greatly reduced by an internal partial shield. This appears to be
'

14

IS:10564-1983
particularly useful where the electrodes are large and stray capacities set up excessive shield currents. If possible, tuned circuits inside the shield should be attached to it at a single point only, to avoid circulating tank currents in the walls.

FIG. 4

A SUGGESTED METHOD FOR MAINTAININGCONTACTAT SHIELD JOINTS

8.3.2 The applicator, wherever physically possible, must be completely enclosed by the shield with no openings or discontinuities in the bonding. Paint must be removed at all surfaces of contact, and these surfaces should be inspected at monthly intervals and any corrosion removed. Typical Joints in the metal shield material may be made as in Fig. 4. door construction is shown in Fig. 5, with continuous bonding around the entire periphery. The springlike bonding strips are of berylliumBrass or bronze weathercopper or phosphor-bronze construction. stripping, or re;ilient metal mesh may be substituted for the construction shown. The shield should be as large as space and cost will permit. Under no conditions should the electrodes be spaced less than 30 cm from any part of the shield for powers in excess of 5 kilowatts ( output ) For the MHz range of and proportionately less for lower powers. industrial heating, generous overlap or metal sheeting is helpful in cases where hooked joints, or closely spaced fasteners, are impractical.

FIG. 5

A SUGGESTED METHOD FOR DOOR BONDING

15

IS : 10564- 1983 8.3.3 In some installations, mainly conveyor belt operations, it becomes essential that openings be provided. In these cases, it is necessary to construct vestibules or corridors as shown in Fig. 6. With a rectangular cross-section, as shown, the length L must be at least equal to the larger Furthermore, the larger of the dimen.of the two dimensions A and B. sions A and B, should not exceed approximately one-third the wavelength of the highest frequency to be suppressed. Such vestibule should not be located in wall surfaces carrying high currents, or in close proximity to a strong electric field,
INTERNAL" VESTIBULE"
FOR EXlERNAL~`VESTIBUL~" DlMENSlONS SAME `S

T

,-

APPLICATOR

NOTE

-

Selection

Shielding characteristics of the internal or external vestibules are the same. of either for a specific application is mainly based on physical consideration.

FIG. 6

OUTLINE DRAWING SHOWING APPLICATOR SHIELDING ` VESTIBULES ' It is under-

8.3.4 Shielding of the applicator floor should not be overlooked. important that it be a continuous part of the whole shield, running neath each of the various enclosed components.

8.4 Wiring - Control wiring must be kept out of the applicator wherever possible. If internal wiring becomes necessary, as large a proportion of the circuit as possible should be run externally and metal conduit Conduit should be terminated at both ends in a employed throughout. metal enclosure, junction box or other shield fitting. Unfiltered wires The main power supply to the should not be extended into the open. equipment pass through a line filter before leaving a conduit. This applies also to auxiliary power lines which may by-pass the main filter. 8.4.1 T'he use of solid metal conduit or flexible metallic braid is to be preferred to spirally wrapped metal sheating ( BX ), due to eventual corrosion and poor contact between turns which will result in highfrequency leakage. 16

IS : 10564

- 1983

8.5 System Ground - If shielding has been properly done, there is no necessity for grounding, other than for safety. For this purpose, a standard Underwriters' safety ground may be installed, or the conduit return to the main entrance switch may be used as a 50 cycle or directcurrent ground. 8.6 Performance Tests - If tests show the need for improved shielding, the location of trouble sources is greatly facilitated by a current Methods of suppression as specified probe such as previously described. should be followed. It is again pointed out that prevention by proper design is a much better policy than an extended series of cures after the installation is complete. 9. USE AND MAINTENANCE

9.1 Operation - The equipment should always be operated within its Access panels, ratings as to power, electrode voltage and frequency. doors and shields should always be in place when the unit is operating. Installers' or manufactui.ers' instructions should be observed. Warning notices to this effect may be posted near the equipment. 9.2 Changes - Any changes in operation or repairs accordance with good engineering practices. should be made in

9.3 Maintenance - A regular maintenance schedule should be followed to ensure the proper operations of shielding devices. All contacts and bonding strips used in conjuction with openings should be cleaned whenever they show evidence of corrosion. Atmospheres corrosive to copper, bronze aluminium, etc, are often prevalent in factories and may quickly reduce the efficiency of a shield by attacking bonding surfaces. Latches, screws or other devices joining these surfaces should be tightened periodically. 9.3.1 Such precautions may be incorporated maintenance schedule for the equipment, SECTION 3 PROCEDURES INTERFERENCE as part of the regular

WHERE ELECTROMAGNETIC IS ENCOUNTERED

10. GENERAL 10.1 Electromagnetic Interference with a Service - Electromagnetrc interference may occur with nearby communication services under Such electromagnetic interference must be abnormal circumstances. remedied promptly. - FauIty shielding, poor design, 10.2 Excessive Radiation factors, often cause leakage currents and excessive radiation installation after it is completed. or other from an

IS : 10564 - 1983 - If the'equipment is found to interfere 10.3 Design of Equipment with any authorized radio services, steps to eliminate the electromagnetic interference shall be taken through improved design. 11. PRELIMINARY CHECKS

11.1 Listening Tests - Where electromagnetic interference and/or excessive radiation is reported and a field intensity meter is not readily available, it is often possible to temporarily obtain a fixed or portable receiver of the communications type, which may give a relative indication'of the field strength level ( in comparison with other signals ) and the nature of the transmission causing the electromagnetic interference. The following observations are carried out:

4 b) 4 4

Does the interfering signal have the same frequency a harmonic relationship with, the suspected generator Does the interfering from the receiving signal? Does the interfering which is identifiable signal point, fade, indicating or is it steady,

as, or bear frequency? remote a local or noise which is

a location suggesting tone

signal have a characteristic with the suspected source?

Does the interfering signal have a sequence identifiable with the suspected source?

of operation

11.1.1 It is often possible to arranoe an identifiable schedule of operation for the suspected generator, such as 2 minutes ON-30 seconds OFF during a known test period. 11.2 Measurement of Electromagnetic Interference - For a very approximate check on the interference level and to observe the effect of any steps taken as corrective measures, it is possible to use the S meter on the communications receiver. Roughly, such a meter is calibrated in steps of 6 decibels between successive S points, with a signal of 50- IO0 This method microvolts at the receiver terminals, corresponding to S9. should be used only as a temporary expedient. Calibration varies between manufacturers and there is no way of correcting for the antenna length, current distribution, directional characteristics, matching, and height above ground, or the variation of receiver gain with frequency. These factors must be known in order to calculate the actual field strength in space. 11.2.1 An accurate method of making field strength observations or noise measurements is with a field intensity or noise meter. The various factors affecting calibration have been carefully evaluated for such 18

IS : 10564 - 1983 meters, so that readings indicate the true intensity of the field at the surface of the antenna. When the meters are properly their readings properly interpreted they give good results. arrivings used and

NOTE - Limits for electromagnetic interference in respect to the radio frequency heating equipment would be followed as given in 6 of IS : 6842*.

12. LOCATION

OF

SOURCES

12.1 Identifying a Faulty Installation - Having ascertained that electromagnetic and/or excessive radiation exists, the first step is to determine which unit is at fault, if several are suspected. Careful operating sequences, or other characteristics observations of frequency, They may be supplemented through may quickly solve the problem. the use of direction-finding loop antennas, such as are frequently incorporated on field-strength meters. Loops are most accurately utilized by rotating them until a minimum reading is obtained. The direction from which the radiation is coming is then perpendicular to the plane of the loop. By taking a directiona reading at each of two known points, the interference source may be determined by triangulation. Loop direction finders are subject to a 180-degree error because two minima appear as They also may be inaccurate they are rotated through 360 degrees. because of reflections from nearby conductors or other reflecting media. 12.1.1 Dipole antennas may be similarly arrival, but they are extremely subject reflection errors. used to indicate direction of to ground, polarization, and

12.1.2 Another search procedure is by a process of homing with a portable receiver. The radiating generator is tracked down by following This method is again along the direction in which the signal increases. handicapped to some extent by reflection. 12.2 Locating High-Frequency Current Leaks - Once the installation causing the electromagnetic interference. has been spotted, the problem of reducing leakage is greatly simplified by locating faults in shielding with a current probe as previously suggested. When available, noise meters and electromagnetic interference locators may be used for locating shield faults. More accurate, quantitative data is obtainable in this way, but it will often be found that the simple probe described is entirely adequate. 13. CORRECTIVE MEASURES

interference to a service 13.1 Frequency Shift - The electromagnetic may sometimes be quickly eliminated by merely changing the frequency sufficiently to avoid any possibility of operation in the service channel. *Specification for limits for electromagnetic interference (first revision). 19

IS : 10564 - 1983 13.2 Automatic Frequency Control - In some instances, it may be possible to place the frequency accurately in the channels assigned for industrial equipment by incorporating an automatic frequency-control device into the generator. When this is done, no special shielding is necessary other than for safety reasons.

13.3 Improved Shielding - In a great many cases improved shielding, filtering, and bonding of the equipment are the only practical solution to a problem. The steps to be followed are similar to those discussed in previous sections.

20

