IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


WRG ATP 
tla al Teen ulfsn ta Hr 
an 2 Shoes & Gran h waar 
( Yee FRAT ) 


Indian Standard 


STEEL TUBULAR SCAFFOLDING — CODE 
OF PRACTICE 


PART 2 SAFETY PROVISIONS FOR SCAFFOLDING 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.100; 77.140.75; 91.220 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 4 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been 
adopted by the Civil Engineering Divisional Council. 


With the heavy construction programme envisaged, the importance of the use of scaffolding cannot be over- 
emphasized. Steel tubular scaffolding is one of the widely used scaffoldings which can be assembled quickly, 
and transported and handled easily. It can be dismantled rapidly and re-used and relied upon for long service and 
life. The Committee, therefore, felt that a Code of practice for steel tubular scaffolding should be formulated and 
thus brought out this standard. 


This standard (Part 2) is published in two parts, Part 1 being on definitions and materials. Part 2 is intended to 
cover safety provisions for the construction and use of scaffolds of tubular scaffolding normally used in 
construction, maintenance, repair and demolition work, which enables persons to obtain access, to perform 
work, or which enables materials to be taken to any place at which such work is performed. 


This standard was first published in 1967. This revision has been brought out to incorporate the improvements 
based on the experience gained in use of the standard since its last version. In this revision, the following major 
modifications have been incorporated: 


a) A new clause on design of scaffolding has been included. 


b) For supervision of scaffolding work, authorized engineer has been specified in place of authorized 
safety engineer. 


c) Provision for maintaining safe distance from electrical lines has been included. 

d) Provision of preventive displacement of foot of any standard or upright, by sinking the same into ground 
has been deleted. 

e) Appropriate modifications have been made to render the provisions applicable to all concerned structures 
rather than only to buildings. 

f) Use of current terminologies such as ‘safety net’ in place of “catching net’, ‘mobile scaffold’ in place of 
‘travelling scaffold’, etc, have been made. 

g) Provision of need for training of workers in safe use of scaffolds, has been included. 

h) A reference clause has been added and references to concerned standards formulated since the last 
version of this standard have been included. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


STEEL TUBULAR SCAFFOLDING — CODE 
OF PRACTICE 


PART 2 SAFETY PROVISIONS FOR SCAFFOLDING 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) covers safety provisions to be 
observed in the design and construction of scaffolding. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on these 
standards are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


2750 : 1964 
14687 : 1999 


Specification for steel scaffoldings 
Falsework for concrete structures — 
Guidelines 


3 PROVISION OF SCAFFOLD AND MEANS OF 
ACCESS 


Suitable and sufficient scaffold shall be provided for 
all work that cannot safely be done from the ground or 
from part of the structure, or from part of a permanent 
structure or from a ladder or other available means of 
support, and sufficient safe means of access shall as 
far as reasonably practicable, be provided to every place 
at which any person has at any time to work. 


4 DESIGN OF SCAFFOLDING 


Scaffolding shall be designed in accordance with 
IS 2750 and IS 14687, and the design shall include 
use of jointing pins, clamps or other accessories 
required. 


5 SUPERVISION OF WORK AND INSPECTION 
OF MATERIAL 


No scaffold shall be erected or be substantially added 
to or altered or dismantled except under the immediate 
supervision of a competent person (that is a qualified 
and authorized engineer) and as far as possible by 
competent workmen possessing adequate experience 
of such work. All material for any scaffold shall be 


inspected by a competent person on each occasion 
before using. 


6 MAINTENANCE 


6.1 All scaffolds shall be properly maintained and 
every part shall be kept so fixed, secured or placed in a 
position as to prevent, as far as is practicable, accidental 
displacement. 


6.2 No scaffold or part of a scaffold shall be partly 
dismantled and remain in such a condition that it is 
capable of being used unless either, 


a) the scaffold continues to comply and would, 
if used, comply, with these provisions; or 

b) ifthe scaffold or part thereof would, if used, 
not comply with these provisions, a prominent 
warning notice indicating that the scaffold or 
part thereof is not to be used, is affixed near 
any point at which the scaffold or part, as the 
case may be, is liable to be approached for 
the purpose of use. 


6.3 Scaffolds installed shall be at a safe distance from 
the electrical lines in accordance with the Electricity 
Act, 2003 and the Rules and Regulations framed 
thereunder. 


7 INSPECTION OF SCAFFOLDS 


7.1 Subject to provisions of this standard, the scaffold 
shall be inspected by qualified and authorized 
engineer, 


a) immediately after erection; 

b) before every use; and 

c) at regular period and wherever there is any 
adverse climatic occurrence such as weather 
conditions likely to have affected or displaced 
any part. 


A report of the results of such inspection certifying 
that the scaffold is suitable for use signed by the person 
making the inspection shall be entered into a register 
to be kept at the worksite. 


It shall not require a scaffold to be inspected by reason 


IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 


only that it has been added to, altered or partly 
dismantled. 


7.2 The requirement of 7.1 (a) and 7.1 (b) shall not 
apply in the case of a scaffold no part of which has 
been erected for more than seven days, and the 
requirement of reporting of the results (see 7.1) shall 
not apply to a ladder scaffold, a trestle scaffold or a 
scaffold from no part of which a person is liable to fall 
more than 2.0 m. 


8 SCAFFOLDS USED BY WORKMEN OF MORE 
THAN ONE EMPLOYER 


Where a scaffold or part of a scaffold is to be used by 
or on behalf of any employer other than the employer 
for whose workmen it was first erected, the first 
mentioned employer shall, before such use, and without 
prejudice to any other obligations imposed upon him 
by these provisions, take express steps, either 
personally or by a competent agent, to satisfy himself 
that the scaffold or part thereof is stable, that the 
materials used in its construction are sound and that 
the safeguards required by these provisions are in 
position. 


9 SUPPORT AND STABILITY OF SCAFFOLDS 


9.1 The displacement of foot of any standard or upright 
shall, unless prevented in some other sufficient way, 
be prevented by placing the standard or upright on an 
adequate base plate on top of timber sole plate or any 
other material in a manner to prevent slipping or 
sinking. 


9.2 Every scaffold shall be securely supported or 
suspended and shall where necessary be sufficiently 
and properly strutted or braced to ensure stability and, 
unless it is properly designed and constructed as an 
independent scaffold, shall be rigidly connected with 
the structure. 


9.3 All structures and appliances used as supports for 
scaffolds, working platforms, gangways or ramps shall 
be of sound construction, have a firm footing or be 
firmly supported, and shall where necessary be 
sufficiently and properly strutted or braced to ensure 
stability. 


9.4 Any mobile scaffold which may be moved on 
wheels or skids shall, unless it is a suspended or slung 
scaffold, shall be, 


a) constructed with due regard to stability, and, 
if necessary for stability, adequately weighted 
at the base; 

b) used only on a firm and even surface, not so 
sloping as to involve risk of instability of the 
scaffold or any load thereon; 


c) adequately secured to prevent movement 
when any person is working upon it; and 

d) moved only by the application of a force at or 
near the base without overturning. 


9.5 Loose bricks, drain pipes, chimney pots or other 
unsuitable material shall not be used for the 
construction or support of scaffolds. However, bricks 
or small blocks may, if they provide a firm support, be 
used to support a platform not more than 0.5 m above 
the ground or floor. 


9.6 No part of a structure shall be used as support for 
part of a scaffold unless it is of sound material and 
sufficiently stable and of sufficient strength to afford 
safe support. Overhanging eaves, gutters shall not be 
used as such supports unless they have been specially 
designed as walkways and are of adequate strength. 


10 CANTILEVER, JIB, FIGURE AND BRACKET 
SCAFFOLDS, ETC 


10.1 No cantilever or jib scaffold shall be used unless 
it is adequately supported, fixed and anchored on the 
opposite side of the support, has outriggers of adequate 
length and cross-section and is where necessary 
sufficiently and properly strutted or braced to ensure 
rigidity and stability. 


10.2 No working platform resting on bearers let into a 
wall at one end and without other support shall be used 
unless the bearers are of adequate strength, pass 
through the wall and are securely fastened on the other 
side. 


11 TRESTLE SCAFFOLDS 
11.1 No trestle scaffold shall be used, 


a) if constructed with more than three tiers; or 

b) if it has working platform more than 4.50 m 
above the ground or floor or other surface 
upon which the scaffold is erected. 


11.2 No trestle scaffold shall be erected on a scaffold 
platform unless, 


a) the width of the platform is such as to leave 
sufficient clear space for the transport of 
materials; and 

b) the trestles or uprights are firmly attached to 
the platform and adequately braced to prevent 
displacement. 


11.3 No trestle scaffold shall be erected on a suspended 
scaffold. 


11.4 No figure or bracket scaffold supported or held 
by dogs, spikes or similar fixings liable to pull out of 
the stonework or brickwork in which they are gripped 
or fixed, shall be used. 


12 WORKING PLATFORMS (INCLUDING 
WORKING STAGES) 


12.1 Every working platform from which a person is 
liable to fall more than 2.0 m shall be, 


a) closely boarded, planked, or plated and non- 
slippery; 

b) at least 700 mm wide, if the platform is used 
as a footing only and not for the deposit of 
any material; 

c) atleast 900 mm wide, if the platform is used 
for the deposit of material; 


d) atleast 1 100 mm wide if the platform is used 
for the support of any higher platform; 

e) atleast 1 300 mm wide, if the platform is one 
upon which stone is dressed or roughly 
shaped; and 

f) atleast 1 500 mm wide, if the platform is used 
for the support of any higher platform and is 
one, upon which stone is dressed or roughly 
shaped. 


12.2 Requirement of 12.1 (a) shall not apply to a 
platform consisting of open metal work having 
interstices none of which exceeds 40 cm? in area, if 
there is no risk of persons below such platform being 
struck by tools or other object falling through the 
platform. 


12.3 Requirement of 12.1 (a) shall not apply to a 
platform which is part of the permanent fixed 
equipment of a structure and the boards, planks or 
plates of which are so secured as to prevent their 
moving and so placed that the space between adjacent 
boards, planks or plates does not exceed 25 mm, if 
there is no risk of persons below such platform being 
struck by tools or other objects falling through the 
platform. 


12.4 Requirements of 12.1 (b) to 12.1 (f) shall not 
apply to a working platform which is at least 500 mm 
wide, and is on the outside of any sloping roof. 


12.5 Requirements of 12.1 (b) and 12.1 (c) shall not 
apply in the case of the platform of a suspended 
scaffold, or in the case of a platform not less than 500 
mm wide being the platform of a ladder scaffold or of 
a trestle scaffold or being a platform under a roof which 
is supported by or suspended from roof members or 
the roof and which is used only by painters for the 
purpose of painting work in the vicinity of the roof, 
where in any such case the work is of such a light nature 
and the material required for the work is such that a 
platform less than 700 mm or 900 mm wide, as the 
case may be, can be used with safety, and the platform 
is not used for the support of any higher platform. 


12.6 Requirements of 12.1 (b) and 12.1 (c) shall not 


IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 


apply in the case of a temporary platform not less than 
500 mm wide passing between two adjacent glazing 
bars of a sloping roof if the space between those bars 
does not admit the platform being at least 700 mm wide 
and if the platform is used only for work in the vicinity 
of those bars. 


13 BOARDS AND PLANKS IN WORKING 
PLATFORMS, GANGWAYS AND RAMPS 


13.1 Every board or plank forming part of a platform 
or used as a toe board shall be, 


a) of a thickness (minimum 32 mm) which is 
such as to afford adequate security having 
regard to the distance between the transoms, 
putlogs, board bearers or standards; and 

b) not less than 200 mm wide or in the case of 
boards or planks exceeding 50 mm in 
thickness, not less than 150 mm wide. 


13.2 The distance between two consecutive transoms, 
putlogs, board bearers or other supports on which a 
platform rests shall be fixed with due regard to the 
anticipated load and the nature of platform flooring. 
As a general rule, the distance with single planking 
shall not exceed 1 000 mm with planks 32 mm in 
thickness, 1 500 mm with planks 38 mm in thickness, 
or 2 600 mm with planks 50 mm in thickness. 


13.3 No board or plank which forms part of a working 
platform, gangway or ramp shall project beyond its 
end support to a distance exceeding four times the 
thickness of the board or plank unless it is effectively 
secured to prevent tipping, or to a distance which, 
having regard to the thickness and strength of the plank 
renders the projecting part of the plank an unsafe 
support for any weight liable to be upon it. 


13.4 At the joints, boards generally should be butted, 
but lapping is permissible if bevelled pieces of wood 
are fitted, or other suitable measures taken to minimize 
the risk of tripping. 


13.4.1 Suitable measures such as the provision of 
adequate bevelled pieces shall be taken to reduce to a 
minimum the risk of tripping and to facilitate the 
movement of barrows where boards or planks which 
form part of a working platform, gangway run overlap 
each other or are not of reasonably uniform thickness 
where they meet each other or owing to warping or for 
some other reason do not provide an even surface. 


13.5 Every board or plank which forms part of a 
working platform shall, 


a) rest securely and evenly on its supports; and 


b) rest on at least three supports unless, taking 
into account the distance between the supports 
and the thickness of the board or plank, the 


IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 


conditions are such as to prevent undue 
sagging. 
13.6 Where work has to be done at the end of a wall 
the working platform at such wall shall, wherever 
practicable, extend at least 600 mm beyond the end of 
the wall. 


14 GUARD-RAILS AND TOE-BOARDS AT 
WORKING PLACES 


14.1 Every side of a working platform or working 
place, being a side thereof from which a person is liable 
to fall, a distance of more than 2 m shall be provided 
one or more suitable guard-rail on guard-rails of 
adequate strength, to a height of at least 900 mm (but 
maximum 1 200 mm) above the platform or place and 
above any raised standing place on the platform, and 
with toe-boards up to a sufficient height being in no 
case less than 150 mm and so placed as to prevent so 
far as possible the fall of persons, materials and tools 
from such platform or place. 


14.2 The guard-rails and toe-boards used on a working 
platform or working place shall be placed on the inside 
ofthe uprights, and the space between any toe-board and 
the lowest guard-rail above it shall not exceed 750 mm. 


14.3 Guard-rails and toe-boards required by 14.1 and 
14.2 may be removed or remain unerected for the time 
being and to the extent necessary for the access of 
persons or the movement of materials. 


14.4 The requirements of 14.1 and 14.2, shall not apply 
to a platform provided with suitable guard-rails which 
is on the outside of a sloping roof. 


14.5 The requirements of 14.1 and 14.2 shall not apply 
to atemporary platform which is used only by erectors 
of structural steelwork for the purposes of bolting up, 
riveting or welding work of such short duration as to 
make the provision of a platform with guard-rails and 
toe-boards unreasonable if, 


a) the platform is at least 900 mm wide; 

b) there is adequate handhold; and 

c) the platform is not used for the deposit of tools 
or materials otherwise than in boxes or 
receptacles suitable to prevent the fall of the 
tools or materials from the platform. 


14.6 The requirements of 14.1 and 14.2 shall not apply 
to a temporary platform passing between two adjacent 
glazing bars of a sloping roof if those bars or the roof 
framework afford secure handhold for the full length 
of the platform, and the requirements of toe-boards as 
specified in clauses under 14 shall not apply as respects 
such platform where and in so far as the provision of a 
toe-board is impracticable on account of the nature or 
circumstances of the work. 


14.7 The requirements of 14.1 and 14.2 shall not apply 
to a platform under a roof which is supported by or 
suspended from roof members or the roof and which 
is used only by painters for the purpose of painting 
work in the immediate vicinity of the roof, being work 
of such short duration as to make the provision of a 
platform with guard-rails and toe-boards unreasonable, 
if, 
a) there is adequate handhold at every working 
position; and 
b) the material required for the work is such that 
the platform can be used with safety. 


15 WORKING PLATFORM AT FACE OF 
STRUCTURE AND CLEARANCE OF PASSAGE 
WAYS 


15.1 Where work at the face of structure is done from 
a working platform the space between the face of the 
building and the working platform shall be as small as 
practicable so that where workmen sit at the edge of 
the platform to work, the space shall not exceed 
300 mm. 


15.2 A clear passage way at least 500 mm wide shall 
be left between one side of any working platform and 
any fixed obstruction or deposited material. 


16 CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF GANGWAYS 
AND RAMPS 


16.1 Every gangway or ramp, from any part of which a 
person is liable to fall a distance of more than 2 m, shall, 


a) be closely boarded, planked or plated; and 
b) be at least 500 mm wide. 


16.2 The requirement of 16.1 (a) shall not apply, 


a) to a gangway or ramp consisting of open 
metalwork having interstices none of which 
exceeds 40 cm? in area, if there is no risk of 
persons below such gangway or ramp being 
struck by tools or other objects falling through 
the gangway or ramp; or 

b) to a gangway or ramp which is part of the 
permanent fixed equipment of a structure and 
the boards, plates or planks of which are so 
secured as to prevent their moving and so 
placed that the space between adjacent boards, 
planks or plates does not exceed 25 mm, if 
there is no risk of persons below such 
gangway or ramp being struck by tools or 
other objects falling through the gangway or 
ramp. 


16.3 No gangway, ramp or working platform shall be 
used for the passage of materials unless it affords a 
clear passage way which is adequate in width for the 


passage of the materials without removal of the 
guardrails and toe-boards and in any case is not less 
than 700 mm wide. 


16.4 All planks forming a gangway or ramp shall be 
so fixed and supported as to prevent undue or unequal 


sagging. 


16.5 No gangway or ramp shall be used, the slope of 
which exceeds | vertical to 1.5 horizontal. 


16.6 Where the slope of gangway or ramp renders 
additional foot holes necessary and in every case where 
the slope is more than 1 vertical to 4 horizontal, there 
shall be provided proper stepping laths which shall, 


a) be placed at suitable intervals, maximum 500 
mm apart; and 

b) be the full width of the gangway or ramps, 
except that they may be interrupted over a 
width of not more than 100 mm to facilitate 
the movement of barrows. 


16.7 Ramps may have a continuous length maximum 
7 m without landing. 


17 GUARD-RAILS, TOE-BOARDS, HAND- 
RAILS, ETC, FOR GANGWAYS, RAMPS AND 
STAIRS 


17.1 Stairs shall be provided throughout their length 
with hand-rails or other efficient means to prevent the 
fall of persons except for the time and to the extent 
necessary for the access of persons or the movement 
of materials. If necessary, to prevent danger to any 
person, the hand-rails shall be extended minimum 1.0 
m beyond the ends of the stairs. 


17.2 All gangways, ramps and stairs from which a 
person is liable to fall a distance of more than 2 m 
shall be provided with, 


a) suitable guard-rails of adequate strength to a 
height of at least 900 mm (but maximum 
1 200 mm) above the gangway, ramp or stair; 
and 


b) except in the case of stairs, toe-boards up to a 
sufficient height being in no case less than 
200 mm and so placed as to prevent as far as 
possible the fall of persons, materials and 
tools. The space between any such toe-board 
and the lowest guard-rail above it shall not 
exceed 700 mm. 


17.3 The requirements of 17.2 shall not apply to a 
temporary gangway which is used only by erectors of 
structural steelwork for the purposes of bolting up, 
riveting or welding work of such short duration as to 
make the provision of a gangway with guard-rails and 
toe-boards unreasonable. 


IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 


18 PLATFORMS, GANGWAYS, ETC, TO BE 
UNOBSTRUCTED AND TO AFFORD SAFE 
FOOTHOLD 


18.1 Every platform, gangway, ramp or stair shall be 
kept free from any unnecessary obstruction, material 
or rubbish and from any projecting nails. 


18.2 If a platform, gangway, ramp or stair becomes 
slippery, appropriate steps shall as soon as reasonably 
practicable be taken by way of sending, cleaning or 
otherwise to remedy the defect. 


19 SCAFFOLDS NOT TO BE OVERLOADED 


Scaffolds shall not be overloaded and materials shall 
not be kept upon them unless needed for work within 
a reasonable time. 


20 AVOIDANCE OF SHOCK ON SCAFFOLDS 


When any material is transferred on or to a scaffold, it 
shall be moved or deposited without imposing any 
violent shock. 


21 PROJECTING NAILS AND LOOSE 
MATERIALS 


21.1 No timber or material with projecting nails shall 
be used in any work in which they are a source of 
danger to persons employed or be allowed to remain 
in any place where they are a source of danger to such 
persons. 


21.2 Loose materials where not required for use shall 
not be placed or left so as to impede the passage of 
persons upon platforms, gangways, floors, or other 
places on the site used for such passage, but shall be 
removed, stacked or stored so as to leave such places 
free from obstruction. Materials shall not be insecurely 
stacked in a place where they may be dangerous to 
persons employed, or so stacked as to overload and 
render unsafe any floor, roof or other part of a building/ 
structure. 


22 LIGHTING OF WORKING PLACES 


Every working place and approach thereto, every place 
where raising or lowering operations with the use of a 
lifting appliance are in progress, and all openings 
dangerous to persons employed, shall be adequately 
and suitably lighted. 


23 ELECTRICAL WIRING 


The setting up of a scaffold near unprotected current 
carrying wires or equipment, or insulated wires and 
equipment shall be started only when the lines have 
been disconnected. The wiring shall be disconnected 
by skilled persons or protected against accidental 
contact. After the erection of scaffold the wires may 


IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 


be made to carry the current only when sufficient safety 
measures have been adopted to avoid accidental 
contact. 


24 SCAFFOLDS AND TRAFFIC 


24.1 During the setting up and dismantling of 
scaffolds, warning signs, safety cordons and other 
safety measures shall be provided to ensure safety for 
the traffic. 


24.2 Scaffolds shall be protected against accidental 
collisions with the traffic. A clear height of 2.5 m shall 
be maintained over pedestrian traffic areas. Up to a 
height of 4.5 m, all parts of the scaffolds shall remain 
at least 0.8 m behind the front edge of the curb. 


24.3 Scaffolds built over street pavement shall 
preferably have a through passage for the pedestrians, 
the clear height of the passage being minimum 2.5 m. 
The roof of the passage should be closely boarded or 
suitably covered with roofing-sheets, tarpaulin or other 
materials as protection from falling materials. 


24.4 Scaffolds on thoroughfares shall be provided with 
light if the street light is not sufficient to make it clearly 
visible. 


24.5 Access to fire alarms, cable tunnels, hydrants, 
etc, shall remain free at all times. Care should be taken 
for underground cables and equipment also. This is 
specially important when parts of scaffolds or other 
fasteners have to be driven in the ground. 


24.6 Trees and street poles shall be cordoned, so that 
they are not damaged. 


25 PROTECTION FROM FALLING MATERIALS 
AND PROTECTION OF WORKERS FROM 
FALLING DOWN 


25.1 Any place on the site of the operations at which 
any person is habitually employed shall be covered in 
such manner as to protect any person who is working 
in that place from being struck by falling materials or 
articles. 


25.2 Scaffold materials, tools and other objects and 
materials (including waste materials) shall not be 
thrown, tipped or shot down from a height where they 


are liable to cause injury, but shall be properly lowered; 
in any place where proper lowering is not practicable 
and also where any part of a structure is being 
demolished or broken off, adequate care shall be taken, 
where necessary, to protect persons employed from 
falling or flying debris. 


25.3 When the work is done above an open space at a 
height of more than 5.0 m, catching scaffold or safety 
net shall be set up to protect those working on floors 
or roofs against falling down, and also to stop building 
materials and tools from falling. Depending on the 
conditions these may be set up as independent 
scaffolds, cantilever scaffold, suspended scaffold or 
mobile scaffold. Further, these may be built up by 
laying scaffold boards on beams or rafters of the 
structure under construction or by attaching the boards 
to roof trusses, crane rails or similar structural 
members. 


25.3.1 When working on building/structure with 
precast concrete parts or setting up wooden or steel 
structures which are already tied up for assembly and 
it is not possible to fix a catching scaffold or a safety 
net, itis necessary that only such workers are employed 
who have experience in this kind of work. 


25.3.2 The width of the catching scaffold shall depend 
on the height from the scaffold covering to the place 
of work and generally be as follows: 
2.0 m 
1.0 m 


3.0m 
1.3m 


4.0 m 
1.8m 


Height Up to 
Minimum Width 


25.4 For the purpose of only preventing workers falling 
down instead of catching scaffold, a safety net or strong 
fabric or individual person safety belt may be used if 
it can be fixed and secured perfectly. The traffic below 
the catching nets, etc, shall be stopped as safety 
measure against building materials falling through. 


25.5 When working on pavement, street or driveway, 
to avoid disturbance of traffic unnecessarily by dust or 
mortar, scaffolds should be covered at the sides by 
protection coverings, for example, timber plank, 
tarpaulin, cloth or roofing sheets. For working on 
gables which are not directly above traffic and on the 
courtyard side, it is sufficient to block the ways. 


25.6 Workers shall be trained for safe use of scaffolds. 


IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Creative Design Consultants & Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH & S Cares, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

M.N. Dastur & Company (P) Limited, 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army 
Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Railways, Govt of India, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and Research, Mumbai 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Chattisgarh 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KRISHNAN (Chairman) 


Suri A. K. PATHAK 
SHRI ANUPAM VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
SHRI SANJAY SONI (Alternate) 


DR SHAILESH KR AGRAWAL 
SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. G. Dave 
SHRI AJAY SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI Å. K. GARG 
SHRI MANU AMITABH (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi Jain (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Datta 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI ANKUR Dure (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHIEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
Suri B. K. Smaa (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. BATRA 
Suri M. K. Gara (Alternate) 


SHRI JAIVEER SRIVASTAVAA 
SHRI RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


Pror B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr K.N. JHA (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S.K. GUHA 
Kolkata SHrI GoBINDA PAL CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


BRIG AMAR KRISHNA 
CoL SuniL Kumar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. RasesH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. Duawan (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. NAHAR 
Suri P. C. Arya (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 4014 (Part 2) : 2013 


Organization 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture (Deptt of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


Spectral Services Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (411, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (W-12/34, Western Avenue, Sainik Farm, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother Dairy 
Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Ms Bina BUDHWAR 
SHRI ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS Sura (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPUL KUMAR 
SHRI JITENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PauL 


SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 
SHRI SANJAY KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


Lr Gen (RETD) Hart UNIYAL 
Suri O. P. GoEL (Alternate) 


DR VANITA AHUJA 
Suri R. P. LAHIRI 


Dr ANIL SAWHNEY 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri A. K. Saini, Scientist ‘G? & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SANJAY PANT 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


and 


SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Alert Group on Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction), CED 29/AG 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 
Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, Chennai 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, ECC Group, Chennai 


School of Planning & Architecture (Dept of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother Dairy 
Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KRISHNAN (Convener) 
Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri P. R. Swarup 
Suri M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI M. NACHIAPPAN 


Dr V. K. PauL 


SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 
SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7773). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


