**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS/ISO/IEC GUIDE 46 (1985) : Comparative testing of consumer 
products and related services - General principles [MSD 10: 
Social Responsibility] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS/ISO/IEC Guide 46 : 1985 

HRrfk WFF 

/nof/an Standard 

COMPARATIVE TESTING OF CONSUMER PRODUCTS 
AND RELATED SERVICES — GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



ICS 03.080.30:19.020 



©BIS 2009 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELH1 1 10002 

June 2009 Price Group 1 



National Mirror Committee of COPOLCO, SPCAD 01 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO/IEC Guide 46 : 1985 'Comparative testing of consumer 
products and related services — General principles' issued by the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) and International Electrotechnica! Commission (IEC) jointly was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on the recommendation of the National Mirror Committee of COPOLCO and approval of the 
Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards under Rule 8(3)C of BIS Rules, 1 987. 

The text of ISO/IEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is 
particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read 

as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standard while in Indian Standards, 
the current practice is to use a point (,) as the decimal marker. 



IS/ISO/IEC Guide 46 : 1985 



Indian Standard 

COMPARATIVE TESTING OF CONSUMER PRODUCTS 
AND RELATED SERVICES — GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



Introduction 

This Guide sets out general principles for the conduct of comparative testing. These principles are applicable to consumer products, 
services and a combination of both. They may usefully be followed by bodies and associations which conduct comparative testing 
programmes. The purpose of this Guide is to enable meaningful test results and information to be presented in a way which will help 
consumers and others to make an informed choice suitable to their own needs. The products and services under test may be based on 
a local, national or international market and the characteristics tested may be either very specific or broadly based, provided that the 
range and limits are clearly stated. (The notes included in the text hereafter offer some but not all the means of applying the 
principles.) 



1 Scope and field of application 

This Guide establishes general principles in relation to the conduct of comparative testing of products and services for the information 
of consumers. 



2 General principles 

2.1 Choice of products or services 

Every reasonable effort should be made to reflect what is available on the market unless the limits of selection are explained. 

NOTE - "Reasonable efforts to reflect what is available on the market" could include consulting manufacturers (agents/ representatives/ importers) 
or checking current literature and catalogues. It is in the interest of consumers and manufacturers (agents/ representatives /importers) that such infor- 
mation should be made available. 

2.2 Sampling 

The methods used to obtain the sample for testing should preferably be the same as those used by the consumer at normal retail 
outlets. In all cases, care should be exercised that a selection is made at random and that special samples are not introduced. Atten- 
tion should be paid to the conditions of sampling, transport and storage before testing. 

Precautions should be taken to ensure as far as possible that the results obtained are representative of the product or service offered 
on the market at the time of sampling. 

NOTE - Sampling shoutd ensure as far as possible that the product or service under test is likely to be available when the results are published. 

2.3 Choice of characteristics 

Except in cases where a survey is made for a particular purpose, all characteristics of a product or service which are important to its 
use by the consumer should as far as possible be taken into account. Any limitation of choice should be explained. 

NOTE - Choice of characteristics may include for example : safety, reliability, durability, performance, energy consumption, environmental effects, 
running costs, setting prices and maintenance. 



IS/ISO/IEC Guide 46 : 1985 

3 Test programme 

3.1 Test methods 

Tart methods should as far as possible be standard methods provided by internationally or nationally recognized standards. If these 
are deemed not to be appropriate or where there is no such standard, care should be taken that the chosen test method is reproduc- 
ible to the degree necessary to obtain a c on sist ent ranking. Where other then internationally or nationally recognized test methods are 
used, it would be useful to inform the national standards body for their possible incorporation into a standard. 



NOTE - For ttst method*, attention m drawn to I SO /I EC Gukfo 30, Preparation of standard methods of measuring performance (SMMP) of 
consumer ooods, 

3.2 Evaluation of test results 

Steps should be taken to rninirnize errors in testing or results from faulty samples. One way of doing this is to inform the manufacturer 
iagerrt/repre se i l Uu va/importer) of test results on his own product and to invite his comments in sufficient time before publication. 
The test results submitted to the manufacturer (agent/representative/importer) should be accompanied by the list of characteristics 
tested and the test methods used. If the manufacturer (agent/representative/importerl disagrees with the test results, it is recommen- 
ded that he sp eedey supplies data to demonstrate that the test results are wrong or exceptional, or that the test methods used were 
unsuitable. In the case of exceptional results, rt may be appropriate to take further samples. 

If the teats show that the product or service is dangerous and could put the consumer at unacceptable risk, the manufacturer 
(agam/r ep r ea en ut tve/i m port e i ) and the appropriate authorities should be irnmediatery and simultaneously informed. 

3.3 P rese ntati on of test results 

Test results should be p rese nte d factuaty in a techrscaty correct manner as wea as in terms comprehenstote to the consumer. They 
should enable the consumer to make a choice a cc ord ing to his own particular needs. 

In cases where, in spite of veri ficati on procedures, major factual errors are found in pubfcshed reports, corrections should be made at 
the eeriest poaaUa opportunity. 



GMGIPN— 160 BIS/ND/09-300 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quaiity certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of the these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodicalty; a standard alongwith amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 
that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SPCAD 01 (004). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices : Telephones 

Central Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg [ 2323 761 7 

NEW DELHI 110002 ! 2323 3841 

Eastern ; 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VI! M, V.LR Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 

KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 1 60022 260 3843 

. 260 9285 

Southern C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

; 2254 2519,2254 2315 

Western Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. MaroL Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891 , 2832 7892 

Branches AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COiMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 

GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOTTHIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, NASHIK^422 006 



