IS 12572 ( Part 4 ) : 1999

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

GUIDE FOR EVALUATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES FOR BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS
PART 4 METHOD OF TEST FOR SYSTEMIC TOXICITY : ASSESSMENT OF ACUTE TOXICITY OF EXTRACTS FROM MEDICAL DEVICES

UDC

615'4 : 614'8 : 616-022 : 615'099'092

DESCRIPTORS : MEDICAL DEVICES. BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS. SYSTEMIC TOXICITY. ACUTE TOXICITY.

@ BIS 1989

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Price Group 2

MANAK BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 11000~

September 1989

Medical Glass Instruments and Appliances Sectional Committee, CPDC 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 4) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 14 September 1988, after the draft finalized by the Medical Glass Instruments and Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical lnstruments Division Council. This part ( Part 4 ) is one of a series of methods of test for assessing the biological hazards of the medical devices that directly contact body tissues or substances that are to be introduced into the body by means other than oral. This standard is proposed to be published in 12 parts. Other parts are as follows: Part Part Part Part Part 1 2 3 5 6 Terminology Selection of biological methods of test Method of testing by tissue implantation Method of test for intracutaneous reactivity of extracts from medical devices Method of test for systemic toxicity: Assessment of pyrogenicity in rabbits of extracts from medical devices Method of test for sensitization: Assessment of potential of medical devices to produce delayed contact dermatitis Methods of test for skin irritation of extracts from medical devices Method of test for skin irritation of solid medical devices Method of test for dental materials Method of test for eye irritation Method of test for toxicity to cells in culture of extracts from medical devices

Part 7 Part 8 Part 9 Part 10 Part 11

Part 12 Part 2 of this standard provides guidance on the selection of recommended methods of test for the initial assessment of biological hazards in medical devices which has been referred to in this part of the standard. In the'preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from BS 5736 : Part 3 : 1981 `Pvaluntion of medical device for biological hazards : Part 3 Method of test for systemic toxicity : assessment of` acute toxicity of extracts' issued by the British Standards Institution, UK.

IS 12572 ( Part 4 ) : 1988

Indian Standard GUIDE FOR EVALUATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES FOR BIOLOG1CA.L HAZARDS
PART 4 METHOD OF TEST FOR SYSTEMlC TOXICITY : ASSESSMENT OF ACUTE TOXICITY OF EXTRACTS FROM MEDICAL DEVICES 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 4 ) describes a method of test designed to provide information on the acute toxic effects attributable to leachable inherent or extraneous substances present in or on a medical device. 1.2 This method specifies the use of a polar and non-polar solvent to obtain extracts that are administered as a parenteral dose to mice and assessed for acute toxicity 3 to 14 days later. 1.3 This method of test is recommended for the initial assessment of devices in Category A, B1, C and E1 ( see Part 2 of this standard ) : administration of a single dose of extract or extractant, 2.2 &vice, Medical Device Any item used in medical treatment, diagnosis or contraception, not intended to have a pharmacological action on the body. 2.3 Final Product Medical device in its ready-for-use state. 2.4 Parenteral Administration Administration by breach of the skin or mucous surfaces. 2.5 Systemic Toxicity Undesirable effect(s) that become apparent at sites distant from the inicction site of an extract or extractant. 2.6 Test Material The final product or sample of final product that is to be tested. 3 ANIMALS AND HUSBANDRY 3.1 l'welve malt and twelve female albino mice of a single strain, weighing 17 to 23 g at the start of the test, shall be used. 3.2 Assign the twelve males randomly into four groups, housing three to a cape. Similarly assign the females to four separate cages. 3.3 The animals shall have free access to food and water. 4 I'KEPARA'IION OF EX'I'RACl`S 4 1 Sterilization and Handling of Test Matrrials 4.1.1 Test m`lterial that is pre-stcrili7cd ( rcl`ers to devices obtained sterilrLcd from tilt rnanufrlclur_cr o r supplier ) shdl bc hilndled aseptically out the extraction and lest proccdurc. 4.1.2 The test material that is normally nun-s[eri!o b u t i s stcrrli& before USC
1

a>

Category A - Those intended for long-term ( long-term covers a period from a few months to permanent use ) implantation within the body tissue, for example, artery grafts and hip prosthesis;

b)

Category B, - Those intended for longterm ( long-term covers a period from a few months to permanent use ) or repeated contact with mucosal surfaces, for example, contraceptive devices; 4 Category C - Those intended for shortterm ( short-term covers a period from a few minutes to several weeks continuous use ) use within the body or in contact with mucosal surfaces, for example, tracheal tubes, urinary catheters and intravenous cannulae;

d) Categnry EL - Those intended to contain or administer substances including blocd, that are introduced parenterally into the body, for example, blood bags, haemodialysis equipment. intravenous administration sets and kits, and hypodermic syringes. 2 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this sttindard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Acute Toxicity, Acute Toxic Fffects Undesirable cffcct(s) that become .lpparent w i t h in an observation period of 14 days or less after

IS 12572 ( Part 4 ) : 1988 sterilized before the extraction procedure and handled aseptically throughout the extraction and test procedure. 4.1.3 Test mntcrial not required to be sterile in use shall be subjected to the extraction procedure and the extracts obtained with the polar solvent shall than be sterilized before administration ( SW Note in 4.2.2 ) 4.2 Extractants The following are required for preparation of extracts and for use as controls. 4.2.1 Polar Solvent Sterile saline solution containing 9 g,il sodium chloride. 4.2.2 Non-Polar Solwnt Sesame oil or cottonseed oil conforming to II', BP or USP.
N O T E - It ic reconnized that it may not be practicable to sterilix the non-pot;,r solvent. Care should be taken to minimirc any possible microbiological ~ontamin;l~ion. Prqxir?.lion as In 4.1.2 may be used.

fluids, or with liquids that are subsequently introduced parenterally into the body under the intended use.
The f:ictor o f o n e - t h i r d xriscs f r o m CO;Isidcration o f t h e margin of wfcty, o n ihc h:l<iz ,~i tt1c te\t an cmpiric:Il d o s e c o m p a r i s o n hctacen :11:im;11 a n t i h u m a n . lil:dcr the conditiclnr qivcn n 4.3.7, the dose per hologram of body weight ;ldI111ni`:tcrfd t o t h e tect animal i s approsrmat~lv 01ic thousand times greater than that which wo~~l~l lx rcccived from she d e v i c e u n d e r int~.ndc~l m e d i c a l LISC II: ;: m,:n vcjghing 7 0 kg.

NWI!L --

4.3.3 The technique used in exposing the test material to the extractant shall be sclcctcd according to the requirements of 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. and may consist of total immersion or flow-through msthods, or a successive extraction of more than one specimen of the final product. 4.3.3.1 Fragmentation of the test material may be used to increase the interfacial area. 4.3.4 Extraction conditions shall simulate, as nearly as possible, the conditions under which the device will normally be used. 4.3.5 During the extraction, 27 1 3" shall be reprcscntative of room temperature and 37+2" that of the body temperature. 4.3.6 The period of contact between the extractant and the te:t material shall be not less than 2 hours and need not bc longer than 72 hours. 4.4 Procedure 4.4.1 Using the polar ( 4.2.1 ) and the non-polar solvent ( 4.2.2 ) as extractants, preparc suflicicllt volumes of extract of the test niatcrlal in acco~`dance with 4.1 and 4.3 to carry out the procedure described in 5.1.2. 4.4.2 In conditions identical with those used in 4.4.1, prcparc controls using both the pol,lr s o l v e n t ancl tllc: non-polar solveIll. iu the abavncc of test material. 4.4.3 Sterilize the extracts obtained with the pol,~l soivcnt from unstcrilizcd devices ( .YCJ(' 4. I.3 ). 4.4.4 Record Ihr the tust report, the prcc~ao c o n d i t i o n 0: cxtractiori a n d , w IIcrc applicnblc, A!sterilization.

4.3 Principles of Exkraction

4.3.1 The test material shall be representative of the final product 4.3.1.1 To achieve this, the test material may consist of small pieces of the final product or of one or more intact devices. For large, multicomponent devices, fclr example, dialysis units or m e m b r a n e oxygenators, it may be appropriate to test the individual components of the device separately. 4.3.1.2 The quantity of any inherent or cxtrancous substances extracted is roluted to the surface arca o f t h e sampie ( intcrl`aclal arca ) w i t h w h i c h extractant is brought into contact. 4.3.1.3 The concentration of any inherent or cxutrancons substances in the extract and 1xxc~ the dose delivered to the animal, depends on both the interfacial arca and the final extract volume, 4.3.1.4 The interfacial arca per unit volume of extract has to be taken into consideration when the dose delivered to the test liriirnal is rctatcd to the exposure of the device to psticnt. 4.3.2 During the extraction, the interfacial arca per milliliIrc 01' linal extract volume sh;111, \blicre possible, bc ulrc-third o f Lhe surI`;ux arw o f the dcvicc that comes into direct contact cithcr with body tissues or with mucosal surfaces and;or body

5.1 Preparation of Animals and Administration uf ihtracts arld extractant

IS 12572 ( Part 4 ) : 1988 51.2 Assign to each of the following four groups, one cage of three males and one cage of three females ( see 3.2 ) and treat the groups in the manner indicated below: a) Group 2 ( Control ) - Administer the polar solvent, 50 ml/kg, as a single intravenous injection via the lateral tail ( coccygeal ) vein. b) Guou/~ 2 ( Control ) - Administer the nonpolar solvent, 50 ml/kg, as a single intrnpcritoneal injection.

5.3 Termination of Test 5.3.1 Not sooner than 72 h or later than 14 da>s after the administration of extracts and extractanls, weigh and kill all surviving animals and record the weights and appearances Ibr the Tess report. 5.3.2 Conduct an autopsy and record the macroscopic appearance of any organs or tissues of interest, i n c l u d i n g b u t n o t restricted to, the injection site, heart, lungs, gastro-jiil,s,inaI tract, liver, spleen, kidneys and gonads. 6 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 6.1 The results shall be submitted in a test report that includes a complctc record 01` the mc~hod of extractlon and procedures followed ;I& any other relevant data necessary for the ,Issessmcnt of`rcsults as described in 7. 7 ASSESSMENT OF RESULTS 7.1 The assessment of results should be carried out by an experienced person ( preferably ;I toxicologist ) who is aware of the conditions of USC of the final product and has appropriate chemical and biological d:lta concerning it ( see 3.3 :111ci 3.4 01` Part 2 of this standard ). 7.2 The overall assessment of test result shall bc carried out taking into consideration all the information contained in the test report and, particul a r l y a n y difYcrence in the rcsulls bctwccn test groups snd control groups and bctwecn XXCS. 7.3 The rcrulls of the asscssmcnt shall lx recorded
in the test report.

c>

Group 3 ( Test ) - Administer the extract of the test material in the polar solvent, SO ml/kg, i n t h e manner specifed f o r Group I.

d) Group 4 ( Test ) - Administer the extract of the test material in the non-polar solvent, SO ml/kg, in the manner specified for Group 2. 5.2 Observation of Animals 5.2.1 Observe the animals frequently during 4 hours immediately following injection and at lcast once a day thercal'tcr. 5.2.2 Record any signs of reaction to in.jcction in terms of period to onset, duration and intensity. 52.3 Record any death and the circumstances of the death. 5.2.4 If any animals die bcforc the end of the period of observation, perform an autopsy on decedents as dcscribcd in 5.3.2.

Standard Mark
The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BlS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a liccnce for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

