( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 11418(Part 2)-1986
UDC 631'321'8 I

SO 4335-l 984

Indian Standard

HIGH LEVEL
Is] 1 I

DATA

LINK CONTROL
OF ELEMENTS

PROCEDURES
OF PROCEDURES

PART

2 CONSOLIDATION

[ IS0 Title : Data Communication-liigh

Procedures -Consolidation
National Foreword

Level Data Link Control of Elements of Procedures ]

This Indian Standard (Part 2) which is identical with IS0 4335-1984 `Data communication -high level data link control procedures-consolidation of elements of procedures', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Computers, Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee and approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they

should Cross

References International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard

IS0

2302/g-1984 Data processing-vocabulary -Part 09 : Oata communication Bilingual edition 3309-1984 terns--Data data link structure Information processrny ;iyscommunication-High-level control procedures-Frame

IS : 1885 (Part 52/Set lo)-1980 Data processing, Section 10 Data Communication (Technically equivalent) IS : 11418 (Part l)-1986 High level data link control procedures : Part 1 Frame structure (Identical)

IS0

Adopted

15 January 1986

Q

November

1988,

ISI

Gr 13

INDIAN MANAK

STANDARDS BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS

: 11418

(Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

0 0.1

Introduction General
data link control (HDLCI procedures are designed to

command

frames. The other data stations on the data link are

known as the secondary stations, and the frames they transmit are referred to as response frames. For the transfer secondary comprising of data between two the primary station and the are con-

High-level

permit synchronous, code-transparent data transmission. This international Standard describes the HDLC elements of procedures. Further studies are in progress to identify and define of procedu. es which may be included at a additional elements later date. In HDLC procedures, data communication

stations,

cases of data link control

sidered (see figures 1 and 2). In the first case, the data station the data source performs a primary station data link and controls the data station comprising with a secondary commands. the data sink and conthat is source by select-type the station data link control function control function,

data sink that is associated

the normal cycle of the code-transparent between two data stations consists of the information from the data source by a frame in the opposite directhe data source receives original information in

In the second case, the data station comprising performs trols the associated by poll-type data station comprising the data

transfer of frames containing to the data sink acknowledged

a primary station data link control function with a secondary commands.

tion. Until the data station comprising an acknowledgment, it holds the memory

station data link control function,

in case the need should arise for retransmissions. integrity between the data source and the data by means of a numbering scheme, which is Standard numbering on in terms of frames. An independent

The information

flows from the data source to the data sink, are always transmitted in the op-

Data sequence

' sink is effected
and measured

and the acknowledgments posite direction.

cyclic within a modulus specified in this International scheme is used for each data source/data the data link. The acknowledgment informing number. formation. HDLC procedcres are applicable to unbalanced information, the data

These two cases of control may be combined link becomes capable of two-way two-way simultaneous alternate communication.

so that the data or

sink combination

communication,

function is accomplished source of the next

bv the data sink sequence

0.3

Balanced data links
data link involves only two participating purposes, each data station data stare-

expected

This can be done in a separate frame, not containing or within the control field of a frame containing in-

A balanced tions.

For control

assumes

sponsibility for the organization of its data flow and for unrecoverable data link level error conditions associated with data links and data links. the transmissions that it originates. Each data station is known as a combined station and is capable of transmitting and receiving both command and response frames. combined stations, the data in figure 3 are utilized. The com-

to balanced

0.2

Unbalanced

data links

For the transfer bf data between link controi functions illustrated data source in each combined the other combined station

station controls the data sink in by the use of select-type

An unbalanced data stations.

data link involves two or more participating For control purposes, one data station on the

data link assumes responsibility for the organization of data flow and for unrecoverable data link level error conditions. The data station assuming these responsibilities is known is the primary station, and the frames it transmits are referred to as

mands. The information flows from the data source to the data sink, and the acknowledgments are always transmitted in the opposite direction. The poll-type commands may be used by each combined station to solicit acknowledgments and status responses from the other combined station.

2

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

Select/information Primary station Acknowledgment Data source

r Secondary station

Data sink

Figure 1 -

Unbalanced

data link configuration

(case 1)

,

Poll/ acknowledgment + Primary station Information Data sink Data source Secondary station

Figure 2 -

Unbalanced

data link configuration

[case 2)

Select/information/acknowledgment/poll Combined station Select/information/acknowledgment/poll Data sink/data source Data sink/data source W Combined station

Figure 3 -

Balanced data link configuration

1

Scope and field of application

2

References
Vocabulary Part 09

This International Standard specifies elements of data link control procedures for synchronous, code-transparent data transmission using the HDLC frame structure specified in IS0 3399 and independent frame numbering in both directions. These HDLC elements of procedures are defined specifically in terms of the actions that occur on receipt of commands at a secondary station or a combined station. This International Standard is intended to cover a wide range of applications; for example one-way, two-way alternate or twoway simultaneous data communication between data stations which are usually buffered, including operations on different types of data circuits; for example multipoint/point-to-point, duplex/half-duplex, switched/non-switched, etc. The defined HDLC elements of procedures are to be considered as a common basis for establishing different types of control procedures. This International Standard does not define any single r&em and should not be regarded as a specification for a data communication system. Not all of the commands or responses are required for a particular system implementation.

IS0 239219, Data processhg communication. IS0 3309. Data communication
procedures Frame structure.

: Data

-

High-level

data link control

3

Definitions

For the purposes of this International Standard, the following definitions apply (see also IS0 2382/g). 3.1 abort : A function invoked by a sending primary, secondary or combined station causing the recipient to discard (and ignore) all bit sequences transmitted by the sender since the preceding flag sequence.

3.2 accept : The condition assumed by a data station
(primary, secondary or combined station) upon accepting a correctly received frame for processing.

3

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 ISO 4335-l 904

address field IA) 3.3 ple of eight, if extended)

: The sequence of eight (or any multibits immediately following the open-

3.14 data link : An assembly stallations and the interconnecting particular
NOTE -

of two or more terminal inline operating according to a to be exchanged.
installation" does not

ing flag sequence of a frame identifying the secondary/combined station sendin; (or designated to receive) the frame.

method

that permits information
the term "terminal

In this context,

include the data source and the data sink.

3.4

address

field extension

: Enlarging the address field to
3.16 cessing station's capafield. station data link level

include more addressing

information.

: The conceptual level of control or proin the hierarchical or structure station) of a data that is combined

logic existing (primary,

3.6

basic

status

: A secondary/combined

secondary

bility to send or receive a frame containing

an information

responsible

for maintaining

control of the data link.

3.6

centralized

control

: A control in which all the primary
in one data

NOTE - The data link level functions provide an interface between the data station high level logic and the data link. These functions include : a) b) (transmit) bit insertion and (receive) field interpretation; generation, transmission and interpretabit deletion;

station functions station.

of the data link are centralized

address/control

combined : That part of a data station that supports the 3.7 combined station control functions of the data link.
NOTE The combined station generates commands and responses

cl command/response tion; and dl

frame check sequence

computation

and interpretation.

for transmission and interprets received commands and responses. Specific responsibilities assigned to a combined station include : a) b) initialization of control signal interchange; organization of data flow; commands and generation of ap-

3.16

data

transmission

: See IS0 2382/S,

term 0901.02.

3.17
term

duplex 09.03.01.

transmission

: See IS0 2382/S,

c-) interpretation of received propriate responses; and

3.18
d) actions regarding error control and error recovery functions the data link level. at

exception

condition

: The condition assumed by a
error or to an inter-

secondary/combined

station upon receipt of a frame which it

cannot execute due either to a transmission nal processing malfunction.

3.8

command

: In data

communication,

an

instruction 3.19 frame. flag sequence employed (F)

represented in the control field of a frame and transmitted by the primary/combined station. It causes the addressed secondary/combined function. station to execute a specific data link control

: The unique sequence of eight bits
and closing of a

~01111110)

to delimit the opening

3.6 a) b)

command

frame

:
by a primary station. by a combined station that

3.26 opening
NOTE -

frame

: The sequence of contiguous bits, bracketed by

and closing flag sequences.
A valid frame is at least 32 bits in length and contains an ad-

All frames transmitted

Those frames transmitted

contain the address of ths other combined

station.

dress field, a control field and a frame check se&ence. A frame may or may not include an information field.

3.10

contention

mode

: A mode of transmission in which a

3.21

frame

check

sequence

IFCS)

: The field immediately
the of transmission er-

preceding

the closing flag sequence

of a frame, containing

transmitter

can send on its own initiative.

bit sequence that provides for the detection rors by the receiver.

3.11 control
extended) frame.
NOTE a)

field

(Cl

: The sequence of eight (or sixteen, if
following the address field of a 3.22 half-duplex transmission : See IS0 2382/S, term 09.03.02.

bits immediately

The content

of the control field is Interpreted station,

by

:
by the of some

the receiving sccondary,`combined instructing

designated

address field, as a command specific function; and

the performance

3.23 higher level : The conceptual level of control or processing logic existing in the hierarchical structure of a data station (primary, level fuhctions buffer allocation, secondary or combined station) that is above of data link control, device the data link level and upon which the performance are dependent; for example etc. station management,

b) the receiving primaryicombined station as a response from the secondary/combined staiion, designated by the address field, to one or more commands.

3.12

control

field extension

: Enlarging the control field to

3.24

information

field

(INFO)

: The sequence

of bits, OC-

include additional

conttoi information.

curring between

the last bit of the control field and the first bit

of the frame check sequence. 3.13
term

dats
09.07

Eomrnunicatibn

: See IS0 2382/g,

NOTE terpreted

The information

field contents

of

I and

UI frames are not in-

.CS.

at the data link level.

4

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1986 ISQ 43351984

3.25

interframe
between

time fill : The sequence of flag sequences
frames.
Standard does not provide for time fill

4
4.1

Data link channel states
Active data link channel state

transmitted
NOTE -

This International

within a frame.

4.1.1 3.26 a)
bl

General
link channel a secondary a frame, is in an active state when the primary or inrerframe transmission

invalid

frame : A sequence
opening

of

bits,

following that either

the

receipt of an apparent is terminated contains

flag sequence, or

:

A data station,

station or a combined

station is actively

by an abort sequence;

transmitting closing

a single abort sequence,

less than 32 bits before is detected.

an apparent

time fill. In the active state, the right to continue shall be reserved.

flag sequence

3.27
primary

primary station : The data station that supports the
station control functions of the data link, i.e. that received commands for transmission and interprets

4.1.2

Atort
a frame shall be accomplished by transmitting at least

generates responses.
NOTE clude -

Aborting

seven contiguous "1" bits (with no inserted "0" bits) to end the frame. Receipt of seven contiguous "1" bits shall be interpreted
responsibilities assigned to the primary station in-

Specific

:
initialization of control signal interchange; organization of data flow; and error control and error recovery functions at

as an abort frame.

and the

receiving

data

station

shall ignore

the

a)
b) c)

NOTE - I! more than seven "1" bits are sent tp abort, care should be taken because if 15 or more "1" bits are sent, Including those already transmitted at the time of the decision to abort, an idle data link channel state will result.

actions regarding

the data link level.

3.28

primary/secondary

station : The general case where
sta-

4.1.3

Interframe

time

fill by transmitting con-

the station may be either a primary station or a secondary tion.

Interframe

time fill shall be accomplished

tiguous flags between

frames. There is no provision for time fill

3.29
in the

response : In data communication,
control field of a response frame

a reply represented that advises the

within a frame.

primary/combined

station with respect to the action taken by station to one or more commands.

4.2

Idle data link channel

state
"1"

the secondary/combined

A data link channel 3.30 a) b) response frame

is in an idle state when a continuous

:
by a secondary station. station that station.

state is detected detection

that has persisted

for at least 15 bit times;

of the idle state at the data link level shall be contransmission.

All frames transmitted

sidered to indicate that the remote data station has relinquished its right to continue

Those frames transmitted

by a combined

contain the address of the transmitting

combined

3.31

secondary

station

: The data station that executes
as instructed
interprets

5

Modes
modes and three non-operational modes are

data link control functions
NOTE A secondary

by the primary station. Three operational
received commands and

station

defined.

generates

responses for transmission.

5.1
3.32 secondary station status

Operational

modes
modes are

: The current condition of a
The three operational a)

secondary station with respect to processing the series of commands received from the primary station.

:

normal response mode (NRM); asynchronous asynchronous response mode (ARM); balanced mode (ABM). and

3.33

two-way

alternate

data

communication

:

See
b) c)

IS0 2382/g,

term 09.05.03.

3.34

two-way

simultaneous

data

communication

: See

IS0 2382/g,

term 09.05.02. 5.1.1

Normal response mode INRM)
is an unbalanced station data link operational transmission mode,

3.35

unnumbered sequence

commands numbers

: The commands

that

do

In NRtvl, which the secondary

not contain

in the control field.

shall initiate

only as the

result of receiving explicit permission to do so from the primary 3.36 unnumbered responses : The responses that do not contain sequence numbers in the control field. station. After receiving permission, the secondary station shall initiate a response transmission. The response transmission

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 I SO 4335-l 984

shall consist of one or more frames while maintaining data `link channel state. The last frame of the transmission station. received 5.1.2 In ARM, shall be explicitly indication indicated by the

an active response secondary is again

A secondary dition(s)

station shall be system predefined

as to the conmode. The

that causes it to assume

a disconnected

Following

of the last frame,

the secondary

disconnected mode (NDM or ADM) shall also be system: predefined. A combined station shall be system predefined as to the condition(s) disconnected that causes it to assume the asynchronous mode (ADM). station capability in a disconnected mode shall

station shall stop transmitting

until explicit permission

from the primary station. Asynchronous which response mode (ARM) mode,

The secondary be limited to

:

is an unbalanced

data link operational

the secondary station may initiate transmission without receiving explicit permission to do so from the primary station. Such an asynchronous indicate transmission may contain single or multiple to frames and shall be used for information status changes in the secondary the number exception 5.1.3 In ABM, combined itiate of the next expected field transfer and/or frame,

a) accepting and responding to one of several appropriate mode setting commands (SNRM, SARM, SNRME, SARME, b) (XID) c) SIM and DISC); and responding to an exchange identification

station (for example, transition of an

accepting

information

command; and responding and responding to a test (TEST) to an unnumbered command; poll (UP)

from a ready to a busy condition or vice versa, occurrence condition). balanced

accepting accepting

Asynchronous

mode (ABM)
mode, either

d)

command; which is a balanced data link operational station may send commands frame transmission without at any time and may inreceiving explicit e) transmitting mode a disconnected (RIM), or mode request (DM), request in-

response

itialization

disconnect and

(RD)

permission to do so from the other combined station. Such an asynchronous transmission may contain single or multiple frames and shall be used for information indicate status changes in the combined the number exception of the next expected field transfer and/or to station (for example, frame, transition

response frame at a respond opportunity action on the part of the primary station; f) transmitting, at the in ADM respond

to solicit a specific

only, an unsolicited opportunity to

XID response an XID

information

frame

request

from a ready to a busy condition or vice versa, occurrence of an condition).

exchange. The capability of a combined station, as a receiver of commode, station shall be the include the since at station (appropriate In addition,

5;2

Non-operational

modes
modes are

. mands, in the asynchronous :
mode SABM, setting commands

disconnected

same as that stated above for a secondary The three non-operational a) b) c) The normal disconnected asynchronous initialization disconnected for a combined SABME, SIM and DSC station

commands). may transmit

mode (NDM); mode (ADM); and

the combined any time, mode setting,

station has the ability to transmit XID or TEST command.

commands

disconnected mode (IM).

the combined

an appropriate

A secondary/combined modes (NDM and ADM) differ from station frames (IM) the is are or ADMI shall, operational logically (I), from modes in that the secondary/combined information (UI), or supervisory mode generating

station in a disconnected capability, (DM) be mode

mode (NDM capable with of the

as a minimum

the disconnected

response

disconnected

from the data link; i.e. no information The initialization differs

unnumbered

F bit set to "1" in response to a command the P bit set to "1"

frame received with

transmitted station

or accepted.

the operational

modes ih that the secondary/combined is either in need of regeneraof the parameters to be used

data link control program mode.

A secondary/combined or ADM) receiving

station in a disconnected (DISC) a DISC A secondary/combined

mode (NDM shall resstation in shall res-

tion or is in need of an exchange in an operational

a disconnect receiving

command command

pond with the DM response. the initialization mode pond with the unnumbered station in an operational

These two disconnected to prevent tions cause a) b) or

modes (NDM

and ADM)

are provided on

acknowledgment

(UA) response if shall.

a secondary/combined exception conditions

station since

from appearing operation

it is capable of actioning the command. respond with the UA response.

A secondary/combined

the data link in a fully operational

mode during unusual situasuch could

mode receiving a DISC command

:
Examples unintended sequence contention number in ARM; between the primary a) the secondary/combined station power is turned on, or restored following a temporary loss of power; b) the secondary/combined reset; and station data link level logic is DISC of possible conditions (in addition to receiving a command) which shall cause a secondary/combined station to enter a disconnected mismatch station, mode are

:

station and the secondary station; or

or between

combined

cl ambiguity in the primary/combined status of the secondary/other combined

station station.

as to the

manually

6

IS : 11418

(Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-1984

c)

the secondary/combined

station

terminal

is manually

portunity.

A XID or TEST command

that can be actioned

shall

switched from a local (home) condition the-data-link (on-line) condition.

to a connected-on-

be responded to with the XID or TEST response, respectively, at the earliest respond opportunity. Receipt of an implemented mode setting, XID or TEST command that cannot be actioned, or receipt of any other command with the P bit set to "1", shall

A secondary/combined station in a non-operational not establish a frame reject exception condition.

mode shall

be responded to with a DM response, or, if the secondary station, or combined station as a receiver of commands, determines it is unable to function, with the RIM response. Any command with the P bit set to "0", other than the implemented

5.2.1

Normal disconnected
which

mode (NDM)
data link non-operational disconnected

In NDM, mode,

is an unbalanced station

mode setting, XlD, TEST or UP commands as described above, may be ignored by the secondary/combined station in ADM. Because a combined it can terminate SIM). ting an appropriate station is also a generator of commands, SABME station or (for

the secondary

shall be logically

from the data link and shall, therefore, not be permitted to transmit or accept information. The secondary station has normal mode respond opportunity response receiving tionally, transmission, a command frame and shall initiate a single frame its status, the as a result of
op-

a disconnected

mode at any time by transmit(SABM, or as a result of

mode setting command

indicating with

Such action can be taken spontaneously

P bit set to "1";

it may initiate such a response as the result of receiving with the P bit set to "0".

transmission received from the other example, a DM or RIM response).

combined

a UP command

5.2.3 In this mode, cept the a secondary command, station shall action only mode setMode setting commands, can be actioned shall exbe ting, XlD and TEST DISC responded portunity. commands. that

Initialization

mode

(IMI data link or balanced combined or regenerated data link by the to that IM is in-

In IM, which non-operational link control primary/other

is an unbalanced program

to with the UA response at the earliest respond opA XID or TEST command that can be actioned shall to with the XID or TEST response, respectively,

mode, a secondary/one may be initialized station action, combined station combined

station data

or other parameters station concludes is operating station corrected,

be responded

be used in the operational voked when the primary/one a secondary/other and needs upgrading determine request combined trol program. its data

mode may be exchanged.

at the earliest respond opportunity.

Receipt of an implemented

mode setting, XID or TEST command that cannot be actioned, or receipt of any other command with the P bit set to "I", shall cause a secondary resoond response. opportunity dary station station in NDM to respond at the earliest with the RIM with the DM response, or, if the seconmode setting, XID with the to resAny com-

combined

abnormally and for

link control

program

a secondary/other Similarly,

combined

data link constation may checks and

a secondary/one

combined

determines

it is unable to function,

it is unable to function station.

due to program

In the case where an implemented is to be reported,

IM to obtain a good program

from the primary/other

or TEST command a status condition

has been received but cannot be actioned or a UP command as appropriate. station in NDM

P bit set to "0" shall cause a secondary pond with a DM or RIM response, mand with mode above, the P bit set to "0", XID, TEST or setting,

A secondary/combined UA response,

station shall enter IM upon sending respond opportunity, mode (SIM)

a in

other than the implemented UP commands as described station in NDM.

at its system predefined

response to the receipt of a set initialization mand. A secondary/combined mand by sending a RIM response. bined station and a secondary/other chang_e information

comcomfor

may be ignored

by the secondary

station may request a SIM comIn IM, the primary/one combined station manner station may exspecified UI or

in the predetermined combined

5.2.2
In ADM,

Asynchronous

disconnected

mode (ADM)

that

secondary/each

(for example,

I frames).
which is an unbalanced data link or balanced data link IM shall be terminated receives nected power. other mode setting mode when a secondary/combined (via a UA response) or when entering constraints station one of the the disconand acknowledges caused

non-operational mode, the secondary/combined station shall be logically disconnected from the data link and shall, therefore, not be permitted to transmit or accept information.
The secondary station, or combined station as a receiver of commands, has asynchronous mode respond opportunity and may initiate a response transmission in two-way alternate ex-

commands, by internal

such as loss of

change upon detection of an idle data link channel state, and in two--way simultaneous exchange at any time. Such a response
transmission command shall only consist of a request for a mode setting (DM), or a request

6
6.1

Control
Control General

field
field

and parameters
formats

for initialization (RIM) if the seconuary station, or combined station as a receiver of com-

mands, determines it is unableto function.

In this mode, if capable, a secondary station, or combined station as a receiver of commands, shall action only mode setting, XID and TEST commands. Mode setting commands, except the DISC command, that can be actioned shall be
responded to with the UA response at the earliest respond op-

6.1.1 \

The three formats

d&ed

for the control field (see table 1) are

used to perform numbered information transfer, numbered supervisory functions and unnumbered control functions and unnumbered information transfer.

7

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1986 IS0 4335-l 964

Table 1 -

Control field formats
Control 1234 field 5 bits* 6 7 8

The maximum

number of sequentially or combined

numbered

I frames that a

primary, secondary
Control format Information field for

station may have outstanding numbers. This restricof transmit-

(i.e. unacknowledged) less than the modulus ted

at any given time shall never exceed one of the sequence in the association

tion is to prevent any ambiguity and/or
NOTE -

transfer command/

I frames with sequence numbers during normal operation
error recovery action.
The number of outstanding

response (I format\

responses fS format)

I frames

may be further restricted

__-

by the data station frame storage capability; for example the number of 1 1 MM P/F MM M I frames that can be stored for transmission and/or retransmission in the event of a transmission error. Optimum data link efficiency can only be obtained, however, if the minimum data station frame storage capacity is sufficient for the maximum anticipated round trip transmission delay. receive sequence bit) number

Unnumbered commands/ responses IU format) N(S) =

,

transmitting send sequence [bit 2 = low-order bit)

number

N(R) S
M P/F

= transmitting

(bit 6 = low-order

= supervisory function bit
= = modifier function poll bit bit station command or

6.22

Frame state variables and sequence numbers
General operations, each data station shall maintain an inreceive a

6.2.2.1
In HDLC dependent another

primary station or combined

frame transmissions/final bit secondary station combined station response frame transmissions (1 = poll/final)

send state variable V(S) and an independent Each secondary

state variable V(R) for the data station.

I frames it sends to and receives from
station shall maintain to the primary station, and a

6.1.2
The

Information

transfer (II format
transfer. The

V(S) for the I frames it transmits tion. In the same manner, independent from, V(S) respectively,

I format is used to perform an information
of N(S), N(R) and P/F

V(R) for the I frames it correctly receives from the primary stathe primary station shall maintain an for I frames sent to and received station on the data link. for the station. and V(R)

functions

are independent;

i.e. each

I frame shall have an N(S) sequence number, an N(R) sequence number which may or may not acknowledge additional I frames
at the receiving data station, "1" or "0". 6.1.3 and a P/F bit that may be set to

each secondary

Each combined transmits

station shall maintain a V(S) for the I frames it station, and a V(R) receives from the other combined

to the other combined

I frames it correctly

Supervisory (S) format
6.2.2.2 Send state variable V(S) the sequence number of the data link supervisory control I frames, requesting retrans-

The S format is used to perform functions such as acknowledging mission of

The send state variable denotes next in-sequence I frame

I frames, and requesting a temporary suspension of transmission of I frames. The functions of N(R) and P/F are
independent: i.e. each S format frame shall have an N(R) additiosequence number which may or may not acknowledge

to be transmitted,

The send state

variable can take the value 0 to modulus

minus one inclusive

(where modulus is the modulus of the sequence numbering scheme and the numbers cycle through the entire range). The vblue of the send state variable shall be incremented with each successive I frame transmission, one. N(R) of the last received frame by more than modulus by one minus but shall not exceed

nal I frames at the receiving data station, and a P/F bit that may be set to "1" or "0".

6.1.4

Unnumbered

(U) format
additional data link control

The U format

is used to provide

6.2.2.3

Send sequence

number

N(S)

functions and unnumbered information transfer. This format shall contain no sequence numbers, but shall include a P/F bit that may be set to "1" or "0". Five "modifier" bit positions are comavailable, this allowing definition of up to 32 additional mand functions and 32 additional response functions.

Only I frames shall contain N(S), the send sequence number of transmitted frames. Prior to transmission of an in-sequence I frame, N(S) shall be set equal to the value of the send state variable.

6.2
6.2.1

Parameters Modulus
shall be sequentially numbered with a number

6.2.2.4

Receive state variable V(R) number of the The receive sequence the entire minus one in-

The receive state variable denotes the sequence next in-sequence I frame expected state variable can take the value 0 to modulus

to be received.

Each I frame which

may have the value 0 to modulus

minus one inclusive

(where modulus is the modulus of the sequence numbers). The modulus equals 8 for the unextended control field format and 128 for the extended control field format. The sequence numbers cycle through the entire range. (See 7.4 for the description of the extended control field format and modulus.)

clusive (where modulus is the modulus of the numbering scheme and the numbers cycle through range). The value of the receive state variable cremented by one on receipt of an error-free, number

shall be inin-sequence

I frame whose send sequence state variable,

N(S) equals the receive

8

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 9114

6.2.2.5 All

Receive sequence

number

N(R)

NOTE positive

-

For example, acknowledgment

if the primary/combined station requires that a particular command has been reto "1". This forces a response in 6.3.2.2. station as described

sequence

I frames and S format frames shall contain N(R), the N(S) number of the next expected I frame. Prior to transmission of an I frame or S format frame, the N(R) shall be
set to equal the current value of the receive state variable. indicates that the station transmitting the N(R) received all I frames numbered [See 7.3.2.2 6.2.3 for definitions (P/F) bit up to N(R) - 1 inclusive. N(R) has correctly

ceived, it sets the P bit in the command from the secondary/combined

6.3.2

Functions

of the final

bit

A response frame with the F bit set to "1" shall be used by the secondary/combined station to acknowledge the receipt of a command 6.3.2.1 In NRM, of frame with the P bit set to "1". Functions of the final bit in NRM if the right to transmit was acquired by the receipt of a then the secondary station shall set the F bit to If the right to with the

of the range of values of N(R).]

Poll/final

The poll (PI bit set to "1" shall be used by the primary/combined station to solicit (poll) a response or sequence station. responses from the secondary station(s)/combined

P bit set to "l",

"1" in the last frame of its response transmission.

The final (F) bit set to "1" shall be used a) by a secondary and station in ARM station in NRM

:
to indicate the final

transmit was acquired by the receipt of a UP command

P bit set to "0", then the secondary station shall set the F bit to "0" in each frame (including the last frame) of its response transmission. Following transmission of the last frame of its response until

frame transmitted command; b)

as the result of a previous soliciting (poll)

by a secondary

and by a combined

station in ABM

to indicate the response frame transmitted (poll) command.

transmission,

the secondary station shall stop transmitting

as the result of a soliciting

either a subsequent command frame with a P bit set to "1" is received, or a UP command is received. 6.3.2.2 In ARM station, Functions and ABM, respectively, of the final bit in ARM the secondary may transmit station and ABM and the combined frames with the on an asynchronous frame with the P bit

6.3

Functions (P/F)

of. the

poll/final

(P/F)

bit in both command frames, the P/F bit

The poll/final

bit shall serve a function (In command

frames and response frames.

response

is referred to as the P bit. In response frames, it is referred to as the F bit.) 6.3.1 6.3.1.1 Functions General of the poll bit

F bit set to "0" at any respond opportunity basis. Following the receipt of a command set to "1". transmission

the secondary/combined station shall initiate of a response frame with the F bit set to "1" at the

earliest respond opportunity. In the case of a two-way The P bit set to "1" shall be used to solicit a response frame with the F bit set to "1" from the secondary/combined station. the secondary/combined simultaneous communication where

station is transmitting

when the comthe F bit shall response frame

mand frame with the P bit set to "1" is received, be set to "1" in the earliest possible subsequent to be transmitted. In ARM the and ABM, the transmission respectively,

On a data link, only one frame with a P bit set to "1" shall be outstanding set to "l", in a given direction at a given a response time. frame Before a primary/combined secondary/combined station issues another station frame with the P bit from the If no time-

of a response frame with station or to stop transmitting

the F bit set to "1" shall not require the secondary combined station, response frames. Additional ted following ARM transmission respectively; and ABM,

it shall have received

with the F bit set to "1". within a system-defined of a command

response frames may be transmitas the end of

valid response frame is obtained out period, the retransmission to "1" for error recovery 6.3.1.2 In NRM, from Functions

the frame which had the F bit set to "1". Thus, in the F bit shall not be interpreted by the secondary station or the combined station, it shall only be interpreted as indicating the

with the P bit set

purposes shall be permitted.

of the poll bit in NRM

response frame from the secondary/combined station sent as a reply to the previous command frame received with the P bit set to "1". In ABM, if a combined station receives a command with the P bit set to "l", transmission of a response with the F bit set to "1" shall take precedence SIM, DISC) over transmission of commands, (SABM or with the exception SABME, 6.3.3 of the mode setting commands and the reset (RSET) bit to assist station shall not

the P bit shall be set to "1" to solicit response frames station. The secondary frame with the P bit

the secondary

transmit until it receives either a command set to "1" or a UP command. The secondary station may send I frames

upon receipt of an

I frame with the P bit set to "l", certain S frames (RR, REJ or SREJ) with the P bit set to "l", a UI command with the P bit set to "1". or a UP command with the P bit set to "1" or "0". 6.3.1.3 !n ARM Functions and ABM, of the poll bit in ARM and ABM

command. recovery (see

Use of the

P/F

in error

also clause 8) 6.3.3.1 the P bit set to "1" shall be used to solicit a with the F bit set As the P and F bits set to "1" are always exchanged (for every P bit there shall be one F bit, and another as a pair P bit shall response, to "1". at the earliest respond opportunity, General

9

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

not be issued until the previous P bit has been matched

with an Operational

Table 2 mode

P/F bit functions
NRM ARM ABM TwAlTw P/F PIF P/F

F bit, another

and,

similarly,

another

F bit shall not be issued until contained in a received Data communication P/F bit in command/response Solicit information 1 Last frame indication Solicit supervisory Or unnumbered response l~w~j7-~sl~~lnhts P/F xl PIF XI P/F

P bit is received),

the N(R)

frame with a P bit [see 8.2.1 h)l or F bit set to "1" can be used to detect that

I frame retransmission is required. This capability provides early detection of I frames not received by the remote
the frame sequence This capability number where to as received retransmission shall begin. is referred

data station and indicates checkpointing.

In all cases, the N(R) of a correctly - 1 inclusive.

I

I x/x I `x I
xl XIX xl XIX xl x/x

I
xl XIX

I
xl XIX

I
xl XIX

I
4

frame or S format frame shall acknowledge ted I frames to N(R)

previously transmit-

___-

Checkpointing Key : 6.3.3.2
In NRM,

Checkpointing

in NRM x indicates that the function is applicable TWA two-way alternate

the N(R) of a received I, receive ready (RR) or receive (RNR) command/response error recovery if frame the which N(R) has the station to does not

not

ready

P/F bit set to "1" shall cause the secondary/primary initiate appropriate acknowledge daryiprlmary at least all I frames transmitted

TWS -- two-way simultaneous

by the seconwith, the last station

station previous to, and concurrent

7

Commands

and responses
and responses is summarized in table 3.

frame which was transmitted with the F/P bit set to "1".

by the secondary/primary

The set of commands

Table 3 6.3.3.3 In ARM, Checkpointing the N(R) in ARM of a received I, RR or RNR comerI -

Commands

and responses
Information transfer format responses

Information transfer format commands Information I -

Information format responses

mand/response ror recovery

frame which if the N(R)

has the P/F bit set to "1" shall station to initiate appropriate not acknowledge at least all

#upervisory format commands RR Receive ready
RNR - Receive not ready REJ - Reject SREJ - Selective reject Unnumbered format commands SNRM mode Set normal response

Supervisory

cause the secondary/primary I frames transmitted to, and concurrent

does

by the secondary/primary

station previous

with, the last frame which was transmitted station with the F/P bit set to "1".

RR - Receive ready RNR - Receive not ready RE.1 - Reject SREJ - Selective reject Unnumbered format responses

by the secondary/primary

UA - Unnumbered acknowledgment DM RIM mode RD UI Disconnected mode

6.3.3.4 In ABM, which

Checkpointing

in ABM

SARM - Set asynchronous response mode SABM - Set asynchronous balanced mode DISC Disconnect

the N(R) of a received I, RR or RNR response frame to initiate appropriate error recovery if the N(R) by the with,

Request initialization Request disconnect Unnumbered information identification

has the F bit set to "1" shall cause the receiving comat least ?/I I frames transmitted

bined station receiving

does not acknowledge combined

station previous to, and concurrent

SNRME - Set normal response mode extended SARME - Set asynchronous response mode extended SABME - Set asynchronous balanced mode extended SIM Set initialization mode Unnumbered Unnumbered Exchange Reset Test poll information identification

the last frame which was transmitted ed station with the P bit set to "1".

by the receiving combin-

' /

XID

-

Exchange -

FRMR TEST

Frame reject Test

6.3.4

Summary

of P/F

bit functions in the three operadata com-

UP UI -

The applicability

of the P/F bit functions ARM and ABM)

XID

tional modes (NRM,

and on data links employ-

ing two-way alternate and two-way simultaneous munication is summarized in table 2.

RSET TEST

10

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1986 IS0 4335-l 984

7.1 Information response

transfer format

command

and t1

First bit
2 0

transmitted 3 s 4 s 5 6 7 8

The function of the information, I, command and response shall be to transfer sequentially numbered frames, each containing an information field, across a data link. The encoding of the I command/response control field shall be as shown in figure 4.

1

Supervisory format

P/F Command (pbll) Response (final)

N(R) I Receive sequencenumber (0 to 7)

/ Commands RR - Receiveready
REJ - Reject RNR - Receive not ready

00
01 10 11

I

Responses RR Receive ready REJ - Reject RNR - Receive not ready SREJ Selective reject

1

1~

SREJ

-

Selective

reject

Figure 5 Send sequence number (0 to 7) Command (poll) Response (final) information transfer format of control field bits

Supervisory

format of control field bits

(See 6.3 for a description of the functions of the P/F bit.) 7.2.1 Receive ready, RR, (S bits = 00) command response and

Figure 4 -

The receive ready, RR, frame shall be used by a data station to a) indicate that it is ready to receive an I frame(s); and

The I frame control field shall contain two sequence numbers : a) N(S), send sequence number, which shall indicate the sequence number associated with the I frame; and b) N(R), receive sequence number, which shall indicate the sequence number (as of the time of transmission) of the next expected I frame to be received, and consequently shall indicate that the I frames numbered up to N(R) - 1 inclusive have been received correctly. (See 6.3 for a description of the functions of the P/F bit.)

b) acknowledge previously received I frames numbered up to N(R) - 1 inclusive. When transmitted, the RR frame shall indicate the clearance of any busy condition that was initiated by the earlier transmissiorl of a RNR frame by that same data station. (See 8.1.) 7.2.2 Reject, REJ, (S bits = 01) command response and

7.2 Supervisory responses

format commands

and

Supervisory, S, commands and responses shall be used to perform numbered supervisory functions such as acknowledgment, polling, temporary suspension of information transfer, or error recovery. Frames with the S format control field shall not contain an information field and, therefore, shall not increment the send state variable at the transmitter or the receive state variable at the receiver; The encoding of the S format command/response control field shall be as shown in figure 5. An S format frame shall contain an N(R), receive sequence number, which shall indicate, at the time of transmission, the sequence number of the next expected I frame to be received, and consequently shalt indicate that all received I frames numbered up to N(R) - 1 inclusive have been received correctly. The primary/combined station may use the S format command frames with the P bit set to "1" to solicit responses from (poll) a secondary/combined station indicating its status.

The reject, REJ, frame shall be used by a data station to request retransmission of I frames starting with the frame numbered N(R). I frames numbered N(R) - 1 and below shall be considered as acknowledged. Additional I frames awaiting initial transmission may be transmitted following the retransmitted I frame(s). With respect to each direction of transmission on the data link, only one REJ exception condition from a given data station to another data station shall be established at any given time. Another REJ frame or a SREJ frame shall not be transmitted until the first REJ exception condition has been cleared unless other conditions have been detected as indicated in 8.2.1, 8.2.2, 8.2.3 and 8.2.4. The REJ exception condition shall be cleared (reset) upon the receipt of an I frame with an N(S) equal to the N(R) of the REJ frame. 7.2.3 Receive not ready, RNR, (S bits = 10) command and response The receive not re iy, RNR, frame shall be used by a data station to indicate a busy condition; i.e., temporary inability to accept subsequent I frames. I frames numbered up to N(R) - 1

11

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

inclusive shall be considered as acknowledged. The I frame numbered N(R) and any subsequent 4 frames received, if any, shall not be considered as acknowledged; the acceptance status of these frames shall be indicated in subsequent exchanges. 7.2.4 Selective and response
reject, SREJ. 6

(See 6.3 for a description of the functions of the P/F bit.) 7.3.1 Unnumbered commands

The unnumbered command encodings are shown in figure 7.

bits = 11) command

-First

bit transmitted

i
1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

The selective reject, SREJ, frame shall be used by a data station to request retransmission of the single I frame numbered N(R). I frames numbered up to N(R) - 1 inclusive shall be considered as acknowledged. The I frame numbered N(R) shall not be considered as accepted. The SREJ exception condition shall be cleared (reset) upon receipt of an I frame with an N(S) equal to the N(R) of the SREJ frame. After a data station transmits a SREJ frame, it shall not transmit a SREJ frame or a REJ frame for an additional sequence error until the first SREJ error condition has been cleared. (To do so would acknowledge as correctly received all I frames up to N(R) - 1 inclusive, where N(R) is the receive sequence number in the second SREJ or REJ frame.) I frames that may have been transmitted following the I frame indicated by the SREJ frame shall not be retransmitted as the result of receiving a SREJ frame. Additional I frames awaiting initial transmission may be transmitted following the retransmission of the specific I frame requested by tt,e SREJ frame. (See 8.2 for sequence error recovery procedures.) 7.3 Unnumbered responses format commands and

3

4

5

6

7

8 SNRM SARM SABM SNRME SARME command command command command command command

00P001 llPOO0 IlPlOO 00P010 llPOl1 11P010 1 0 1 1 0 1 P P P 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 10P000 00P000 llPOO1

DISC command

SABME

SIM command UP command UI command XID command RSET command Icombined station only) P 1 1 1 TEST command

1

1

0

0

Figure

7 -

Unnumbered command assignments

control

field

bit

Unnumbered, U, commands and responses shall be used to extend the number of data link control functions. Frames transmitted with the U format shall not increment the state variables at either the transmitting or the receiving data station. Five "modifier" bits are provided which allow up to 32 additional command functions and 32 additional response functions to be defined. Thirteen command functions and eight response functions are defined below; all others are reserved. The encoding of the U format command/response control field shall be as shown in figure 6.
First bit transmitted 1 2 3 M 4 M 5 P/F M

1 1 Unnumbered format I

I

The SNRM, SARM, SABM, DISC, SNRME, SARME, SABME and SIM unnumbered mode setting commands and the RSET unnumbered resetting command, the XID unnumbered command, and the TEST unnumbered command, shall require the secondary/combined station to acknowledge acceptance by responding with the appropriate unnumbered response frame (a UA response frame, a XID response frame, and a TEST response frame, respectively). If the secondary/combined station receives more than one of the above commands before a respond opportunity occurs, it shall transmit the response appropriate to the first of the received commands at the first respond opportunity. The secondary/combined station transmission of the appropriate response following the receipt of one of these commands shall take precedence over a response for any other previous command which may be waiting for a respond opportunity at the secondary/combined station. Following receipt of one of the above commands, the se&ndaty/combined station may ignore all frames received, except to detect the next respond opportunity, until it has sent a response appropriate to that command. Following receipt of a RSET resetting command, a combined station may discard the information field contained in any I or UI frames received but shall continue to utilize whatever control information is contained in any frames received (for example N(R), change in busy/not busy status, request for retransmission, indication .of an exception condition, etc.) until it has sent a UA response acknowledging receipt of that resetting command. In two-way alternate communications, a secondary/combined station, following the receipt of a mode setting command, or a combined station, following the receipt of a resetting command, shall transmit a UA response frame at the next respond opportunity. In two-way simultaneous communications, a secondary/combined station which is transmitting concurrent

Command (pollI Response (final)

5 "modifier" bits (see 7.3.1 and 7.321

Figure

6 -

Unnumbered

format

of control

field

bits

12

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

to the receipt

of a mode

setting

command,

or a combined

b)

Upon

receipt

of

the

DISC

command,

the

secon-

station which is transmitting resetting command, shall

concurrent to the receipt of a initiate transmission of a UA response frame at the earliest respond opportunity. If appropriate to the mode of operation, the secondary/combined station may continue transmission following return of the UA response.

dary/combined station shall respond with the UA or DM response depending on whether the secondary/combined station was in an operational mode or a disconnected mode, respectively, at the time that the DISC command was received. The UA or DM frame shall have the F bit set to has the P bit set to "1". "1" if the DISC command If the secondary/combined

station cannot accept a mode setstation cannot accept a resetrespond setting opportunity, or resetting as appropriate, at its earliest of the mode

The respond (SNRM, accepted

opportunity SABM,

et tt+e secondary/combined SNRME, SARME or SABME)

station that is station

ting command, ting command, transmit indicating command a DM,

or the combined it shall, FRMR,

shall be determined SARM,

by the operational

mode setring command

RD, or RIM response,

(i.e. the mode that the secondary/combined

non-acceptance

has accepted as follows : a)

dictates when the response shall be transmitted),

Upon receipt of a SNRM

or SNRME

command

with the or

P bit set to "l", SNRME P bit set command frame to

the secondary has the and

station shall respond with a If the SNRM the secondary with a single

7.3.1.1 The

Set normal response mode (SNRM) command

command

single UA frame with the F bit set to "1". P bit set to "0", then shall respond station shall wait until a command "1"

SNRM

shall be used to place the addressed where

frame is received with the or shall wait until a UP

secondary

station in the normal response mode (NRM)

UA frame with the F bit set to "l",

all control fields shall be one octet in length. No information field shall be permitted with the SNRM command. The secondary station shall confirm by transmission acceptance of the SNRM command control of a UA response in the unextended

is received with the P bit set to "0" and then shall

respond. with a single UA frame with the F bit set to "0" bl Upon receipt of a SARM or SARME command with or without the P bit set to "l", the secondary station shall transmit a UA frame :

field format et the first respond opportunity. Upon acceptance of this command, the secondary station send and receive state variables shall be set to zero. When this command is actioned, the content the responsibility for all field of

1) upon detection of an idle data link channel TWA data communication;-or 2) at the earliest respond opportunity

state in

unacknowledged

I frames assigned to data link control reverts of the information I frames is reassigned to data link conor not is decided at a higher level.

to higher level. Whether data such unacknowledged trol for transmission

in TWS

communication. The UA frame shall have the F bit set to "1" if the comThe UA frame may be folif pensecondary station transmissions,

mand has the P bit set to "1". lowed by additional ding. c) Upon receipt of a SABM while in ABM,

7.3.1.2 The

Set asynchronous command

response mode (SARM) the

command adressed

SARM

shall be used to place

secondary or SABME command, or a with or without the P bit set a UA frame

station in the asynchronous

response mode (ARM) command. The corn-

where all control fields shall be one octet in length. No information field shall be permitted secondary with the SARM station shall confirm acceptance of the SARM

RSET command to "l", 1) TWA 2)

the combined upon detection

station shall transmit

:

of an idle data link channel or opportunity

state in

mand by the transmission of a UA response in the unextended control field format at the first respond opportunity. Upon acceptance of this command, the secondary station send and receive state variables shall be set to zero. When this command is actioned, the responsibility for all

data communication; at the earliest respond

in TWS

data

communication. The UA frame shall have the F bit set to "1" if the comThe UA frame may be folif penunacknowledged I frames assigned to data link control reverts the content of the information field of

mand has the P bit set to "1". ding. In the case of the non-operational (SIM and DISC), the respond dary/combined normal station

lowed by additional combined station transmissions,

to higher level. Whether such unacknowledged trol for transmission

I frames is reassigned to data link con-

or not is decided at a higher level.

mode

setting at

commands the seconi.e. a given mode

opportunity

7.3.1.3 The

Set asynchronous command

balanced mode (SABM)

command

shall be system opportunity

defined;

secondary/combined mode respond as follows receipt respond opportunity command, a)

station shall be system defined to use the or the asynchronous for the response following a SIM or DISC

SABM

shall be used to place the addressed balanced mode (ABM) The com-

combined

station in the asynchronous

where all control fields shall be one octet in length. No information field shall be permitted combined with the SABM command. station shall confirm acceptance of the SABM

:
of the SIM command, the secon-

Upon

dary/combined

station shall respond with the UA response.

mand by transmission of a UA response in the unextended control field format at the first respond opportunity. Upon ac? ceptance of this command, the combined receive state variables shall be set to zero. station send and

The UA frame shall have the F bit set to "1" if the SIM command has the P bit set to "1".

13

I

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

When

this

command

is actioned, the content

the

responsibility

for

all

to higher

level. Whether

the content

of the information

field of

unacknowledged to higher

I frames assigned to data link control
of the information at a higher level.

reverts field of

level. Whether

such unacknowledged trol for transmission

I frames is reassigned to data link conor not is decided at a higher level.

such unacknowledged trol for transmission 7.3.1.4 Disconnect

I frames is reassigned
or not is decided (DISCI command

to data link con7.3.1.7 command The SABME command shall be used to place balanced the octets shall in length with confirm the addressed mode where command. of the in the exsend all No inforSet asynchronous balanced mode extended (SABME)

The DISC command or initialization switched the addressed mode

shall be used to terminate previously networks is suspending should networks,

an operational In both that a the

combined control mation The tended SABME

station field shall

in an asynchronous be permitted station field by transmission format of this command,

set by a command. station(s) operation assume

fields shall be two combined command control

(see 7.4). SABME acceptance

)

and non-switched station

it shall be used to inform and that the logically disconoperation

secondary/combined station(s) In switched

primary/combined secondary/combined disconnected nected function at the physical of &-physical dary, .~.:r,-2+cd shall UC r:ermif:er! the.command, the `acceptance UA response. When this

of a UA response respond the combined

at the first

opportunity. station

mode.

a logically

Upon acceptance and receive

at the data link level may also serve to initiate, level interface, level; station a physical disconnect i.e. to have go "on-hook". the addressed seconNo information field Prior to actioning shall confirm of a station

state variables

shall be set to zero. the responsibility to data link control of the information at a higher level. for all reverts field of

When this command is actioned, unacknowledged I frames assigned to higher level. Whether the content I frames such unacknowledged trol for transmission

b,:ith the DISC command.

the secondary/combined of the DISC command

is reassigned

to data link con-

by the transmission

or not is decided

command

is actioned, assigned the content I frames

the

responsibility

for

all

7.3.1.8 The SIM

Set initialization command initialize shall

mode be

(SIM) used to

command cause the

.
addressed proNo inThe of the at the state

unacknowledged to higher

I frames

to data link control of the information at a higher level.

reverts field of secondary/combined cedurets)`to formation station to initiate with a station-specified functions. command. acceptance the SIM

level. Whether

such unacknowledged trol for transmission 7.3.1.5 mand Set normal

is reassrgned

to data link con-

or not is decided response

its data link level control station shall confirm acceptance send

field shall be permitted

mode extended

(SNRME)

com-

secondary/combined SIM the command first respond

by the transmission opportunity. Upon station

of a UA response and receive

of this command,

The SNRME secondary fields

command

shall be used to place response in length acceptance

the addressed all control The seconcommand control acceptance field of state

secondary/combined

station

in a normal octets

mode where command.

variables When

shall be set to zero. this command is actioned, assigned the content I frames the responsibility for all

shall be two

(see 7.41. No information of the SNRME Upon unacknowledged to higher I frames to data link control of the information at a higher level. reverts field of

field shall be permitted dary station format variables When by transmission this command,

with the SNRME

shall confirm

of a UA response respond the secondary

in the extended

level. Whether

at the first

opportunity. station

such unacknowledged trol for transmission

is reassigned

to data link con-

send and receive

or not is decided

shall be set to zero. 7.3.1.9 this command is actioned, assigned the content the responsibility for all The UP command shall be used to solicit response frames from Unnumbered poll (UP) command

unacknowledged to higher

I frames

to data link control of the information

reverts field of

level. Whether

such unacknowledged trol for transmission

I frames is reassigned to data link conor not is decided at a higher level. response mode extended (SARME)

a group of secondary stations (group poll), from all secondary stations fall-station poll) or from a single secondary/combined station (individual poll) by establishing a logical operational condition that exists at each addressed data station for one respond opportunity. In the case of a group poll or all-station poll, the mechanism employed to control response transmissions (to avoid simultaneous transmissions) is not defined in this International Standard. The UP command does not acknowledge receipt of any response frames that may have been previously transmitted by the secondary/combined station. No information field shall be permitted The secondary/combined with a group with the UP command. which address receives the UP in

7.3.1.6 Set asynchronous command

The SARME command shall be used to place the addressed secondary station in an asynchronous response mode where all control fields shall be two octets in length (see 7.4). No information field shall be permitted The secondary station shall SARME tended command control field by transmission format of this command, with the SARME command. confirm acceptance of the of a UA response respond the secondary in the exsend opportunity. station

station(s) or all-station

at the first

command

shall respond

Upon acceptance and receive When this

state variables command

shall be set to zero. the responsibility for all

the same manner as when polled using an individual address. The response frame(s) shall contain the sending secondary/combined station's individual address, plus N(S) and N(R) numbers tinuity as required of each by the particular response(s). station's N(S) The conshall be secondary/combined

is actioned, assigned

unacknowfedgod

I frames

to data lrnk control

reverts

14

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1986 IS0 4335-l 984

maintained. If the UP command has the P bit set to "l", each addressed secondary/combined station shall respond with at least one frame, the last frame having the F bit set to "1". If the UP command has the P bit set to "0", each addressed secondary/combined station may or may not respond depending on the status of the secondary/combined station. Secondary/combined station responses sent in reply to a UP command with the P bit set to "0" shall have the F bit set to "0" in all frames of each secondary/combined station's response. A secondary/combined station which receives a UP command with the P bit set to "0" shall respond when :
a) it has an INI

The encoding of the format identifier field shall be as shown in figure 8.
NOTE The format identifier has a capability of designating formats and 128 different user-defined 128 dif-

ferent standardized

formats.

First blt transmitted Format identifier bits Standardized User-defined format format

f
1 x x 2 x x 3 x x 4 x 5 x x 6 x x 7 x 8 1

frame(s) to send;

\

x

; -.

0

Format identifier

]
XID format identifier

value b) it has an I frame to resend because it did not receive an acknowledgment; c) it has received, but not acknowledged, an I frame(s);
In an operational mode (NRM,
ARM or ABM), a FRMR condition may be established

Figure 8 -

d) it has received, but not responded to, a Xlb or TEST command; e) it has experienced an exception condition or change of status that has not been reported; or f) it has a status that has to be reported again (for example, a FRMR, RIM or RD response, or, optionally, an appropriate frame to report a no-traffic condition, or a DM response to request a mode setting command). If an idle data link channel state (15 "ones") exists following the receipt of a frame(s), or no response is received within a given period of time, it shall be assumed that the secondary/combined station has completed, or will not initiate, transmission. 7.3.1.10 Unnumbered information (UI) command

if the received XID command defined station.

informaof

tion field exceeds

the maximum

storage capability

the secondary/combined

7.3.1.12

Reset (RSET) command
shall be used by a combined No information station in an

The RSET command operational dressed combined shall confirm acceptance received

mode to reset the receive state variable in the adstation. field shall be permitby transmisUpon station The addressed combined station

ted with the RSET command. acceptance

of the RSET command the addressed combined

sion of a UA response at the first respond opportunity. of this command, combined

receive state variable shall be set to zero. If the UA response is correctly, the initializing station shall reset its send state variable to zero. The RSET command shall reset all frame rejection conditions in station, except for an invalid N(R) station has reported may be sent by the frame. by the

The Ul command shall be used to send information (for example, status, application data, operation, interruption, temporal data, link level programs or parameters) to a secondary/combined station(s) without affecting the V(S) or V(R) variables at any station. Reception of the UI command is not sequence number verified by the data link procedures; therefore, the UI frame may be lost if a data link exception OCcurs during transmission of the command, or duplicated if an exception condition occurs during any reply to the command. There is no specified secondary/combined station response to the UI command. 7.3.1.11 Exchange identification (XID) command

the addressed condition combined frame

combined

which the addressed combined The RSET command

by a FRMR frame. rejection

station which detects an invalid N(R) to clear such a condition in place of sending a FAR shall be transmitted

To clear an invalid N(R) frame rejection condition with a RSET command, combined When the RSET command station that detects the invalid N(R). is actioned, the responsibility for all

this command

unacknowledged I frames assigned to data link control reverts to higher level. Whether the content of the information fiel; ,V such unacknowledged I frames is reassigned to data link t,ontrol for transmission or not is decided at a higher level.

The XID command shall be used to cause the qddressed secondary/combined station to identify itself, and, optionally, to proand/or identification station primary/combined ride characteristics to the addressed secondary/combined station. An information field is optional with ihe XID command. A secondary/combined station receiving a XID command shall, if capable, action the XID command in any mode unless a UA response to a mode setting command is awaiting tranStniSsion or a FRMR condition exists. lf a XlD command contains an information field, the first Octet
of the information field shall be the format identifier for the re-

7.3.1,13
The

Test (TEST) command

TEST command shall be used to cause the addressed with station to respond the secondary/combined TEST response at the first respond opportunity, .thus performing a basic test of the data link control. optional with the TEST command. An information field is the by the the oh If present, however,

received information field shall be returned, if possible, station with secondary/combined addressed TEST response. the mode dary/combined The TEST command variables station. or sequence maintained

shall have no effect

by the secon-

mainder of that information field.

15

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1986 1SO 4335-1984

The primary/combined station shall consider the data link level test terminated upon receipt of the TEST response or when a time-out period has run out. The results of the TEST.command/response exchange may be made available for interrogation by a higher level. 7.3.2 Unnumbered responses

After sending a FRMR response, the combined station : a) shall stop transmitting I frames if the frame reject exception condition #as caused by an invalid N(R) since its direction of transmission is affected; or b) may, because the opposite direction of transmission is affected, optionally continue sending I frames if the frame reject exception condition was caused by :

The unnumbered response encodings are shown in figure 9.
First bit transmitted

f
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 0 1 0 0 1 0 4 0 1 0 0 1 0 5 F F F F F F 6 1 0 0 0 1 1 7 1 0 1 0 0 1 8 0 0 0 0 1 1 UA response FRMR response DM response RD response RIM response UI response XID response TEST response

1) a command or response that is undefined or not implemented, or
2) an I frame with an information field which exceeded the maximum information field length which can be accommodated by the secondary/combined station. [See 8.4 for a description of command-response rejection procedures.) The primary/combined station receiving the FRMR response shall be responsible for initiating the appropriate mode setting or resetting corrective action by initializing one or both directions of transmission using the RSET, SNRM, SARM, SABM, SNRME, SARME, SABME, or DISC command, as applicable. An information field shall be returned with this response to provide the reason for the frame rejection. The information field shall contain the fields shown in figure 10.
First bit transmitted

111OFOOl

lllOFOO0

Figure 9 -

Unnumbered response control field bit assignments

7.3.2.1

Unnumbered acknowledgment (UA) response

The UA response shall be used by the secondary/comb;ned station to acknowledge the receipt and acceptance of SNRM, SARM, SABM, SNRME, SARME, SABME, RSET, SIM and DISC commands. The UA response shall be transmitted in the unextended or extended control field format as directed by the received command. No information field shall be permitted with the UA response. 7.3.2.2 Frame reject (FRMR) response

f1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 26

Figure 10 -

Information

field format for FRMR response

The FRMR response shall be used by the secondary/combined station in an operational mode to report that one of the following conditions, that is not correctable by retransmission of the identical frame, resulted from the receipt of a frame without FCS error from the primary/combined station : a) the receipt of a command or a response that is undefined or not implemented; b) the receipt of an I/lJI command or response, or, optionally, a TEST command, or, optionally, a XID command or response, with an information field which exceeded the maximum information field length which can be accommodated by the secondary/combined station; c) the receipt of an invalid N(R) from the primary/combined station, i.e. an N(R) which identifies an I frame which has previously been transmitted and acknowledged or an I frame which has not been transmitted and is not the next sequential I frame awaiting transmission; or d) the receipt of a frame containing an information field when no information field is permitted by the associated control field.
The secondary/combined station shall transmit the FRMR

The functions of these fields shall be as follows : a) The rejected frame control field shall be the control field of the received frame which caused the frame reject exception condition, b) N(S) shall be the current value of the send state variable at the secondary/combined station (bit 10 = low-order bit). c) C/R set to "1" shall indicate that the frame which caused the frame reject exception condition was a response frame, and C/R set to "0" shall indicate that the frame which caused the frame reject exception condition was a command frame. d) N(R) shall be the current value of the receive state variable at the secondary/combined station (bit 14 = IOWorder bit). e) w set to "1" shall indicate that the control field received and returned in bits 1 to 8 inclusive was undefined or not implemented. f) x set to "1" shall indicate that the control field received and returned in bits 1 to 8 inclusive was considered invalid

response at the first respond opportunity.

16

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

because the frame contained not permitted be set to "1" in conjunction g) y set to "1" exceeded

an information with this bit.

field which

is

A secondary/combined

station which has sent an RD response frame(s) other than the DISC comif it is able to do so. If the non-DISC procedures comwhen frame(s)

with this command

or response.

Bit w shall

and receives a command the secondary/combined mand frame(s), responding

mand shall accept the command field it shall follow

shall indicate the maximum

that the information information

station accepts

received which station. h)

field length

the normal station.

can be accommodated

by the secondary/combined

to the primary/combined

Secondary/com-

bined station acceptance If the secondary/combined the disconnected mode

of a frame other than the DISC comstation still wishes to be placed in (NDM or ADM), it shall re-issue the

mand after sending an RD response cancels the RD response. in bits 1 to 8 inclusive contained an invalid

z set to "1" shall indicate that the control field received

and returned N(R).

RD response. If the secondary/combined station cannot accept the non-DISC frames due to internal problems, it may field of the FRMR rejec7.3.2.5 Request initialization mode (RIM) response again respond with an RD response to the non-DISC frames.

The w, x, y and z bits in the information

response may all be set to zero, indicating an unspecified If required, response convenient, the information mutually agreed boundary. field contained upon within

tion of the frame for one or more of the conditions cited above. the FRMR word or may be padded with zero bits so as to end on any character, byte, (See also 8.4.) (see 7.4) is used, the format for

The RIM response shall be used in any mode to report a secondary/combined station's need for initialization. with the RIM response. station has sent a RIM response, received (other than the to the XID or TEST comNo informatior field shall be permitted

machine-dependent When

control field extension

the information

field returned with the FRMR

response shall be

Once a secondary/combined additional mand) commands SIM or DISC command, shall be monitored oersists. retransmit

as shown in figure 11. First bit transmitted r'
1

subsequently to detect

or, if capable,

a respond opportunity

-

- -

16'17 ,,

18 -

-

24 25 26 C/R

N(R)

32 33 w

- - X

the RIM response,

as an indication that the need for

36

initialization

Rejected extended frame control field

N(S)

.Y i

7.3.2.5 Information extended field format for FRMR The

Unnumbered

information

(UI) response (for exor

Figure

11 -

UI response status, or V(R)

shall be used to send information application data, operation,

response

ample, the V(S)

interruption, Reception

temporal data) to a primary/combined Bit 18 and bit 26 are the low-order values. 7.3.2.3 Disconnected mode (DM) response the bits of the state variable UI response procedures; exception duplicated The DM response secondary/combined shall be used to report a status where station is logically disconnected in NDM or ADM. is not sequence therefore, number

station without affecting of the verified by the data link may be lost if a data link of the UI response, or occurs during any reply to

variables at either station. the UI frame transmission condition

occurs during if an exception

the UI response.

from the 7.3.2.7 Exchange identification (XID) response An

data link, and is, by system definition, The DM response to the

shall be sent by the secondary/combined combined if sent in to inNo setting combined command, station or, that

The XID response shall be used to reply to a XID command. information identification field containing and/or the secondary/combined may be optionally characteristics

station in NDM or ADM to request the primary/other station form issue a mode primary/other response to the reception NDM/ADM information

station present

of a mode setting command,

with the XID response. response, tion exists.

A secondary/combined shall, if capable,

station in any send the XID condi-

it is still in

mode receiving a XID command

and cannot action the mode setting command. field shall be permitted with the DM response. or ADM

unless a UA response is pending or a FRMR

A secondary/combined received commands (rehransmit RD response, nected SABME, 7.3.2.4 the

station in NDM

shall monitor in order to TEST or (other than

to detect a respond opportunity (or the RIM, are accepted SABM, XID, i.e. no commands

If a XID response contains an information field, the first octet of the information field shall be the format identifier for the re mainder of that information of the format identifier field. mode, a secondary station field. See figure 8 for the encoding

DM response commands) SARM,

as appropriate);

the XID and TEST command (SNRM, or SIM,

until the disconof a mode setting In an asynchronous disconnected SARME, may send an unsolicited XID response at a respond opportunity to request a XID exchange. However, the XID response shall not be sent as a response to any received command other than the XID command. A combined station in ABM may establish a FRMR exception condition if the information field of a received XID response exceeds the maximum station. defined storage capability of the combined

mode is terminated

by the receipt

SNRME,

as appropriate). (RD) response

Request disconnect

The RD response shall be used to indicate to the primary/combined station that the secondary/combined station wishes to be placed in the disconnected mode (NDM or ADM). No information field shall be permitted with the RD response.

17

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 184

7.3.2.8

Test (TEST) response

responm shall be used to reply to the TEST comstation, receiving a is send the TEST response in unless a UA response

In the extended

formats,

x bits are reserved and set to "0", and Bit 2 and bit 10 shall be the lownumbers.

the value of U is unspecified. The TEST order bits of the sequence mand in any mode. A secondary/combined TEST command, accordance pending shall, if capable, with the defined mode, exists. shall be If the

8

Exception

condition

reporting

and

or a FRMR condition

recovery
The following procedures are available to effect recovery condition are

An information returned with

field, if present in the TEST command, the corresponding TEST response.

following

the detection/occurrence

of an exception conditions

secondary/combined station is busy and cannot accept an information field, a TEST response without an information field shall be returned. If the secondary/combined station is in an operational mode (NRM, ARM, ABM), a FRMR condition may be established if the received TEST command has an information field which exceeds the maximum established frame storage capability without of the secondary/combined for this condition, station. If a FRMR response is not returned an information a TEST response

at the data link level. The exception

described

,

those situations which may occur as the result of transmission errors, data station malfunction or operational situations.

8.1

Busy
shall result when or unable a data station to continue for example, is tem-

The busy condition porarily unable

to receive,

to receive, receive buf-

field shall be returned.

I frames due to internal constraints; fering limitations.

In this case, an RNR frame shall be transmitmay be transmitted condition from the busy The conby

7.3.3 The

Assignment XID format

of XID

format described

identifiers in 7.3.1.11 and 7.3.2.7

ted with the N(R) number of the next I frame that is expected. Traffic awaiting transmission data station tinued retransmission prior to, or following, of a busy the RNR frame.

identifiers

shall be assigned according Applications

to the following

procedure. identifiers shall through

existence

shall be reported

of an RNR frame at each P/F frame exchange.

for the assignment

of XID format 97/SC

be made to the Secretariat the national standards tion originated. plications The submission fields. When Where

of ISO/TC

6 (ANSI)

A data station receiving an RNR frame when in the process of transmitting I frames secondary (i.e. two-way station in NRM simultaneous) possible time. shall stop transmitting It is suggested that a at the earliest

body of the country where the applicano national standards the IS0 body exists, apSecretariat. of the inCentral

shall be made through

return a frame with the F bit set to a

shall include at least a description and a detailed description

tended application

of the format and

"1" before suspending transmission. A secondary/combined station in ARM/ABM, respectively, shall perform response/command Indication time-out before resuming transmission.

approved,

a format identifier value will be assign-

ed and will be included in annex C. that a busy condition SNRM, has cleared and that I frames by the transmission SNRME, of SABM, SARME, will now be accepted 7.4 shall be reported SARM,

Extended

control

field

formats
by the addition of a second

an RR, REJ, SREJ, SABME

or UA frame with or without of an

the P/F bit set to "1".

The control field may be extended

Clearance of a busy condition indicated by the transmission "1". Clearance

at a primary station shall also be

contiguous octet immediately following the basic control field. This capability shall provide for an N(S) and N(R) of modulo 128. When ment the secondary/combined regarding control station, field station station format shall operational known environby the sent by in basic

I frame with the P bit set to
at a secondary/combined of an I frame

of a busy condition

station shall also be indicated by the transmission with the F bit set to "1".

is not

primary/combined

a mode setting command be expressed

8.2

N(S) sequence

error
condition shall occur in the

the primary/combined format. Control field extension format format

An N(S) sequence receiver for the information the transfer comcomcomwhen

error exception received

an I frame

error free (no FCS error) (i.e. not incre-

contains an N(S) that is not equal to the receive state variable at the receiver. The receiver shall not acknowledge ment its receive state variable) the frame causing the sequence error or any I frames which may follow untii an I frame with the correct N(S) is received. Unless the SREJ frame is to be used field of SREJ N(S) does not equal the receive (See 8.2.3 for to recover from a given sequence error, the information

mand/response mand/response mand/response

(I format), (S format),

supervisory

and the unnumbered

format (U format) shall be as shown in table 4.

Table 4 -

Extended control field formats

all I frames state recovery.

received shall

whose be

variable

discarded.

1

A primary, secondary or combined station which receives one
or more I frames having sequence errors, but which are otherwise error free, shall accept the control information contained in the N(R) field and the P/F bit to perform data link control functions; for example, to receive acknowledgment of previously transmitted I frames, to cause a secondary/combined

18

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

station to respond (P bit set to "l"), and, in NRM, to detect that the secondary station is terminating transmission (F bit set to "1"). Therefore, the retransmitted I frame may contain an N(R) field and/or P/F bit information that are updated and different from those contained in -the originally transmitted I frame. Following the occurrence of a sequence error, the following means are available for initiating the retransmission of lost I frames or those with errors. 8.2.1 Poll/final also 6.3) (P/F) bit (checkpoint) recovery (see

f) If, after sending a frame with the P/F bit set to "1". a data station receives an acknowledgment to that frame before receiving the correspondent frame with the F/P bit set to "1". checkpoint retransmission on the frame with the F/P bit set to "1" shall be inhibited. g) If a SREJ frame with the P/F bit set to "1" is received, SREJ recovery retransmission shall take precedence over checkpoint retransmission. h) In the case of a combined station, if any frame with the P bit set to "1" is received, checkpoint retransmission shall be inhibited. 8.2.2 REJ recovery

#en a data station receives a frame with the P/F bit set to "l", it shall initiate retransmission of unacknowledged I frames previously transmitted with sequence numbers that are less than the V(S), send state variable, value that was current at the time of transmission of the last frame with the F/P bit, respectively, set to "1". Retransmission shalt start with the oldest numbered unacknowledged I frame. I frames shall be retransmitted sequentially. New I frames may be transmitted if they become available. Such retransmission of I frames as a result of an exchange of P/F bits set to "1" is known as checkpoint retransmission. Checkpoint retransmission shall not be initiated under the following conditions : a) In the case of a secondary/primary station, if a REJ frame with the P/F bit set to "0" has been received and actioned, checkpoint retransmission shall be inhibited on the next P/F frame received, if it would cause retransmission of the same particular I frame; i.e. same N(R) in same numbering cycle. b) In the case of a combined station, if a REJ command with the P bit set to "Cl" or "1". or a REJ response with the F bit set to "0". has been received and actioned while a P bit set to "1" was unanswered, checkpoint retransmission shall be inhibited on the next frame received with the F bit set to "l", if it would cause retransmission of the same particular I frame; i.e. same N(R) in same numbering cycle. c) In the case of a secondary/primary station, if a SREJ frame with the P/F bit set to "0" has been received and actioned, checkpoint retransmission shall be inhibited on the next frame received with the P/F bit set to "1" when this frame is a SREJ frame and contains the same N(R) as the first SREJ frame, if it would cause retransmission of the same particular I frame; i.e. same N(R) in same numbering cycle. d) In the case of a combined station, if a SREJ command with the P bit set to "0" or "1". or a SREJ response with the F bit set to `XI", has been received and actioned, checkpoint retransmission shall be inhibited on the next frame received with the F bit set to "1" when this frame is a SREJ frame and contains the same N(R) as the first SREJ frame, if it would cause retransmission of the same particular I frame; i.e. same N(R) in same numbering cycle. e) If a P/F bit set to "1" is received in an unnumbered format frame, checkpoint retransmission shall be inhibited.

The REJ command/response shall be used primarily to initiate an exception recovery (retransmission), following the detection of a sequence error, earlier than is possible by checkpoint (P/F bit) recovery; for example, in two-way simultaneous information transfer, if a REJ frame is immediately transmitted upon detection of a sequence error, then there is no requirement to wait for a frame with the P/F bit set to "1". With respect to each direction of transmission on the data link, only one "sent REJ" exception condition from a given data station to another given data station shall be established at a time. A "sent REJ" exception condition shall be cleared when the requested I frame is received, when the response/command time-out function runs out, or when a P/F checkpoint cycle that was initiated concurrent with or following the transmission of the REJ frame is completed. When the data station perceives by time-out or by the checkpointing mechanism that the requested I frame has not been received, because either the requested I frame or the REJ frame was in error or lost, the REJ frame may be repeated. A data station receiving a REJ frame shall initiate sequential transmission (or retransmission) of I frames starting with the I frame indicated by the N(R) contained in the REJ frame. New I frames may be transmitted subsequently if they become available. If a) retransmission beginning with a particular frame occurs due to checkpointing (see 6.3.3.1, 6.3.3.2, 6.3.3.3 and 6.2.1). and b) a REJ frame is received which would also start retransmission with the same particular I frame [as Identified by the N(R) in the REJ frame], the retransmission resulting from the REJ frame shall be inhibited.

8.2.3

SREJ recovery

The SREJ command/response shall be used primarily to initiate more efficient error recovery by requesting the retransmission of a single I frame followi? 1 the detection of a sequence error rather than the retransmission of the I frame requested plus all additional I frames which may have been transmitted subsequently.

19

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1986 IS0 4335-l 984

When

an

I frame sequence error is detected,

and it is deter-

8.2.4

lime-out

recovery

mined that SREJ recovery is to be employed, the SREJ frame shall be transmitted at the earliest possible time. When a primary/secondary set to "0" station sends a SREJ frame with the P/F bit SREJ" exception condition is not station is ready to issue the primary/seconWhen a comand the "sent

In the event that the remote data station, as a result of a transmission error, does not receive (or receives and discards) a transmission consisting of a single

I frame or the last I frame(s)

cleared when the primary/secondary

the next frame with the P/F bit set to "l",

in a sequence of I frames, it will not detect an out-of-sequence exception condition and therefore will not transmit a SREJ/ REJ frame. The data station which transmitted ledged the unacknowof a system to

dary station shall send a SREJ frame with the P/F bit set to "I" with the same N(R) as the original SREJ frame. bined station sends a SREJ command or "l", "sent SREJ" condition is not with the P bit set to "0" when the combined

I frame!s) shall, following the completion

or a SREJ response with the F bit set to "0", and the cleared

defined time-out period, take appropriate recovery action determine the point at which retransmission shall begin. A primary/combined supervisory a) frame. station When station has a respond opportunity, time-out or equivalent and should enquire status with

station is ready to issue the next frame with the P/F bit set to "1". the combined station shall send a SREJ response with the F bit set to "1" with the same N(R) as the original SREJ frame.

a

a secondary an optional

In a primary/secondary sent with the P/F checkpoint

station,

since an

I or S format frame
of causing station shall b) function for unacknowledged c) no new

bit set to "1" has the potential a primary/secondary

retransmission,

I frames has run out, and

not send a SREJ frame with the same N(R) (i.e. same value and same numbering cycle) as that of the previously sent frame

I frames are available, I frame
primary

with the P/F bit set to "1". In a combined of causing checkpoint retransmission,

station, since an

I or
then the secondary station should transmit only the last and should wait until status is received from the

S format frame sent with the F bit set to "1" has the potential a combined station shall sent frame not send a SREJ frame with the same N(R) (i.e. same value and same numbering cycle) as that of the previously with the F bit set to "1".

station. Alternatively, a data station which has timed-out waiting for a reply may retransmit one or all unacknowledged

I frames as a mechanism to solicit the status of the remote data
station.

With respect to each direction of transmission only one "sent SREJ'! exception condition

on the data link, NOTES

from a given data

station to another given data station shall be established at a time. A "sent SREJ" exception condition shall be cleared when the requested mand time-out cycle that was transmission

I frame is received,
function initiated concurrent

when with

the response/coma P/F checkpoint the or following

runs out, or when

1 If a data station retransmits one of the unacknowledged I frames (not the last I frame) after a time-out, the data station should keep record of the highest value of V(S) that had been sent so as to be able to identify an N(R) received as acknowledging or not acknowledging some or all of the I frames previously transmitted.
2 If a data station does retransmit all unacknowledged I frames after a time-out, it should be prepared to receive a following REJ or SREJ frame with an N(R) greater than the send state variable at the data station which retransmits. 3 When. as a result of a time-out, a secondary/combined station decides to retransmit a response frame, the retransmitted response frame should have the F bit set to "0" unless an unanswered P bit set to "1" has been received since the earlier transmission of the response frame. 4 Care should be taken if a higher level attempts to change an information field which is being retransmitted as a part of time-out recovery, because the new information field is discarded if the receiving data station had correctly received an I frame with the same N(S). 5 To account for possible retransmissions after time-out, a receiving data station should not set a SREJ exception condition when it receives an I frame with an N(S) one less than its receive state variable.

of the SREJ frame is completed.

When a data station perceives by time-out ting mechanism that the requested because either the requested

or by the checkpoin-

I frame will not be received,

I frame or the SREJ frame was in

error or lost, the SREJ frame may be repeated.

A

data

station

receiving

the

SREJ

frame

shall

initiate

retransmission

of the single I frame indicated

by the N(R) con-

.

tained in the SREJ frame. New I frames subsequently if they become ayailable.

may be transmitted

When

a primary/secondary

station

receives

and

actions

a

SREJ frame with the P/F bit set to "0", it shall disable actioning of the next SREJ frame if the SREJ frame has the P/F bit set to "1" and has the same N(R) (i.e. same value and same numbering cycle) as the original SREJ frame. When a combined station receives and actions a SREJ command with the P bit set to "0" or "l", or a SREJ response with the F bit set to "O", it shall disable actioning of the next SREJ frame if the SREJ frame has the F bit set to "1" and has the same N(R) (i.e. same value and same numbering cycle) as the original SREJ frame.

8.3

FCS error
by

Any frame received with a FCS error shall not be accepted

the receiver and shall be discarded. At a secondary/combined station, no action shall be taken as the result of that frame. At a primary/combined station, if the frame with the FCS error was a response frame with the F bit set to "l", a resulting time-out function shall occur in the primary/combined itiating recovery action. station prior to in-

NOTE - To improve transmission efficiency, it is recommended that the SREJ command/response be transmitted as the result of the detection of a sequence error where only a single I frame is missing [as determined by receipt of the out-of-sequence N(S)].

20

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 988 IS0 4335-l 984

8.4

Command/response

frame rejection

In the case of exception the transmission of I frames

conditions may

that are not related to with received condition If I

I frame transmission from the reporting data station, the
continue, only for the state of the P and F bits station issuing a mode setas appropriate. combined combined to in a). it shall station

A command/response rejection exception condition shall be established upon the receipt of an error-free frame which contains an undefined information tion. At a primary station, this exception recovery/resolution N(R), recovery setting command. At a secondary station, this exception condition shall be exexshall include, condition shall be subject to or not implemented command/response information in field the control field, an invalid frame format, length which can be accommodated an invalid N(R) or an

frames being examined

and the value of the N(R) field until the exception is cleared by the other combined ting command or a RSET recovery station is not effected command,

field which exceeds the maximum

by the receiving data sta-

by the other frame,

within a specified time-out

interval, the reporting

may repeat the FRMR

or it may choose as described action,

assume control of the recovery function If the other combined is unable to effect FRMR FRMR function frame. frame an appropriate

at a higher level. In the case of an invalid at least, the issuance of a mode

station that receives the FRMR frame recovery rejecting the received recovery

reply with a FRMR frame of its own, The combined shall then in a). initiate

station that sent the original an appropriate

reported action.

by a FRMR

response

for appropriate

primary station a FRMR

as described

Once a secondary

station has established

ception condition,

no additional

I frames shall be accepted,

cept for examination tion issuing a mode shall be repeated effected

of the state of the P bit and the value of is cleared by the primary staThe FRMR response setting command.

8.5

Contention

situations
(ABM) during a mode setting or following an

the N(R) field, until the condition

Contention extended TWA

may occur in ARM or TWS period of inactivity

at each respond opportunity

until recovery is

action in either TWA configuration.

communications,

by the primary station. station, this exception condition shall be dealt

(idle data link channel state) in a case, the primary/one com-

In the TWA

At a combined

with in either of two ways a) The combined

:
may follow a course of action The or a

bined station and secondary/other combined station are contending for the use of the logical communication path for mode setting or data interchange combined purposes. In the TWS case, the combined primary/one function. In all of the above resolved through in each data station. cases, the contention function situation employed shall be functions by the that than station and secondary/other

station

similar to that described for a primary station, where the exception condition combined action. b) The combined station may follow a course of action conRSET command, is resolved as a higher level function. as appropriate, station shall issue a mode setting command

station are contending

with regard to initiating a mode setting

as a part of this recovery

the use of different The time-out station combined

value time-out

secondary/one employed

shall be greater

similar to that described for a secondary station and request that the other combined station resolve the exception recovery. dition and effect the required

by the primary/other situations combined

combined

station so as to per-

mit such contention primary/specified

to be resolved in favour of the

station.

21

IS : 11418 (Part 2).1888 IS0 4335-l 984

Annex A Time-out function considerations
(This annex does not form part of thii international Standard.)

A.1

Introduction

In order to detect a no-reply or lost-reply condition, each primary/combined station shall provide a response time-out function. Also, in ARM and ABM, in order to detect a no-reply or lost-reply condition, each secondary/combined station shall provide a command time-out function. In any case, the expiry of the time-out function shall initiate appropriate error recovery procedures. The duration of a time-out period is system dependent end. subject to bilateral agreement.

A.2
A.2.1

Primary/combined station command reply time-out function
NRM

Stan condition : Transmission of a frame with the P bit set to "1". Restart condition : Receipt of en error-free frame with the F bit set to "0". Stop condition : Receipt of an error-free frame with the F bit set to "1".

A.2.2

ARM (TWA) and ABM UUVA)

Start condition : Transmission of a frame with the P bit set to "1". Restart condition : Transmission of a command frame. Stop condition : Receipt of en error-free frame with the F bit set to "1".

A.2.3

ARM UVVSI and ABM (TWSI

Start condition : Transmission of a frame wtth the P bit set to "1". Stop condition : Receipt of an error-free frame with the F bii set to "1". A.2.4

NOM, ADM and IM

Start condition : Transmission of a frame with the P bit set to "1". Stop condition : Receipt of an error-free frame with the F bit set to "1".

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

A.3 A.3.1

Primary/secondary/combined
NRM

station l-frame reply time-out

function

Not used.

A.3.2

ARM (TWA) and ABM WVAI

Start condition : Transmission of an I frame. Restart condition : Transmission of a frame. Stop condition : Receipt of an error-free frame with the expected N(R).

A.3.3

ARM (TWS) and ABM UVVS)

Start condition : Transmission of an I frame. Stop condition : Receipt of an error-free frame with the expected N(R). A.3.4 NDM, ADM

and IM

Not used.

A.4
A.4.1

Secondary/combined
NRM, NDM and IM

station command

request time-out

function

Not used A.4.2 ARM, ADM and ABM

Start condition : Transmission of an unnumbered response frame which requests a command. Stop condition : Receipt of an error-free command frame.

A.5

No-activity

time-out

function

(for switched circuit application)

Start condition : Physical connection established. Restart condition : Receipt of an error-free frame. Stop condition : Initialization of the disconnect procedure at the interface.

23

/'
IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l 984

Annex Examples

B and responses

of the use of commands

(This annex does not form part of this International Standard.)

B.l B.l.1

Introduction General notation

The notation used in the diagrams in this annex is illustrated'below.

F'ag fiae' frame boundarv'^,Frame

without information

Frame containing information

Frame with error :

8.1.2

Notation

for primary and secondary

stations

Information format 1 l Send sequence number f or final bit ON N(S), N(W) P/F ~Poll

Information frame :

t
Receive sequence number (next expected frame)

Example : Pri xmits : 12.6 P. This denotes a primary information frame with send sequence number 2, the next expected 1frame from the secondary is receive sequence number 6 (frames numbered 5 and below are therefore acknowledged) and the poll bit is set to "1" (i.e. the secondary is to initiate transmission with I frames if available).

Supervisory frame :

I-x$x

Supervisory command/response N(R), P/F ~Poll or final bit ON

Receive sequence number

Example,:

)%i xmits : RR2 P. This denotes a receive ready (RR) command, N(R) = 2 (i.e. the next expected I frame from the secondary IS &eive sequence number 21, and the poll bit is set to "1".

Unnumbered frame ;

xxxx,

1

Unnumbered command or response P/F -Poll or final bit ON

Example

: Pri xmits : SNRM, P. This denotes the normal response mode (NRM) mode-setting command with the P bit set to "1". 24

IS : 11418(Part 2)-188% IS0 4285-1884

8.1.3

Notation

for combined station8

Information frame :

\r
Address X, I x,

Information format Send sequence number N(R) tP/F _-Poll or final bit ON r NW,

Receive sequence number (next expected frame1

, AddresS

supervim

frame :

XXX

f

Supervisory command/response NW, L P/F _-Poll or final bit ON

Receive sequence number

Address Unnumbered command or response Unnumbered frame : T

x,

-0

P/F--Poll

or final bit ON

B.2 B.2.1
8.2.1.1

Examples of normal response mode (NRM) Normal response mode (NRM)

two-way

alternate

(TWA) transmission

TWA without

transmission
transfer

errors

NRM start-up procedure and secondary

only Information

SNRM,P Prixmita: I .UA,F
Set xmits :

RR0,P
I 10.0 Il.0 l2.0F

RR3.P t=l

I

t

1 I

.
I

13,e

IS,0

1

I

1 I

3

B.2.1.2

NRM start-up procedure and primary only informatlon

transfer

SNRM,P Pri xmib :

l0,0

11,0P

l2,0

13.0

I
UA,F

RR2.F I

-

*xmim:

t=l

B.2.1.3

NRM Information

tmnefer

by primary and secondary
15.3 I 12.5F 1 i

10.0
Pti xmita :

I

I 1

ll,0

I I

12,0P

13.2

t4,2p

I
103 IljF

I

I

Set xmits :

I

I

I

I

I

IS : 11418(Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l984

8.2.2
8.2.2.1

Normal response mode (NRMI
NRM start-up command SNRM,P error

TWA with transmission

errors in command

frames

SNRM,P

10.0

Pri xmits

: vi+-Time-out
I UA,F

t

\

Set xmlts :

8.2.2.2

NAM primary information

frame error
J RetranT frames

t
Pri xmits :

10,0

;

"?A

12.0P

, I

11.2 I

12,2

! 1

13.2P 1

10,l
Set xmits

I1,lF

:

I 1

I

6.2.2.3

NRM primary poll frame error
Retransmitted frame

10.0
Pri xmits

:

I

1 r

11.0

I I

12.0P

Time-out

RR0,P

12,2

/ I 1

13.2

14.2

I /BI0,2 11.2F

I 1

I

Set xmits :

t

I I

I

8.2.3
B.2.3;1

Normal

response mocie VIWAI

HDX with transmission

errors in re&ponse frames

NRM start-up response error SNRM,P SNRM,P
Time-out

10.0

Pri xmits

:

we

-I
UA,F

I

7

Set xmits

:

I frame error
Retransmitted frames

8.2.3.2

NRM secondary information

10.0
Pri xmits

11.0

12,BP

13,0

14.0P

:
1 , 10,pk 11,3F , c-----t-----1 , 10,5 : 11,5F ,

15.2 I--?

Set xmits or

:

Retransmitted frames

10.0
Pri xmits

:

I

I I

Il.0

12,BP

1 I

Set xmits :

26

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1986 IS0 4335-l 984

8.2.3.3

NRM secondary "final" frame error
Retransmitted frame

Pri xmits

:

10.0 t.j--F

Il.0

12,0P

Time-out or idle line detect

13.1

14,lP

15.3

I
1

3

11,5 Set xmits :

12.5F

or 10,0
Pri xmits

Retransmitted frame

:

I

1 1

I 1.0

1 I

12.0P

I

Time-out or idle line detect

RR1.P
=+=I c

13.3
7

Set xmits :

8.3
8.3.1 8.3.1.1

Examples

of asynchronous response

response

mode

(ARM)

two-way
transmission
transfer

alternate
errors

UVVAI transmission

Asynchronous

mode (ARM)

TWA without

ARM start-up procedure and secondary only information

SARM,P
Pri xmits

RR2 c-l; UA,F 10.0
indefinite time i----t----l

RR3 &I
I

:

I
11,0

Set xmits

:

I_

I I I
v,,,I,time

12,0
-)

8.3.1.2

ARM primary and secondary information

transfer with contention

situation

Contention

SARM,P
Pri xmits : I

l0,0 l1,0P +--k-+-;;~$t-UA,F 10.0
Indefinite time

10.0

l1,0P

Il.0

Set xmits

:

Z

WV

Secondary time-out -

l0.2F

I

7

8.3.2
8.3.2.1

Asynchronous

response

mode (ARM)
error

TWA with transmission

errors in command

frames

ARM start-up command

SARM,P
Pri xmits

SARM,P
Time-out -I

:

UA,F
Set xmits

:

I
P7

IS : 11418(Part 2).1986 is0 4335-l964

8.3.2.2
NOTE -

ARM primary information

frame error

Recrhery procedure is identical to NRM operation.

SARM,P
Pri xmits

~

_i

yig

11.0P

,

~ 10,OqO~fra;s,ndefinitetime

i

:

I :

Indefinite time

RR0,F
Set xmits

RR2,F

I

8.3.2.3
YOTE -

ARM primary "poll" information

#rgme error

Recovery procedure is identical to NRM operation.

Retransmitted frame

f
SARM,P Pri xmits

10.0
Indefinite time UA,F RR1

12,0P

:

I

)

c-----t-----l

RR3,F Indefinite time
I=+-+

Set xmits

:

I

I=/

6.3.3
B.3.3.1

Asynchronous ARM start-up

response

mode

(ARM)

TWA

with

transmission

errors

in response

frames

SARM,P Pri xmits

SARM.P Time-out UA,F UA,F

:

c--l, :

Set xmits

I

8.3.3.2

ARM secondary information

frame error

Retransmitted frames SARM,P Pri xmits R R0,P I UA,F J\ 10,0F Indefinite time w I RR2

:

I

Sac xmits :

I

1
I

I

11,0

I

W

Indefinite time

B.3.3.3

ARM secondary "final" information

frame error

SARM,P
Pri xmits :

RR2
I=3

I

Set xmits

t==l
UA,F

10.0
Indefinite time

11.0

I

I
e

a

Indefinite time

Retr fwmitted f ranw

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-l 886 IS0 4335-l 984

9.4
8.4.1

Examples of normal response mode (NRM) two-way
Normal response mode (NRM) WS without transmission

simultaneous
errors

(IV/S)

transmission

B.4.1.1 NRM start-up procedure and secondary only information

transfer

SNRM,P
Pri xmits

RR0.P

RR1

RR2

RR3

Rk4

RR5,P

:

I
UA,F

I
10.0

t=lt=lrwl=l
11.0 12.0 13,0

I 14.0F I I f

Set xmits :

l=l

t

I I

I 1

I I

RR0,F

or (where primary acknowledgments are returned for several response frames)

SNRM,P
Pri xmits

RR0,P

RR3

RR5.P

:

I
UA,F

I
10.0 11.0 12.0

I
13.0 14.0F

1
RR0,F

Set xmits :

w

t

1

1

I

1

1

8.4.1.2

NRM start-up procedure and primary only information SNRM,P 10,0P 11.0 12,0P

transfer 13,0 14.0P 15.0

Pri xmits

:

I
UA,F

I

I 1
RR1.F

I

1

L I

1 I
RR5.F

1

RR3,F

Set xmits :

I

t=l

i=l

I=4

or (where primary sets poll bit to "1" to solicit acknowledgment for several frames)

SNRM,P
Pri xmits

10,0P

11,0

l2,0

13.0

14.0

l5,0P

:

l=l
UA,F

t

I 1
RRl,F

I

I 1

I

I

1
RR6,F I

Set xmits : 8.4.1.3

I

I
information 12,l transfer 13,4

NRM start-up procedure and primary/secondary SN RM,P I0,BP 11,0

)

Pri xmits

:
UA,F

I

I
10,0 11,l

,
12,2 13.2

I
14.2

. l4,4 I

l5,4

l6,5

17.5

1

I
15,5

I
16.7

/

Set xmits : 6.4.2 6.4.2.1 Normal

I
response mode

I
(NRM) lWS

1 I
with

,

L

1 I
errors in command

1
frames

1 I

j

transmission

NRM REJ capability
Retransmitted frames Abort' J 1 J4

l0,0P
Pri xmits : c I

I 1,0
1 /v

12.0
A 1 a

l3,l
I

14,2 7

l2,3
I

13.4
1

14.5
I

Set xmits

:

l

Optional

: Frame may ba completed or aborted.

29

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1988 IS0 4335-l 984

8.4.2.2

NRM

SREJ

capability
Retransmitted frame

I0,BP
Pri xmits

11.0

f
12.0 13.1 14,2 l2,3 154 16.5

:

I

I
10.1

1

/"' / I
11.2 12,2

I
SREJ2

I
l3,2

1
1 I 14.2

I
I I 15.5

1
I 1 16.6 i

Sac xmits

:

8.4.3

Norma\

response

mode

(NRM)

lWS

with

transmission

errors

in response frames

8.4.3.1

NRM REJ capability

l0,OP
Pri xmits

11.0

12.0

13,l

14,l

REJl

15,l

16.1

17.1

l0,2

: : I
10.1

1 I
11.2

1 I

, I
12,7

2 I `/
13.0

Set xmits

A 1 '

12.3

I

I3,4

1

11.5

/"

\

#
Retransmitted frames

-)

8.4.3.2

NRM SREJ capability

l0.0P
Pri xmits

11.0

12.0

13,l

l4,l

SREJl

15.1

l6,l

l7,4

10.4

: :
It?,1

I I 1
l1,2 I2,3 I3,4

I
14,6

I

7
15.0

Set xmits

/"'

a

I I

1 '

II,5

I 1

1

I

1
Retransmitted frame

6.5 Examples of asynchronous transmission
8.5.1
8.5.1.1

response mode IARM)

two-way

simultaneous

(MIS)

Asynchronous

response mode (ARM)

lWS

without

transmission

errors
transfer

ARM start-up procedure and intermittent

secondary or primary information

SARM,P Pri xmits

10,t

l1.2P

:

I UA,F l0,0 lndefinite time

t I 1
Il.0

1

4
RR2,F

Set xmits

:

I

I

I

8.5.1.2

ARM start-up procedure and continuous

primary/secondary

information

transfer

SARMP
Pri xmits

l0.0P

:

t=i .
UA,F

I

t

r1,0

1

l2,l

-__---

1 , 1, ,r --j 1

l3.2P

I I 1 \' ----!!r----l3,&

l4,2

15.3

t

l6,4P

4 1 14.5 1

)

Set xmits

:

I-

Indefinite time

1 10.0

3 I ll,lF-'

12.2

30

IS : 11418(Part 2).1986 IS0 4335-l984

6.5.2 8.5.2.1

Asynchronous

response

mode (ARM)
error

lWS

with transmission

errors in command

frames

ARM start-up command

ShRM,P
Pri xmits

SARM,P
Time-out t=l -c Indefinite time

:

UA,F
Set xmits

:

I

8.5.2.2

ARM REJ capability

SARM,P
Pri xmits

:
UA,F

Set xmits :

I

6.5.2.3

ARM SREJ capability
Retransmitted frame

SARM,P
Pri xmits

10,0P I
Indefinite time

11,0

12,0 ' 1

13,l

11,2P

14.3

15.3

:

I

I I '
I______, i

/v

I

I '
i_____ 1

I

1

UA,F
Set xmits

RR1F.F

10,l

11,l

SREJl

12.1

RR4,F

i
t

13.5

:

I

I

1

4

I

\

6.5.3
8.5.3.1

Asynchronous

response

mode (ARM)

TWS with transmission

errors in response frames

ARM REJ capability
Time-out

SARM,P
Pri xmits

10,0P

11,0

12.1

13.1

REJl

14,lP

15.1

16.2P

:

I
6 Indefinite time

t

I

I I

I

UA.F
Set xmits

10,0 I 1

Il,lF

12.2

l1,4

12.5F

13.5

14.6

:

1 /v ' '
Retrar!mitted fraLs

I

'

'

.

l

Optional

: Frame may be comoleted or aborted. 31

IS : 11418(Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l984

0.5.3.2

ARM SREJ capability
4 Time-out SREJl SARM,P' ,P 14,l 15.1 16.5

Pri xmits

:

I
UA,F Indefinite time L_____-___, C 10,0 Il,lF

1 1 I
L_-------__-,

1

j

i
12.2 I3,3 14.4

;
11,5F 15.5

Set xmits

:

I

t

I

A/: /v '

,

I `4
Retransmitted frame J/

'

?

8.5.3.3

ARM P/F bit recovery with transmission

errors in command

frames
Retransmitted frames

SARM,P Pri xmits

10.0P Indefinite time

ll,l

12.2

13,3P

14,4

15,5

/ l1,6P

f 12.7

/' 13.0

:

I

1

I

I

I

I

,

I

1

1

7

Set xmits

:

Set N(R) does noi acknowledge Pri frame through previous P bit (i.e. through 3); Pri initiates retransmission.

B.5.3.4

ARM P/F bit recovery with transmission

errors in response frames

Pri N(R) does not acknowledge Set frame through previous F bit (i.e. through 2); Se?

SARM,P Pri xmits

:

time Indefinite

,051P .

1 -I r----' 1
13.2

, 14,l -a:' ----~
I4,3 11.4:

1 15,l ,

, l6,2

, 17,3P 1

, 10.4 I ---15.0'1

I
UA,F

m
10.0 11.0

:____

,------`-`---12,5 I3,6

12,oFI

14.7

Set xmits

:

I

I

1

"

1

1

1

I

1

i

Retransmitted frames

6.6
B.6.1 8.6.1.1

Examples of changing
Normal Two-way response alternate

control mode
response mode

mode fNRM1 to asynchronous
[TWA) transmission

(ARM)

change

NRM to ARM code change

Example A

11,0 Pri xmi!s

12,BP

RNRl,P

SARM,P w RR3.F

:

t

L I

Indefinite time

i
l0,3F

I

I
l0,0 II,0

Set xmits

I

i

1

e

32

IS:11418 (Part 2)-1886 IS0 4335-1984

Example B I 1.0
Pri xmits

12,BP

RNR0.P

SARM,P

Indefinite time

:

-1
RR3.F

I
RR3,F

I
UA.F

10.0
//

11.0

Set xmits

:

I

I

El

I

l

Example C RN R3.P
Pri xmits

SARM,P

Indefinite time

:
11.0 12.0F

I
RR0,F

l=l
UA,F

10.0
-Ll

Il.0 I 1

Set xmits

:

I+=

I
simultaneous (lWS1 transmission

I

B.6.1.2

Two-way

NRM to ARM mode change

Example A

Pri xmits :

Set xmits

:

Example 6

11.0P
Pri xmits :

12.0

13,BP

RNR0.P

SARM,P I RR4,F I

Indefinite time

?

:

1
RR2.F

I

I
RR4.F I

I

I

Set xmits

:

I

ExampJe C RR2 RNR3.P
I

SARM,P
I

1

Pri xmits :

I Il.0

Set xmits

:

7

!

I I

l2,BF 4

R R0.F I

UA,F t=l :

11.0 .i

8.6.2 8.0.2.1

Asynchronous Two-way

response

mode

(ARM) to normal

response

mode

(NRM) change

alternate

(TWA) transmission

ARM to NRM mode change

Example A 11.0
Pri xmits

:

I :

I I

l2,OP

RNRl,P

SNRM,P

IQ.0

I
10.3F

I
RR3.F

I
UA,F

I

I I

Il.0

4

Set xmits

t

i

l=l

I

l

Optional

: Frame may be completed or aborted.

,

33

IS : 11418(Part 2)-l 986 IS0 4335-l984

Example B

11.0
Pri xmits

12.0.P

RNR0.P

SNRM,P

10.0

11.0

:

t

I I

1 R R3,F

I
RR3.F

I
UA,F

I

I 1

I

Set xmits :

I

t=l

I

Example C

RN R3,P
Pri xmits

SNRM,P

10,0

: t=l
Il.0 12.0

I
RRf&F UA,F

t

I I

11.0

I

Set xmits :

t--+--i

El

El

6.622

Two-way

simultaneous

(TWS) transmission

ARM to NRM mode change

Example A

11,2P
Pri xmits

12.3
1

10,0P
I
14.2F

11,0

:

I

I

10,l 11,2

I3,l Set xmits

:

r

1

I

-

Example B

11,BP
Pri xmits

12,0

13.0P

RN R0,P

SNRM,P

:

I

I
RR2.F

,

lgl,0P

11.0

I
RR4,F t=I

I
RR4,F l=l

I
UA,F I

l--k--+
10.1 I I

Set xmits

:

I

Example C

Abort RR2
I

l

RNR3,P

SNRM,P

10,0P

11,0
I0,l

1 4

Pri xmits :

II
11,0
12.0

/ 1

I
UA,F I

I i

Set xmits

:

I

1

B.7 Examples of end of operation (general closing procedure)
8.7.1 Normal response mode (NRM), two-way alternate (lWA) transmission 10,0
Pri xmits

11P

RNR2,P I

:

c-----c----!

I0,2
Set xmits :

11,2F
I

RR2.F

c

-:

I

+

Optional : Frame may be completed or aborted.

84

IS : 11418(Part 2)-l 889 IS0 4339-l984

8.7.2

Normal

response

mode (NRMI.

two-way

simultaneous

(lWS1

transmission

10,0P
Pri xmits

13.2

RN R3.P

: 10,l
11.1 12,2F RR4,F

Set xmits :

t

6 1

I

4

I

8.7.3

Asynchronous

response mode (ARM)

two-way

alternate

UVVAI transmission

ANR2.P
Pri xmits

:
l0.0F Il.0

Time-out or counting > 15 "1" bits
l

RR0.F

Set xmits :

I+{

II

B.7.4

Asynchronous 10,0P

response 11,0
12.0 1

mode /ARM),
13,lP I Il.2 I 12,3

two-way

simultaneous

(TWS) transmission

RNR4.P I 13,4F 14,4 RR4.F

Pri xmits :

k

1

I 10,lF

Set xmits :

I

1

1

1

I

4

I

B.8 Examples
8.8.1 8.8.1.1
6.8.1.1.1

of exception

recovery

procedures recovery for TWS operation

REJ and poll/final NRM - WS

bit exception

with information

frame exception

REJ received correctly

REJl 10,BP
Pri xmits

I1,0

15.1

:

t

I 10,l
11,2 ~12.3 13.4 14.5

I

16.1

1

17.2

1 I

10',3

1

11',4

I

Set xmits :

I

1

v

I '

1

1

1 I

11.5

1

12.6

I

13.7

* //

14.0'

, I

+ Retransmissions

l

The method of counting 15 binary "1" bii is still subject to further study with respect to possible impact on IS0 3309.

3s

IS : 11418(Part 2).1880 IS0 4335-1904

8.8.1.1.2

RW not received correctly REJl

10,0P
Pri kmits :

11,0 1 I 1 12.3 1 i3,b I

15.1 I 14.5 1

16,l 1 I

17.1 1

10',1 I

Ill.1 1

12',1P >

I

I 1

Set xmits

:

Continuation

Module count exhausted 13',1 14'.1 1 11.3' 12.4' 8 13.5' 15',2 1 14.6' 16',3 1 15.7' l7',4 I 16,0" 10",5 I
17.1"

L

l1",6 1

l2",7 \ 10',2"

Pri xmits :

?i

Set xmits

:

8.8.1.2 8.8.1.2.1

ARM - WB

information frame exception

RW received correctly REJl 15,lP 16,l 17,2 10',3

Ill,4 I I

, 10,lF 11.2 12,3 T ' 13,4F 14.4 11.5

1 I 12,6F

I 13.7

Set xmits :

? :

1 1

1 I

a I

1

1

I

I

I4,0'

1

Retransmissions

8.8.1.2.2

RW not received correctly REJl 10,BP 11,7 I2,0 13,lP I5,lP 16,l 17,l I0',2P 11',3

Pri xmits

:

t

I I I I 10,l F

1

1

,
12,3 I3.4F I4,4 15.5

1
Il,6F

,

I
I2,7

1
13,0' 14,l'F

)
15,2'

Set xmits :

?

I

11.2

A

I '

I

I

I \

1

1
f

I

I

1

/"

Retr!nsmissic!L

f
Secondary initiates P/F bit recovery because it received commend frame 15,lP'where the N(R) of 1 is less than N(S) of 3 in the last response frame with the final bit set to "1" (13,4Fl.

B.8.2 8.8.2.1

SREJ/REJ exception

recovery for lWS

operation

NRM - lWS with information frame exception
SRW received correctly
Retransmission

8.8.2.1.1

10,BP
Prf xmits : t 1

11,0
/v I '

12,0
I

f
13,l
I

11.2
1

14.3
1

15.4
1

l6,5
<

Set xmits

:
SREJl

38

IS : 11418(Part 2).1888 IS0 4335-1984

8.8.2.1.2

SREJ not received correctly

Medulo count exhausted

Pri xmits :

Set xmits

:

Retransmission continuation

Modulo count still exhausted

Il.4'P

/--

I0',5' t 14'0' , : ;5'B" ,

: 16.1

; 17',1' : 10.1' (

Me&lo

count exhausted

8.8.2.2 8.8.2.2.1

ARM

-

WS

with I frame exception

condition

SREJ received correctly

Retransmission

f
10,7P Pri xmits : 11.7 I2,0 13,lP 11,2 14.3 15.4P 16,4 17.4 10',5 Ill.5

I

1. /V' I 10.1 F
11,l

1

1
I2,4

I
13,lF

1

1 r
14.4

1 r

I
15,7F

1

/
16.1'

Set xmits

:

j

+--+--a
SREJl

1

1

I

I

3

6.8.2.2.2

SREJ not received correctly

10,7P Pri xmits

Il.7

12.0

13,lP

14.2

15.2

11.3P

16.4

17.5

10',6

:

I

L /v

A

I '

I

I

1

1
13.1

1
14,l 15.6F

1
16.7

I

1

Set xmits

:
SREJl SREJl ,F

1

1

1

/

8.8.2.2.3

Second

SREJ not received correctly

10.7P Pri xmits

:

I
17.1

1

I1,7

/

12,0

I

13, 1P

m

I

,

1

,

1

163P ,

'FT,,

11,5p

; I@`,6 ;

)

/'
IQ,1 F Il,l

a I

i
15,l 16.1 17,0

Set xmits

:

P

a

I
SREJl SREJ1.F

I

I

1

37

IS : 11418(Part 2)-1986 IS0 4335-l 984

B.9 B.9.1
4.9.1.1

Examples

of asynchronous balanced

balanced

mode without

(ABM) transmission errors

&ynchronous

mode (ABM)

ABM start-up procedures

B,SAEM
Ato 8 I \ \B.uA/ B to A I=&/

Link available for information exchange

Link available for information exchange

B.9.1.2

ABM information

exchange

-

Normal acknowledgment

by I frame

B,l0,0P
Ato

B,l1,0
I 11 \ / `\

A.RR1.F

B, l2.2P

B, 13.3

A, l4.4F

B A,l0,0P

I !&Il,lF I\-,// \ `\ t /`A,l2.2 / `1 /`A,l3,2P'\ I

I / h\ /6,14,3F\, I I

8 to A

I

I

i

8.9.1.3

ABM information

exchange

-

RR as preferred acknowledgment

B,l0,0P
A to B

B,l1,0

A,RRl,F

B,l2,1P

B to A

8.9.1.4

ABM information

exchange

-

Use of RNR
Retransmitted frame

Ato

0

B to A

B.9.1.6

ABM information

exchange

-

Basic system extended

by use of UI

B,l0,0P
A to B

B,UI

A,Il,lF

B,UI

B,l2,2P

A. l3.3F

I A,IB,BP

1 `\ `,
1.

I / I\
B~l,lF\\ I

I /l\
A:Ul `\

I I
A,l2,2P I

I I/ A,UI I I
\

/ \
,/B,l3,3F

B to A

I

I I

I

I

IS : 11418 (Part 2)-1836 IS0 4333-l 884

6.9.1.9

ABM resetting
B,lm1 ,n

the numbering

B,SABM,P ,/ ,I

B,l0,0P
l-l

A to 0

l-\-----c-l,,

\ \A.ln,m B to A I

\

\

\

//B,UA,F'

A,l0,0P
I

8.9.2
8.9.2.1

Asynchronous ABM start-up -

balanced command
_

mode

(ABM)

with

transmission

errors

error and response error
_ Time-out z Link availabla for information exchange F /

*Time-out

B,SABM Ato 0

8, SABM

B to A

Link available for information exchange

B.9.2.2

ABM information

exchange

-

Checkpoint

recovery,

normal acknowledgment

by I frame

Abort A,RRl,F A to B 11 ' Y 1A.12.1 I 1 // /`A,l3,1P I k, \ \ ;I\, B,12,2P 8.13.3

Retransmitted frame
l

A,14,4F --L /' //8,15.1 I `VL

7 6,11,5P :

$,14,1\F 1

8 to A

8.9.2.3

ABM information

exchange

-

Checkpoint

recovery,

RR as preferred acknowledgment
Retransmitted frame

f B,l0,0P
A to B I A,RR2 B,l3,2 A.RR3.F B,l1,3P

B to A

8.9.2.4

ABM information

exchange

-

Time-out

recovery, normal acknowledgment

by I frame

Time-out

l

Optiinal

: Frame may be completed or aborted.

VS : 11,418 (Part 2)-l S86 180 4335-l984

B.S.24

ABM information

exchange

-

Time-out

recovery,

RR as preferred acknowbdgment

-

/-Abort*

Retransmitted frame7

A,RR4,F

B,l0,4P

A,l0,0P B

/&It,0 II

`\,

I/,,,,.,

to A

t

,

8.9.2.6

ABM information

exchange

-

Basic systems extended

by US8 Of REJ (see 8.9.2.4 for Comparison)
B !+Retransmitted frames

Abort

l

B,l1,0 A to B A,l0,0P g to A I I I I /

A,IZ,lF

B,l3,2

`7

,

,

8.11.3

A, 12.4F

I

p:11,0`1 \

h

8.9.2.7

ABM information

exchange

-

ByStem extended

by use of REJ, P/F checkpoint

inhibited
Retransmitted frames

B,l4,7 A to B

B to A

NOTE -

Receipt of B 18.2 F normally would have resulted in retransmission of 12 but inhibited due action following B,REJP.

8.9.2.8

ABM information

exchange

-

ByStem extended

by us8 of SREJ (see 8.9.2.4 for comparison)

Abort + B,l1,0 A to B

1

A,l2,lF I

B,13,2 7

I

Retransmitted frame NOTE A,l4,4F B,l3,3 B,l0,2P 7 I I

c

6 to A

NOTE -

A, SRWO,

P not actioned due to previous action taken on 6, SREJO.

l

Optional : -Frame may be completed or aborted.

40

IS : 11418 (Part 2).1986 IS0 4335-l 984

8.9.3
8.9.3.1

Asynchronous

balanced
SABM

mode (ABM)
and SABM

contention

situations

ABM contention -

Ato

B
Procedure may be completed at either 0 1 information transfer or 2 0,. with lmk available for information

B to A

8.9.3.2

ABM contention

-

SABM and SABM,

with transmission

errors

Procedure may be completed at either

8.9.3.3

ABM contention

-

DISC and DISC

QQ
1
A to B

2

Procedure may be completed at either 0 1

or

2 0.."

with llnk In disconnected mode.

B to A

B.9.3.4

ABM contention

-

DISC and DISC, with transmission

errors

B,DISC
A to B

A.DM

1
Procedure may be completed at either @ or @ with link 1

in disconnegi

B to A

mode.

41

IS : 11418 (Part 2).1988 IS0 4335-l 984

8.9.3.5

ABM contention

-

DISC and SABM

l3,DISC A to 0

A.DM

(
1 0

Procedure is completed at

with link in disconnected mode.

8.9.3.6

ABM contention

-

DISC and SABM,

with

transmission

errors

A

to 0

0 to A
1 0

0,DISC

A,DM ,-\

At0 0 0 to A

Q
1

Procedure is compteted at disconnected mode.

with link in

A,DM /-I\ \ `,,,

\ `\\ i<SABMr,,"

I
8.9.3.7 ABM contention B,SABME
A -

Time-out

SABME and SABM A,DM B.SABME \ / /
Procedure is completed at @ with link

to 0
available for information transfer in extended mode.

0 to A

B.9.3.6

ABM contention B.SABME

-

SABME and SABM, A,DM B,SABME

with

transmission

errors 1

A to 0 1'

1Ir

Y
\\

0 to A

A,SABM
I==+

i

`\

`, \ \

/

/

Procedure is completed at

@

with link

available for information transfer in extended mode.

B,SABME A to 0
Procedure is completed at @ with link available for information transfer in unexten-

