**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13212 (1991) : Blackoxide coatings for iron and steel 
parts [MTD 7: Light Metals and their Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13212 : 1991 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

//2^/a/2 Standard 

BLACK OXIDE COATING FOR IRON AND 
STEEL PARTS — SPECIFICATION 



UDC 621-793 : 6691 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

September 1991 Price Group I 



Metallic and Non- Metallic Finishes Sectional Committee, MTD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finaJized by the 
Metallic and Non-MetalJic Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical 
Engineering Division Council. 

The coating presents a black appearance that can be used for decorative purposes. Highly glossy black 
appearance and non-reflective surface produce dull black appearance. This coating is particularly 
suited for parts that cannot tolerate any dimensional build-up. This finish produces no noticeable 
dimensional change. 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from MIL-C-13924 B, US Military 
specification. 



IS 13212 .1994 



Indian Standard 



BLACK OXIDE COATING FOR IRON AND 
STEEL PARTS — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

!•! This standard specifies the requiretnents of 
black oxide coating ( also known as chemical 
blackening ) on iron and steel parts. 

l.l.l This finish should not be specified for use 
where protection against humid or corrosive 
environment is required, and on assemblies 
containing other than iron and steel parts, and in 
places where the areas are capable of trapping the 
blackening chemical. 



applied after all 
cold straightening, 



1.1.2 This coating shall be 
machining, forming, welding, 
and heat-treatment processes. 

2 REFERENCE 

The Indian standard IS 11826: 1986 'Recomm- 
ended practice for chemical colouring for engineer- 
ing components in general and for Tricycle compo- 
nents is necessary adjunct to this standard. 

3 GENERAL REQUIREMENT 

The iron and steel parts may, as far as practicable, 
be coated, in accordance with IS 11826 ; 1986. 

4 COATING REQUIREMENTS 

Black oxide coating shall meet the requirements 
given in 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3. The test shall be carried 
out before the application of preservative oil or 
after degreasing. 



4.1 Freedom from Defects 

The coating shall be uniform in colour with glossy 
black appearance to dull black appearance depend- 
ing on the condition of the basis metal before 
coating. Coloured metal components shall be free 
from untreated patches and flaky and uneven 
deposit. They shall be free from scratches, pits 
and residues of processing solution or it may 
initiate deterioration of the organic coating or 
premature corrosion. 

4.2 Visual Tests 

There shall be no indication of any reddish brown 
or green smut when inspected visually under strong 
light. The sample shall also be wiped with a clean 
white cloth for indication of smut. 

4.3 Quality of Oxide Coating ( Oxalic Acid Test ) 

Three drops of 5 percent oxalic acid is deposited 
on black oxide coated surface. The reaction shall 
be observed up to 8 minutes. After 8 minutes the 
surface shall be rinsed and compared to Fig. 1. 

A light grey centre with a light border colour 
( Fig. I A ) indicates a poor quality coating. A 
grey black centre with a light border I Fig. IB) 
indicates a^border line quality coating. A black or 
dark brown centre with a light border ( Fig IC ) 
indicates % good quality coating. 




lA A Poor Quality Coating 

Fig. 1 





IB A Borderline Quality Coating IC A Good Quality Coating 

Assessment of Quality of Black Oxide Coatings 



I 



IS 13212: 1991 



5 HYDROGEN EMBRITTLEMENT 

High^'strength steei parts having an ultimate tensile 
strength of 1 647 N/mm^ and above shall be baked 
at 19r ± 14°C for more than three hours after 
application of the oxide coating for embrittlement 
relief. Coated springs or other parts subject to 
flaxure shall not be flexed prior to the baking 
operation. 

6 SAMPLING 

6.1 Sanding for Production Control 

Statistical quality control is reconnBended for 
controlling the quality of chendcal colouring erf" 
components. For this purpose, it is recommended 
that the articles that arc eoloured shall be taken 
from a place in tlie bath whidi is tiktty to give 
light shade and subjected to the test H>^fi^ i& 
4.1, 4.2 and 4.3. 



6.2 Sam^HQ for Acceptance of a Lot 

For the purpose of this sampling, a lot shall be 
divided into sub-lots consisting of 100 articles or 
part thereof any ^uch articles, as are coloured at 
one time in the same bath. Two samples shall be 
selected from each sub lot and subjected to the 
tests specified in 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3. 

6.3 Criteria of Acceptance 

If these samples pass the tests, the sub-lot repre- 
sented by them shall be accepted. If one or both 
the samples should fail, two further samples shall 
be selected from the same sub-lot and subjected to 
the tests. If both these samples pass the tests, the 
sub-lot shall be considered as conforming to the 
standard. If either of them fails in any of the tests, 
the sub-lot shall be rejected. 

7 MARKING 

The coated articles may be marked with the name 
or trade mark. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to thai standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of alHts publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard maybe 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. MTD 20 ( 3569 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 



Eastern 

Northern 
Southern 
Western 

Branches 



NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

(311 01 31 
(331 13 75 

37 86 62 

53 38 43 

235 02 16 

6 32 92 95 



AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, 
PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



