ARA ATTE IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


a Rara чата At añ 
ate 
WNT 5 Wares aie хата aaa 
(чест gastaron ) 


Code of Recommended Practice for 
Amusement Rides Safety 


Part 5 Operation and Maintenance 
Procedures 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.200.40 


© BIS 2022 


Ara 979% St 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
u нф чач, 9 19% ТЄ AH AMT, Ag {6 - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 7 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 6 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


Amusement parks in India are becoming quite common and people visit these parks quite often. In order to ensure 
their safety in amusement parks or while enjoying the rides, an attempt has been made to stipulate safety in the 
form of a National Code. It is hoped that organizers of amusement parks, manufacturers of rides would make use 
of these codes to ensure the overall safety of human beings and equipment at such places. 


This revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international 
practices. This revision incorporates the following major changes : 


a) More safety provisions were added. 
The code of recommended practice for amusement rides safety is in six parts. This standard covers the operation 
and maintenance procedures for amusement rides. The other parts in this series under the general title are as 
follows : 
Part 1 General information 
Part2 Safety requirements 
Part3 Design, manufacture, and erection 
Part4 Selection, training, and supervision of operators 
Part6 Performance tests 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 


‘Rules for rounding off numerical values’ (second revision). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


Indian Standard 
CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES 
SAFETY 
PART 5 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5) covers procedures for 
operation and maintenance of amusement rides or 
devices keeping in view general and specific safety 
requirements. 


This standard does not cover all the safety concerns 
associated with the use of rides or devices to carry 
passengers for amusement purposes. It is the 
responsibility of the manufacturer/designer and 
owner/user to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and determine applicability prior to the use 
of the ride or device. 


This standard is not intended to contravene the 
provision of any of the existing Government 
regulations. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
Code to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and comply with regulatory and statutory 
requirements prior to the use of the ride or device for 
carrying passengers for their amusement. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
15475 Code of recommended practice for 
(Part 1) : amusement rides safety : Part 1 
2022 General information 
15475 Code of recommended practice for 
(Part 4) : amusement rides safety : Part 4 
2022 Selection, Training and Supervision 

of Operators 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions are 
given in IS 15475 (Part 1) shall apply. 


4 STANDARD OPERATION PROCEDURE 


In addition to general safety rules as described in 
relevant Indian Standards, the following safety 
measures shall be taken: 


a) Deployment of trained operating 
personnel; 

b) Availability of simple and clear operating 
instruction (manual); 

с) Ensure wearing of proper personal 
protective equipements (PPE), such as 
helmet, safety shoes, gloves, identification 
badge, etc.; 

d) Ensure availability of medical facility (first 
aid, oxygen cylinder at altitude above 12 
000 feet), signage, safety instructions, 
information or means of communication at 
various points of use; 

e) Prevent entry and movement of passengers 
to the areas not designated for public use. 


4.1 Each owner/operator of an amusement ride or 
device shall advise the manufacturer/supplier, to 
supply documented, recommended operating 
instructions with the delivery of each ride or device. 


The instructions shall include the following 
information: 


4.1.1 Description of the ride or device operation 
including the functions and operation of its major 
devices/components. 


4.1.1.1 Description of the motion(s) of the ride or 
device during operation. 


4.1.2 Description of the recommended passenger 
loading procedures during operations, including 
recommended seating, where applicable. 


4.1.3 Recommended safety procedures and 
instructions including information about safety 
equipment/devices pertaining to patrons, 
operators/attendants of rides or devices. 


4.1.4 Capacity of carrier unit of ride by maximum 
total weight of passengers and a maximum number 
of adult passengers. 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


4.1.5 Description of the passenger restraint system, 
its recommended use, and operation. 


4.1.6 Operational safety checks, visual and other 
inspections to be performed by the supervisor, 
operator, and attendants of ride or device are prior 
to and during operation of each ride or device. 


4.1.7 Safety instruction for users. 


41.8 Operational restrictions relating to 
environmental conditions such as wind, rain, or 
temperature. 


4.1.9 Operating procedures including location or 
position of operators and attendants of each ride or 
device. 


4.1.10 Pre-opening inspections to be performed by 
the owner or his authorized representative before 
granting permission for use of ride for carrying 
passengers. 


4.1.11 Functions of operator and attendant at prime 
locations which control the starting and stopping 
mechanism of ride or device. 


4.1.12 Recommended emergency procedures. 


4.1.13 Recommended evacuation procedures for 
each ride or device. 


4.1.14 Recommended use of emergency power 
equipment if any provided with the ride or device. 


4.1.15 Series of steps to be taken to restart the ride 
or device after interruption of power supply. 


4.1.16 Proper anchoring of inflatables is to be 
ensured. 


5 OPERATING CONDITION 


5.1 Passenger transportation service shall take place 
only when the Controller or the person designated 
by him is present at the installation. 


5.2 Before starting daily operation, a check must be 
made on the condition of the ride as per the 
prescribed daily checklist including a test run 
encompassing the following and a record for the 
same must be kept: 


a) The required minimum clearances from 
stationary structures are obeyed; 

b) All safety units are active and/or in 
operating conditions. 


5.3 Whenever a cross-wind makes the cabins sway 
intolerably, the system operation should be 
temporarily stopped. Similar action should be taken 
upon the arrival of a storm, or whenever there is fear 


for the safety of the installation. If required, 
appropriate wind measuring devices shall be used. 


5.4 No operation shall be carried out in complete 
darkness. Except for dark rides. 


5.5 If the system operation is interrupted by safety 
devices or technical problems, the cause must be 
eliminated and a check must then be carried out to 
ensure that functioning is normal. 


5.6 If a fault cannot be eliminated within a time 
acceptable to passengers who find themselves on the 
route and if it is not possible to set the installation in 
motion, passenger rescue must be proceeded with. 


5.7 Rescue operation should be carried out by 
trained personnel only and with utmost safety. 


5.8 Before leaving a station, the operating personnel 
must close the entrances and exits, as well as attach 
an appropriate ‘NO ENTRY’ sign. 


5.9 All amusement rides, shall be under direct 
supervision at all times when the ride is in use. They 
should further be within the coverage area of at least 
one CCTV. Simple devices that are designed for 
unattended use may have indirect supervision such 
as CCTV. The operator shall be capable of working 
the device competently in a safe manner with due 
regard for passenger, public, and staff safety and 
shall be in control throughout the operating cycle. 
The number of attendants required to operate it 
safely shall be on duty. 


5.10 An operator shall not be in charge of more than 
one device in operation at any one time unless they 
are designed for unattended use. 


5.11 Supervision of Public 


5.11.1 Appropriate steps, including stopping the 
device if necessary, shall be taken to prevent 
passengers’ intentionally misusing equipment 
provided for their safety, behaving recklessly, or 
disregarding clear and reasonable instructions. The 
number of people allowed on access platforms and 
grandstands shall not exceed the number specified 
by the number in the manual(s) and registered in the 
device log. In any case, the number shall only be as 
many as will ensure safe operation. Rescue paths 
shall be kept unobstructed. If necessary, the 
platforms shall be cleared before cars and gondolas 
are set in motion. 


5.11.2 If parts of a ride or passengers swing out less 
than 2.5 m above the ground, public access to these 
areas shall be fenced. Areas on or near devices 
where it is not safe for persons to stand, shall either 
be fenced off or clearly indicated and so far as is 
reasonably practicable, members of the public shall 


be prevented from access into these areas. Where 
appropriate, safe areas shall be provided for the 
public to wait, controlled by such means as queuing 
rails, gates, and/or additional supervision. 


5.11.3 On dark rides, emergency exit routes shall be 
provided, be kept clear of obstructions, and have 
good emergency lighting. Risks from tripping or 
falling shall be minimized, particularly where the 
emergency routes cross or run alongside rail tracks. 
For rides with rail tracks, crossing places for the 
public shall be clearly marked and measures are 
taken to prevent trips and falls. 


5.12 Instruction to Public 


Legible signs, pictograms, or notices in the 
appropriate language shall be prominently displayed 
at the device, clearly and simply stating any 
instructions and limitations for the safe use of the 
device as specified in the device log or 
manufacturers’ instructions. 


5.12.1 Attendants and operators shall be trained 
about what people should, and should not do, and 
ensure the instructions are followed. This includes 
(but is not limited to) — not carrying loose personal 
possessions, example handbags, umbrellas, — not 
wearing clothing such as scarves where these might 
create arisk by being dropped, ejected, or becoming 
trapped in moving parts, — where to place hands, 
feet, etc. particularly where passengers need to brace 
themselves against the forces they will experience. 


6 RESPONSIBILITY OF 
OWNER/OPERATOR 


6.1 Each owner of ride or device and operator shall 
read and become familiar with the contents of 
documents relating to operating procedures supplied 
by the manufacturer/supplier as mentioned in 4.1. 


6.2 Each operator of ride or device shall prepare (or 
procure from the ride manufacturer) an operation 
manual to be made available with the operators and 
attendants, of each ride or device. 


6.2.1 The operation manual prepared by the 
operator/manufacturer shall include at least the 
following information: 


a) Specific ride or device operation policies 
and procedures on the basis of 
manufacturer’s instructions; 

b) Description of the ride or device operation; 

c) Specific duties at assigned 
position/location; 

d) General safety procedures; 

e) Specific emergency procedures to be 
followed in the event of an abnormal 
condition or an interruption of service; 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


f) Additional information such as regulatory 
or statutory requirements relating to riding 
or device. 


6.3 The owner or operator shall arrange to provide 
training to operators and attendants of each ride or 
device in accordance with IS 15475 (Part 4). 


6.4 The owner/ride operator shall verify whether 
operators or supervisors had conducted the pre- 
opening inspections required prior to carrying riders 
for amusement purposes. 


6.4.1 The operator shall verify daily tests of all 
communication equipment or system necessary for 
the operation of the ride or device. 


6.5 The operator shall witness a minimum of one 
complete operating cycle before granting permission 
to use the ride or device. 


6.6 The operator shall deny entry to the ride or 
device of persons who may cause injury to other 
passengers or jeopardize the safety system or feel 
discomfort during permitted exposure time on a ride 
or device. 


6.7 The operator shall ensure special considerations 
applicable to physically disabled and mentally 
impaired patrons related to their particular ride or 
device. 


6.8 The operator shall ensure fixing or placing of 
signs or notice boards at prominent places 
containing instructions and necessary information 
for the public. 


6.8.1 The signs or notices shall be bold in design, 
with wording short, simple, and to the point in 
English/Hindi/Local language. 


6.8.1.1 To the extent possible some internationally 
accepted geometrical/conventional signs should be 
used. 


6.8.2 Warning for entry of unauthorized persons 
shall be posted outside the machinery room or other 
restricted areas. 


6.9 Maintain and update the operational logbook. 


6.10 Help passengers, whenever needed, board and 
alight from the system quickly and safely; 


6.11 Inform the Controller as soon as possible if any 
abnormalities (smoke, sound, vibration, etc.) are 
noticed and await instructions. However, in an 
emergency, they shall take appropriate measures or 
stop the system. 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


7 RIDER RESPONSIBILITY 


7.1 Rider(s) willing to enjoy shall be made aware of 
the inherent risks involved by participation. 


7.2 Rider(s) have a duty to exercise good judgment 
and act in a responsible manner while using the 
amusement ride or device. 


7.3 Rider(s) shall obey all oral or written warnings 
or advice prior to or during participation. 


7.4 Rider(s) have a duty not to participate in or on 
any amusement ride or device or attraction when 
they are under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 


7.5 Rider(s) have a duty to properly use all safety 
equipment provided for participation. The rider must 
declare if he/she has any medical condition. 


8 MAINTENANCES 
8.1 General 


The following minimum requirements shall 
generally apply in conformity with the standards 
listed in 2. 


8.2 A Preventive Maintenance Schedule (PMS) 
comprising of daily, monthly & half-yearly shall be 
drawn up and kept up to date. It shall take into 
account the required periodic inspections and 
maintenance procedures appended below. A 
suggestive PMS to be prepared by the Manufacturer 
and in accordance with 11.2 and 11.3. 


8.3 The periodic inspections and maintenance 
operations shall be in accordance with the PMSand 
Formatwhich contain the reference values and 
Permissible tolerances, as well as the frequency of 
replacement for the components. 


8.4 The specifications and defect acceptance criteria 
for visual inspections and non-destructive testing 
shall be indicated in the PMS. 


8.5 The report on each maintenance operation shall 
be confirmed by the signature of the person carrying 
out the work. 


8.6 Maintenance work carried out on safety 
components in accordance with the schedule 
mentioned in the maintenance plan shall be 
inspected by a second person authorized by the 
Controller and the inspection confirmed by that 
person’s signature. 


9 MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES 


9.1 The manufacturer of the ride or device shall 
provide documented maintenance manual which 
shall contain at least the following information: 


a) Description of recommended procedures 
for installation, set up, disassembly of ride 
or device; 

b) Description of daily and pre-opening 
inspections required for the identification 
of special care areas; 

c) Schedule of recommended maintenance 
inspections and testing; 

d) Recommended wear limits or tolerances 
were deemed necessary by the 
manufacturer/ designer; 

e) Recommended specifications for the 
replacement of fasteners or components, 
etc; 

f) Recommended torque requirements for 
fasteners; 

g) Schematic diagrams of electrical power, 
lighting, controls, and other systems 
including troubleshooting guide where 
applicable; 

h) Name of the component manufacturer and 
identification code or specification of 
electrical and mechanical component used 
in ride or device as applicable; 

j) Schematic diagrams of hydraulic and 
pneumatic systems, including 
recommended pressures, location of 
components, line specification, fitting 
specification, type of fluid, location chart, 
and troubleshooting guide; 

k) Recommended maintenance procedures for 
hydraulic and pneumatic systems and 
components; 

m) List of critical spare parts used in the 
assembly of ride or device; 

n) Recommended maintenance procedures 
for electrical components; 

p) Series of steps to be taken in the extended 
period of non-operation or storage of 
amusement ride or device; 

q) Recommended restrictions and special 
procedures, lubricants materials, or 
equipment that may be necessary relating 
to environmental conditions; 

r) Description of recommended assembly and 
disassembly techniques and procedures 
pertaining to specific components; 

s) Recommended lubrication procedures, 
recommended types, and specifications of 
lubricants; 

t) Schematic lubrication drawing, a chart 
showing the location of lubrication points; 

u) Special method of lubrication and safety 
instructions. 


9.2 The owner/operator shall deploy/depute only 
trained and qualified persons for 
maintenance/servicing of each ride or device. 


9.3 The owner/operator shall provide documented 
maintenance manual based on the instructions and 
information provided by the manufacturer. 


9.4 The owner/operator shall arrange and provide 
necessary tools, accessories, testing apparatus, and 
safety apparatus, etc. 


9.5 Prior to carrying riders, the owner/operator or his 
authorized representative shall verify the pre- 
opening inspections and obtain a documented 
inspection report and checklist for each ride or 
device. 


9.6 The owner/operator shall permit the use of the 
ride or device for the purpose intended only after 
ensuring that the subject ride or device is in safe 
working condition. 


10 REPLACEMENTS OF PARTS 


10.1 Parts/components/fasteners, etc, required for 
replacement of defective or worn-out items shall be 
procured from the original manufacturer and 
supplier of an amusement ride or device, using the 
appropriate manufacturer/suppliers 
specification/identifying nomenclature. 


10.2 In case of non-availability of parts/components 
with the manufacturer or supplier, they shall be 
procured or produced using appropriate original 
manufacturing drawing or specification or both. 


10.3 The manufactured/fabricated replacement part 
shall conform to original design parameters or 
Indian Standards where available. 


10.4 Sufficient stock of spare parts shall be kept so 
that defective or worn-out parts can be replaced as 
and when required during preventive or corrective 
maintenance services. 


11 SPECIFIC SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


11.1 Besides statutory and other requirements 
relating to inspection and maintenance of 
amusement/joy ride system, specific safety 
requirements relating to these aspects shall be 
observed particularly at the utilization stage. 


11.2 Inspection and Maintenance Program 


An inspection and maintenance program shall be 
planned, organized, and implemented to keep the 
entire amusement ride system and devices in safe 
operating condition. 


11.2.1 The preventive maintenance program, time 
schedule, and the responsibility of personnel at 
various levels to implement the program shall be 
fixed. 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


11.3 Regular Checks 


Those responsible for inspection and maintenance 
shall be thoroughly familiar with the 
recommendations made by the amusement ride and 
device manufacturer and the inspection and 
maintenance program. 


11.3.1 In addition to others, checks all take-up 
devices provided for the purpose of adjusting for a 
stretch in the belt, chain, or cable shall be checked 
for proper functioning periodically as per the time 
schedule decided in the inspection and maintenance 
program. 


11.3.2 All other pins, fasteners, and couplings shall 
be checked periodically and carefully in accordance 
with the inspection and maintenance program. 


11.3.3 Regular and periodic inspection shall be 
made and details recorded for assessing the status of 
equipment, parts/components, and future reference. 


11.4 Spare Parts 


Depending upon the wear, tear and other 
characteristics adequate consumable spare parts 
shall be maintained for ready replacement. 


11.5 Tools and Plants 


Depending upon the necessity and maintenance 
requirement proper tools and plants shall be used 
and maintained carefully. Safety belts and harness 
assemblies shall also be made available. 


11.6 Lubrication 


Inadequate and improper lubrication may lead to 
frequent breakdown of the system/subsystem 
components thus causing a safety hazard. Particular 
attention shall be paid to lubrication schedules 
recommended by the manufacturer of rides or 
devices and to the replacement of worn-out parts 
before they fail. The lubricant shall be of the type, 
grade, etc, as recommended by the machine 
manufacturers. 


11.7 Removal of Guards 


Prior to the removal of safety guards for inspection 
and maintenance purposes, the electrical supply 
shall be disconnected and the controller shall be 
locked in the “OFF” position. An appropriate 
“warning sign’ shall also be provided during 
inspection and maintenance. It shall be ensured that 
safety guards and covers are refixed on the 
completion of inspection and maintenance work. 
The alert/warning bell/audiovisual system between 
the operators of the machine and control cabin of 
major rides should be provided which should have a 
two-way flow (communication). 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


11.7.1 It is recommended that a ‘DANGER’, 
“OUT OF CONTROL”, “SYSTEM UNDER 
REPAIR”, ‘CLOSED FOR SAFETY CHECK’ tag 
system shall be evolved and implemented. 


11.7.1.1 Under normal circumstances when an 
authorized person has tagged or locked out a control 
then it shall be the responsibility of that person to 
remove the tag and to reset the control after the 
purpose, for which these were used, was 
accomplished. 


11.8 Safety of Personnel 


Where inspection and maintenance personnel are 
required to work at places where there is a risk of 
falling, priority shall be given to the use of safety 
belts and harness assemblies. 


12 SUPPLEMENTAL NOTIFICATION 
BULLETINS 


12.1 The manufacturer shall provide all the 
necessary information related to newly 
recommended inspections or testing or both which 


shall be consistent with the following criteria in 
order to carry the effect of recommended practice. 


12.1.1 Modifications, procedures, testing, and 
inspections shall be as per recommended practice. 


12.1.2 Modifications, procedures, testing, and 
inspections shall be reasonable, ethical, and 
consistent with the general manufacturing practices. 


12.1.3 Supplemental notification bulletin when 
delivered to the owner/operator shall be titled as 
follows: 


a) Safety alert for notifications that 
recommend immediate actions and shall 
be printed in RED (see Annex A). 

b) Service bulletin for notifications that do not 
recommend immediate actions but do 
recommend future action and shall be 
printed in BLUE (see Annex B). 

c) Notification for notifications that do not 
necessarily recommend future but are 
primarily for the promulgation of 
information and shall be printed in GREEN 
(see Annex C). 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 12.1.3 (a)) 
PROFORMA 
OWNER/OPERATOR : M/s 


ADDRESS : 

SAFETY ALERT 

RIDE MANUFACTURER : M/s 

RIDE NAME : 

MODEL/TYPE : 

SERIAL NUMBER : 

DATE OF INSPECTION : 

REASON(S) OF RELEASE : The inspection team/Operator/Maintenance Person/Technician had reported that 
the above-mentioned amusement ride or amusement device is out of order and immediate actions are required to 
be taken. 

ACTIONS TO BE TAKEN 

1. 

ЭХ 

3. 

(Reference of schematic drawing/maintenance manual/operation manual) 


PLEASE NOTE — All operators/maintenance person(s) and rider(s) are advised not to operate, repair, and use 
the subject ride or device without the written permission of the undersigned. 


OWNER/OPERATOR 


(OPERATION/MAINTENANCE) 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
[Clause 12.1.3(b)] 
PROFORMA 
OWNER/OPERATOR : M/s 


ADDRESS : 

SERVICE BULLETIN 

RIDE MANUFACTURER : M/s 

RIDE NAME : 

MODEL/TYPE : 

SERIAL NUMBER : 

DATE OF SERVICE/TEST : 

REASON(S) OF RELEASE : The inspection team/Inspecting authority/supervisor had reported that the above- 
mentioned amusement ride or amusement device is in good working condition. However, actions required to be 
taken in the future are below. 

ACTION TO BE TAKEN IN FUTURE 

1. 

ЭХ 

3. 


(Reference of schematic drawing/maintenance manual) 


OWNER/OPERATOR 


(OPERATION/MAINTENANCE) 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


ANNEX C 
[Clause 12.1.3(c)] 
PROFORMA 
OWNER/OPERATOR : M/s 


ADDRESS : 

NOTIFICATION 

RIDE MANUFACTURER : M/s : 

DATE OF MANUFACTURE : 

RIDE NAME : 

SERIAL NUMBER : 

DATE OF INSPECTION/TEST : 

REASON(S) OF RELEASE : FOR INFORMATION AND RECORD 


The above-mentioned amusement ride or device is in good working condition. Necessary actions related to 
inspection, operation, and maintenance have been taken. 


OWNER/OPERATOR 


(OPERATION/MAINTENANCE) 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


ANNEXD 
( Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


Organization(s) 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


CSIR — Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Conveyor and Ropeway Services Private 
Limited, Kolkata 


Desein Private Limited, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanba 


Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur 


Elecon Engineering Company Limited, Gujarat 


Indian Association of Amusement Parks and 
Industries, Mumbai 


Lepton Projects Private Limited, Ghaziabad 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Mcnally Bharat Engineering Company Limited, 
Kolkata 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, 
New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Mineral Development Corporation, 
Hyderabad 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Polo Amusement Park Lmited, Gurugram 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


Ropeway and Resorts Private Limited, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHRA (Chairman) 


SHRI DEBASHISH BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA М. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHKRAVARTY 
SHRI KAMAL KUMAR BOSE (Alternate) 


SHRI H. K. GUPTA 

SHRI ARVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI G. Р. NJALINGAPPA 

SHRI H М BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI D B NAYAK 
SHRI VIIAY YADAORAO BARAPATRE (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRIC. S. SHAH 
SHRI K. S. KODIA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SHRI ANIL PADWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI PIYUSH RATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY BHATTACHAR 
SHRI AMIT PAL (Alternate) 
SHRI SANJOY MAITI 
SHRI SANDIPAN DAW (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI O. P. KALIA 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR MEHTA 
SHRI S. SURENDER (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE KUM. GHOSH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH CHAWLA 


SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 


SHRI A. K. KINRA 


10 


Organization(s) 
TRF Limited (A Tata Enterprise), Jamshedpur 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi 
Mumbai 


Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad 
Usha Martin Limited, Ranchi 
In personal capacity (143/44, South Sinthi 


Road, Kolkata — 700050) 


In personal capacity (BH/V1/SF, VIP Floors 
Sector 81, DPS Faridabad, Haryana - 121007) 


In personal capacity (F-7B DDA MIG Flats, 
Hari Nagar, New Delhi - 110006) 


In personal capacity (20 D, Dhakuria Station 
Road, Kolkata - 700031) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15475 (Part 5) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRIN. К. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUJOY MATTI 
SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 
SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBRATA DUTTA 

SHRI SANDEEP JAISWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI C. K. KARMAKAR 
SHRI. ASHUTOSH BHADRA 


SHRI S. C. GANDHI 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIAMAN DHANAWAT 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (18112). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


