UDC 621'791'55'053'6 : 669'14

: 620'177

IS0 5173 -1981
Indian Standard

IS:3600(

Part5)-1983

\ ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

METHOD

OF TESTING FUSION WELDED AND WELD METAL IN STEEL
TRANSVERSE ROOT AND BUTT WELDS FACE BEND

JOINTS
TEST ON

PART 5 m 1 I
( IS0 Title

( Second Revision ) : Fusion Welded Butt Joints in Steel Root and Face Bend Test )

Transverse

National Foreword This part of the Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 5173-I 981 `Fusion welded butt joints. in steel - Transverse root and face bend test', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the-Indian Standards Institution on the recommendations of the Welding General Sectional Committee and approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions in Indian Standards; attention is specially drawn to the following : are not identical with those used

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current practice is to use full point ( . ) on the base line as the decimal marker. Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Additional Information Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should be

This standard was first published in 1966 and was revised in 1973 and covered the various tests In view of the experience gained and in order to on fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel. bring the test and test requirements in line with other international standards published so far it has been decided to revise this standard in the following parts : Part Part Part Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Cruciform fillet weld tensile test* Beam impact (Cnarpy V-notch) test* Transverse tensile test on butt welds Longitudinal tensile test on cylindrical weld metal test pieces on butt welds (IS0 5173-l 981) Transverse root and face bend test on butt welds (IS0 5177-l 981) Transverse side bend test on butt welds Longitudinal root and face bend test on butt welds* Nick break test and fillet weld fracture test* Macro and micro examination*

This part is one of them. In this revision free-bend test has been deleted as the ductility of the weld zone Is being assessed more and more by other bend tests. Special tests such as tests for the susceptibility to lamellar tearing, reheat cracking, brittle fracture and creep fatigue will be covered in separate standards. The main purpose of this standard is to recommend test procedures and test specimens that should be quoted or incorporated in engineering application standards that deal with welded constructions primarily for the qualification of welding procedures and operators. Where differences still exist between application standards, the methods of test given in this standard should. be preferred. A general indication is given of the purpose served by the tests specified in this standard, but this standard does not indicate the choice of test method for a particular application nor the number of specimens to be tested or the repeat tests to be allowed in the event of failure. Such requirements are matters to be dealt with in the particular application standards where they exist or to be agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. lt should be realized that variations in welding procedure and the preparation of test specimens can give rise to variations in the test results.
*Under preparation. Adopted 15 December 1983 I INDIAN
MANAK

0

May 1984, ISI I INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

Gr 3

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

0 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 3600 ( Part 5) - 1983 IS0 5173 - 1981

cu.

,.

.:

ir ..,

i

Scope

This International Standard specifies two methods for making transverse root and face bend tests on test pieces taken from a fusion welded butt joint in order to assess ductility or absence of defects on the surface in tension of the joint itself. It also gives the dimensions of the test piece.

surfaces are used, the cuts shall. be at a distance from the test piece greater than or equal to 8 mm but in any case sufficient, according to the process used, not to induce alterations which could modify the test results. An exception to this may be, the case when the bend test is made only to ascertain the possible presence of weld defects, in which case the edges of the specimen shall be dressed smooth.

2

Field of application

5

Machining

of the test piece

This International Standard applies to ferrous materials with butt joints made by any fusion welding process. `:

3

Principle

5.1 The test pieceshall be finished by machining or grinding, suitable precautions being taken to avoid superficial strainhardening or excessive heating of the material. Within the length L (see figures 3 and 4) the surfaces shall be free from scratches or notches transverse to the test piece direction.

Submitting a test piece, taken transversely from a welded joint, to plastic deformation by bending it, without reversing the bending direction, in such a way that one of the surfaces of the weld is in tension. The test may be made according to either of two methods described in clauses 6 (bending test using a former) and 7 (bending test using a roller).

5.2 The test piece shall have a rectangular cross-section practically constant for all its length. The cross-sectional shape shall conform to figure 1.

When the weld is made from one side only, the bend test pieces are called :

4

Taking of test pieces

face bend test pieces, when the surface in tension contains the largest width of the weld;

4.1 The test piece shall be taken from a part of a welded fabrication or a welded test assembly') transversely to the welded joint in such a way that after machining the weld axis will remain in the middle of the length of the specimen.

root bendtest pieces, when the surface in tension contains the root of the weld.
When the joint is made from both sides, then the side from which welding commenced first is called the face. The other side is called the root.

4.2 Each test piece shall be marked in such a way that after its removal it is possible to identify its exact position in the fabrication or in the test assembly from which it has been taken. No heat treatment shall be applied to the test assemblies unless it is specified or allowed by the application standard for the welded joint to be tested. Details of any heat treatment shall be recorded in the test report.

5.3 The upper and lower surfaces of the weld shall be dressed flush with the original surfaces of the parent metal. Machining of any undercuts is not permitted unless otherwise specified in the application standard.

4.3 The test piece shall be taken by appropriate means. Shearing is excluded for thicknesses of more than 8 mm. If thermal cutting or other methods which could affect the cut

5.4 For plate material, the width b of the test piece shall not be less than 1.5 times (I, with a minimum of 20 mm.

11 "Test assemblies"are welded joints which do not belong to a construction but are made for purposesof approval tfor~ex~n@eprocedure qualification),control (for example productiontest coupons)or studiesand research.

IS : 3600 ( Part 5) - 1983 IS0 5173 - 1981
l

For tubes, the width b of the s&imen

shaH be :

6.3. The distance L Jsee figure 3) between rollers shall be pot greater than L = D + 3 a.
6.4 The test is completed when the bending angle a (see figure 3) reaches the value given in the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination.

for tube biarnet&s < 50 mm : S + 0.1 D (with a minimum of 8 mm); ._ for tube diameters > w-mm : S + 0,05 D (with a minimum of 8 mm and a maximum of 40 mm);
where S is the tube thickness, and D is the outside diameter of the tube. 5.5 Generally, the test piece thickness u shall be equal to the thickness of the parent metal near the welded joint. When the joint thickness exceeds 30 mm, it is permissible, instead of a single test piece having the full joint thickness, to take several test pieces from the welded joint, provided the thickness u of each testpiece is not less than 30 nini.and that they cover the full thickness of the joint (&ee figure 21.1) In such a case the position of the test piece in the welded joint thickness shall be identified. ! 5.6 The corners of the test piece on the face in tension shall be rounded by machining to a radius R not exceedjng 0,2 a (maximum : 3 mm).

7

Method.of

bend testing using a roller

(see figure 4)

7.1 The test shall be carried out by firmly clamping one end of the test piece in a testing device having two parallel rollers. The test piece shall be slowly and continuously bent by applying a concentrated load on the test piece by means of the rotation of the outer roller, having a ladius R, through an arc centred on the axis of the inner roller.

7.2 The diameter D of the inner roller shall conform to the requirements of the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination.

6 Method kee figure 3)

of bend testing using a former

7.3 The test is completed when the bending angle a (see figure 4) reaches the value given in the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination.

6.1 The test shall be carried out by placing the test piece on
two supports consisting of parallel rotters. The test piece shall be slowly and continuously bent by applying in the middle of the span, on the axis of the weld, a concentrated load (three point bending) perpendicularly to the test piece surface. 6.2 The load shall be applied by means of a`former having an end diameter D thateocforms to the requirements of the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination.

6

Results

After bending, both the external surface and the sides of the test piece shall be examined. The evaluation of the bent test piece shall be made in accordance with the appropriate application standard for the welded
joint under examination.

In the test report the method of bending shall be recorded.

1) A reduced number of test pieces or test pieces taken in different positions may be required by the application standard concerning the welded joint to be tested.

IS : 3600 ( Part 5) - 1983 IS0 5173 - 1981

cp

R only on the
face in teneim

,
(3

1
a

1 b

i

S = thickness of the joint

Figure 2

Figure 3

IS : 3600 ( Part 5) - 1963 IS0 5173 - 1981

Figure 4

5

l%ted

at Offset Printing Centre, New Delhi, India

