(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS:724!5-1974

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
Construction
Chairman MAJ-GEN J. S. BAWA

FOR CONCRETE PAVERS
Machinery Sectional Committee, BDC 28
of

Plant

and

Representing
Directorate General, Border Roads (Ministry Shipping and Transport ), New Delhi

Members
Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( P & M ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( P & M ) ( Alternate ) Punjab Agro-industrial Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh SHRI N. S. GILL Sayaji Iron & Engineering Co Pvt Ltd, Baroda SHRI R. P. GODBOLE SHRI R. SWANKAR( Alternate ) . Voltas Ltd, Bombay COL N_ C. GUPTA SHRI N. K. PILLAI ( Alternate ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) JOINT DIRECTOR( WORKS ) JOINT DIRECTOR( CIV ENCC ) (Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) BRIG P. N. KAPOOR LT-COL LALJI D. SINGH (Alternate ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. KARMARKAR Cent;~or~;~lding Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI J. P. KAUSHISH SWRI S. S. WADH~A ( Alternate) Killick, Nixon & Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. Y. KHAN SHRI A. MEHRA ( Alternate ) Heatly and Gresham ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. KUMAR SHRI V. GULATI (Alternate ) Beas Project, Talwara Township SHRI J. C. MALHOTRA SHRI R. K. MALHOTRA (Alternate) Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co of SHRI M. R. MA+YA India Ltd, Bombay DR B. S. BASSI ( Alternate) Bharat Earth Movers Ltd, Bangalore MAJ-GEN 0. M. MANI COL G. K. GOKHALE (Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI G. C. MATHUR The Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI M. A. MEHTA SHRI Y. K. MEHTA ( Alternate ) Vak Engineering Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. F. ROBERT MOSES SHRI T. U. MAKHIJANI(Alternate ) Recondo Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI T. H. PESHORI Builders Association of India, Bombay SHRI T. H. PESHORI SHRI TARLAUCHANSINGH ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, New SHRI V. RAMU Delhi ( Continuedon page 2 ) @ Copyright STANDARDS

1974
INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement

of copyright

under the said Act.

IS I 7245- 1974
(Continuedfiom
SHRI V.V. SHRI B.M.

page 1 ) Representing Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur

Members
RANGNEIAR SEN

SHRI H. A. SIDDIQI ( Alternate ) SUPEPINTENDINO ENGINEER,DELHI Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CENTRAL ELECTRICAL CIRCLE No. III EXECUTIVE ENGINEER( ELECTRICAL) MECHANICAL & WORKSHOPDIVISION(Alternate ) Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi PROF C. G. SWAMINATHAN Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters ERIC TARLOCHANSINGH LT-COL LAKSHMAN CHAND (Alternate) Roads Wing ( Ministry of Shipping & Transport ) SHRI P. K. THAKUR SHRI G. VISWANATHAN ( Alternate ) Marshall Sons & Co Mfg Ltd, Madras SHRI N. S. VISWANATHAN SHRI B. V. K. ACHAR ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o_&o Member ) SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Secretary &RI Y. R. TANEJA Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

IS : 7245 - 1974

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CONCRETE PAVERS
0.
0.1 This Indian

FoREWORD

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 8 February 1974, after the draft finalized by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Rapid industrialization has necessitated far reaching improvements in Machinery the techniques of construction of concrete roads and air-fields. is playing an ever increasing role in the speedy and efficient construction of. concrete roads and air-field pavements capable of carrying heavy loads and very high speed traffic; and the use of concrete pavers, spreaders and This standard is intended finishers for this purpose is becoming popular. to deal with the essential features of concrete pavers to serve as guidance to Concrete spreaders and finishers are both manufacturers and purchasers. covered in IS : 7242-1974* and IS : 7251-1974t respectively. 0.3 Concrete pavers are used primarily to move along the side of the road or runway under construction and either to supply concrete into the trough hopper of a concrete spreader or to distribute concrete on the formation The paver can also be for final spreading thereafter by concrete spreader. used for other purposes for which the reach and height of discharge of its boom make it suitable, such as placing concrete for culverts, charging hoppers of concrete pumps and loading open haulage trucks. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 2-1960$. value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down requirements regarding materials, construction, capacity and performance of concrete pavers.
*Specification for concrete spreaders. tspecification for concrete finishers. $Rules for rounding off numerical values (raked).

&sign,

3

IS : 7245 - 1974 2. MATERIALS 2.1 The materials
the requirements 3. SIZE for different of appropriate components of the paver Indian Standards. shall conform to

3.1 The size of the paver shall be designated by the capacity of its concrete mixer expressed in litres. Common sizes of the pavers are 800 litres and 1 000 litres; other sizes may be supplied if agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier.
4. CONSTRUCTION 4.1 General - The concrete paver shall be complete self-contained, selfpropelled machine, designed to progressively distribute concrete between the forms while moving by the side of forms. It shall consist of a nontilting concrete mixer mounted on a crawler tracked chassis with a long boom projecting from the front of the machine. The boom shall carry a bottom opening bucket for receiving the mixed concrete from the mixer. The bucket shall be capable of travelling along the length of the boom and thus placing the mixed concrete in the desired position. 4.1.1 control The paver shall have a control and view all operations. components station from which one man can

4.2 The various to 4.10.

shall conform

to the requirements

given in 4.3

4.3 Chassis - The chassis shall be of structural steel construction and shall be mounted on a crawler tractor so that the maximum pressure exerted on the ground in the fully loaded condition does not exceed the required bearing capacity ( to be specified by the purchaser depending upon the situation of .use ) and the machine is stable while resting or travelling for any position of the boom and the fully loaded bucket. 4.4 Concrete Mixer - The concrete mixer shall be of non-tilting shall be suitably mounted on the chassis. type and

4.4.1 Loading Skip - A suitable sized skip capable of receiving the prebatched dry materials at ground level and then discharging them into the mixer drum shall be provided at the rear of the machine. The loaded skip may be operated manually or from the main power unit. 4.4.2 If agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, the mixer drum may be divided into two halves arranged so that the first half can be recharged while the second half is completing the mix of the previous batch. 4.4.3 The concrete mixer mixed batched capacities: shall generally 800 litres 1 000 litres
NOTE - In case of mixer conforming capacity of 800 or 1 000 litres. to 4.4.2 each half of the mixer shall have a

be of the following

nominal

4

IS : 7245 - 1974 4.4.3.1 Sizes other than 800 and 1 000 litres may be provided to between the purchaser and the supplier. if agreed

4.4.3.2 The mixer drum shall be designed to hold an overload of 10 percent of the nominal mixed batch capacity while standing on a reasonably level ground ( that is on gradient of less than 1 in 16 ). 4.4.4 Speed of the Mixer Drum - The speed of the drum shall be 15 to 16 revolutions per minute. Independent clutches shall be provided for engaging or disengaging the drum from the power unit. 4.4.5 Water Storage Tank - A suitable water measuring and storage tank shall be provided for automatic feed of a predetermined ( but adjustable) quantity of water to the mixer. Arrangements shall also be provided for pumping water from the water mains or water truck into the water tank. 4.4.6 Discharge Chute - The discharge chute shall be so placed that the mixed concrete can be directly discharged into the bucket. The chute alignment shall be such that the centre line of the chute plate is at an angle of not less than 50" to the horizontal when in discharge position. 4.4.7 In addition to the requirements specified in 4.4 crete mixer shall conform to the appropriate requirements and IS: 4634-1968t. 4.5 Boom -The boom be capable of 90" swing be capable of delivering 3 m above ground level to 4.4.6 the conof IS: 1791-1968*

shall be of structural steel construction and shall on either side of the axis of the machine. It shall the bucket load at any height between 650 mm to at any radius up to 10 m. also be capable of being elevated for a high

4.5.1 The boom shall discharge if required.

4.6 Bucket - The bucket shall have bottom opening discharge gates which shall be hydraulically as well as manually operated with a control on the degree of opening. 4.6.1 The bucket shall be moved along the boom by a power winch or other suitable arrangement which shall have adequate capacity to raise the fully loaded bucket even when the boom is raised to the steepest angle. 4.6.2 The maximum capacity of the bucket shall normally be 1550 litres. Any other sizes may be provided by mutual agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 4.7 Operator's Station - The operator's station shall have a deck of non-skid steel sheet of the raised pattern or expanded metal type.
*Specification for batch type concrete mixers (Jirst revision ). tMethod for testing performance of batch-type concrete mixers.

made Steps

5

IS : 7245 - 1974 and walkways made of non-skid steel sheet and grab rails shall be attached All on each end of the paver to provide access to the operators' station. controls shall be grouped at a single centrally located operating station and assembled so that the entire range of performance is in view of and conThe range of veniently and simultaneously controllable by one operator. control shall include, but not be limited to complete control of concrete maker engine speed, travelling speed of the paver, forward and reverse speed ratios, clutches, brakes, the swing of the boom and travelling of the bucket, the control of the bucket gates and the concrete mixer. 4.8 Steering - A steering mechanism shall be provided to permit moving the paver within the full range of grades and curves encountered in paving operations. The steering mechanism shall be arranged so that disengagement of the traction drive shall simultaneously apply the brakes, thus The paver stopping and holding the paver at any point along its path. shall be capable of negotiating curves from a minimum radius of 30 m on any grade encountered in paving operations. 4.9 Power Unit-The paver shall be powered by a suitable diesel or petrol engine conforming to relevant appropriate Indian Standards. The engine power and speed required by the paver while working at maximum capacity shall not exceed the net continuous output power rating of the The engine shall be furnished complete engine at the applicable speed. Such accessories shall conform with the accessories necessary for operation. to the engine specification and shall include the following: a) A fuel tank of sufficient rated load operation. capacity for not less than eight hours

b) A housing. C>An instrument panel with the following instruments: 1) Lubricating oil pressure gauge, 2) Cooling liquid temperature indicator, 3) Battery charging indicator, 4) An hour meter, and
5) The instrument shall be so located that they are visible to the operator in his normal operating position except the hour meter may be mounted on the engine accessory housing.

4

Unless otherwise specified, system shall be furnished.

an

electrical

and

manual

cranking

When specified, a hydraulic cranking system consisting of a hydraulic cranking mortar, a piston type accumulator, an oil reservoir, an engine driven pump, a hand-operated pump, and all connecting 6

IS : 7245 - 1974
lines, valves, and fittings to make a complete installation furnished in lieu of the electrical cranking system. e) When electric cranking system is furnished, generator shall be provided. an 18-ampere shall shall be charging

4.9.1 Batteries - Unless otherwise specified, the paver with the batteries conforming to IS: 985-l 962*.

be provided

4.9.2 Battery Box - When an electrical cranking system is furnished, the paver shall be furnished with a weatherproof battery box with drain and _ shall be constructed of steel sheet not less than 2 mm in thickness. The box shall be designed for batteries conforming to IS: 985-1962*, and shall have a positive clamping device to hold the batteries in place. The battery hold-down arrangements shall be installed so that pressure will be exerted only on the ends or sides of the battery case. The box shall be located so that the batteries will be accessible for routine maintenance, removal, and replacement. The battery electrolyte level shall be visible when the battery filler caps are removed, and the batteries shall be accessible to conventional battery servicing aids such as a hydrometer and syringe. Grommets shall be provided to protect the battery lead cables. 4.10 Transmission - The transmission shall provide a maximum speed of 35 m/min in forward and reverse when all the components are running simultaneously under full load. The power unit shall also have sufficient reserve power to enable the paver to operate normally at high altitudes?. 4.10.1 Clutch - The engine shall be connected to the transmission through a manually operated clutch of the disc type. Clutch shall be capable of transmitting not less than 130 percent of the maximum torque developed by the engine. 4.11 Control Identification, Safety and Warning Plates - A plate shall be provided for each switch, gauge, and control, and at points which require special attention for safe and efficient operation of the paver. The plates shall be labelled by lettering or other appropriate marking with information as to function, direction the control is to be moved, neutral posisafety instructions, and warnings as necessary. Lettering on the tion, plates shall be not less than 6 mm high and the plates shall be attached to the paver in a manner to ensure permanent affixing. 5. MAINTENANCE

ACCESSIBILITY
to all component

5.1 The paver design shall provide convenient accessibility subassemblies and parts for maintenance and repairs.

*Specification for lead acid storage batteries ( heavy duty ) for motor vehicles ( ~~~~~~~ )* iLImit to be specified by the purchaser.

7

IS : 7245 - 1974

6. INTERCHANGEABILITY
parts shall be manufactured to definite standards, clearances and tolerances in order that any such parts of a particular type or model having the same functional and performance characteristics can be replaced or adjusted without requiring modification. When practicable, all such parts shall be permanently and legibly marked with the manufacturer's part number. 7. FINISHING

6.1 All replaceable

7.1 All exposed
with suitable

parts of the paver anticorrosive protective

shall be cleaned, paint.

treated

and painted

7.2 Fungus Resistance - When specified, electrical connections including terminal and circuit connections, components, and circuit elements shall be coated with varnish except that: a) components and elements inherently sealed need not be treated, and inert to fungi or hermetically

b) components and elements whose operation will be adversely affected by the application of varnish shall not be treated. 8. LUBRICATION for lubrication shall be provided for all moving parts requiring All lubrication fittings shall be accessible to a hand grease lubrication. gun. Pressure lubrication fittings shall not be used where normal lubricating pressure may damage grease seals or other parts. The paver shall be lubricated prior to delivery with suitable specified lubricants designed for use in the ,specified temperature range. The paver shall be conspicuously tagged to identify the lubricants and their temperature range. 8.1.1 Enclosures with Integral Reservoir of Lubricant - Enclosures, such as gear cases and transmission housing, which contain a reservoir of lubricants for the lubrication of the parts enclosed shall be equipped with dip sticks, finger holes, or sight holes to determine the level of the lubricant. Such enclosures shall be equipped with a permanent magnetic type drain plug. Each enclosure shall be equipped with a means for fitting the enclosure The drain plug shall be located so that removal ofthe plug with lubricant. will result in complete drainage of the lubricant from the enclosure. Drainage shall be to the ground when the equipment is in its normal position. Integral tubes or troughs may be used to convey the lubricant from the drain to the ground. Accessibility to the drain plug, the filling means, and the lubricant level checking device shall be obtained without the removal or adjustment of accessories or parts. Engine housing side panels and plates equipped with hand-operable, quick-disconnect fasteners may be used. 8

6.1 Means

IS : 7245 - 1974 9. SAFETY 9.1 The REQUIREMENTS

shall preclude or minimize hazards to the operator, design rotating, reciprocating, and high temperatclre parts shall be fully enclosed, adequately guarded, or insulated. brakes are auto-

9.2 Automatic braking system shall be provided so that matically applied when the power unit is stopped.

10. REPAIR

PARTS,

MAINTENANCE

TOOLS

AND ACCESSORIES

tools, and accessories as are specified shall be furnished. A manual of instructions for maintenance and an illustrated list of spare parts required for replacement shall also be furnished. 10.2 ToolboxThe toolbox shall be made of metal not less than 2 mm The toolbox shall be complete with trunk drawbolt in nominal thickness. The drawbolt shall be and a lid which shall open not less than 90 degrees. of a type that will keep the lid closed when subjected to vibration or rough The toolbox shall be securely fastened to the paver, and shall be travel. of sufficient size to hold the tools specified.

10.1 Such repair parts, maintenance

11. INSTRUCTION

PLATES

11.1 Each paver shall be equipped with instruction plates, including warnings and cautions, suitably located, describing any special or important Plates shall procedures to be followed in operating and servicing the paver. be of copper base alloy. 12. TRANSPORTATION AND POSITIONING EQUIPMENT

12.1 When so required by the purchaser suitable means for transporting The transporting means shall be readily the paver shall be provided. detachable from the paver. 13. PARTICULARS TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE
following

PURCHASER
particulars to the

13.1 The purchaser shall supply the manufacturer or supplier while ordering:
a) Type of mixer ( see 4.4.2 b) Capacities c) Whether d) Whether of the mixer required required ), and bucket,

to operate

at high altitudes, into transport packs,

to be dismantled 9

IS : 7245 - 1974
e) Whether the power unit shall be compression or spark ignition type ( petrol ), and f) 14. Any other special requirements. ignition type ( diesel )

MARKING
plate permanently marked on it: affixed

14.1 Each machine shall have an indentification to it with the following particulars conspicuously
a) Manufacturer's b) Manufacturer's c) Size and capacity d) Capacity f) Rating of bucket e) Type of mixer name or trade-mark, reference number

of the machine, length on the boom,

of the machine, along with its traversing ), and

( see 4.4.2

of the paver unit, of manufacture.

g) Gross weight of the paver, h) Year

10

