NAT AWA IS 17588 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


ales area & fare fates — 


Specification for Cold Box — 
General Requirements and 
Test Methods 


ICS 11.040.01 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH MT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 6 


Hospital Equipment and Surgical Disposable Sectional Committee, MHD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Hospital 
Equipment and Surgical Disposable Sectional Committee had been approved by the Medical Equipment and 
Hospital Planning Division Council. 


This Indian Standard specifies the essential requirements for thermally insulated cold boxes which are used to 
collect and transport vaccine supplies from one fixed vaccine store to another and from vaccine stores to health 
facilities. 


In preparation of this standard, assistance has been drawn from specifications received from Technical 
Specifications Development Group (TSDG) for Cold Chain Equipment, National Cold Chain and Vaccine 
Management Resource Centre (NCCVMRC), Department of Health and Family Welfare. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17588 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


SPECIFICATION FOR COLD BOX — 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND 
TEST METHODS 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard specifies the essential requirements 
for thermally insulated cold boxes which are used to 
collect and transport vaccine supplies from one fixed 
vaccine store to another and from vaccine stores to 
health facilities. This standard covers both short range 
and long range cold boxes. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated: 


IS No./Other Title 
Publications 
IS/TEC 60529: 2001 Degrees of protection 
provided by enclosures 


(IP CODE) 


Ease of operation of everyday 
products — Part 1: Context of 
use and user characteristics 


ISO 20282-1 : 2006 


IS 17589 : 2021 Specification for water 
packs for use as ice-packs, 
cool-packs andwarm-packs— 
Requirements and test 


methods (under print) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


3.1 Cold Boxes — Cold boxes are insulated containers 
that can be lined with water packs are for short duration 
storage of pre-cooled vaccine and its transportation 
from one fixed vaccine store to another, within the 
specified temperature range. 


3.2 Short Range Cold Box — Cold boxes with 
a minimum cold life of 48 h that can be used for 
transportation/storage for only a short period of time. 


3.3 Long-range Cold Box — Cold boxes with 
a minimum cold life of 96 h that can be used for 
transportation/storage for a longer period of time. 


3.4 Cold Life — When the empty container is 
stabilized at +43 °C, loaded with frozen icepacks and 
the lid closed, the time taken for the temperature of the 
warmest point in the vaccine storage compartment to 
first reach + 10°C, at a constant ambient temperature 
of +43 °C. 


NOTE — The “cold life” of a cold box is the maximum length 
of time that a closed cold box can maintain temperatures below 
+10 °C when it is lined with frozen ice packs at a constant 
ambient temperature of +43 °C. 


3.5 Cool Life — When the empty container is stabilized 
at +43 °C and loaded with cool-packs which have been 
stabilized at + 5 °C for a minimum of 24 h and the 
lid closed, the time taken for the temperature of the 
warmest point in the vaccine storage compartment to 
first reach +20 °C, at a constant ambient temperature 
of +43 °C is called Cool life. 


NOTE — The “cool life” of a cold box is the maximum length 
of time the closed cold box can maintain temperatures below 
+120 °C if lined with cool water packs that have been stored in 
a refrigerator at a constant ambient temperature of +43 °C. 


3.6 Warm Life — When the empty container is 
stabilized at +18 °C and loaded with warm-packs 
which have been stabilized at the same temperature for 
a minimum of 24 h and the lid closed, the time taken for 
the temperature of the coldest point inside the vaccine 
storage compartment first reaches 0 °C at a constant 
ambient temperature of —20 °C is called warm life. 


3.7 Ice-pack — A water-pack frozen to a temperature 
between -5 °C and -20 °C before use is called 
icepack. 

NOTE — Ice-packs are used frozen for the transport of oral 


polio vaccine (OPV), and used conditioned for the transport of 
all other freeze sensitive vaccines. 


3.8 Cool-pack — A water-pack pre-cooled to a 
temperature between + 2 °C to + 8 °C before use is 
called cool-pack. 


3.9 Water-pack — A flat, leak proof, plastic container, 
filled with tap water. It is a robust container designed 
to store water which, when frozen, cooled or warmed 
to an appropriate temperature, provides the thermal 


IS 17588 : 2021 


inertia needed to maintain safe storage conditions for 
vaccines and biological specimens when carried inside 
a cold box or vaccine carrier. 


3.10 Warm-pack — A water-pack typically stabilized 
at room temperature, up to a recommended maximum 
of + 24 °C. Warm-packs are used for the transport of 
freeze sensitive vaccines in places where sub-zero 
temperatures are common. 


3.11 Phase Change Material (PCM) — A material, 
other than water, which changes state between solid 
and liquid or changes between two different solid 
crystallization states over a defined temperature range, 
absorbing or releasing heat during the phase change. 
This process is reversible and can be useful for thermal 
control in cold chain devices and products. 


3.12 Vaccine Storage Capacity — The total volume 
of the vaccine storage compartment, in liters. The 
measurement is equal to the volume of the largest 
rectilinear object that can be inserted into the 
compartment with all the manufacturer’s specified 
packs in place. 


3.13 Vaccine Storage Compartment — The zone 
within an insulated container which is designated 
by the manufacturer as suitable for storing vaccine 
when the container is loaded with the full number of 
water-packs required to achieve the cold life specified 
in this standard. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 General 


Short range or long range insulated cold box, with 
hinged and insulated lid, designed for transporting 
vaccines. 


4.2 Performance 


4.2.1 Vaccine Storage Capacity 
a) Short range : 5.0 to 14.0 liters. 
b) Long range : 15.0 to 25.0 liters. 


4.2.2 Cold Life 

a) Short range : minimum 48 h. 

b) Long range : minimum 96 h. 
4.2.3 Shape 
Cold boxes shall be substantially square or rectangular 
in plan and section. Rounded corners are preferred. 
4.2.4 Design Principles 


The design of the container, including the placement 
of the packs and of the load, shall promote the free 
circulation of air within the container to ensure 
minimum temperature stratification. The product shall 
be designed in accordance with the general usability 


principles laid out in ISO 20282-1 : 2006. All types 
of cold boxes shall be designed so that they can 
comfortably be carried, when fully loaded. 


4.2.5 Lid Seal 


The lid of the container must be fitted with a captive 
labyrinth seal which engages with the container walls 
when the lid is closed so as to minimize cold bridging 
and maximize structural strength. 


4.2.6 Hinges 


The lid of the container shall be fitted with a robustly 
constructed hinge mechanism. The lid must open 
beyond 90° to give full access to the interior of the cold 
box. The hinges shall be recessed so that they are fully 
protected against damage during transport and storage. 
Hinges shall be maintenance free, without need for 
lubrication and must be secured to the container in a 
manner which prevents loosening due to vibration. 


4.2.7 Lid Stay 


The container shall be fitted with a stay device designed 
to prevent damage caused by over-stressing the lid 
when open. The stay device shall be designed to prevent 
it becoming trapped between the lid seal and the body 
of the container when the lid is closed and it shall be 
secured to the container in a manner which prevents 
loosening due to vibration. 


4.2.8 Catches 


The lid of the container shall be secured in the closed 
position by a catch or catches and it must not be possible 
for a catch to open accidentally once engaged. Catches 
shall be recessed so that they are fully protected against 
damage during transport and storage. Catches shall be 
maintenance-free, without need for lubrication and 
shall be secured to the container in a manner which 
prevents loosening due to vibration. 


4.2.9 Carrying Handles 


The body of the container shall be fitted with at 
least two molded-in or hinged handles designed so 
that they can be used to lift and carry the container 
comfortably when it is fully loaded. Hinge mechanisms 
shall restrain the handle in a near-horizontal position 
when the container is lifted and the handles shall 
automatically drop back into the vertical position 
when they are released. Preferably the handles should 
be recessed so that they are fully protected against 
damage during transport and storage. Handles shall be 
maintenance-free, without need for lubrication and must 
be secured to the container in a manner which prevents 
loosening due to vibration. The handle arrangement 
shall not prevent stable stacking of the boxes. 


4.2.10 Vaccine Storage Advice 


Cold boxes shall carry factory-fitted non-removable 
labels designed to last the lifetime of the cold box. 


Labels should be in the language to the country of use 
(that is, English, or other language, by special order) 
and should carry the following information: 
a) On the outside of the lid, and/or on the front face 
of the cold box as provided in Annex A; and 


b) On the inside of the lid as provided in Annex B. 


4.2.11 Stacking and Handling 

The design of the base and lid of the container should 
include molded features that allow multiple units of the 
same model to be stacked on top of one another in a 
safe and stable manner. The base of the container shall 
be designed to withstand repeated dragging across hard 
rough floor surfaces. 


4.2.12 Corrosion Resistance 

All metallic components and their fixings shall be 
constructed in stainless steel or a suitable non-ferrous 
metal. 

4.2.13 Chemical Resistance 

The external and internal surfaces of the container 
shall be resistant to chemicals used for disinfecting 
(for example, sodium hypo chlorate, 5.25 percent in 
water). 

4.2.14 Ingress Protection Rating 

Protection of the container with lid closed and latched 
not less than IEC 60529 : IP55. 

4.2.15 Robustness 


The container shall withstand a one meter drop on to 
each face, edge, and corner at its rated fully-loaded 
weight. At the end of the test there shall be no damage 
that affects the performance of the product and the lid 
shall still be closed and latched properly. 


4.3 Environmental Requirements 


4.3.1 Ambient Temperature Range 

The ambient temperature range during transport, 
storage and use of the cold boxes should be 
from — 30 °C to + 55 °C. 

4.3.2 Humidity Range 


The ambient humidity range during transport, storage 
and use of the cold boxes should be from 5 percent to 
95 percent RH. 


4.4 Physical Characteristics 


4.4.1 Overall Dimensions 
In conformity with 4.5.1 to 4.5.3. 


4.4.1 Weight 


The weight of the container must not exceed the 
following figures: 


IS 17588 : 2021 


a) Short range: Maximum loaded weight, inclusive 
of the recommended number of water filled 
water-packs 35.0 kg. 


b) Long range: Maximum loaded weight, inclusive 
of the recommended number of water filled 
water-packs 50.0 kg. 


4.5 Interface Requirements 


4.5.1 Dimensional Compatibility with Packs 


The internal dimensions of the container shall be 
compatible with any of the three standard types of 
water-pack. However, it is acceptable for the product to 
achieve its designated cold life at its designated vaccine 
storage capacity using only one of these three types. 


4.5.2 Dimensional Compatibility with Vaccine 


Packaging 


Cold boxes are generally used to transport vaccine 
in secondary packaging. The net dimensions of the 
storage compartment (length, breadth and height, with 
water-packs in place) should accommodate the widest 
possible range of standard immunization vaccines in 
this form of packaging, with the vials arranged upright 
in the container as given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Dimensions of the Storage Compartment 


( Clause 4.5.2 ) 
Length Breadth Height (cm) 
(cm) (cm) 
Maximum 25.3 16.4 14.5 
Minimum 6.1 2.9 I.7 
95™ Percentile 19.5 14.8 11.0 


4.5.3 Dimensional Compatibility with Transport Mode 


a) Short-range cold boxes shall be designed so that 
they can safely be carried upright inside cars, light 
vans or 4WD vehicles, strapped to the luggage 
rack of a small motorcycle or moped or carried by 
a single porter or a pack animal. 


b 


wm 


Long-range cold boxes shall be designed so that 
they can safely be carried upright inside cars, light 
vans, 4WD vehicles or boats, or carried by two 
porters or a pack animal. 


4.5 Human Factors 


The product shall be designed in accordance 
with the general usability principles laid out in 
ISO 20282-1 : 2006. 


4.6 Materials 


4.6.1 Casing Material Selection 


Internal and external casing materials shall resist 
UV degradation and all joints between the molded 


IS 17588 : 2021 


components shall be water and vapor proof, shall be 
easy to clean and shall be selected with environmentally 
safe end-of-life disposal in mind. Chlorinated plastics 
and composites containing epoxy resins shall not be 
used. 


4.6.2 Thermal Insulation Foaming Agents 


Any gas complying with the limitations and deadlines 
set by the montreal protocol on the elimination of 
ozone-depleting chemicals. Cyclopentane and similar 
foaming agents with a low global warming potential 
(GWP) are preferred. 


4.6.3 Other Restricted Materials 


The product and its constituent components shall not 
contain lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium, 
polybrominated biphenyls (PBB) or polybrominated 
biphenyl ethers (PBDE). 


5 TEST METHODS 


Number of samples : Two samples of the product are 
required, together with empty water-packs, conforming 
to MHD 12 (13695). The quantity of water-packs 
supplied must equal the number of packs recommended 
by the container manufacturer plus sufficient additional 
packs to fill an empty container entirely, in accordance 
with the requirements of Robustness Test and to provide 
spares in the event of leakage or other eventuality. 


The S/N of all the Testing equipment and instruments 
should be listed in the test report along with the 
calibration status of the equipment and instruments 
used in testing. 


5.1 Robustness Test (To be done with Sample 1) 


5.1.1 Test Conditions 


a) Test chamber at + 18.0 °C to + 24.0 °C and ambient 
humidity. Record conditions at time of test. 


b) Line the perimeter of the container with filled 
water-packs in accordance with the container 
manufacturer’s instructions. Fully fill the central 
void with a non-breakable dummy load and 
suitable soft packaging arranged to prevent the 
load from shifting during the clause 5.1.4 drop 
test. The total weight of the water-pack lining and 
the dummy load shall equal the maximum loaded 
weight established in 5.2. 

NOTE — Water-packs, gel-packs or sand bags may be used as 
a dummy load. 

c) Mark the faces, edges and corners of the container 
with the test numbers shown in the Table 2 to 
5.1.1 (d). 


d) Using a free fall drop tester, drop the container 
26 times from a height of one meter (measured 
from the lowest part of the container at the start 
of each test) onto a smooth dense concrete floor 
in the exact order set out in the following table. 


Cancel the relevant test number marking after 
each drop so as to avoid inadvertent duplication. 


Table 2 Faces, Edges and Corners 
for the Drop Test 


( Clause 5.1.1 ) 


Face Edges Corners 
1 Top 7 Front top 19 Front top left 
2 Bottom 8 Back top 20 Front top right 
3 Front 9 Left side top 21 Back top left 
4 Back 10 Right side top | 22 Back top right 
5 Left side 11 Front bottom | 23 Front bottom left 
6 Right side 12 Back bottom | 24 Front bottom right 


13 Left side bottom 25 Back bottom left 


14 Right side bottom 


26 Back bottom right 


15 Front left side 


16 Front right side 


17 Back left side 


18 Back right side 


e) Stop the test after the 26" drop or when part of the 
load falls out, whichever is the sooner. If the load 
falls out prematurely due to failure of the hinges 
and/or catches, re-secure the lid and continue the 
test. 


f) After each drop note any damage that has occurred. 
Assess the overall damage at the end of the test 
according to the ratings given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Damage Ratings 
( Clauses 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 ) 


Rating DamagetoCasing Rating Damage to Fittings 
1 Heavy damage or 1 Hinges and/or 
lid pulled off catches and/or 
handles broken 
2 Easily repairable 2 Hinges and/or 
damage catches become 
undone and/or 
handles distorted. 
3 Superficial damage 3 Hinges, catches and 


handles function 
correctly. 


4 Slightly marked 
5 Unmarked 


5.1.2 Acceptance Criteria 


The acceptable Rating for both the Casing and the 
fitting tests are Casing-2, Fitting-2 as shown in Table 3. 
Results will be reported. 


5.1.3 Rejection Criteria 


Failure to achieve rating 2 or above for either or both of 
the casing and fittings tests. 


5.2 Test for Dimensions, Weights and Vaccine 
Storage Capacity 


5.2.1 Test Conditions 


a) Test chamber between + 18.0 °C and +24.0 °C at 
ambient humidity. Record conditions at the time 
of the test. 


b) Record maximum external dimensions in 
centimeters (length, width and height, with handle 
folded, (+ 0.5 cm)). 


c) Record minimum internal dimensions in 
centimeters, without water-packs (length, width 
and height, (+ 0.5 cm)). 


Record the empty weight of the container, without 
water-packs, in kilograms (+ 0.1kg). Take the 
number of water-packs designated by the container 
manufacturer. The total volume of water in the set 
of water-packs shall equal the following formula: 


d 


wa 


(water-pack manufacturer’s rated water volume) x 
(designated no. of waterparks) (+ 2.0 percent). 


e) Fill each water-pack in the set with the equal 
volumes of tap water, stabilize data temperature 
of +20.0 °C (+2.0 °C). Record the total volume 
of water used and the total weight of the filled 
water-packs. 


f) Fully freeze the set of water-packs at —20.0 °C 
(+2.0 °C). Line the container with the ice-packs in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 
Record the minimum overall dimensions of the 
vaccine storage compartment measured between 
straight edges placed over the bulging internal 
faces of the ice-packs (length, width and height, 
(+ 0.5 cm)). 

Weigh the cold box, in kg, with the ice-packs in 
place. Pack the vaccine storage compartment up 
to the manufacturer’s designated load line with 
the maximum possible number of cardboard 
boxes or blocks made out of plastic foam or 
wood, measuring 100 x 100 x 100 mm and 
100 x 100 x 50 mm. Ensure that the lid of the 
container can be closed and latched. Measure the 
total volume of the test units in liters and multiply 
by 0.55 kg. Add this figure to the measured empty 
weight. Record the total weight in kilograms 
(5+0.1 kg) as the maximum loaded weight. 
Record the total volume of the boxes as the 
vaccine storage capacity. 


a 


8 


NOTE — Place a layer of ice-packs above the load if this is 
shown on the manufacturer’s loading diagram. Include these 
when measuring the empty weight. 


5.2.2 Acceptance Criteria 


The container should conform to the volumetric ranges 
and weight limits set out in the Table 4. 


IS 17588 : 2021 


Table 4 Volumetric Range and Weight Limits 


( Clause 5.2.2 ) 
Type Vaccine Storage Maximum Loaded 
Capacity (L) Weight (kg) 
Short range 5 to 14 liter 35 kg 
Long range 15 to 25 liter 50 kg 


5.2.3 Rejection Criteria 


Maximum empty weight or maximum loaded weight 
outside designated ranges. Vaccine storage capacity 
below the minimum designated volume. If the vaccine 
storage capacity exceeds the designated maximum, but 
empty and loaded weights remain within the designated 
upper limits, the container can be accepted, but results 
will be reported. 


5.3 Cold Life Test (To be Carried out with Sample 2) 


5.3.1 Test Conditions 
a) Test chamber at +43.0 °C (+ 0.5 °C). 


b) Stabilize the container in the + 43 °C test chamber 
for a minimum of 24 h, with the lid open. 


c) Assemble a dummy vaccine load comprising 
partially filled waterparks with a combined 
density of 0.4 kg per liter of the measured vaccine 
storage capacity. The water-packs should be 
arranged so that they substantially fill the vaccine 
storage compartment, leaving voids for the sensor 
positions shown in Annex C. Condition the load in 
a refrigerator at + 5.0 °C (+0.5 °C). 


Fully freeze the set of water-packs as described 
in 5.2 at —20.0 °C (+0.5 °C). Line the container 
with the ice-packs in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Place the conditioned 
load in the vaccine storage compartment together 
with the Annex D temperature sensors laid out as 
shown in the Annex C diagram. Ensure that the 
sensors do not touch the adjacent water-packs. 
Close the lid of the cold box. 


Monitor temperatures at one minute intervals 
until the temperature of the warmest point in 
the vaccine load first reaches + 10.0 °C. Record 
the temperature of the coldest point in the load 
at this time. The cold life is measured from the 
moment when the container lid is closed until the 
temperature of the warmest point in the vaccine 
storage compartment first reaches + 10 °C. 


d 


wn 


e 


wa 


5.3.2 Acceptance Criterion 


The cold-life must be a minimum of 48 h for short 
range containers and a minimum of 96 h for long range 
containers. 


5.3.3 Rejection Criterion 


Failure to achieve the minimum cold life. 


IS 17588 : 2021 


5.4 Cool Life Test (Optional) 


5.4.1 Test Conditions 
a) Test chamber at + 43.0 °C (40.5 °C). 


b) Stabilize the container in the + 43 °C test chamber 
for a minimum of 24 h, with the lid open. 


c) Reuse the dummy vaccine load described in test 
5.3, Step 5.3.3. Condition the load in a refrigerator 
at + 5.0 °C (+0.5 °C). 

Stabilize the set of water-packs described in test 5.2, 
step 5.2.5 at +5.0 °C (+ 0.5 °C). Line the container 
with the cool-packs in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Place the conditioned 
load in the vaccine storage compartment together 
with the Annex B temperature sensors laid out as 
shown in the Annex A diagram. Ensure that the 
sensors do not touch the adjacent water-packs. 
Close the lid of the cold box. 


Monitor temperatures at one minute intervals 
until the temperature of the warmest point in the 
vaccine load first reaches + 20.0 °C. Record the 
temperature of the coldest point in the load at this 
time. The cool-life is defined as the time interval 
from the moment when the lid is closed until the 
temperature of the warmest point first reaches 
+ 20.0 °C. 


d 


wa 


e 


wm 


5.4.2 Acceptance Criterion 


There is no standard criterion for the acceptance. 
However, the results of the test may be reported as 
agreed between manufacturer and user. 


5.5 Warm Life Test (Optional) 


5.5.1 Test Conditions 
a) Test chambers at —20.0 (£0.5 °C) and + 18.0 °C 
(+ 0.5 °C). 
b) Stabilize the container in the + 18 °C test chamber 
for a minimum of 24 h, with the lid open. 


c) Reuse the dummy vaccine load described in test 
5.3, Step 5.3.3 Condition the load in a refrigerator 
at + 5.0 °C (+ 0.5 °C). 

Stabilize the set of water-packs described in test 
5.2, Step 5.2.5 at +18.0 °C (+0.5 °C). Line the 
container with the warm-packs in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s instructions. Place 
the conditioned load in the vaccine storage 
compartment together with the Annex D 
temperature sensors laid out as shown in the 
Annex C diagram. Ensure that the sensors do not 
touch the adjacent water-packs. Close the lid of 
the cold box. 


Place the loaded cold box in the —20 °C test 
chamber. 


d 


wn 


e 


<~ 


f) Monitor temperatures at one minute intervals until 
the temperature of the coldest point in the vaccine 
load first reaches 0.0 °C. Record the temperature 


of the warmest point in the load at this time. 
The warm-life is defined as the time interval 
from the moment when the lid is closed until 
the temperature of the coldest point first reaches 
0.0 °C. 


5.5.2 Acceptance Criterion 


There is no standard criterion for the acceptance. 
However, the results of the test may be reported as 
agreed between manufacturer and user. 


5.6 IP Rating Test to IS/IEC 60529 


5.6.1 Test Conditions 
a) Use sample 2, if IP test is required. 


b) Obtain an independent test report from the 
manufacturer showing full conformity with 
IS/IEC 60529 : IP55. Only if this is not available. 


c) Carry out an IP55 test on a single sample. Record 
results. 


5.6.2 Acceptance Criterion 
IP55 test passed. 


5.6.3 Rejection Criterion 
IP55 test failed. 


5.7 Lining Integrity Test and Section through 
Reference Sample 


5.7.1 Test Conditions 


a) Sample: Sample 2 after completion of all other 
tests. Results of this test will be kept on file as 
a record of the reference sample in the event of 
future quality related issues arising in the field. 

b) Fill the cold box with water to the top of the lining. 
Leave for two hours. 

c) Empty the cold box and thoroughly dry the 
interior with tissue paper and/or warm air without 
applying pressure to the inner lining. 

d) Apply firm hand pressure to the inner lining. 
Check for evidence of moisture extruded through 
pinholes in the lining. 

e 


wn 


Cut the sample in half laterally and vertically, 

including the lid. Cut one of the two halves at 

45 degrees and vertically through the bottom corner 

of the container and through the corner of the lid. 

f) Examine the construction closely. Photograph and 

record the following: 

1) The presence of voids in the insulated core; 

2) Evidence of moisture penetration through the 
inner lining; and 

3) Measure the thickness of the inner and outer 
casing at key points, including flat areas and 
corners (+ 0.1 mm). Note any weak points in 
the moldings and sudden changes of thickness. 


5.7.2 Acceptance Criterion 


No significant voids in insulated core. No weak points 
in the moldings. 


5.7.3 Rejection Criterion 


Water penetration though inner lining. Insulation voids 
or molding weaknesses that adversely affect thermal 
performance or long-term robustness. 


6 ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS 


The accompanying documents shall include the 
following: 


a) Instructions for use; and 


b) Instructions for maintenance, cleaning and 


disinfection. 
7 PACKING, MARKING AND LABELLING 


7.1 Materials used for packaging the finished product 
are to be free of ozone depleting compounds as defined 
in the montreal protocol. The general specification 
of shipping containers shall be as agreed between 
manufacturer and purchaser. 


IS 17588 : 2021 


7.2 The following shall be clearly and permanently 
marked on the container: 


a) The manufacturer’s name or trade-mark; 

b) Shall be marked with the Indian Standard 
applicable; 

c) The model (or commercial designation); 

d) Serial number; and 

e) Date of Manufacture. 


7.3 Disposal and Recycling 


The manufacturer is to provide information to 
the buyer on any hazardous materials contained 
within the product and suggestions for resource 
recovery/recycling and/or environmentally safe 
disposal. 


7.4 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 17588 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 4.2.10 and 5.4.1 ) 


LABEL ON OUTSIDE OF THE LID, AND/OR FRONT FACE OF COLD BOX 


White lettering on red ground. 


Black and white EPI logo 


STOP! 


Do you need to open it? 


10 cm minimum 


10 cm minimum 


Fic. 1 LABEL ON OUTSIDE OF THE LID, AND/OR FRONT FACE OF COLD Box 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 4.2.10 and 5.4.1 ) 
LABEL ON INSIDE OF LID 


Performance data: 
- Rated cold life: <xx> hours at +43°C with <xx> number <xx> litre frozen ice-packs 


- Tested cool life; <xx> hours at #43°C with <xx> number <xx> litre cool-packs at +8°C, 


OPTIONAL DATA, IF REQUESTED BY PURCHASER: 
- Tested warm life: <xx> hours at -20°C with <xx> number <xx litre warm-packs a t +18°C. 


<Ice-pack/coolpack/warm-pack loading diagram= 


Vaccine transport advice: 


= OPV : Only use frozen ice-packs. NEVER transport froeze-sensitive vaccines in the same cold box as OPV. 


- BOG. Muissles. MMR, MR and Yullow Fever : Refrigerated cool-packs at #2°C to +8°C are recommended, 
but frozen ice-packs will not harm these vaccines. If you use ice-packs, NEVER transport freeze-sensitive 
vaccines in the same cold box. 


= Other vaccines. including combination vaccines : Only use refrigerated coolpacks at r2°C to 8°C, 
NEVER transport these vaccines using frozen ioe-paoks. 


OPTIONAL DATA, IF REQUESTED BY PURCHASER: 
- Use warm-packs for transporting freeze-sensitive vecines in cold weather. 


Manufachae spammer Model no sef- Dale of manufacture/serial po Sonu 


FIG. 2 LABEL ON INSIDE OF THE LID 


IS 17588 : 2021 


IS 17588 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 5.3.1 ) 
TEMPERATURE SENSOR POSITIONS 


Cold box: top view 


Cold box: side view 


FiG. 3 POSITION OF THE TEMPERATURE SENSORS 


NOTES 


1 All measuring points, with the exception of the center one, must be 25-30 mm from the nearest ice-pack. Ensure that this is achieved 
using suitable fixing devices attached to the dummy load. Ensure that the load cannot rotate, or otherwise become displaced once the 
sensors are in place. 


2 Sensor leads can be introduced into the container using one of two methods: 
a) Through the lid seal, taking care not to affect the quality of the seal. 


b) Through a hole in the geometric center of the lid, taking care to seal the outer and inner openings adequately. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 5.3.1 ) 
TEMPERATURE SENSOR SPECIFICATION 


A standard temperature sensor probe, accurate to mass of 25 g+5 percent and of minimum external area 
+0.5 °C, inserted into brass or tin-covered copper (diameter = height = about 15.2 mm). 


10 


IS 17588 : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Hospital Equipment and Surgical Disposable Sectional Committee, MHD 12 


Organization Representative(s) 
Directorate General of Armed Forces of Mas GEN (DR) SUNIL KANT, VSM (Chairman) 
Medical Services, New Delhi 
3 M India Limited, Bengaluru SHRI KULVEEN SINGH BALI 


SHRIMATI MADHULIKA SINGH (Alternate I) 
Dr ANmoL (Alternate II) 


All India Institute of Medical Sciences, PROF ANITA DHAR 
New Delhi Dr MANJUNATH MARUTHGI POL (Alternate) 
Asia Pacific Medical Technology Association SHRI MANOJ APPUKUTAN 
(APACMED), Singapore 
Association of Indian Medical Device Industry SHRI Rajiv NATH 
New Delhi SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 
Becton Dickinson India Pvt Ltd, Haryana SHRI SUMIT SHARMA 
SHRI NEERAJ SHARMA (Alternate) 
Boston Scientific India Pvt Ltd Ms KIRTI ARORA 
Ms PREETY SHARMA (Alternate) 
Central Drugs Standards Control Organization, Dr V. G. SOMANI 
New Delhi DR RAVIKANT SHARMA (Alternate) 
Dental Council of India, New Delhi Dr SANJAY TEWARI 
Dr R. K. Trwart (Alternate) 
Directorate General of Armed Forces of Medical COL SAMEER KUMAR 
Services, New Delhi CoL GAURAV KUMAR (Alternate) 
Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi Dr A. K. GOoILa 
DR YASHVANT SINGH (Alternate) 
E.I. Dupont India Private Limited Gurgaon SHRI VISHNU SHANKAR VYAS 
SHRI SRINIVAS S. CHERUKUPALLI (Alternate) 
Employees State Insurances Corporation Ltd, Dr S.K. JAIN/DR Kayam SINGH 
New Delhi DR A. K. AGARWAL/R. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 
ESIC Dental College & Hospital, New Delhi Dr DHIRENDRA SRIVASTAVA 


DR JITIN KHARBANDA (Alternate I) 
DR Mansi ATRI (Alternate II) 


Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, New Delhi Dr Buarat B. SAGAR 
Haffkine Institute for Training, Research & Testing, DR SHASHIKANT VAIDYA 
Mumbai Dr SANDESHA PASHTE (Alternate) 
Hindustan Syringes and Medical Devices Ltd, SHRI PRADEEP SAREEN 
Ballabhgarh SHRI DINESH BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 
IIT Delhi, New Delhi Dr SANDEEP K. JHA 
Dr DEEPAK JosHi (Alternate) 
Indian Medical Association, New Delhi Dr R. N. TANDON 
Dr V. K. MonGa (Alternate) 
Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad Dr ANIL KUMAR TEOTIA 


Dr MANOJ KUMAR PANDEY 


11 


IS 17588 : 2021 


Organization 
Iscon Surgicals Ltd, Jodhpur 
Johnson & Johnson Limited, Mumbai 
Kalam Institute of Health Technology (KIHT), 
Visakhapatnam 
KOB Medical Textiles Pvt Ltd, Coimbatore 
Lady Irwin College, New Delhi 
Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 
MIDMARK (India) Private Ltd, Mumbai 


(Formerly Janak Health Care, Mumbai) 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), New Delhi 


Nat Steel Equipment Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Office of Development Commissioner, (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Paramount Surgimed Limited, New Delhi 


Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education & 
Research, Chandigarh 


Precision Electronics Instruments & Component, 
Mumbai 


Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi 
Sir Ganga Ram City Hospital, New Delhi 
Sri Rama Chandra Medical College & Research 


Institute, Chennai 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI DEEPAK SINGHAVI (A/ternate) 


SHRI R. ASOK KUMAR 
SHRI SHIV KUMAR HURDALE (Alternate) 


DR JITENDAR SHARMA 
SHRI DILIP KUMAR CHEKURI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. SHANMUGAVASAN 
SHRI S. KUMAR SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


Dr BHAWANA CHANANA 
Dr SHEETAL CHOPRA (Alternate) 


Dr DEEPAK GHULIANI 
Dr ANURAG MIsHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI AsHISH M. DEOKAR 
Mrs SARANNYA JAYAKUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr A. PRAKASH 
Dr C. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT PAHAPALE 
SHRI DEEPAK CHALKE (Alternate) 


SHRI KANWALINDER SINGH SODHI 
Suri G. S. Buatia (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILY GROVER 
SHRI ABHAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr NAVNEET DHALIWAL 
Dr SHWETA TALATI (Alternate) 


SHRI SITAL D. SHAH 


Dr VIMAL BHANDARI 
Dr R. K. Son! (Alternate) 


BRIG (Dr) B. S. RANA 
CDR JANAK S. GULERIA (Alternate) 


Dr N. JAMBU 
Dr B. MOHAN CHOUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAKASH BACHANI SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (MHD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SUMIT KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (MHD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MHD 12 (13694). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


