**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10636-2 (1983) : Method for Measurement of Abrasive Wear 
Properties of Metallic Material, Part 2: Test Method for 
High Stress Abrasion [MTD 3: Mechanical Testing of Metals] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



13 : 1063a ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

MEASUREMENT OF ABRASIVE WEAR 

PROPERTIES OF METALLIC MATERIAL 

PART 2 TEST METHOD FOR HIGH STRESS ABRASION 



UDG 669 :G20 173-1 ii2-44 




© Copyright 1981 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK HUAVaN, 9 BAHADtW SHAH ZAVah MARG 

neiv pni.ui uocoa 

^ 2 December 1983 



IS : 10636 ( Part 2 )- 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHOD/ FOR 

MEASUREMENT OF ABRASIVE WEAR 

PROPERTIES OF METALLIC MATERIAL 

PART 2 TEST METHOD FOR HIGH STRESS ABRASION 

Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee, SMDC 3 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi P. K. Chakbavabty The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Members 

Shbi R. K. Abbol Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd,Ganaur 

Shbi Kanwaxjit Singh Aboba ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Sujit Kttmar Bastj M. N. Dastur & Co (P) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi S. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Db A. Chakbabobty Usha Martin Black ( Wire Ropes ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi H. Maheswaby (Alternate) 
Shbi K. K. Cherian Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi Pankaj De ( Alternate ) 
Shbi O. P. Chtjgh Associated Instrument Manufacturers* (India) 

Private Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi V. N. Nanda ( Alternate ) 
Db R. P. Dambal Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi N. Nagabaj ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. K. Das Gupta National Physical Laboratory ( CStR ), New Delhi 

Deputy Dibector ( Met )-2, Ministry of Railways 

RDSO, Lucknow 

Assistant Resident Offices/ 

Met-2, RDSO, Lucknow {Alternate) 
Shbi D. Dutta The Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shbi C. B. Lunawat ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. C. Erby Steel Authority of India Ltd, ( Bokaro Steel 

Plant ) Bokaro 
Shbi K. G. Gabg Directorate General of Technical Development 

and Production ( Air ), New Delhi 

Shbi P. Raghothama Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. S. Majumdab ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 10636 (Part 2) -1983 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri S. A. Haqtte 

Shbi A. S. Walia ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. B. Idnani 

Shri G. S. Sobti ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. V. Kttlkarni 



Representing 
Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 



Blue Star Limited, Bombay 

& Engineers 



Pvt 



Ltd, 
Machinery Corporation Ltd, 



Fuel Instruments 
Ichalkaranji 
Shbi J. V. KuLEABia ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Kumar Mining Allied 

Durgapur 
Shbi K. S. Lakshminarayan Avery India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi R. D. Shabma ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. R. Majtjmdar Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi A. K. Chakrobobty ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. A. Padmanabhan Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR), Durgapur 
Shbi M. Prasad Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri N. Gopalakbishna ( Alternate) 



National Aeronautical Laboratory (CSIR), 
Bangalore 

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 
New Delhi 

Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) 

Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 
Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 
Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), 
Jamshedpur 
DrD.J. Chakravarti ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. Raghavendran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ofjicio Member) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. K. Gupta 

Deputy Director ( Metals), ISI 



Shri S. Rat>hakrishna;n 

Dr V. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. N. Saha 

Shri S. K. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. N. Sarkab 

Shbi A. R. Ba3U ( Alternate ) 
Shbi F. C. Shabma 
Shbi K. Swamiappan 
ShbiH. K. Taneja 

Shri V. N. Panbey ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. Rao 



IS : 10636 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

MEASUREMENT OF ABRASIVE WEAR 

PROPERTIES OF METALLIC MATERIAL 

PART 2 TEST METHOD FOR HIGH STRESS ABRASION 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 27 July 1983, after the draft finalized by the Methods of 
Physical Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural 
and Metals Division Council. 

0,2 Wear is a consequential removal of material from one or both of the 
surfaces in relative motion against each other. Several factors, such as 
mechanical, thermal and chemical ( corrosion ) are associated with the 
process of wear. However, in most of the industrial applications 
involving material handling, abrasive wear plays a dominant role. 
Abrasion is a wear by displacement of material from surfaces in relative 
motion, caused by the presence of hard protuberances or by the presence 
of hard particles, either between the surfaces or embedded in one of them. 
Abrasive wear may occur in dry state or in the presence of a liquid. 
Abrasive wear occurs, when a relatively harder material moves across the 
wearing metal surface. This mode of wear has three sub-groups: 

a) Gouging Wear refers to the situation in which the metal is 
removed by a type of c Machining ' operation in which the hard 
material indents the metal and in moving along the surface, 
removes material in relatively larger pieces. This type of wear 
is often accompanied by heavy impact and common examples 
are seen in wear of crusher liners, earth-moving shovels and in 
heavy digging operations. 

b) High Stress Abrasion is a term used where the wear is on a finer 
scale than the gouging abrasion but the stresses involved are 
sufficient to fracture the abrasive particles. A common example 
is the wear of ball and liners in ball mills. 

c) Low Stress Abrasion occurs in a situation when the stresses 
involved are very low and the abrasive particles are fine and not 



IS: 10636 (Part 2) -1983 

fractured. A situation of this type is found to exist during dry 
sand running down a chute, abrasive slurries moving inside a 
pipe and in one classifiers, etc. 

0.3 Extensive work has been done all over the world on the measurement 
of wear and several testing machines have been developed. However, 
none of these have been standardized which makes it difficult to compare 
results obtained in different laboratories even when the testing machines 
are almost similar. In the present standard an attempt has been made 
to present some of the methods which may be used as standard methods 
for the measurement of abrasion resistance of metals and alloys under 
different abrasive wear situation. 

0.4 This standard is being issued in three parts covering different test 
methods for determination of wear. This part ( Part 2 ) deals with the 
test method for high stress abrasion. 

The other parts in the series are: 

Part I Test Method for Gouging Abrasion Resistance (Jaw 
Crusher Test) 

Part III Test Methods for Low Stress Abrasion. 

0.5 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this 
standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, 
it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2 - 1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) prescribes the test method for the 
measurement of abrasion resistance of various materials under high stress 
abrasive conditions. A state of high stiess abrasion is said to exist in a 
situation in which the wear is on a finer scale as compared to gouging 
abrasion but the stresses are sufficient to fracture the abrasive particles. 

2. EQUIPMENT 

2.1 The test equipment uses a rotating pin specimen pressed against an 
abrasive surface rotating at a fixed speed and simultaneously the rotating 
pin also slides along the width of an abrasive cloth. This provides fresh 
abrading surface to the specimen throughout the test ( see Fig. 1 ). 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). 

4 



IS: 10636 (Part 2) -1983 



SLIOING SLOCK 



i s MOTOR fOf? SP€OM€N 
n^X ROTATION 




Fig. 1 Schematic Arrangement of Testing Machine for 
High Stress Abrasion Resistance Test 



2.2 Control Parameters 

Force — Variable up to 500 N. 

Width — The width of the abrasive cloth — 225 mm. 

Speed — The speed of rotation of the abrasive cloth-variable to give 
a surface speed at the specimen up to 2*5 m/min. 

Specimen Rotation — The specimen rotation is variable up to 1 750 
rpm. 

Lateral Speed of the Pin — The lateral speed of the pin should be so 
adjusted that 90 percent width of the abrasive cloth is 
covered in 10 minutes. 



IS : 10636 ( Part 2 )- 1983 

2.3 Material 

2.3.1 Abrasive Cloth — Bonded abrasive of silicon carbide, alumina, 
garnet, emery or silica with grit size up to 900 Um. 

2.3.2 Lubricant — Lubrication may be wet or dry as desired. Water, 
alcohol and solvents may be used as lubricant. 

3. TEST SPECIMEN 

3.1 A pin type specimen, 6 to 12 mm diameter with flat end. 

3.2 Reference Material — Reference material shall be of hot rolled 
mild steel having hardness of 140 ± 10 HB. 

4. TEST PROCEDURE 

4.1 A specimen as mentioned in 3.1, is appropriately loaded according 
to its diameter and mounted over the abrasive surface which has to be 
replaced for each fresh test. The load/diameter ratio is given in Table 1. 
A single test shall be the duration of 10 minutes. After each test the 
specimen is cleaned and weighed to the nearest milligram. Similar test 
is to be conducted with the reference mild steel material. 



TABLE 1 SPECIMEN DIAMETER AND LOAD RATIO 




Diameter of the Pin 
mm 

(D) 

6 




Load 

N 

(F) 
75 




8 




135 




10 




210 




12 




300 




Note — Any other size of the pin 


with FID* — 


100 1 V A 
may also be used, 


where F 


is in M and D is in mm. 









5. PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 

5.1 Results are reported as wear ratio which is the weight loss of test 
sample ( W x ) to the weight loss of the reference mild steel samples ( W t ). 

Wi 
Wear Ratio =-777* 

5.1.1 At least three number of tests shall be conducted and in no case, 
the single value shall differ more than 20 percent from the mean value. 
Otherwise a fresh set of three tests shall again be conducted. 



