**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12074 (1987) : Method for determination of lead by atomic 
absorption spectrophotometry [CHD 1: Inorganic Chemicals] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS s 12074 -1987 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 



MBTHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF LEAD BY ATOMIC 

ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETER 



UDC 543-422 : .'i#; SIS 



© Citf^r^hi 1988 

AUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK liHAVAN, 9 SiAHADUR SHAH ZAFAk MARO 

Kl-:W UELkll 110002 



IS : 12074 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF LEAD BY ATOMIC 

ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETER 

Chemical Standards Sectional Committee, CDC 1 

Chairman Representing 

T>R B. N. Mattoo Maharashtra State Forensic Science Labortory, 

Bombay 

Members 

Dr S. K. Meqhal ( Alternate to 
Dr B. N. Mattoo) 
Db p. K. Aqabwal IDMA Laboratories, Chandigarh 

Shri K. D. Amrk National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri S. B. Nanal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. A. Ashtaputre Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. K. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Assistant Director Gei^eral Directorate General of Health Services, New 

( PFA ) Delhi 

Assistant Secretary ( PFA } ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. C. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Chemist & Metallurgist Railway Board, Ministry of Transport 

Assistant Research Officer 
( Met) -2 {Alternate) 
Chief Chemist Central Revenues Control Laboratory, New Delhi 

Deputy Chief Chemist ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director ( Chemicals ) Department of Industries & Commerce, Madras 

Deputy Director ( MCL ) {Alternate ) 
Dr S. K, Kapoor Regional Testing Centre, New Delhi 

Dr J. K. NiGAM Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Shri N. S. Birdie ( Alternate) 
Db a. V, Paigankab Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. Mansukhani ( Alternate ) 
Dr P, K. Pandya Sarabhai M. Chemicals, Vadodara 

Dr M. Pardhasaraohi Regional Research Laboratory, Hyderabad 

DrJ. Madhusudan Rao {Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act { XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



18:12074-1987 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi Om Prasad Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Dr D. G. Prashar National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Dr a. K. Sarkar {Alternate ) 
Dr G, Ramana Rao Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Roop Lal Shah ( Alternate ) 
Db M. p. Sahakari Italab Private Limited, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Honavar ( Alternate ) 
Dr L. V. Sastry Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri V. N. Sehgal Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New Delhi 

Shri V. S. Bisaria ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. R. Sengtipta Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri B. B. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Db S. C. Sharma Central Indian Pharmacopoeia Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Db P. D. Sethi ( Alternate ) 
Shri G, S. Shukla Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Prof M. M. Taqxti Khan Central Salt & Marine Chemical Research 

Institute, Bhavnagar 
Dr G. D. Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shri Satish Chandkr Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. Bakshi Gupta 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), BIS 



IS : 12074 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF LEAD BY ATOMIC 

ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETER 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on 28 May 1987, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 The atomic absorption spectrophotometric method is dependent on 
the fact that metallic atoms present in ground state will absorb incident 
radiation from the source, normally hollow cathode lamp, when excited. 
When radiation from the given excited element is passed through the 
flame containing ground state atoms of that element, the intensity of the 
transmitted radiation will decrease in proportion to the amount of the 
ground state atoms present in flame. A hollow cathode lamp whose 
cathode is made of the element to be determined provides the radiation. 
The metal atom.s to be m.easured are placed in the beam of radiation by 
aspirating the sample solution into an oxident fuel flame. A monochro- 
mator isolates the characteristic radiation from the hollow cathode lamp 
and a photosensitive device measures the attenuated transmitted 
radiation. Various metallic elements including lead can be precisely 
analysed by this technique. 

metals and alloys, food products, edible oils, drugs, chemicals, paints, 
rubber products, water and effluents, petroleumi products, etc. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the method for determination of lead by 
atomic absorption spectrophotometer. 



•Kules lor rounding on numerical values {rtvised)* 

3 



IS : 12074 - 1987 

2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

2.1 The sample is brought into the solution by suitable treatment with 
acids or acid combinations, diluted with distilled water, filtered and 
suitable dilutions are made for aspiration into the air acetylene flame. 
The standard solution is made in the same way for calibration. The 
most sensitive lead line is 217*0 nm, however, other lines suitable for 
higher concentration can also be used. 

3. INTERFERENCE 

3.1 No cationic interference have been reported for the air acetylene 
flame. A number of anionic interferences have been reported. 
Phosphates, carbonates, iodides, fluorides and acetates suppress lead 
absorbance significantly at concentrations ten times greater than lead. 
These interferences can be largely overcome by addition of EDTA 
solution so as to give 0*1 molar concentration of EDTA in the final 
solution for aspiration. 

3.2 At 217*0 nm wavelength, non-atomic species in the flame absorb 
strongly. Where the sample has a high concentration of dissolved solids, 
it is necessary to use background correction with the help of hydrogen 
continuum lamp. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Atomic absorption spectrophotometer provided with background 
corrector and having following parameters: 

a) Lamp current — depending on the lamp and instrument 

used 

b) Support — air 

c) Fuel — acetylene 

d) Flame stoichiometry — oxidising 
e) Wavelength and working range 

Wavelength (nm) Band Pass (nm) 

217*0 1*0 

283-3 0-2 

261*4 0-2 

202*2 0*2 

205*3 0*2 

Note — Incase of multi-element hollow cathode lamp containing copper, the 
second sensitive line for lead, that is, 283'3 nm may be taken to avoid the interference 
of copper. 



Working Range (xg/ml 


5 to 


20 


10 „ 


40 


200 „ 


800 


250 „ 


1000 


2 000 „ 


8 000 



IS r 12074 -1987 

5. REAGENTS 

5.1 Pure Lead Metal — 99*99 percent. 

5.2 Concentrated Nitric Acid — ^e^ IS : 264-197G*. 

5.3 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid-^^^ IS : 265-19761. 

5.4 Standard Lead Solution — Dissolve I'O g of lead in 1 : 1 nitric 
acid, dilute to one litre with distilled water to give 1 000 [xg/ml of lead. 

6. SAMPLE PREPARATION 

6.1 Metals and Alloys — A suitable quantity of sample is dissolved in 
hydrochloric acid or a mixture of hydrochloric acid and nitric acid, 
evaporated to dryness, again dissolved in hydrochloric acid, diluted, 
filtered and made up to known volume. A suitable dilution is made for 
determination of lead before aspirating in the flame. Concentration of 
solution by ion exchange or by solvent extraction should be done where 
lead is expected to be present in very low quantities. 

6.2 Water and Effluents — Lead content in water is usually at very 
low level. Concentration technique is required before feeding to flame. 
Concentration may be done by evaporation of solvent extraction or by 
ion exchange method. 

6.3 Minerals and Ores — Finely divided particles are dissolved in 
hydrochloric-nitric acid mixture and evaporated to dryness. It is again 
taken in hydrochloric acid, diluted and filtered to remove siliceous 
matter. 

Residue is dried, ignited and fused with fusion mixture. Extract 
in hydrochloric acid is taken and mixed with original solution. The 
final solution is made up to known volume. 

6.4 Food Products, Clinical Samples, Organic Materials, Paints, 

etc — The sample is brought into solution by wet digestion with nitric 
acid /perchloric acid or dry ashing at 450°C and dissolving in nitric 
acid. Filtrate is made up to suitable known volume. 

6.5 Atmospheric Particulates — Membrane filter containing parti- 
culates is leached in nitric acid and filtered. The solution is made to a 
known volume with distilled water. 



♦Specification for nitric acid ( second revision ). 
fSpecification for hydrochloric acid ( second revision ). 



IS : 12074 - Wa? 

6.6 Coal and Coke — After ashing at 350° C, it is dissolved in aqua-regiQ., 
filtered and diluted to known volume. 

1. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Optimize the response of instrument by adjustment of burner 
height and flame. Aspirate water to get zero absorption, when stable 
response is observed, aspirate standards- ( at least 4 ) and note down 
absorption. 

Aspirate sample to get absorption of the sample. Prepare 
calibration curve by plotting the net absorption value of the standard 
against concentration in H-g/ml of lead. Locate the point of the 
sample absorption and calculate the concentration of lead in the 
sample. 

8. CALCULATION 

o * T 1 1. C X 7 100 

o.l Lead percent by mass — — rjrg — X ~~t^~ 

where 

(7= concentration of lead in JJi-g/ml in final solution, 

V = volume in ml of final solution, and 

M = nnass in g of the sample in final solution. 



