U DC 66'047'67158

: 001'4

IS : 10875 - 1983
Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

m

1

I

GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND MATERIAL -OF CONSTRUCTION FOR ROTARY DRYERS AND COOLERS

I.

Scope - This standard covers definitions and material of construction Nhich are commonly used for granular materials. !. Terminology

for rotary dryers

and

coolers

c

:

!.I Capacity - Capacity shall Imply the quantity of material produced under the stipulated conditions If quality. In the case of rotary dryers it can be expressed as the quantity ( kg ) of dried material per Jnit time ( h ) within stipulated moisture contents at inlet and outlet of dryer, alternatively, the evapora:ion capacity, which is quantity of moisture ( kg ) evaporated per unit time ( h 1. In the case of rotary :oolers it can be expressed as quantity ( kg ) of material cooled within stipulated temperature ( "C ) differential at inlet and outlet of cooler. 2.2 Concurrent Dryer - Concurrent dryer is one in which-both wet material to be dried as well as the hot air used for drying enter from the same end and travel in the same direction of the dryer. A basic advantage is that higher inlet temperatures for the hot air can be used. 2.3 Constant during which
Rate Drying - Constant rate drying occurs in the initial stage in drying of wet materials period of time the evaporation rate per unit drying surface area remains constant.

L

&
r-

s
2
Y

2.4 Counter Flow Dryer - Counter flow dryer is one in which the direction of flow of the material to be dried and that of the hot air are opposite. They are also called counter-current flow dryers. A dried product with an extremely low moisture content can be obtained in this set-up. 2.5 Critical Moisture Content - Critical moisture content is the moisture content at a particular time during the drying process when the constant rate drying period changes to the falling rate one. Sometimes it is also referred to as a point differentiating the bound and the unbound moisture content. 2.6 Dry Basis - Dry basis is the representation of the dividing the mass of water by the mass of the dry material. 2.7 Dryer Thermal total heat supplied moisture content in the product obtained by

Efficiency - Dryer thermal efficiency is a representation of the percentage by the fuel to evaporate a specific amount~of water from the product.

of the

2.8 Drying Curve - Drying curve is a~graphical representation of the moisture content in the product being dried versus the time during the process of drying. It identifies the constant rate and falling rate regimes as well as the critical moisture content. 2.9 Dust Burden or Loading - Dust burden or loading in the exhaust gases is a representation quantity of dust picked up by the exhaust gases and is generally expressed in mg/Nm3. of the

2.10 Falling Rate Drying - Falling rate drying occurs in the latter stages in the drying of wet materials during which period the change of moisture content goes on decreasing with time elapsed. 2.11 Final Moisture Content - Final moisture content represents the exact moisture content in the final product leaving the dryer or cooler. The oven method is to be followed for determination of moisture contents unless specified otherwise. 2.12 Free Moisture - Free moisture is generally is not held by hygroscopic forces. It may include referred to as the water content bound and unbound moisture.
in a material which

2.13 Ho/d-up - Hold-up is a representation of the total mass of material held in the dryer or cooler at any time of operation. It is expressed either in absolute mass (kg > or as a percentage of the volume of the material to the clear internal volume of the cylindrical shell of the dryer or cooler. 2.14 Moisture Content - Moisture content is a basic representation product compared to the mass of the product on either dry or wet basis. of the mass of moisture in ;

Adopted

23 December

1983

0 July 1984, I
iNDIAN
MANAK

ISI I INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

~Gr2

STANDARDS
BHAVAN.

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

lS:10875-1983
2.15 Retention Time - Retention time is the time taken by the feed to travel the length of the dryer or cooler and is the sum of the movement time due to action of the lifters as well as slide along its slope. It is also referred to as the time requirement for which the material has to be retained to complete the process of drying or cooling. 2.16 Wet Basis - Wet basis calculations incorporate the mass of wet material It is obtained by dividing the mass of water by the mass of wet material. in the denominator.

2.17 Specific Power Consumption - Specific power consumption is obtained by dividing electrical energy ( kwh ) consumed by the complete dryer or cooler installation and its divided by the output ( dry basis).

the actual auxiliaries

2.18 Specific Heat Consumption or Thermal Requirement - Specific heat consumption or thermal requirement is obtained by dividing the net heat input ( J ) by the output of dryer (dry basis ) in kg per unit time. 3. Nomenclature Fig. 1.
INLET END

-

The various

components

of the rotary dryer or cooler

shall

be designated

as in

FEED

SPOUT

GEAR

GIRTH

GEAR

DISCHARGE

DISCHARGE END HOUSING

MOIST AIR

AIR INLET

GEARBOX/ STRAIGHT

/MOTOR

/SUPPORTING ROLLER

MING

RADIAL

FLIGHTS TYPICAL FIG. 1 NOMENCLATURE

QUADRANTS LIFTER ARRANGEMENTS DRYER

CROSS

FOR ROTARY

OR COOLER

4. Classification

-

The rotary dryers and coolers may be classified

as ;

a) Batch type, and b) Continuous type.

In the ~batch type, the charge to be dried or cooled is loaded into the dryer or cooler and after the drying or cooling process it is removed in a batch; whereas in the continuous type, a continuous supply and removal of material is maintained. 2

18:10875-1983
4.1 The rotary dryers are further

classified

as :

a) Direct heat dryers, b) Indirect heat dryers, and heat dryers.

c) Indirect-direct

4.1 .l D~irect heat dryer is one in which the material being dried is brought into direct contact with the drying medium, either in the parallel or counterflow configuration. The heat transfer is predominently convective. 4.1.2 Indirect heat dryer is one in which the heat to the material being dried is transferred The configuration could very in either shell and tube type or furnace enclosed metallic wall. Radiation is the dominant mode of heat transfer. through a shell type.

4.1.3 Indirect-direct heat dryer is one employing a combination of the above two applying a double-pass for the hot gases, resulting in a high degree of heat utilization three modes. 4.2 The rotary coolers are further a) Direct coolers, b) Indirect coolers. comes into direct contact, and classified as:

principles and through all the

4.2.1 Direct cooler is one in which the air used for cooling counter flow, with the material being cooled. 4.2.2 Indirect cooler is one in which the cooling material being cooled through a metal wall.

generally

in

medium, air or water,picks

up the heat from the

5. Sizes - Sizes of rotary dryers and coolers shall be denoted length of the cylindrical shell in metres.

by the

internal

nominal

diameter

and

6.

Designetion a) Commonly

-

The designation used name,

of a rotary dryer or cooler shall include :

b) Classification, c) Size designation, and

d) Number of this standard. Example : A rotary sand dryer with an inside diameter of 3'0 m and 18 m long, the hot flowing in opposite direction to the feed sand, will be designated as : Direct Heat Counter-Current Rotary Dryer 3'0 X 18 IS : 10875-I 984 gases for drying

7. M8teri8k The materials of construction duty requirements of the individual components. general practice.

of the rotary dryers and coolers will depend upon the Table 1 gives a list of the same in accordance with

3

18:10875-1683

TABLE

1 MATERIALS

OF CONSTRUCTION

( Clause 7)

SI No.

I

Components

I

Material/Specification

I

Remarks

i)

Main shell

a) Grade 2 of IS : 2002-1982 Specification for steel plates for pressure vessels for intermediate and high temperature service including boilers ( first revision ) b) IS : 2062-1980 SpecRication for structural steel ( fusion welding quality ) ( second revision ) C) Stainless steel a) CS 640 of IS : 2644-1979 Specification for high tensile steel castings ( second revision ) b) Grade 27-54 of IS : 1030-I 982 Specification for carbon steel castings for general engineering purposes ( third revision )

For high temperature corrosive materials

and

ii)

Tyres

iii)

Support

rollers
roller shafts

I
iv) Support

a) CS 640 of IS : 2644-1979 I b) Grade 27-94 of IS : 1030-1982 a) 15 C8 of IS : 1570 ( Part 2)-1979 `Schedules for wrought steels: Part 2 carbon steels ( unalloyed steels ) ( first revision )' b) Class 3 of IS : 1873-l 978 `Specification for carbon steel, billets, blooms, slabs and bars for forgings ( fourth -revision )' a) Antifriction roller bearings b) Journal bearings a) CS 65 of IS b) Grade 27-54

4 vi)

Support roller bearings Girth gear

: 2644-1979
of IS : 1030-1982 steel 1 Plate thickness ing 20 mm Pl;;;himckness not exceedexceeding

vii)

Pinion

a) IS 226-l 975 `Specification for structural ( standard quality ) ( fifth revision )' a) IS : 226-l 975 b) IS : 2062-l 980

viii)

All other fabricated items Lifters

ix)

a) IS : 2062-1980 b) Stainless steel c) Grade 1 of IS : 276-1978 `Specification for austenitic manganese steel castings ( third revision ) a) High alumina b) Castables bricks

For casting

xl

Refractories

, To suit material temperature
profile and abrassive resistance

EXPLANATORY
The rotary dryer or cooler tyres or riding rings on plain rollers alternatively a chain shaft pinion, motor is the prime mover in nearly

NOTE

consists of a near horizontal cylinder or shell supported by means of held in bearings. It is rotated by means of a girth-gear and counter and sprocket drive arrangement through a main gearbox. An electric all cases.

The inside of the shell is equipped with flights running throughout the length of the dryer or These flights lift the material to be dried and shower it across the air stream. The flight cooler. configuration, sizes, shapes and geometry vary considerably. The drying action basically involves the removal of liquid, in most cases water, by converting it into vapour that separates readily from the solid. In the rotary dryer, the drying action is intermediate between that of a particle suspension unit and a static bed.

Printed at Printrade.

New Delhi, India

