RAT Alte IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


qA arel Raar xr feratur, sremera 
TAT LATS — VICIT HaT 
ST 7 athe AAU TST 
( TECH JATT ) 


Construction, Operation and 
Maintenance of River Valley 
Projects — Safety Code 
Part 7 Fire Safety Aspects 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4 freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2020 Price Group 7 


Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21 
had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


A continuous supply of electric power is of primary importance for almost all human activities, particularly in the 
industrial sector. Outbreak of fire or an explosion in a power station may completely curtail supply of electrical 
power for considerable time in addition to causing extensive damage to the building and equipment. 


Importance of fire safety, for electrical generating and distributing stations has been increasingly recognized, 
due to occurrence of several devastating fires in such locations in the recent past. Therefore, considering the fact 
that any fire in such installations may completely disrupt the life of the community, several industries served by 
them, and may also involve replacement of highly valuable equipment, it is necessary that every attempt should 
be made to prevent or at least minimize, the occurrence and spread of fires in these installations. Installation of 
equipment having built-in safety measures in the premises and judicial suppression or isolation of fire risks will 
therefore reduce both frequency of outbreaks of the fire as well as curtail the possibility of its spreading to other 
areas. Further, with the adoption of suitable fire safety norms with regard to design, layout and construction of 
buildings and other structures, choice of materials for construction, etc, the premises can be rendered safer from 
the point of view of fire risk. 


The important fire safety and fire protection requirements for a power plant which should receive due attention are 
given in this standard. Where necessary, reference to relevant Indian Standards has also been made. Any fire safety 
measures other than those covered in this standard, if prescribed in the relevant statutory rules and regulations, 
should also be adhered to. Requirements in respect of first aid and other emergency medical relief are not covered 
in this standard. 


This standard was first published in 1993; however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
decided to revise it based on the experience gained since then as well as considering technological development 
in the field. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Indian Standard 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 
OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS — SAFETY CODE 


PART 7 FIRE SAFETY ASPECTS 


( First Revision ) 
1SCOPE IS No. 
1.1 This part lays down the fire safety requirements in — 949 : 2012 
river valley projects covering the following components 
and aspects: 

a) Main components, such as dams, canals, tunnels, 950 : 2012 
penstocks, control structures, valve houses, 
distribution stations, transformer and switch 
yards. 951 : 2003 
b) Buildings both permanent and temporary. 
c) Forest - Where most of the river valley projects 
are located either in hills or foot hills. 1641 : 2013 
d) Hydropower stations and their allied equipment. 
1.2 This standard is intended to be of use during the 
construction, operation as well as maintenance periods, 1642 : 2013 
for the fire safety of river valley projects. Utmost i 
care should be taken in fire precautions during the 
construction time of the project as it is the busiest 
period for various activities and on account of large 1643 : 2013 
deployment of men and material. 
2 REFERENCES 1644 : 2013 
The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 1646 : 2015 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on these standards are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the : 
standards indicated below: ator AD 
IS No. Title 
636 :2018 Specification for non-percolating 2175 : 1988 
flexible fire fighting delivery hose 
(fourth revision) 
941:1985 Specification for blower and 2189 : 2008 
exhauster for fire fighting (second 
revision) 
944 : 1979 Functional requirements for 1800-1/ 
2190 : 2010 


Min trailer pump For fire brigade use 
(second revision) 


Title 
Emergency (Rescue) Tender — 
Functional Requirements (third 
revision) 


Functional Requirements for water 
tender, type B for fire brigade use 
(third revision) 

Functional Requirements for crash 
fire tender for air fields (fourth 
revision) 

Code of practice for fire safety 
of buildings (general) General 
principles of fire grading and 
classification (second revision) 


Fire safety of buildings (general): 
Details of construction — Code of 
practice (second revision) 


Code of practice for fire safety of 
buildings (general): Exposure hazard 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for fire safety 
of buildings (general): Exit 
requirements and personal hazard 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for fire safety 
of buildings (general): Electrical 
installations (third revision) 


Foam making branch pipe and foam 
inductor — Specification (second 
revision) 

Specification for heat sensitive fire 
detectors for use in automatic fire 
alarm system (second revision) 


Selection, installation and 
maintenance of automatic fire 
detection and alarm system — Code 
of Practice (fourth revision) 


Selection, installation and 
maintenance of first-aid fire 
extinguishers — Code of Practice 


(fourth revision) 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


IS No. 


2871: 


3594 : 


3844 : 


4571: 


4927: 


4989 


6070 : 


9668 : 


10993 


11006 


12459: 


12717: 


12777 : 


12835 
(Part 


1989 


13039 


15325: 


2012 


1991 


1989 


1977 


1992 


: 2018 


1983 


1990 


: 1984 


: 2011 
1988 


1989 


1989 


Tys 


: 2014 


2020 


Title 


Branch pipe, universal for fire 
fighting purpose — Specification 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for fire safety of 
industrial buildings: General storage 
and warehousing including cold 
storage (first revision) 


Code of practice for installation and 
maintenance of internal fire hydrants 
and hose reels on premises (first 
revision) 

Specification aluminium extension 
ladders for fire brigade use (first 
revision) 

Unlined flax canvas hose for fire 
fighting - specification (first revision) 


Foam concentrate for producing 
mechanical foam for fire fighting — 
Specification (fourth revision) 


Code of practice for selection, 
operation and maintenance of trailer 
fire pumps, portable pumps, water 
tenders and motor fire engines (first 
revision) 


Provision and maintenance of water 
supplies and fire fighting - Code of 
practice (first revision) 


Functional requirements for 2000 kg 
dry powder tender for fire brigade 
use 


Flash back arrestor (flame arrestor) — 
Specification (first revision) 


Code of practice for fire safety in 
cable runs 

Fire fighting equipment 
High capacity portable pumpset 
(1 100 - 1 600 l/min) — Functional 
requirements 


Method for classification of flame 
spread of products 


Design and installation of fixed foam 
fire extinguishing system — Code of 
Practice Part 1 Low expansion foam 


External hydrant systems - provision 
and maintenance — Code of practice 
(first revision) 

Design and installation of fixed 
automatic high and medium velocity 
water spray system — Code of 
Practice 


3 GENERAL 


3.1 A fire outbreak in any part of a river valley project 
assumes the greatest importance because of the 
following factors: 


a) Except for large network of canals and tunnels, 
other components, such as storage dams, power 
house, transformer yard, storage yard and 
residential camps are mostly located relatively 
close to one another. 


b 


— 


Generally, the peak period of activity in a project 
starts after one year of the beginning of the project 
and ends one year ahead of completion of the 
project. A number of temporary structures, both 
residential and non-residential exist in the area 
with a large number of human beings occupying 
them. Hence, there is a possibility of outbreak of 
fire with the chances of its spreading being greater. 
Other components of the project are generally 
constructed with concrete/masonry and steel, duly 
following the precautionary measures of fire safety 
as per standards. Hence the possibility of outbreak 
of fire in these structures is comparatively rare but 
cannot be ruled out completely. 


3.2 The main fire risk areas in a hydropower station are: 


a) Turbo generators including lubricating and oil 
systems. 


b) Oil fueled generator, station, unit and auxiliary 
transformers including associated coolers and 
conservator tanks. 


c) Diesel driven pump/engine units and their fuel and 
storage tanks. 


d) Hydrogenerators and their allied equipment, such 
as unit transformers, auxiliary transformers, AC/ 
DC distribution and control boards, AC/DC power 
and control cables, etc. 


e) Cable gallery within power house as well as cable 
gallery from power house to switchyard. 


f) Oil storage tank room used for storing of 
transformer oil for its dehydration during capital 
maintenance of generator transformer. 


g) Lubricating oil system and electrical system in 
valve house. 


h) Control room. 


3.3 The distribution stations such as load dispatch 
centres and sub-stations also present fire hazards 
arising from oil filled transformers, switchgear, cable 
galleries/tunnels, etc. 


3.4 The fire protection coverage for power plants should 
be comprehensive in catering to all the fire hazards as 
mentioned above. The planning for the fire protection 
schemes should start right from the design stage of 


the plant, thereby ensuring that adequate and suitable 
fire protection measures, both active and passive are 
incorporated not only while finalising the plant design 
Itself, but also right up to the completion stage. 


3.5 [n the fire protection system for the power plant, due 
consideration should be given to the danger of smoke 
logging in all locations in addition to safeguarding 
against other likely gaseous and toxic products. The 
provision of adequate means of escape should also be 
given due consideration in the interest of safety to life 
(see IS 1644). 


3.6 Each installation shall prepare a detailed 'Fire 
emergency procedures’ manual outlining the actions 
to be taken by each personnel during a major incident 
for use by the organization and this manual shall be 
available to all personnel in the installation. The fire 
emergency procedures including firefighting plan 
should be prepared for fighting fires in process area, 
storage tanks, Electrical fire, building fire, etc. 


4 COMMUNICATIONS 


4.1 Reliable communication system for various 
components of the river valley project among 
themselves and with fire fighting stations, etc, are 
vital as fire fighting personnel have to get mobilized 
and move into action within the shortest possible time, 
before the situation worsens. 


4.2 Communication systems should be reliable and will 
have to be maintained perfectly in view of the fact that 
the components of the river valley projects are located 
mostly in remote and isolated areas. 


4.3 Fire alarms (automatic and manual) and sirens 
should be installed at suitable important locations for 
local alerts. 


4.4 Provision for announcement of fire on the loud 
phones installed at various locations of the power plant 
should also be made. 


4.5 Telephone numbers of emergency responders that 
is Fire Station, Ambulance, Forest Officers, Plant 
Incharge, etc, should be prominently displayed at 
vulnerable locations. 


4.6 CCTV should be provided for all the remote/1solated 
locations. Display of the same should be available at 
control room for monitoring. 


5 FIRES IN FOREST 


5.1 When a forest fire starts, it is quite small in extent 
and not noticed till it develops significantly and 
becomes wide spread. A fully developed fire is difficult 
to extinguish or control. Hence, precautions should be 
taken, not only for preventing start of fires, but also 
for extinguishing them, so that the components of the 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


structures in hydro projects are not affected in a big 
way. 


5.2 Prevention 


Trespassers and people, who visit forests on picnics, 
should be warned about the danger of creating fires by 
careless and indiscriminate actions. Suitable warning 
boards should be exhibited at a number of places. 


Observation towers are erected in forests by the 
forest department for various purposes. The spacing 
of such observation towers should be made closer in 
forests where components of hydro projects are sited. 
There should be good liaison between the authorities 
of the hydro projects and the forest department in the 
exchange of information about fire for their mutual 
safety. 


In many projects, it is now mandatory to provide 
for compensatory afforestation. Such compensatory 
afforestation should not be made in close proximity of 
the various components ofthe hydro projects. Generally, 
extensive cultivation, plantation or compensatory 
afforestation should not be allowed within a distance of 
30 m from the components of hydro projects. 


5.3 Fire Extinguishment 


If the fires are observed during early stages, they can 
be extinguished by beating. A number of personnel in 
the hydra projects should be trained for undertaking the 
beating operation in a systematic way. Such personnel 
may be trained by the staff of the forest department. 


Fire barriers may be created at close intervals so as to 
contain fire in a limited area and concentrate on the 
efforts for extinguishing the fire. 


Proper use of water can extinguish many fires 
effectively and also contain their spread. Facility for 
adequate supply of water should be created in the fringe 
areas of the components of hydro projects, adjoining 
the forest areas. The personnel in hydro projects should 
be trained in the use of water for extinguishing and 
preventing the spread of fires. 


When a fire is noticed in the forest, the nearby fire station 
should be immediately alerted by instantaneously 
communicating with them, as it is advisable to get 
trained fire personnel and fire fighting equipment to the 
danger area at the earliest. 


6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 
RELATED REQUIREMENTS 


AND 


6.1 The structural elements of all buildings of an 
electrical generating/distributing station should be of 
Type 1 construction, complying with the requirements 
of IS 1642. 


6.2 Smoke Ventilation 


Provision for ventilation of smoke and toxic gases from 
a fire within the power station building, preferably of 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


automatic type, should be made over the generator floor 
to permit escape of heat, toxic gases and large volumes 
of smoke likely to be generated. The requirements of 
fire venting should conform to the provisions contained 
in Annex B of Part 4 of the National Building Code 
2016. For extraction of smoke from fire a minimum 
air change rate of 12 per hour be obtained depending 
on fire load, room height, size, etc. In case the start of 
smoke extraction is delayed, the volume change rate 
may have to be increased even up to 30 changes. Smoke 
vents of approved design, preferably automatic, should 
be incorporated in cable tunnels/galleries, turbine halls, 
plant rooms, switch board rooms, etc, and provision 
made for the attachment of portable extraction units, 
if not already served by a fixed smoke extraction 
installation. 


6.3 To achieve compartmentisation, the plant should be 
subdivided into individual fire areas to the maximum 
feasible extent, so as to reduce the spread of fire from 
one area to another area and the consequential damage, 
and also to achieve easy control and extinguishing 
of the fire. Such compartment by fire barriers, or 
separation walls of minimum 2 h fire resistance, should 
be provided in the following cases: 


a) Where a turbine hall houses more than one unit, a 
fire barrier/separation wall should be provided for 
each unit beneath the operating floor in the turbine 
and electrical bays. 

b) Between turbine generator hall and control room/ 
computer room/instrument room. 

c) Between turbine generator hall and Electrical 
Switchgear room (unit wise barriers needed). 

d) Between the turbine generator hall and cable 
galleries (unit wise barriers needed). 

e) Between staircases and lift shafts and the rest of 
the building. 

f) Flammable liquids should be stored separately 
away from the work area. 

g) Between transformer yard/outdoor transformers 
and any other nearby building, in case a clear 
distance of 15 m is not available. 

h) Between indoor transformers where a clear 
distance of 15 m is not available. 

j) Between individual oil-filled transformers 
containing oil in excess of 2 000 litre, in case 
clear distances as specified in IS 1646 are not 
maintained. 

k) Between battery rooms and other adjoining areas. 

m) Between cable galleries of each unit. 

n) Within cable galleries. 

6.4 The door provided in the separation walls between 


these fire areas should be self-closing, fire-check doors 
of fire rating equal to that of the separation wall. 


6.5 Windows/ventilators in fire separation walls 
(for example for control rooms or computer rooms) 
should be preferably provided with clear fire resisting 
glass of minimum 45 min fire resistance or with 
automatic fire resistance/shutters or an automatic water 
curtain. 


6.6 Cellular or foamed plastic materials (such as 
expanded Polystyrene, polyurethane foam, etc) should 
not be used as interior finish or insulation in any part 
of the building. Where interior finishes (wall, linings. 
false ceilings, etc) are unavoidable they should be non- 
combustible of Class I flame spread (see IS 12777). 


6.7 Air conditioning for the control room should 
provide a pressurized environment to preclude the entry 
of smoke in the event of a fire outside the control room. 


6.8 Plastic ducts, including ‘fire retardant’ types, should 
not be used for ventilating systems. 


6.9 Provision should be made in all fire areas of the 
plant for removal of all liquids, including fire fighting 
water, directly to safe areas. The drainage facilities 
(pits, sumps and sump pumps) should be adequate to 
cater to all of the following emergencies; 


a) The spill of the largest single container of any 
flammable or combustible liquids or both, in the 
area; 


b) A minimum flow of 1 800 lpm for fire fighting 
operations, for at least 20 min; and 


c) The maximum design volume of discharge from 

fixed fire suppression system(s) operating for a 
minimum of 20 min. 
NOTE — The provision for drainage and any associated 
drainable facilities (pits, sumps, drains to downstream surge 
chamber and/or tail tunnel or tail race, and sump pumps) for 
underground power plants should be sized to accommodate to 
discharge from the maximum expected discharge of the fixed 
fire suppression system(s) operating for a minimum of two 
hours. 


6.10 Floor draining from areas containing flammable or 
combustible liquids should incorporate suitable flame 
traps or flame arrestors, conforming to IS 11006. 


6.11 Switchgear, oil-circuit breakers and transformers 
should be preferably housed in detached single storey 
buildings of Type 1 construction (see IS 1642). 


6.12 The building used for storage purposes should 
conform to the requirements of IS 3594. 


6.13 The safety distance separating various buildings 
should be according to IS 1643 and the exit requirements 
should conform to IS 1644. 


6.14 Distance separating fuel oil storage tanks, open 
storage oil drums, etc, should be in accordance with the 
relevant statutory requirements as given in Petroleum 
Rules, 2002. 


6.15 Theswitch yards should be provided with lightning 
protection conforming to IS/IEC 62305. 


7 POWER STATION FACILITIES 


7.1 Generator Units 


7.1.1 Major fire risks in turbo generators arise from 
the leakage, or escape, of combustible lubricating and 
hydraulic fluids contained in the lubricating or governor 
seals, and jacking oil systems. The risk normally 
extends to the floor areas which house the lubricating 
systems and within the radius of an oil spray pattern 
cascading from a failure of bearings in the oil supply 
headers. 


7.1.2 A bund wall should surround and contain the main 
lubricating oil, jacking oil and flushing oil package unit 
area, to prevent spread of oil to surrounding floor areas. 


7.1.3 Concrete or concrete protected steel should be 
used for the supporting structure of turbine generator 
units. Exposed steel construction is acceptable, if 
protected by an automatic deluge sprinkler system. 


7.2 Oil Risks 


7.2.1 The risks arise from an escape of combustible 
lubricated and hydraulic fluids contained in the 
system, which can be considerably reduced by using 
completely separate circuits for the lubricating system 
and the control system. 


7.2.2 The seal oil and jacking oil systems are also 
subject to the same risks. 


7.2.3 There should be arrangement for collecting of 
lubricating oil from the distribution pipes by adopting 
any one of the following methods; 


a) By running the oil lines in concrete lined tunnels/ 
trenches, or steel-lined troughs, specially provided 
for the purpose or 

b) By employing the double pipe system, that is 
running the pressurized supply pipe inside a 
concrete larger pipe acting as a leakage collector, 
which should also act as a return pipe 


8 ELECTRICAL 
EQUIPMENT 


INSTALLATIONS AND 


8.1 General Requirements 


8.1.1 The electrical installations and equipment of the 
power station should conform in all respects to the 
relevant guidelines given in IS 1646. 


8.1.2. Gasoline, benzene, ether, alcohol, similar 
flammable cleaning fluids and water should not be used 
on energized electrical apparatus. 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


The use of such flammable cleaning fluids on de- 
energized apparatus may, however, be permitted 
provided the apparatus is not energized within half an 
hour of such use. 


8.1.3 None of the flammable solvents mentioned 
in 8.1.2 should be used in the vicinity of electrical 
equipment from which sparks may be received. 


8.1.4 All electrical equipment should be kept absolutely 
free of deposits of oil, grease, carbon dust, etc. 


8.1.5 All electrical equipment should be effectively 
earthed at atleast two points to avoid any flash/spark. 


8.1.6 Electrical equipment shall be regularly inspected 
and tested to prevent chances of fire. Precautions to be 
taken for safety of electrical installations confirming to 
relevant standards/ OEM recommendations. 


8.2 Cables and Cable Galleries 


8.2.1 The fire protection requirements for cable galleries 
cable runs, etc, should conform to the provisions 
contained in IS 12459, including the fire protection 
requirements such as segregation of cable runs into 
compartments, use of fire resistant cables in critical 
areas and groups of cables and sealing of penetration 
openings in the walls and floors. 


8.2.2 In addition to the usual cable clamps above floor 
level, cables should also be clamped immediately below 
floor level. Each cable or group should, where possible, 
be protected by a pipe or cover of heat resisting material 
rising to a height of at least 450 mm above floor level, 
or terminating just below the cable gland, sealed at the 
bottom and filled with sand or small pebbles. 


8.2.3 Whenever possible, all jute shavings should be 
removed from cables in switch rooms, basements and 
tunnels. 


8.2.4 Where cables rest on the floor of tunnel or 
basements, they should be separated into groups by 
vertical barriers of tile, brick or concrete and the 
trenches so formed should be filled with small pebbles. 
Alternatively, the cables may be separately clamped and 
each cable group should be separated by a minimum 
clear space of 75 mm. 


8.2.5 Power cables and control cables should run in 
separate trenches, wherever possible. 


8.2.6 Emergency lighting shall be provided inside the 
cable gallery and cable tunnels. 


8.2.7 Fire stops should be deployed at the locations 
where the trenches enter the sub-station. 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


8.3 Transformers 


All transformer installations should comply with the 
provisions of IS 1646 in addition to the following: 


a) As a protection against excessive damage due 
to occurrence of faults, transformers fitted with 
conservators should be protected with Bucholz 
relay. 


b 


— 


All other transformers should be equipped with 
oil temperature alarms or excess current relay 
protection. 


c 


wa 


The level and dielectric strength of the transformer 
oil should be checked at periodic intervals and in 
the event of presence of a large quantity of sludge, 
the oil shall be reconditioned/ replaced. 


d 


wa 


Diagnostic devices like PD monitoring system etc 
shall be provided to read the health of transformers 
with capacity 20 MVA and above. 


e) Differential protection should be provided for 
transformers rated 5 MVA and above. 


f) Transformers connected to Grid supply should 
have ‘ON LOAD TAP CHANGERS’ for control 
of secondary voltage. 


8.4 Battery Room 


8.4.1 Motor generator sets and/or converter or rectifiers 
together with necessary switches and control gear 
should be mounted separately (preferably in separate 
rooms as far as possible ) and away from the batteries. 


8.4.2 The storage batteries and all attendant equipment, 
except compact metal clad units, should be mounted 
away from all other apparatus, in a location free from 
dust, and should be well ventilated. 


8.4.3 The batteries should stand directly on durable, non- 
ignitable, non-absorbent and non-conducting material, 
such as glass, porcelain or glazed earthenware. These 
materials should rest on a bench which should be kept 
dry and insulated from earth. If constructed of wood it 
should be slatted and treated with anti-sulphuric enamel 
and coated with fire resistant paint. 


8.4.4 The batteries should be so arranged on the bench 
that a potential difference exceeding 12 V should not 
exist between adjoining cells. Batteries exceeding 20 V 
should not be bunched together or arranged in a circular 
formation. 


8.4.5 All combustible materials within a distance of 60 
cm measured horizontally, or within 2.0 m measured 
vertically, from any battery, should be protected with 
hard asbestos sheets. 


8.4.6 The charging circuit should be provided with 
miniature circuit breakers of suitable rating. Where 
a motor generator is employed, the motor should be 


provided with double or triple pole switches and fuses 
and an automatic battery and cut-out should be placed 
in the generator circuit. Any subcircuit should be 
provided with a fuse rated not more than 7 A in each 
live conductor. 


8.4.7 The charging control panels should be of 
durable, non-ignitable non-absorbent, non-conducting 
material and together with rectifiers, transformers 
and supports for resistance of lamps, should be on a 
bench which should be kept dry and insulated from 
earth. If constructed of wood, it should be slatted and 
treated with anti-sulphuric enamel and painted with fire 
resistant paint. 


8.4.8 If batteries are charged through resistance or 
lamps, unless these are enclosed in metallic enclosures, 
they should be at least 60 cm away from the nearest 
battery. 


8.4.9 All permanent wiring should be securely run and 
protected against mechanical injury. Efficient terminals 
or connections should be used from which connections 
to batteries can be made. Rubber insulated wiring or 
any other type of combustible insulated wiring, if on 
insulators, should not be run in such a position that a 
fire arising at any battery could reach it. All conductors 
connecting the supply terminals to batteries should 
have either rubber or tough compound insulation 
without tape or braid. 


8.4.10 If the source of supply in the mains has one 
conductor earthed, the lamps or other resistance should 
be connected on an earthed lead and the batteries 
connected direct to earth conductors. 


8.4.11 No celluloid cased storage batteries should be 
used. 


8.4.12 All china clay or other insulators should be 
kept free of dust, and all casings, conduits, wood or 
metal work likely to be affected by acid spray or fumes 
should be protected by acid resisting paint, varnish or 
compound. All exposed current carrying bus shall be 
insulated and terminals coated with petroleum jelly 


8.4.13 The housing of the batteries should be well 
ventilated to prevent build-up of flammable atmosphere 
and all electrical accessories should be flame proof.. 


8.4.14 No switching operation should be allowed inside 
battery room. All normal/ industrial type switches 
should be located outside battery room. 


8.4.15 Floors and walls (up to 1 m height) should be 
lined with acid proof tiles or coated with acid resistant 
paint. 


8.4.16 Eyewasher/shower should be provided in battery 
bank room. 


8.4.17 AII battery banks shall be routinely checked for 
healthy cell voltage, specific gravity of cells, electrolyte 
level, etc. 


9 ILLUMINATION 


9.1 The illumination levels in different areas shall be as 
per good engineering practice. Minimum illumination 
levels for various areas should be as per IS 6665/ 
OISD-RP-149 


9.2 Storage godowns and warehouses shall be 
illuminated as per provisions of IS 3594. 


10 FIRE PROTECTION MEASURES 


10.1 General 


10.1.1 Generating stations may vary in size from small 
capacity stations to large multi unit power stations 
including super power stations. Electrical generating 
and distribution stations come under the occupancy 
classification of Industrial Buildings, G-3 (see IS 1641). 


10.1.2 The extent and nature of the fire protection 
measures as well as exit facilities to be provided will 
depend on various factors like size and location of the 
station, risks involved, availability of outside help for 
major fire fighting, etc. However, all the power stations, 
irrespective of their size, should provide for adequate 
fire protection/fire fighting arrangements and exit 
facilities. 


10.1.3 Most of the hydropower stations are located in 
relatively remote areas with hardly any other assisting 
fire service within a reasonable distance. Such isolated 
locations make it all the more necessary for power 
stations to have an independent, full-fledged and well 
maintained fire fighting service of their own. Further, 
in order to enable quick response to any fire outbreak 
and to limit the response time to accepted standards, 
that is, within 5 min, it is necessary that a well trained 
and adequate fire fighting service is available within 
the premises under the direct administrative control of 
power house authorities. 


10.2 Turbo Generators and Supporting Structures 


10.2.1 In underground powerhouse for fire protection 
of turbo-generator, fixed water spray system to be 
provided. In case of surface powerhouse, fixed carbon 
dioxide extinguishing system backed by hydrant system 
or fixed water spray system to be provided. 


For fire involving large quantities of lubricating oil on 
turbo generators (in and around bearing housing) fixed 
water spray system/ hydrant/ portable fire extinguisher 
system to be provided. 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


10.2.2 Fixed high velocity water spray systems, 
the designed to discharge a flow of 10 lpm should 
completely cover all oil systems, oil piping, pumps, 
coolers and all similar associated equipment including 
adjacent floor areas. The water spray systems should be 
divided into convenient zones, and each zone should 
have sufficient numbers of projectors to cover the 
zone adequately. The number and groups of protection 
zones are related to the size of the turbo generator 
unit, its lubricating plant and auxiliaries. Typical 
zone arrangements should cover the areas of Lube oil 
systems, governor oil system, turbo-generator and steel 
foundation support legs etc. as applicable. Fire detectors 
for the zones should be of the quartzoid glass bulb type 
or combined fixed temperature and rate of heat rise heat 
detectors as per IS 2175. The heat detectors should be 
provided at strategic points and arranged to give early 
warning of the unusually high temperature conditions 
in the area. 


10.2.3 Automatic control of the extinguishing systems 
in this area is more effective than manual control. 
However, manual over-ride should also be provided. 
Zone control deluge should be carefully sited so as to be 
operable without fire or smoke hazard to the operator, 
during a fire. This may be achieved by careful location 
of the valve assemblies away from protection zones, 
or by enclosing the valves in protective cubicles, at the 
same time affording the operator a good view of the 
protected zones. Access routes to control valves should 
not involve to the operators. 


10.2.4 The water spray systems should incorporate 
isolation facilities so as to enable periodic testing, 
maintenance, etc. 


10.2.5 Normally all cut off valves should be locked in 
open positions. 


10.2.6 A selected number of internal hydrants (landing 
valves) should be provided, connected to the fixed 
pressurized fire protection system. These hydrants 
should be strategically positioned to cover the turbine 
operating floor as well as the basement areas. 


10.2.7 The pressurized fire protection system should 
have sufficient pressure to allow the generation of low 
expansion foam for fighting static/running oil fires. 


10.2.8 To enable fire fighting to be successfully carried 
out, facilities must exist for easy smoke dispersal, by 
provision of sufficient and controllable, top and bottom 
ventilation. 


10.2.9 In event of a fire involving, or close to, a turbine 
generator or its auxiliaries, it may be safer to shut down 
the unit so as to limit the damage only to that directly 
resulting from the fire. The shut down system should 
be automatic. 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


10.3 Transformers 


10.3.1 No fixed fire protection equipment (such as 
high velocity water spray) IS required on transformers 
below 10 MVA in the case of oil filled transformers, 
with oil capacity of 2000 litres and below. For all other 
transformers high velocity water spray system should 
be provided. This system should be separately mounted 
and designed to take into account the possibility of a 
transformer explosion. The water spray deluge valve 
house should be located outside the transformer fire 
zones and protected from radiant heat and other fire 
effects. The actuation ofthis system should be automatic 
but manual operating valves should also be provided. 


10.3.2 Fire barrier wall should be provided between 
transformers where they are less than 15m apart or 
where the oil capacity exceeds 2 000 litre. 


10.3.3 The transformer should be so designed as to 
permit the safe testing of the fire protection system, 
with discharge of water, while on load. 


10.3.4 There should be arrangements for containment 
of the spilled oil. For generator transformers and other 
large transformers the drainage system as well as the 
storage pit should be sufficiently large, to accommodate 
at least the total volume of the oil and an allowable 
volume of fire fighting water. The drain pipe should be 
provided with standard type of flame arrestors (see IS 
11006). 


10.3.5 The fire protection systems covering the 
generator transformers, associated oil conservator tank 
and cooler batteries should be designed to meet the 
single risk concept, so that simultaneous deluge over 
all the three risk zones is possible. 


10.3.6 When the transformer is installed near the cable 
trenches, the gaps in the trench cover plates within a 
reach or approximate 15 m or so (depending upon the 
capacity of transformer) should be properly filled with 
lean mortar so that in the event of explosion in the oil 
filled equipment, burning oil may not find access into 
the cable. Entry of the cable duct from the yard into 
the cable gallery should be effectively sealed with brick 
work of lean mortar 1:5 to guard against ‘stack-effect’. 


10.3.7 Fire extinguishers and fixed fire fighting system 
for oil filled outdoor transformers should be provided in 
line with CEA (Measures related to safety and electric 
supply) Regulations/ OISD-STD-173. 


10.3.8. Transformers installed adjacent to sub-station/ 
buildings shall, where oil capacity does not exceed 2 000 
litre, be provided with a layer of 100 mm deep stones 
of about 40 mm granulation, all around the transformer, 
for a width of 20 percent of the transformer height or 
with a minimum width of about 800 mm. 


10.3.9. Transformers installed adjacent to sub-station / 
building shall, where oil capacity exceeds 2,000 Litres 
of oil in a chamber, be provided with oil containing pits. 


10.4 Switch Gear 


10.4.1 Gas filled circuit breakers and vacuum breakers 
(such as sulphur-hexa-fluoride) are the least fire 
hazardous as compared to oil circuit breakers or air- 
blast breakers. Hydrant protection should be in close 
proximity to these risks. 


10.4.2 For an enclosed switchgear room without any 
operating persons, automatic carbon dioxide total 
flooding extinguishing system is considered preferable 
to water system. Switch rooms should be provided with 
controllable ventilators. 


10.4.3 All openings for cable entries in the switchgear 
room should be effectively sealed by use of fire stops 
(see IS 12459). 


10.4.4 All switchgear rooms should be kept clear 
and free from any accumulated debris or flammable 
material. 


10.4.5 The following switch boards may be housed in 
separate room: 


a) 6.6 kV unit switch boards (with separate room for 
boards of each unit ), 


b) 6.6 kV station switch boards, 
c) 415 V station switch boards, and 
d) 415 V unit switch boards. 


10.4.6 Switchgear rooms should be pressurized by 
the ventilation system to prevent ingress of dust. 
Suitable interlocks should be provided to switch off the 
pressurized ventilation system before the centralized 
extinguishing gas system is put into operation. 


10.4.7 Smoke detectors of the multi-sensor and optical 
type should be installed in the switchgear rooms on the 
cross-zoning principle, with suitable time delay devices 
incorporated. Proven intelligent fire detection systems 
(micro-processor based) are preferable. 


10.4.8 Fixed gaseous extinguishing system of the local 
application type will be ideal for extinguishing fires in 
switchgear systems. 


10.4.9 ISI marked Insulating mats as per 1815752 shall 
be provided in the front and back end of switch boards 


10.5 Control Room 


10.5.1 All openings for cable entries in the control 
room should be effectively sealed by use of fire stops 
(see IS 12459). 


10.5.2 The rooms should be kept clear and free of any 
waste material. 


10.5.3 The air conditioning system should be 
automatically switched off before the extinguishing 
system is put into operation or in the event of fire. 


10.5.4 Smoke detectors of the multi-sensor and optical 
type should be provided in the control room on cross- 
zoning principle with suitable time delay devices 
incorporated. Proven intelligent fire protection system 
(micro-processor based) are preferable. 


10.5.5 Entry of cables to the control room buildings 
shall be through fire resistant multi cable transits 
(MCTS). 


10.5.6 Control room entry shall have double doors. The 
air curtain facility at inner door 


may be considered to prevent any dust entry inside the 
control room. 


10.5.7 The plant /control room communication system 
shall include some or all of the following facilities as 
per individual plant requirements: 


a) Telephone public address system, 
b) Emergency communication system, 
c) Radio communication system and 


d) Intrinsically safe mobile phones. 


10.5.8 The exit doors of control room should be 
distinctly marked. 


10.6 Cable Galleries 


10.6.1 The experience of power station cable fires has 
been that in many cases, several units, if not the whole 
station, had got seriously affected by a single fire. PVC 
is not easily flammable but burns freely in fairly high 
temperature conditions producing copious quantities 
of dangerous fumes and gases including hydrogen 
chloride. These gases are toxic and highly corrosive. 
The cable galleries, separating rooms, etc, should be 
provided with facilities for ventilation together with 
means of controlling it from the outside. Apart from the 
need to clear smoke and toxic gases in the event of a 
fire, ventilation may also be necessary for temperature 
control of the galleries or areas. 


10.6.2 To limit the spread of fires along cable ways, 
fire barriers or separation walls should be installed for 
compartmentisation as mentioned in IS 12459. 


10.6.3 Access and exit ways, large enough to allow a 
man wearing breathing apparatus and carrying other 
fire fighting equipment, to pass through, should be 
provided. The distance between such exit ways should 
not exceed 60m in the cable galleries except in case 
of vertical cable galleries or tunnels as in case of 
underground power house. The cable galleries should be 
provided with automatic fixed fire fighting installations 
using water, carbon dioxide, inert gas system or high 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


expansion foam. However, water sprinkler system 
is generally preferred. The design of sprinklers and 
projectors should ensure that no rack of cables is left 
unprotected. Multi-sensor smoke detectors & linear 
heat sensing cables to be used for the automatic fire 
alarm system. The exit doors should open outwardly. 


10.6.4 Where high expansion foam or gas extinguishing 
systems are used, the system should actuate only after 
all persons have been evacuated. 


10.6.5 Self-contained breathing apparatus sets should 
be available for ready use by trained personnel, on 
strategic points near the entry to the cable galleries. 


10.6.6 All cable tunnels, galleries, cable ways, etc, must 
be kept clean and free from all extraneous combustible 
material. 


10.6.7 The means of escape should be clearly indicated 
and all exit ways must be kept clear. A controlled 
access procedures should be enforced for cable 
galleries, tunnels, etc, for employees on regular work 
or inspection duties. 


10.6.8 LHS (Linear heat sensing cable) shall be used 
for fire detection along EHV cables. 


11 WATER SUPPLIES FOR FIRE FIGHTING 
(EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL HYDRANT 
SYSTEMS) 


11.1 The water supplies for fire fighting for power 
stations should, by and large, conform to the provisions 
contained in IS 9668. Those for internal hydrant system 
should conform to IS 3844 and for external hydrant 
system to IS 13039. In addition, the requirements given 
in 11.2 to 11.7 should also be taken into account. 


11.2 The water supplies should be planned on the 
basis of the requirements of the largest fixed fire 
extinguishing system demand plus the maximum 
demand from the hydrant mains of not less than 1 800 
Ipm for a minimum of 2 h duration. 


11.3 The fire fighting pumps should be automatic 
starting with manual stopping. 


11.4 The main reservoir should have replenishment 
arrangement for complete re-filling of the reservoir 
within an 8 hour period. The re-filling operation should 
preferably be accomplished automatically. 


11.5 The water mains should be looped around the main 
power block and the pipe sizes should be designed to 
cater to future expansion needs. 


11.6 The interior fire protection mains/risers should be 
considered as an extension of the yard main and should 
be provided with at least two valve connections with 
sectional control valves. 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


11.7 For the entire power station area universal branch 
pipes, conforming to IS 2871, should be provided in 
the hose cabinets, as spray nozzles having shut-off 
capability will be ideal for use in such premises. 


11.8 Hydrant pipes above ground should be avoided as 
far as possible. 


12 MANUAL FIRE ALARM SYSTEM 


The entire plant area, including administrative and 
other buildings should be provided with manual fire 
alarm system with call boxes deployed at various 
strategic locations. The system should conform to the 
requirements given in IS 2189. The control panels of 
the fire alarm system should be located both in the 
control room as well as in the fire station control room. 


13 EMERGENCY POWER 


All generator units required emergency power for 
operation of the, bearing oil pumps and control units, 
besides meeting the requirements of emergency 
services like emergency lighting of all vital areas, 
means of escape, fire fighting pump, etc. A set of station 
batteries is a reliable supply for each load. Separate 
battery banks should be provided for each unit. In 
addition, emergency stand by power is necessary in 
the form of diesel generators, these units will provide 
backup power to the station battery system and should 
be designed to have capability of sufficient power for 
automatic and dead start. In addition emergency lamps 
with adequate illumination should be provided at 
strategic locations (Such as control room) which should 
operate automatically on the failure of the main supply. 


14 ADDITIONAL 
MEASURES 


FIRE PROTECTION 


14.1 Some of the special fire protection measures which 
need consideration for hydro electric power stations are 
mentioned in 14.2 to 14.5. 


14.2 For oil storage rooms automatic sprinkler/ 
high velocity water spray systems or portable fire 
extinguishing system using foam or carbon dioxide 
should be installed. The low expansion foam 
extinguishing system should conform to IS 12835 
(Part 1). 


14.3 Water turbines should have all essential safety 
device including a fail-safe governor drive mechanism, 
means to stop the flow of water to the penstock and 
turbine in the event of failure of the turbine, automatic 
shut-down of the turbine on development of abnormal 
conditions, temperatures, etc. 


14.4 Air cooled generators of capacity 100 MW and 
larger should also be protected suitably. 


10 


14.5 Water proof lighting fixtures should be provided, 
wherever the water sprinkler fire fighting system is 
installed. 


15 FIRE PROTECTION FOR POWER PLANTS 
DURING CONSTRUCTION 


15.1 The potential fire hazards during construction of 
power stations are considerable, and call for observance 
of stringent fire precautions. An above average level 
of fire protection is necessary during this phase from 
the consideration of life safety of the large number of 
on-site personnel, high value of materials and long 
duration of the construction period. 


15.2 The availability of essential fire protection 
equipment, and minimization of fire risk during 
construction activities 1s particularly important. 


15.3 Construction schedules should be coordinated 
so that planned permanent fire protection systems are 
installed and placed into service as soon as possible, at 
least prior to the introduction of any major fire hazards. 


15.4 Minimum fire detection and fire extinguishing 
measures will have to be provided for all locations 
where fire hazards are present, like storage of 
construction materials, storage of flammable materials, 
fire safety of welding and cutting operations and other 
building operations. 


15.5 A fire trained supervisor should be available at the 
construction site to ensure that all essential fire safety 
precautions are observed. 


15.6 Where practical, the permanent fire hydrant 
system for the plant should be installed well ahead of 
the completion of the project so that fire fighting water 
supplies will be available even during the construction 
period. Where this is not practicable, a minimum 
number of water tanks of not less than 1.25 lakh litre 
capacity, with replenishing arrangements, should be 
available at strategic locations in the plant area which 
can be utilized as an emergency water supply for fire 
fighting even after commissioning of the plant. A 
minimum of 2 h duration water supply for fire fighting 
should be available at the construction site. 


15.7 In addition to the fixed water extinguishing 
systems, sufficient number of first aid fire fighting 
equipment like different types of fire extinguishers 
should be available for deployment at various fire risk 
areas, as per IS 2190. 


16 REQUIREMENTS OF MAJOR FIRE 
FIGHTING APPLIANCES/EQUIPMENT AND 
MANPOWER 


16.1 On account of the reason that hydra power 
stations are generally located in relatively remote 


areas with hardly any other assisting fire service within 
a reasonable distance, it is necessary for the power 
stations to be provided with an independent full-fledged 
and well maintained fire service of their own. Quick 
response to a fire outbreak by fire fighting service is 
vital as it makes a difference between a small fire or a 
major fire with catastrophic loss. In other words, power 
station fire brigades should be in a position to tackle 
a fire, control and extinguish it before any damage is 
done. 


16.2 Major Fire Fighting/Appliances/Equipment 


16.2.1 Scales of Major Appliances/Equipment for 
Power Stations Installed Capacity Less than 50 MW 
(Class IV Power Stations). 


There may not be any need for any major fire fighting 
appliances for generating stations of this category, 
provided the station is located within 8 km from 
the nearest municipal/local fire brigade possessing 
adequate fire fighting appliances. In case it is located 
at a further distance, or if the municipal fire appliances 
are not available, a trailer fire pump conforming to IS 
944, or a higher capacity portable pump conforming to 
IS 12717, should be provided with a skeleton fire staff. 


16.2.1.1 The power stations should have a hydrant 
system, and also at least three static water tanks of 
minimum 1.25 lakh litres capacity deployed at strategic 
locations. 


16.2.1.2 The under mentioned equipment should also 
be provided: 


a) A minimum of 25 lengths of 63 mm dia fire 
fighting hose of 20 m length each (15 lengths of 
Type ‘A’ of IS 636, and 10 lengths conforming to 
IS 4927). 


b) Universal branch pipes conforming to IS 2871 - 4 
No. 


c) Foam-making branches FB 5X (see IS 2097) - 2 
No. 


d) Foam-making branches FB 10X (see IS 2097) - 2 
No. 


e) Mechanical foam compound (see IS 4989) - As 
required. 


f) B.A. sets (positive pressure type) - 4 No. 


g) Blower and exhauster for fire-fighting as per IS 
94] - 2 No. 


h) Water jel blankets (fire blankets) 2 X 1.75 m - 2 
No. 


j) Water jel blankets (for burns) 1 X 0.75 m - 4 No. 
k) Water jel container - 1 No. 
16.2.1.3 The above equipment should be equally 


applicable to load dispatch centres in major distribution 
stations (220 kV sub-stations and above). 


11 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


16.2.2 For Generating Stations of Installed Capacity 
from 50 MW to less than 200 MW (Class III) 


SI Type of Appliances No. Manning 
No. Pattern 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
i) Foam and carbon dioxide 1 Round the 
tender (as per IS 951) clock 
ii) Water tender Type ‘B’ 1 Reserve 
(as per IS 950 ) 
ii) High capacity portable 1 Reserve 
pump as per IS 12717 
iv) Portable water/foam 2 (No separate 
monitors manpower 
Required) 
v) B.A.sets 8 
(positive pressure type ) sets 
vi) High pressure charging 1  (atHQ) 
set (for B.A. sets) 
vii) Blower and exhauster 2 
for fire fighting, as per 
IS 941 
viii) Water jel blankets - 2x 4 
1.75 m 
ix) Water jel blankets - 1x 8 
0.75 m 
x) Water jel container 2 
xi) Fire proximity suits 2 


16.2.3 For Generation Stations of Installed Capacity 
from 200 MW to less than 1000 MW (Class II) 


SI Type of Appliances No Manning 

No. Pattern 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 

i) Foam and carbon ] Round the 
dioxide tender clock 
(see as per IS 951) 

i) Dry chemical tender 2 1 Round the 
000 kg (see as per IS clock 
10993) 

iii) Water tender Type ‘B’? 1 Reserve 
(see IS 950 ) 

iv) High capacity portable ] Reserve 
pump (see IS 12717) 

v) Portable water/foam | 2 (No separate 
monitors man-power 

Required) 

vi) 13.5 Light alloy 1 -do- 
extension ladder with 
rope (IS 4571) 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


SI Type of Appliances No Manning SI No. Type of Appliances No. Manning 
No. Pattern Pattern 
(1) Q) 3) (4) (1) Q) (3) (4) 

vil) B.A. sets (positive 18 xii) Water jel blankets — 32 
pressure type ) 1 x 0.75 m 

viii) High pressure charging 1 xiv) Water jel container 8 
set (for B.A. sets ) xv) Fire proximity suits 6 

ix) Lighting van 1 NOTE — Considering the large area of the super hydel 
X) Jeep4x4 1 stations as well as for facilitating quick turn outs, it may 

. be necessary to deploy the operational equipment at two 
xi) Blower and exhauster 4 fire stations, a main fire station and a sub-fire stations, both 
xii) Water j el blankets — 2 x 8 having up to date communication arrangements. 
1.75 m 
xiii) Water jel blankets- 1 x 16 16.3 Requirements of Manpower for Manning Fire- 
0.75 m Fighting Appliances 
xiv) Water jel container 4 16.3.1 The manpower requirement has to be based on 
xv) Fire proximity suits 4 the number offire fighting appliances to be kept manned 


16.2.4 For Generating Stations of Installed Capacity 
1000MW and above (Class I) 


SI No. Type of Appliances No. Manning 
Pattern 
(1) Q) 3) (4) 
1) Foam and carbon 1 Round the 
dioxide tender (see clock 
IS 951) 
i) Water tender Type 1 Round the 
‘B’ (see IS 950 ) clock 
iii) Dry chemical tender 1 Round the 
2 000 kg (see as per clock 
IS 10993) 
iv) Emergency tender as 1 As reserve 
per (IS 949 ) 
v) Portable water/foam 4 Reserve 
monitors 
vi) 13.5 Light alloy 2 - 
extension ladder 
with Rope (IS 4571) 
vii Lighting van 1 
viii) Jeep4x4 1 
ix) B.A. sets (positive 24 sets 
pressure type) 
x) High pressure 1 set 
charging set 
(for B.A. sets ) 
xi) Blower and 4 
exhauster (IS 941 ) 
xi) Water jel blankets — 16 


2x].75m 


12 


round the clock (day and night). The scales of manpower 
required for each type of appliance should be as per 
the norms prescribed by the Standing Fire Advisory 
Council of the Government of India, and also as per 
guidelines given in IS 6070. The fire crew, computed 
as per the scales prescribed above, should work in three 
shifts. A reserve of 33'/, percent of the total strength 
required for shift duties should also be provided, to 
cater for leave, absence, training requirements, etc. It 
has to be ensured that the designated strength of crew 
for each shift is available for speedy turn-out at all 
times for quick response to fire calls. 


16.3.2 For generating stations of installed capacity less 
than 50 MW the following minimum manpower should 
be maintained: 


: 1 No. 
: 1 No. (per shift) 


The same norms should apply for manpower 
requirements for load despatch centres and also for 
major substations. 


a) Assistant station officer 
b) Leading firemen 


16.3.2.1 In addition to the full time fire fighting staff, 
selected members of the security plant staff have also to 
be imparted basic training in fire fighting/fire prevention 
duties, so that they can be utilized for fighting duties in 
an emergency. 


16.3.3 For Class III, Class II and Class I category 
power stations the manpower requirements should be 
computed as per norms mentioned in 16.3.1. 


16.3.4 In addition to the above, one Fire Station Officer/ 
Senior Fire Station Officer will also be necessary for 
each power station, depending upon the category, as 
overall in-charge of the power station fire brigade for 
ensuring proper training, control and supervision of the 
entire fire fighting staff. He will also be responsible for 
all the fire protection arrangements in the power station. 


16.4 Fire Stations 


Power stations authorized for full time fire brigades 
with major fire fighting appliances should have well 
designed fire stations for housing of appliances and 
fire fighting staff. They should be so located that the 
response time is kept to a minimum, not to exceed 5 
min. The design of the Fire Stations should conform to 
the standard Fire Station requirements as prescribed by 
the Standing Fire Advisory Council. 


17 FIRST AID FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT 


In the entire power station area, first aid fire fighting 
equipments like fire extinguishers should be deployed 
as per the scales prescribed in IS 2190. It is essential 
that these extinguishers are periodically inspected and 
maintained in accordance with the provisions contained 
in IS 2190. 


13 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


18 FIRE EMERGENCY ORDERS 


18.1 Each power station should have a fire emergency 
plan formulated so as to facilitate organized actions to 
be taken in case of any fire emergency. Such orders 
should contain the actions to be taken by staff at various 
levels, during day-light hours as well as night. These 
orders should also contain the instructions on fire 
prevention measures and the fire sighting organization. 


18.2 The fire emergency orders should also contain a 
mutual aid scheme for mobilizing assistance by way 
of equipment and trained manpower from neighboring 
units, if available. 


18.3 Periodical training programmes/mock fire drills 
should be conducted so as to check the alertness and 
efficiency of plant staff as well as fire fighting staff, and 
records maintained. 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Composition of Safety in Construction, Operation & Intenance of River Valley Projects 
Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


Organisation 


NHPC Ltd, Faridabad 


BEML Ltd, Bengaluru 
Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 
Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Centre For Fir, Explosive & Environment Saftey 
(CFEES), Delhi 


Gammon India, Mumbai 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


HCC Ltd, New Delhi 
Himachal Pradesh Power Corporation Ltd, Shimla 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 


Irrigation Department & C.A.D, Govt of 
Andhra Pradesh 


Irrigation Department,Govt of Maharashtra, Nashik 
Irrigation Department, Govt. of Punjab, Chandigarh 


Irrigation Department,Govt. of Uttarakhand, Dehradun 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, Chennai 


National Projects Construction Corporation Limited, 
Faridabad 


National Water Development Agency, 
New Delhi 


NHDC Ltd, M.P 
NHPC Ltd, Faridabad 


14 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ALOK Kumar (Chairman) 
CHIEF GENERAL MANAGER 


REPRESENTATIVE 


MEMBER (IRRIGATION) 
Director (DAM Safety) (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri A. C. Gupta 
Suri M. L. Bawesa (Alternate) 


Director (HPM Division) 


Deputy Y. Director (HPM Division) (Alternate) 


Director (DSM) 
Director (DSR) (Alternate) 


Dn PF. K. Rat 


Suri M. V. JATKAR 
SHRI AsHIsH Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr SAIBAL GHOSH 
Suri MANO) Kumar Kaistha (Alternate) 


SHRI AVINASH HARDE 
Suni JAI PRAKASH (Alternate) 
Er DEVENDRA K. SHARMA 
Er K. K. Goet (Alternate) 
Dr GoPAL CHAUHAN 
Suri I. S. N. Ragu 
SHRI S. PANDURANGA Rao (Alternate) 
SUPERINTENDENT ENGINEER (DSO) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (DSO) (Alternate) 
CurEF ENGINER (RSDD) 
Director Dams (RSDD) (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (GANGA VALLEY) 
SUPERINTENDENT ENGINEER (MB DAM) 
(Alternate) 


SHRI AMAR PAL SINGH 
SHRI SANJAY PANI (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKUL KUMAR 
Suri N. P. Prasap (Alternate) 


Suri N. C. JAIN 
Suri O. P. S Kusnean (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI AMIT KUMAR 
SHRI RAJESH Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, Shillong 


NTPC Ltd, Noida 
Saradar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gandhi Nagar 


Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam, Shimla 
Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution Corporation 
Ltd, Chennai 


Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Ltd, Rishikesh 


UJVN Limited, Uttarakhand 


Water Resources Department,Govt of Madhya Pradesh, 


Bhopal 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 10386 (Part 7) : 2020 


SHRI RAJENDRA SHARMA 
SHRI Binop CHANDRA Boran (Alternate) 


Suri G. L. HURIA 


SHRI K. B. PARMAR 

SUPERINTENDENT ENGINEER (Alternate) 
SHRI ARVIND MAHAJAN 

Suri Asay Uppat (Alternate) 
ER N. MURUGESAN 

ER V. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 
Suri R. K VisHNOI 

SHRI MANOJ SARDANA (Alternate) 
SHRI ARVIND KUMAR 

SHRI PANKAJ Kumar (Alternate) 
Suri B. C. PURANDARE 

Suri R. K. JAIN (Alternate) 


SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (WRD) 
[ REPRESENTING DiRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI LATHAN PARI 
SciENrITST ‘E’ (WRD), BIS 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 21 (00619). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


