(Reaffirmed 2004)

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING SPECIAL ALLOYS
1 SOFT MAGNETIC MATERIALS

TO

PART

UDC

669-018-5 : 001.4

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BA-HADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August

1993

Price GFOU~3

Special Metals and Alloys Sectional

Committee,

MTD 27

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian finalized by the Special Metals and Alloys Sectional Committee Metallurgical Engineericg Division Council. Standards, after the draft had been approved by the

This standard has been prepared for the guidance of manufacturers and consumers to assist them in the correct interpretation of common terms used in special alloys. It is hoped that this glossary of terms will help in establishing a generally recognized usage and eliminate ambiguity and confusion that might arise from individual interpretation of terms. This standard is intended mainly to cover technical definitions of terms relating to soft magnetic materials, and it does not necessarily include all the legal meaning of the terms. Conversion only. factors from Gaussian to SI units are given in Annex A for information and guidance

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has *Terminology of symbols and definitions relating to Society for Testing and Materials ( ASTM ) and BS terminology' issued by the British Standards Institution

been derived from ASTM A 340-1986 magnetic testing' issued by the American 4727 : Part 1 Group 07 : 1973 `Magnetism ( BSI ).

IS 13795( Part 1 ) : 1993

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING SPECIAL ALLOYS
1 SOFT MAGNETIC MATERIALS

TO

PART 1 SCOPE

This standard ( Part 1 ) is intended to define and explain the terms commonly used in different production units of soft magnetic materials. 2 DEFINITIONS A 2.1 Active ( Real ) Power, P - The product of the rms current I in an electrical circuit, the rms voltage E across the circuit and the cosine of the angular phase difference 0 between the current and the voltage P = EI cos 0. The SI Unit is watt. 2.2 Ageing Coefficient - The percentage change in a specific magnetic property resulting from a specific ageing treatment. 2.3 Ageing Magnetic - The change in the magnetic properties of a material resulting from metallurgical change. This term applies whether the change results from a continued normal or a specified accelerated ageing condition. 2.4 Ampere - Turn - The SI unit of magnetomotive force, equal to the magnetomotive force produced by a current of one ampere flowing through one turn of a conductor. One ampere - turn equals 4.,:- or 1,257 gilberts. 2.5 Ampere per Metre ( Ampere - Turn per Metre) -The SI unit of magnetic field strength ( magnetic intensity, magnetizing force ). One ampere per metre equals 4n x IO-" or 0.012 57 oersted. 2.6 Anisotropic Material the magnetic properties directions. A material in which differ in various

tesla or ampere square metre ) that is equal to the magnetic moment of an electron due to its spin. C 2.9 Coercive Force, Hc - The ( d.c. ) magnetizing force at which the magnetic induction is zero when the material is in a symmetrically cyclically magnetized condition. The SI Unit IS ampere per metre. 2.10 Coercive Force Intrinsic, Hci - The ( d.c. ) magnetizing force at which the intrinsic induction is zero when the material is in a symmetrically cyclically magnetized condition. The SI Unit is ampere per metre. 2.11 Coercivity, H,, -- The coercive force. maximum value of

2.12 Core Laminated - A magnetic core constructed by stacking thin pieces of suitable shape, which are stamped or sheared from Individual pieces sheet or strip material. usually have an insulating surface coating to minimize eddy current losses in the assembled core. 2.13 Core Loss, Specific PC ( B, f ) - The active power ( watts ) expended per unit mass of magnetic material in which there is a cyclically varying induction of a specified maximum value, B, at a specified frequency f.
Loss ( Total ), P, The active power ( watts ) expended in a magnetic circuit in which there is a cyclically alternating induction. 2.14 Core,

2.15 Curie Temperature, TC - The temperature above which a ferromagnetic material becomes paramagnetic. The SI Unit is the kelvin. 2.16 Cyclically Magnetized Condition - A magnetic material is in a cyclically magnetized condition when, after having been subjected to a sufficient number of identical cycles of magnetizing force, it follows identical hysteresis or flux-current loops on successive cycles which are not symmetrical with respect to the origin of the axes.
1

2.7 Area - The geometric cross-sectional area of magnetic path which is perpendicular to the direction of the induction. The SI Unit is square metre.
B

2.8 Bohr Magneton -A constant ( 9.274 078 x 1o-21 erg/gauss or 9.274 078x 10VLdjoule per

IS 13795( Part 1 ) : 1993 D 2.17 Demagnetization Curve - That portion of a normal ( d.c. ) hystersis loop whic'h lies in the second 6s fo&hquadrant, ihat is, between the residual induction point, B,, and the coercive Points on this curve are force point, E-r,. designated by the coordinates, Bd and Hd. 2.18 Domains, Ferromagnetic Magnetized either macroscopic or microscopic in regions, within ferromagnetic materials. Each size, to intrinsic domain, per se, is magnetized saturation at all times, and this saturation induction is unidirectional within the domain. 2.19 Domain Wall -- A boundary region between two adjacent domains within which the orientation of the magnetic moment of one domain changes into a different orientation of the magnetic moment in the other domain. E 2.20 Eddy Current Loss, Normal Pe - That portion of the core loss which is due to induced currents circulating in the magnetic material subject to a symmetrically cyclically magnetized excitation. 2.21 Electrical Steel - A term used commercially to designate a flat-rolled iron-silicon alloy used for its magnetic properties. _F 2.22 Ferrimagnetic Material A material in which unequal magnetic moments are lined up antiparallel to each other. Permeabilities are of the same order of magnitude as those of ferromagnetic materials, but are lower than they would be if all atomic moments were parallel and in the same direction. Unde! ordinary conditions the magnetic characteristics of ferrimagnetic materials are quite similar to those of ferromagnetic materials. 2.23 Ferrite - A term referring to m%gnctic oxides in general, and especially to tnaterial having the formula MOFe,O, where M is a divalent metal ion or a combination of such ions. Certain ferrites, magnetically `soft' in character, are useful for core applications at radio and higher frequencies because of their advantageous magnetic properties and high volume resistivity. Other ferrites, magnetically `hard' in character, have desirable permanent magnetic properties. 2.24 Ferromagnetic Material - A material that, fin general, exhibits the phenomena of hysteresis and sx<uration, and whose permeability is dependent on the magnetizing force. 2.25 Flux Path Length a flux loop. The distance along 2.26 Flux Path Length, Effective - In a magnetic core, the equivalent mean length of the flux path which is used in the calculation of certain magnetic parameters. G 2.27 Gauss ( Plural Gausses ) The unit of magnetic induction in the cgs electromagnetic system. The gauss of equal to 1 maxwell per square centimetre or 1O'J tesla. 2.28 Gilbert The unit of magnetomotive force in the cgs electromagnetic system. The gilbert is a magnetomotive force of 10 ampereturns. H 2.29 Hysteresis Loop, Intrinsic - A hysteresis loop obtained with a ferromagnetic material by plotting (usually to rectangular coordinates) corresponding d.c. values of intrinsic induction B, for ordinates and magnetizing force H for abscissae. 2.30 Hysteresis Loop, Normal - A closed curve obtained with a ferromagnetic material by plotting ( usually to rectangular coordinates ) corresponding d.c. values of magnetic induction (B) for ordinates and magnetizing force (H) for abscissa v;hen the material is passing through a complete cycle between equal defioite limits of either magnetizing force -& W,,, or magnetic induction -f 3,. In general the normal hysteresis loop has mirror symmetry with respect to the origin of the B and H axes but this may not be true for special materials. 2.31 Hysteresis Loss, Normal, PI, (1) - The power expended in a ferromaguetic material, as a result of hysteresis, when the material is subjected to a symmetrically cyclicall!r magnetized excitation. 2.32 Hysteresis Loss, Normal, P,, (2) The energy loss per cycle in a magnetic materia~l as a result of magnetic hysteresis when the induction is cyclic ( not necessarily periodic ). 2.33 Hysteresis Magnetic - The property of a ferromagnetic material exhibited by the lack of correspondence between the changes in inducresulting from increasing magnetizing tion force and from decreasing ~magnetizing force. I 2.34 Induction, Intrinsic, Bi - The vector difference between the magnetic induction in a magnetic material and the magnetic induction that would exist in a vacuum under the influence of the same magnetizing force. See magnetic induction ( flux density ). 2

IS 13795 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 2.35 Induction, Maximum &, (1) - The maximum value of magnetic induction, B, in a hysteresis loop. The tip of this loop has the magnetostatic coordinates Hm, B, which exist simulataneously. 2.36 Induction, Maximum, B,, (2) - B,,, the maximum value of induction in a flux-current loop. 2.37 Induction, Normal, B The maximum induction, in a magnetic material that is in a symmetrically cyclically magnetized condition.
NOTE -Normal parameter usually induction is a magnetostatic measured by ballistic methods.

2.46 Magnetic Dipole Moment, j - The product of the magnetic constant and the magnetic ( area ) moment. The SI Unit is weber meter. 2.47 Magnetic Flux, (6 - The product of the magnetic induction B, and the area of a surface ( or cross-section ) A, when the magnetic induction B is uniformly distributed and normal to the plane of the surface. 4 = BA where $ = magnetic B = magnetic A = area flux, induction, and

of the surface. and has no direction. B See magnetic

2.38 Induction, Remanent, Bd - The magnetic induction that remains in a magnetic circuit after the removal of an applied magnetomotive force. 2.39 Induction, Residual, B, - The magnetic induction corresponding to zero magnetizing force in a magnetic material that is in a symmetrically magnetized condition. 2.40 Induction, Saturation, B, .-- The maximum intrinsic induction possible in a material. 2.41 Induction Curve, Intrinsic ( Ferric ) - A curve of a previously demagnetized specimen depicting the relation between intrinsic induction and corresponding ascending values of magnetizing force. This curve starts at the origin of the Bi and H axes. 2.42 Induction Curve, Normal - A curve of a previously demagnetized specimen depicti,ig the reIatlon between normal induction and corresponding ascending values of magnetizing force. This curve starts at the origi:l of the B and H axes. 2.43 Isotropic the magnetic tions. Material properties - Material in are same for all which direc-

Magnetic flux is a scalar The SI Unit is weber.

2.48 Magnetic Flux Density, induction ( flux density ).

2.49 Magnetic Induction ( Flux Density ) - That magnetic vector quantity which at any point in a magnetic field is measured either by the mechanical force experienced by an element of electric current at the point, or by the electromotive force induced in an elementary loop during any change in flux linkages with the loop at the point. The SI Unit is tesla.
NOTE - The magnetic induction, distributed and normal to a surface then the magnetic induction is : R, is uniformly or cross-section,

B -

+]A

where B = magnetic induction, ,;6 = magnetic flux, and A = area of surface. 2.50 Magaetic Line of Force - An imaginary line in a magnetic field which at every point has the direction of magnetic induction at that point. One weber equals IO* lines. 2.51 Magnetic (Area ) Moment, nz - A measure of the magnetizing force, H produced at ~points in space by a plane current loop or a magnetized body. It relates to the turning effect ( moment ) on it when in a given field. It is defined as the torque observed in a unit field at For a coil with `N' 90" to the magnetic axis. turns and area *A', carrying a current `I'. In = NIA In this case netic moment square meter. m is often called the electromagof the coi!. The S1 Unit is ampere J v of A vector a material assoand

M 2.44 Magnetic Circuit - A closed path formed by magnetic lines of force. The concept is very important in electrical engineering; it compares directly to an electrical circuit. Magnetomotive force compares to electromotive force; magnetic flux is the analogue of current; reluctance is like resistance. 2.45 Magnetic Constant ( Permeability of A constant equal to 4ax IO-' Wee ), p0 henry per metre. Its value is unity and has no dimension in the cgs-electro magnetic system.
NOTE -

multiplied
density

For practical purposes this constant, when by the field strength equals the flux-

in vacuum.

2.52 Magnetic Polarization, icated with the volume, 3

IS I3795 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 equal to the total magnetic dipole moment -+ divided by the volume. j of that volume, One oersted per metre. equals 1 000/4n P 2.60 Permeability, a.c. - A generic term used to express various dynamic relationship between magnetic induction, B, and magnetizing force, H, for magnetic material subjected to a cyclic excitation by alternating or pulsating current. The values of a.c. permeability obtained for a given material depend fundamentally upon the excursion limit of dynamic excitation and induction, the method and conditions of measurement, and also upon such faciors as resistivity, thickness of laminations, frequency of excitation, etc. 2.61 Permeability, d. c. Permeability is a general term used to express relationship between magnetic induction, B, and magnetizing force, H under various conditions of magnetic excitation. These relationships are either ( 1 ) absolute permeability, which in general is the quotient of a change in magnetic induction divided by the corresponding change in magnetizing force, or ( 2 ) relative permeability, which is the ratio of the absolute permeability to the~magnetic constant. 2.62 Permeability, Initial, pi The limiting value approached by_ the normal permeability as the applied magnetrzing force H, is reduced to zero. The permeability is equal to the slope of the normal inductron curve at the origin of linear B and H axes. 2.63 Permeability, Rlaximum, pm - The value of normal permeability for a given material where a straight line from the origin of linear B and H axes becomes tangent to the normal induction curve. 2.64 Permeability, Normal, p - The ratio of the normal inductron to the corresponding magnetizing force. It is equal to the slope of a straight line joining the limits of ~a normal hysteresis loop or the slope of a straight line joining any point ( Hrn, Bm ) on the normal inducrion curve to the originof the linear B and H axes. R 2.65 Reluctance ( Magnetic Resistance ), R The ratio of magnetomotive force to total magnetic Aux in a magnetic circuit. It is the magnetic analogue of electric resistance. The SI Unit is henry per metre ( ampere per weber metre ). The reciprocal permanence. of the reluctance is known as or 79.58 ampere

It can be interpreted

as the volume The r metrc ).

density SI Unit

of is

magnetic dipole moment, tesla ( weber per square

2.53 Magnetization, M - A vector associated with the volume, of a material, equal to the total magnetic moment of that volume divided by the volume. 3
Xrn k= v

It

interpreted as volume density of + magnetic moment, m. The SI Unit is ampere per metre. Sometimes magnetization, M can be expressed as &atom, pR/formula unit etc.
NOTE - The term magnetization may also be used in a qualitative sense to mean the process of magr.etizing. Where cocfusion may arise it is possible to use the term Gmagnetlzation strength' for the vector quantity.

can

be

2.54 Magnetization, Saturation, maximum obtainable magnetization maierial at a given temperature.

Me The for a given

Field Force ( Magnetic 2.55 Maguetizing Strength ), I-1' - That magnetic vector quantity at a point in a magnetic field which measure the ability of electric currents on magnetized bodies to produce magnetic induction at the given point. The SI Unit is ampere per meter. 2.56 Magnetomotive Force, -F ( Magnetic Portenital, m.m.f ) - The i,rtegral of magnetic field --t+ strength, H around a closed path that is s H.dl. The SI Unit is ampere turn. Magnetomotive force is analogous to electromotive force in electric circuits 2.57 Maxwell - The the cgs electromagnetic equals lO-s weber. unit of magnetic system. One _N 2.58 Non-orierted Electrical Steel A flat rolled electrical steel which has approximately the same magnetic properties in all directions. 0 2.59 Oersted - The unit of magnetizing force ( magnetic field strength ) in the cgs electroOne oersted equals a magmagnetic system. netomotive force of 1 gilbert/cm of flux path. flux in maxwell

IS 13795 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 2.66 Retentivity, Brs - That property of a magnetic material which is measured by its maximum value of the residual induction ( retentiis usually associated with saturation vity induction ). It is also known as remanence. S Cyclically Magnetized 2.67 Symmetrically Condition -- A magnetic material is in a symmetrically cyclically magnetized condition when, under the influence of a magnetizing force that varies cyclically between two equal positive and negative limits, its successive hysteresis loops or flux-current loops are both identical and symmetrical with respect to the origin of the axes. T 2.68 Tesla The SI Unit of magnetic induction. One tesla is equal to one weber per square metre or 1G4 gausses. W 2.69 Watt - The SI Unit of active power. watt is a power of one joule per second. One

2.70 Weber - The SI Unit of magnetic flux. The weber is the magnetic flux whose decrease to zero when linked with a single turn induces in the turn a voltage whose time integral is one volt-second. One weber equals 10s maxwells. 2.71 Winding Loss ( Copper Loss ), Pw - The pclwer expended, as heat, in the conductors of an inductor or resistor, or both, due to the electric current in them.

ANNEX

A

1 Foreword )
CONVERSION
r-------Gaussian Magnetic Multiply the Number for h----~-_---~ Quantity flux, 46

FROM

GAUSSIAN
by

TO SI UNII'S
To 0 btain the Number C--------_h--____7 SI Quantity Unit Magnetic flux, r$ Flux density, Magnetic B H J J Wb T(Wb/m'; Vs/m') A/m A/m T A/m T pB/atom -or pB/formula unit etc* m J/T(Aml) does depend on _

Unit Mx G Oe G or Oe G or Oc pB/atom or pB/formula unit 10-s 10-4 10314 97 10" 477.1 o-" IO"/4 n lo-" 1

Flux density, ' Magnetic field strength, Magnetization, Magnetization, Magnetization, P+I 47;kf fif

field strength,

Magnetization, M Magnetic polarization., Magnetization, M Magnetic polarization, Magnetization, M

Magnetic

moment,

nl

erg/G of unit system.

10-s However, the numerical

Magnetic moment,

`l'Natural units, independent unit system. SYMBOLS G=Gauss; m,=metre; and UNlTS

value of the Bohr magneton

Oe=Oersted; T=Tesla; J=Joule, Mx=Maxwell.

Wb=Weber;

pB==Bohr

magneton;

A=Ampere;

V=Volt;

S=second;

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Pndiao Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to of standardization, marking and quality promote harmonious development of the activities certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. This does not preclude the free use, in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. in thecourse of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type to copyright be addressed to the Director Enquiries relating or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook. and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. MTD 27 ( 3657 ) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication of Issue Text Affected

Date

BUREAU Headquarters: 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Manak Bhavan, Telephones : 33 101 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN Marg,

STANDARDS 110002 Telegrams ( Common : Manaksanstha to all Offices ) Telephone

New Delhi

Regional Central Eastern

Offices

: Shah Zafar Marg Maniktola

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002

331 01 31 E 331 13 75 378499, r 37 86 26, 53 38 43, I 53 23 84 235 02 16, c 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92 378561 37 86 62 53 16 40

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VI1 M, V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri

Northern Southern Western Branches

160036 600113 )

: C. I. T. Campus,

IV Cross

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

( East

: AMMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COLMBATORE, FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GCWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Printwell
Printers, Aligarh, India

