-IS12448 (Part7) :1990 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

BASICTESTINGPROCEDURESAND MEASURINGMETHODSFOR ELECTROMECHANICALCOMPONENTSFOR ELECTRONICEQUIPMENT
-PART 7 MECHANICAL OPERATING TESTS AND SEALING TESTS

UDC

621'38'038 + 621'31 : 620'165'29

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG Price Group 3

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

April

1991

Electromechanical

Components

for Electronic Equipment

Sectional Committee,

LTD 7

FOREWORD This Indian Standard-( Part 7 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 23 March 1990, after the draft finalized by the Electromechanical Components for Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronic and Telecommunication Division Council. The object of this standard is to lay down uniform methods operations and sealing of electromechanical components. of tests for measuring mechanical

This standard is based, without any technical change, on IEC Pub 512-7 : 1988 `Electromechanical components for electronic equipment : Basic testing procedures and measuring methods, Part 7 Mechanical operating tests and sealing tests' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC ). In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

Is 12418 ( Part 7 ) : 1990

Indian Standard

BASICTESTINGPROCEDURESAND MEASURINGMETHODSFOR ELECTROMECHANICALCOMPONENTSFOR ELECTRONICEQUIPMENT
PART 7 MECHAN~ICAL OPERATING TESTS AN-D SEALING TESTS

1 SCOPE

1.1This standard covers methods for mechanical operating test and sealing test of electromechanical components.
2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed necessary adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. 9000 Title

fully engage or separate mating components, including the effect of any device that assists the engaging/separating operations.
NOTE -The generic sense. term `Force(s)' is used here in its

3.1 Test Method below are 3.1.1 One of the mating zcomponents rigidly held in position. shall be

(Part

13) : 1981

9000 ( Part 151 Set 7 ) : 1982

12448 (Part 2/ Set 3 ) : 1988

12448 ( Part 2/ Set 4 ) : 1988

Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 13 Low air pressure test Basic Environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 15 Sealing test, Section 7 Immersion test Basic testing procedures and measuring methods for eleccomponents tromechanical equipment: electronic for Part 2 General examination, electrical continuity and contact resistance tests, insulation tests and voltage stress tests, Section 3 Insulation test Basic testing procedures and measuring methods for eleccomponents tromechanical equipment: electronic for Part 2 General examination, electrical continuity and contact resistance tests, insulation tests and voltage stress tests, Section 4 Voltage stress test
OPERATING

3.1.2 The other component shall be fully engaged or separated in the normal manner, for example, using any incorporated device or any specified tools that assists engaging/separating operation. 3.1.3 The forces required to fully engage separate the components shall be measured. or

3.1.4 The rates of engagement or separation shall be as specified by the detail specification. 3.2 Test Requirements The forces required to fully engage or separate the components shall be within the limits specified by the detail specification. 3.3 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be given: a) Maximum value of the engaging force;

b) Minimum

SECTION

1

MECHANICAL TESTS

and maximum values of the separating force, where applicable; cl Rates of engagement and separation, where applicable; d) Special tools, where applicable; e) If a lubricant is used, a complete description shall be given; and f) Any deviation from the standard test method. AND

3 TEST 13a ENGAGING FORCES 3.0 General

AND SEPARATING

4 TEST 13b INSERTION WITHDRAWAL FORCES 4.0 General

The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to measure the force required to

The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to measure the insertion and 1

IS 12448 ( Part 7 ) : 1990 withdrawal forces of mating components without the effect of any locking or similar devices.
NOTE-A gauge mating Component. may be used to simulate a

The metal plate shall be strong enough to withstand the forces applied. The length and width of the metal plate shall be such that the contour of the specimen is exceeded. 5.2 Method ofMeasurement The force shall be applied to the actuating part in the direction and at the point specified in the The force shall be steadily detail specification. increased at the rate specified until the actuating part has travelled from a first stable equilibrium position to its next stable equilibrium position or a stop, and the switch has operated electrically. The maximum force necessary to move the actuating part to the next stable position or stop shall be measured and recorded. In the case of a switch in which the actuator does not take up a second stable equilibrium position ( momentary position >, the torque required to move the actuator to the operating position shall be measured and recorded. If appropriate, the measurements of the operating force may be carried out in both directions. In each direction, the number of measurements shall be as specified in the detail specification. 5.3 Requirements All mea.sured values shall be within specified in the detail specification. 5.4 Details to be Specified When this specification, given: test is required by the detail the following details shall be the limits

4.1 Test Method 4.1.1 The insertion and withdrawal forces of a mating component/gauge shall be checked without any previous sizing. 4.1.2 One of the mating rigidly held in position. components shall be

4.1.3 The other component/gauge shall be fully inserted or withdrawn in the normal manner. Care shall be taken to ensure correct alignment and direction of movement. 4.1.4 The forces the withdraw measured. required to fully insert component/gauge shall or be shall

4.1.5 The rate of insertion or withdrawal be as specified by the detail specification. 4.2 Test Requirements

The forces required to fully insert or withdraw the component'gauge shall be within the limits specified by .the detail specification. 4.3 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be given: a) Maximum value of the insertion force; b) Minimum and maximum values of the withdrawal force, where applicable; c) Rate of operation, where applicable; d) Details of the gauge, where applicable; e) Details of any special test jig, where applicable; f) If a lubricant is used, a complete description shall be given; g) Any deviation from the standard test method. 5 TEST 13c OPERATING ( SWITCHES ) 5.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to measure the force necessary to move the actuating Part of a switch from any one position to the next. 5.1 Preparation of Specimen FORCES

a) Preparation of specimen; b) Number of measurements;
Point c> and direction of force application;

4 Rate of increase of force;
Permissible e>

f>

minimum and maximum values of force; Temperature other than normal ambient, if appropriate; and g) Any deviation from the standard test method. TORQUE

6 TEST 13d OPERATING ( SWITCHES ) 6.0 General

The object of this test is to d&ail a standard method to assess the torque necessary to rotate the operating spindle of a switch from one position to the next. 6.1 Preparation and Mounting of the Specimen

The specimen shall be prepared as specified by The specimen shall be the detail specification. rigidly mounted on a metal plate using the fixing devices specified in the detail specification. 2

`*`*I Preparation The specimen shall be prepared the detail specification.

as specified

in

IS 12448 ( Part 7 ) : 1990

6.1.2Mounting The specimen shall be rigidly mounted on a metal plate using the fixing devices specified by the detail specification. The metal plate shall be strong enough to withstand the forces applied. The length and width of the metal plate shall be such that the contour of the specimen is exceeded. 6.2 Method of Measurement The torque shall be applied to the operating spindle in the direction specified. The torque shall be steadily increased at the rate specified until the actuating part has travelled from a first stable equilibrium position to its next stable equilibrium position or a stop, and the switch The maximum torque has operated electrically. necessary to move the actuating part to the next stable position or stop shall be measured and recorded In the case of a switch in which the actuator. does not taks up a second stable ( momentary position ), equilibrium position the torque required to rotate or pivot the actuator to the next operating position shall be measured and recorded. If appropriate the measurements of the operating torque may be carried out in both directions. In each direction the number of measurements shall be as specified in the detail specification. 6.3 Requirements All values recorded shall be within specified by the detail specification. 6.4 Details
to be Specified

pecified in the detail specification the fixed hart of the specimen shall be mounted as in normal service so as to permit mating of the i-ee part. When specified in the detai speciication, the applicable gauge shall ble used nstead of the mating connector. In the case ,f edge-socket connectors, the mating part may 3e the appropriate printed board. 7.2 Test of Correct Mating I'he free part shall be correctly mated to the fixed part. aligned with and

7.3 Test of Mismating for Two Connectors Having the Same Polarization Combination Attempts shall be made to engage the ccnnectors in any manner other than the correct one, using the coupling device, if any, with the appropriate, engaging force applied as specified. 7.4 Requirements
It shall be possible to mate connectors

fully in the correct manner. it shall not be possible to mate the connectors in any manner other than the correct one. When specified in the detail specification the polarization device shall engage before the contacts engage. 7.5 Details
to be Specified

the range

When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) Preparation of specimen; b) Number of measurements; c) Direction of operation; d) Rate of increase of torque; e) Minimum and maximum values of torque permissible; f) Temperatures other than normal ambient, if appropriate; and g) Any deviation from the standard test method. 7 TEST 13e POLARIZING
~7.0 General METHOD

When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: All necessary mating connectors, printed boards, or gauges; b) The engaging forces as applicable; 4 Any requirement for the polarization device to engage before the contacts engage; and d) Any deviation from the standard test method.

a>

SECTION

2

SEALING ( GROSS

TESTS AIR

8 TEST 14a SEALING LEAKAGE )

Under consideration. 9 TEST 14b SEALING LEAKAGE ) Under consideration.
10 TEST 14c SPRAYING WATER AND SPLASHING ( FINE AIR

The object of this test is to detail a standard method to assess the capability of the polarization method to allow the mating of correctly matched connectors land prevent the mismating of incorrect1 y matched connectors. 7.1 Preparation and Mounting of the Specimen

Under consideration.
11 TEST 14d IMMERSION, 11.0 General WATERPROOF

The connectors shall be prepared as specified in the detail specification. Unless otherwise 3

The object of this test is to detail a standard method to verify the effectiveness of the sealing of a component against imm'ersion in water under specified conditions of pressure and time.

IS 12448 ( Part 7 ) : 1990 11.1 Preparation of the Specimen The specimen shall be preconditioned, wired and mounted as specified in the detail specification. 11.2 General Requirements The specimen shall be tested in accordance with IS 9000 ( Part lS/Sec 7 ) : 1982 in a chamber under pressure by submerging in conductive wat er. The conductivity of the water shall be ensured by dissolving 5 rt 1 parts by weight of non-iodized commercial salt in 95 parts by weight of distilled or deionized water. No contaminants shall b: added to, and no contaminant shall be present in, the container or solution which would tend to prevent wetting of All the test specim en by the salt solution. wire or cable end s shall be sealed or extended outside the chamber. 11.3 Procedure The specimen shall be fully submerged in the of the conductive water. The temperature water shall not vary from that of the specimen by more than 5�C. The chamber shall be sealed and pressurized to a differential of 101 kPafS% The or as specified in the detail specification. duration shall be 4 hours f5?! or as specified in the detail specification. After the chamber pressure has been returned to normal ambient pressure and while the specimen is still submerged, insulation resistance shall be measured in accordance with IS 12448 ( Part 2/Set 3 ) : 1988. 11.4 Requirements The insulation resistance shall be not less than the minimum value specified in the detail specification. 11.5 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: Number of specimens to be tested; b) Any preconditioning of the specimen; Wiring of the specimen; sealing of a immersing a then exposing in accordance 12.1 Scope This test applies only to a mated connector assembly when required by the detail specification. 12.2 Test Equipment 12.2.1 Low Air Pressure Chamber The low air pressure chamber shall consist of a sealed chamber having means of visual observation of the test specimen and having vacuum pump equipment to maintain a pressure of 2 kPa in accordance with IS 9000 ( Part 13 ) : 1981. The chamber shall be of sufficient size to house the container. 12.2.2 Container The container shall began open vessel of internal dimensions sufficient to accommodate the test specimen without imposing undue constraint on the cable/wire -bundles. A salt solution shall be placed in the container to a depth that will completely cover the test specimen at all times during the test. 12.2.3 Salt Solution The salt solution shall be prepared by dissolving 5+ 1 parts by weight of non-iodized commercial salt in 95 parts by weight of distilled water. No contaminants shall be added to and no contaminant shall be present in the container or solution which would tend to prevent wetting of the test specimen by the salt solution. 12.3 Test Specimen 12.3.1 The test specimen shall consist of one fully assembled and mated electrical connectors set with the specified number of contacts, wire or cable type, size and end preparation, sealing plugs and other fittings as required by the detail specification. Care shall be taken to ensure that the wire insulation or cable jacket is free of perforations that would permit leakage of the solution into the connector. It shall be verified coupled. that the connector is fully mated connector assembly by test specimen in salt water and the specimen to low air pressure with IS 9000 ( Part 13 ) : 1981.

a> c>

d) Mounting

of the specimen;

e) Pressure f)

d
h)

to be applied, if other than 101 kPa; Duration of the application of pressure, if other than 4 hours; Minimum acceptable value of insulation resistance; Any deviation from the standard test method. AT LOW AIR

12 TEST 14e IMMERSION PRESSURE 12.0 General

12.3.2 The wires provided for electrical connection of the connector shells shall be properly connected. The maximum resistance from the wire end to the farthest point on the connector shall be 1 ohm. 4

The object of this test is to detail a standard test method which will demonstrate a degree of

IS 12448 ( Part 7 ) : 1990 12.3.3 No contaminant no contaminant shall specimen which would of the test specimen by

shall be added to, and be present, on the test tend to prevent wetting the solution.

in the salt solution, the specimen shall be subjected to the insulation resistance test in accordance with IS 12448 ( Part 2/Set 3 ) : 1988. 12.4.4 Voltage Proof Test After the performed immersed test shall 1s 12448 ( insulation resistance test has been and while the specimen is still in the salt solution, a voltage proof be performed in accordance with Part 2/Set 4 ) : 1988.

12.4 Test Procedure
12.4.1 Immersion of the Specimen

The test specimen shall be immersed in solution in accordance with IS 9000 ( Part Set 7 ) : 1982. The uppermost point of the specimen shall be 25 mm maximum below surface of the solution.

the 151 test the

The test voltage shall be applied for a minimum of5 s.
12.5 Visual Examination

The wires or cable of the test specimen shall be brought out of the solution and the ends shall remain unsealed. The unsealed wire or cable ends shall be terminated within the chamber so that they are exposed to the chamber atmosphere. The wires shall be so arranged as to prevent any voltage breakdown or low insulation resistance which might incorrectly indicate connector failure. 12.4.2 Low Air Pressure Cycling The chamber-shall be sealed. The chamber pressure shall be reduced from room ambient to 2 kPa within 5 min to 15 min in accordance with IS 9000 ( Part 13 ) : 1981 and maintained at that nressure for a minimum of 30 min. The chamber pressure shall then be increased to room ambient within 1 min and shall be maintained at room pressure for a minimum of 30 min. This consti&tes one cycle. Two additional cycles shall be performed making total three cycles. The test specimen shall remain fully immersed in the salt solution during the three cycles and during the subseauent measurements specified by th& test. 12.4.3 Insulation Resistance Test After the third cycle, and while still immersed

Immediately after the above tests have been performed, the specimen shall be visually examined and the following shall be recorded: a) Evidence of penetration of salt water; b) Deficient moisture seals; and of dielectric and location c) Evidence breakdown. 12.6 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) Number of specimens to be tested; b) Specimen preparation, including number of contacts to be wired and number of sealing plugs; c) Wire or cable type and size; d) Accessories specimen; to be installed `on and the mini-

e) Insulation resistance, method mum allowable limit; f) Proof voltage, method leakage current; and g) Any deviation method. from the

-and maximum standard test

Standard ~Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standar,ds Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, I986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent possession of the latest amendments or edition. to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. LTD 7 ( 1093 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 41 29 16

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 95

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat Press, Delhi, India

