IS 15987: 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IRRA WAH (Reaffirmed 2020) 
e-s ap Hr War 4 Hale Eras st 
afm чагт 84- зуна tifa 


Indian Standard 


NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING OF CONCRETE 
STRUCTURES USING IMPACT-ECHO TECHNIQUE — 
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 


ICS 19.100 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 5 


Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Non- 
Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


The objectives of the testing of concrete using impact echo technique is used for measurement of P-wave velocity 
measurement of thickness of concrete structure testing of concrete structures for presence of any flaws/defects 
and testing of concrete structures for delamination of reinforced bars. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15987 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING OF CONCRETE 
STRUCTURES USING IMPACT-ECHO TECHNIQUE — 
RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the object, principle, apparatus 
and test procedures for non-destructive testing of 
concrete structures using impact-echo technique. This 
technique is employed for the determination of wave 
velocity, measurement of thickness of concrete 
structures, detection of flaws, location of reinforced 
bars and determination of delamination of reinforced 
bars. In addition, some additional guidelines for the 
impact-echo testing and the errors involved in the 
measurement are also given. 


2 PRINCIPLES OF IMPACT-ECHO TECHNIQUE 


Impact-echo technique involves introducing a transient 
stress pulse into a test object by mechanical impact 
and monitoring the surface displacements caused by 
the arrival of reflections of the pulse from internal 
defects and external boundaries. The pulse consists of 
compression (Р) and shear (5) waves which propagate 
into the object along spherical wave fronts, and a 
Rayleigh (R) wave that propagates along the surface. 
These waves are reflected by internal defects and the 
boundaries and the reflected waves propagate back to 
the surface. At the top surface, the waves are reflected 
again and they propagate into the test object. Thus a 
transient resonance condition is setup by multiple 
reflections of waves between the top surface and 
internal flaws or external boundaries. A displacement 
transducer located close to the impact point is used to 
monitor the surface displacements caused by the arrival 
of these reflected waves. P-waves are of primary 
importance in the impact-echo testing of concrete 
structures, because the displacements caused by 
P-waves are much larger than those caused by S-waves 
at points located close to the impact point. The 
amplitude of the reflected P-wave, A eflecteq 15 given by: 


Z, -Z 
2, %2, 


А пеле = А, | 


where Z, and Z, are the acoustic impedances of the 
region in which the wave is approaching the interface 
and of the region beyond the interface respectively, 
and A, is the amplitude of the particle motion in incident 
wave. The phase of the reflected wave depends upon 


the ratio of Z,/Z,. If Z,/Z, is less than one (at concrete/ 
air interface; Z,/Z, =5 x 10°), then the phase reversion 
takes place at the interface. Because of the phase 
reversion at both the interfaces, waves reflected 
between two concrete/air interfaces produce successive 
arrival of tension wave (Inward displacement) at the 
impact surface. Whereas, waves reflected between a 
concrete/air interface and a concrete/steel interface 
produce arrival of alternate compression wave 
(Outward displacement) and tension wave (Inward 
displacement) at the impact surface, which makes the 
frequency of the arrival of P-wave of similar nature 
(compression/tension) half to that when reflected 
between two concrete/air interface. 


The frequency of P-wave arrivals at the transducer is 
determined by transforming the time domain signal 
into the frequency domain using the fast Fourier 
transform technique. The frequencies associated with 
the peaks in the resulting amplitude spectrum represent 
the dominant frequencies in the waveform. 


3 APPARATUS 


The apparatus consist of, (a) a hand held unit containing 
an impacting device (steel ball) for producing low 
frequency stress waves (sound waves) and a pair of 
piezoelectric transducers that detect surface 
displacements caused by reflected waves; (b) a high 
speed, analog to digital data acquisition system that 
receives and digitizes the analog voltage signal from 
the transducers and transfers it to the computer; (c) a 
portable computer; and (d) a software programme that 
monitors each test, and guides the data processing to 
produce output displays, namely time signal, frequency 
spectrum, frequency amplitude as a function of percent 
depth, that provides information about the structure 
being tested. 


3.1 Impactor 


The impactor shall be spherical or spherically tipped. 
The spring loaded hardened steel balls of various 
diameters in range of | mm to 16 mm can be used for 
generating the stress waves of different frequency 
ranges in the specimen. The highest frequency of stress 
waves (fmax) at which the relative amplitude is sufficient 
for impact-echo testing is approximately given by: 


IS 15987 : 2013 


_ 0.284 


Max D . (1) 


where, fmax 15 іп kHz and D is the diameter of the 
hardened steel balls, in metres. 


The impact shall deliver sufficient energy to the 
concrete structure so that a well defined amplitude 
spectrum is obtained with predominant peaks. The 
impact duration, t, must be less than the round trip 
travel time for a P-wave during the impact-echo testing, 
that is 


Sx 2T 
“С. ...(2) 
р 
where, T is the thickness of the specimen and С, is the 
P-wave velocity in the concrete specimen. 


The smaller diameter ball generates higher frequency 
wave with low energy and is more useful for the near 
surface defect detection, whereas, the larger diameter 
ball generates lower frequency wave with more energy 
and hence is more useful for the larger depths. 


3.2 Transducer 


Two broadband, piezoelectric transducers which 
respond to normal surface displacement shall be used. 
These transducers must be capable of detecting the 
small displacements that correspond to the impact 
generated P-wave travelling along the surface during 
the velocity measurement and the reflected P-wave 
from the interface during the impact-echo testing. A 
small contact area between the piezoelectric element 
with a tip diameter of 1.5 mm with the larger end 
attached to a brass backing block has been found 
suitable. 


A suitable material is required to be used to couple the 
transducer to the concrete. A lead sheet approximately 
0.25 mm thick is a suitable coupling material for such 
a transducer. 


3.3 Spacer Device 


A spacer device shall be used to hold the transducer at 
a fixed distance apart during measurement of the wave 
velocity. The transducer tips shall be placed about 
300 mm apart and the actual distance between the tips 
of the transducers be measured and recorded to the 
nearest 1 mm. 


3.4 Data Acquisition System 


This consists of hardware and software for acquisition, 
recording and processing of the signal output of the 
two transducers. This system can be a portable 
computer with a two channel data acquisition card or 
a portable two channel waveform analyzer. The 


sampling rate for each channel shall at least be 
500 kHz. The system shall be capable of triggering on 
the signal from one of the recording channels and 
acquisition of up to 2 048 data points. The voltage range 
and resolution of the data acquisition system shall be 
matched with the sensitivity of the transducer. 


4 PROCEDURES FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
P-WAVE VELOCITY 


4.1 Procedure A 


This procedure measures the time taken by a wave to 
travel between two transducers positioned at a known 
distance apart (300 mm) along the surface of a 
structure. The schematic of the experimental set up for 
this procedure is shown in Fig. 1. The wave velocity is 
calculated by dividing the distance between the two 
transducers by the travel time. The P-wave velocity 
can either be calculated directly by measuring the travel 
time of P-wave or by measuring the travel time of 
R-wave and then using the relation between R-wave 
and P-wave velocities, knowing the Poisson’s ratio. 


4.1.1 Measurement of Travel Time of P-Wave 


Figure 2 shows the signal acquired for measurement 
of P-wave velocity directly. The procedure for 
determination of P-wave velocity by directly measuring 
the travel time of P-wave is as follows. As the P-wave 
generated upon the impact is compression in nature, 
its arrival can be identified by the first rise in voltage 
above the horizontal line. The difference in the arrival 
time of the P-waves at the two transducers can be 
measured by moving the cursors [see Fig. 2(a)] to 
locate the rising points in the two voltage plots and 
this can be used to calculate the P-wave velocity (C,). 


4.1.2 Measurement of Travel Time of R-Wave 


Figure 2(b) shows the signal acquired for measurement 
of R-wave velocity. The procedure for determination 
of P-wave velocity by measuring the travel time of 
R-wave is as follows. The arrival of the R-wave is 
identified by a sharp drop in the voltage due to the 
tensile nature and high amplitude of the R-wave. The 
difference in the arrival time of R-waves at the two 
transducers can be measured by bringing the cursors 
to the first sharp dropping points in each voltage plots 
[see Fig. 2 (b)]. The R-wave velocity can be calculated 
from this end and P-wave velocity can be determined 
using the following equation: 


1+» [а-у] 
C=C 
0.87+1.12v| 1-2у 


223) 


С, = P-wave volocity, 


IMPACT POINT 


135/0 .0048 8v 


SAMPLING 
( а) INTERVAL 


TRANSDUCER UNITS 


IS 15987 : 2013 


SPACER BAR 


96/0.13184v 


SAMPLING 
(ы INTERVAL 


Fic. 2 SIGNAL ACQUIRED AND PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINATION OF P-WAVE VELOCITY BY (a) DIRECTLY 
MEASURING THE TRAVEL TIME OF P-WAVE AND (b) MEASURING THE TRAVEL TIME OF R-WAVE 


у = Poisson’s ratio, and 
Ср = R-wave volocity. 
4.2 Procedure B 


The principle of this procedure is similar to that of 
impact-echo testing on a concrete structure of known 
thickness. Impact on the surface of the concrete 
generates stress waves of which P-wave is of primary 
importance. The P-wave propagates into the concrete 


and is reflected from the opposite surface. Multiple 
reflections of the P-wave between the two surfaces give 
rise to a transient thickness resonance with a frequency 
related to the thickness of the concrete and wave 
velocity in the concrete. A receiving transducer, located 
adjacent to the impact position, receives the reflected 
wave and the output of the transducer is captured as a 
time domain waveform. The frequency of P-wave 
arrivals at the transducer is determined by transforming 


IS 15987 : 2013 


the time domain signal into the frequency domain using 
the fast Fourier transform technique. The frequencies 
associated with the peaks in the resulting amplitude 
spectrum represent the dominant frequencies in the 
waveform. P-wave velocity can be determined by using 
the following equation: 


C, =fx 27/8 (4) 


where, f is the thickness frequency (the frequency of 
the thickness mode of vibration), T is the thickness 
and В is the shape factor for the thickness mode of 
vibration. The values of B for various structures are 
given in Table 1. 


5 MEASUREMENT OF THICKNESS OF 
CONCRETE STRUCTURE 


The principle of impact-echo testing for measurement 
of thickness of concrete structure shall be similar to 
that explained in 4.2. Before carrying out the thickness 
measurement, the wave velocity in the specimen shall 
be determined using either the procedure A or B, as 
given in 4. Even though the procedure B is more 
accurate, it can be used only if the thickness is known 
in the same structure at any other given location. Then 
the impact-echo test shall be carried out as explained 
in 4.2. The thickness of the structure shall be 
determined by using the following equation obtained 
by re-rearranging Equation 4. 


с, 
CAPR 2.(5) 


6 TESTING ОЕ CONCRETE STRUCTURES FOR 
DETECTION OF FLAWS/DEFECTS 


The experimental setup for detection of flaws in 
concrete structures is similar to that discussed in 4.2 
and 5. The presence of a flaw changes the patterns of 
stress wave propagation and reflection. These changes 
shall get reflected in the waveforms and spectra 
obtained from impact-echo tests, and they provide both 


qualitative and quantitative information about the 
flaws. This clause focuses on signal behaviour 
associated with cracks and voids in plates, including 
the special case of a shallow crack or delamination, 
and the response of plates containing unconsolidated 
concrete (honey combing). Although the discussion is 
focused on plate structures, the interaction of stress 
waves with flaws and the resulting changes in the 
waveform and spectrum can be generalized to any 
geometry. 


A crack or void within a concrete structure forms a 
concrete/air interface. Cracks with a minimum width 
(Crack opening) of about 0.08 mm cause almost total 
reflection of a P-wave. The responses from cracks and 
voids are similar, because stress waves are reflected 
from the first concrete/air interface encountered. Thus 
а crack at a depth (а) will give the same response as а 
void whose upper surface (nearest to the impact 
surface) is at the same depth (see Fig. 3). 


When tests are carried out to locate flaws in a plate 
structure, the first step is to determine the response of 
the solid structure. This is accomplished by performing 
tests in a region where the structure is known to be 
solid. If the thickness and wave speed are known, the 
thickness frequency can be calculated, and tests can 
be performed until a solid response is obtained. The 
difference between the solid response and the response 
when a crack of wide lateral extent is present is 
illustrated in Fig. 4. The depth of the flaw can be 
determined using Equation 6, as given below: 


с, 
ary) ...(6) 


The impact-echo testing is also influenced by the depth 
at which a flaw is located. When the lateral dimensions 
of a crack are comparable to its depth, stress waves are 
both reflected from the crack and diffracted around it. 
As а result, P-wave reflections occur both within the 
layer above the crack and across the full thickness. 


Table 1 Various Shapes as Defined During Impact-Echo Testing of Concrete Structures and 
Corresponding Shape Factor (В) 


(Clause 4.2) 
SI Structure Shape Definition Shape Factor 
No. (8) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Plate A structure with two parallel faces, for which the ratio of lateral dimension to 0.96 

thickness is sufficiently large, so that multiple wave reflections from the side 

boundaries do not reach the transducer within the few milli-seconds in which 

multiple reflections between the two faces are being recorded. When 1 024 data 

points are recorded at an interval of 2 ys, this ratio is five to six 
ii) Bar of circular cross-section A structure in which the length is at least three times the diameter 0.92 
iii) Bar of square cross-section A structure in which the length is at least three times the thickness 0.87 


iv) Bar of rectangular cross- A structure in which the length is at least three times the largest dimension in the Function of depth/ 


section cross-section 


breadth (D/B) 


IS 15987 : 2013 


Fic. 3 A CRACK АТ A DEPTH 4 


However, the full thickness frequency is lower than 
that of the solid plate because of the reduced stiffness 
in the vicinity of the crack and because the P-waves 
must travel a longer path around the crack to reach the 
bottom surface. The difference between the solid 
response and the response when a crack of small lateral 
extent is present, is illustrated in Fig. 5. When the depth 
of the flaw is greater than about 10 cm, the response 
from multiple P-wave reflections within the layer above 
the flaw is relatively strong. 


If the depth of the flaw is less than 10 cm, flexural 
vibrations in the thin layer are often excited, and the 
response is dramatically different. This situation, for 
example, is frequently encountered on concrete bridge 
decks, for example, where widespread cracking called 
delamination occurs at shallow depths due to corrosion 
in the reinforcing steel. The resulting signal includes a 
large-amplitude, low frequency component due to the 
flexural vibration. The flexural vibrations are similar 
to the vibration in a drum, and because the resulting 
surface displacements are far larger than those caused 
by P-wave arrivals they dominate the signal. The 
higher-frequency component due to multiple P-wave 
reflections across the thin layer is weak by comparison, 
and thus making it sometimes difficult to detect. 


A schematic representation of the effects of flexural 
vibration in thin layer is shown in Fig. 6. Flexural 
vibration, shown schematically in Fig. 6 (a), has low 
frequency (typically 2-6 kHz) and very large amplitude 
as compared to surface displacements caused by the 
arrival of reflected P-waves, shown schematically in 
Fig. 6 (с). Figures 6 (Б) and (d) show the corresponding 
contributions to the spectrum: flexural vibrations 
produce a high-amplitude, low frequency signal that 
dominates the waveform and spectrum, while the peak 
resulting from P-wave reflections has a higher 
frequency and lower amplitude, and is sometimes too 
small to be seen. There are two methods for amplifying 
this high frequency peak: (a) Using a smaller impactor; 
and (b) Digital filtering. 


A region of unconsolidated concrete typically consists 
of large number of small, interconnected voids, 
commonly referred to as ‘honeycombing’. Such areas 
include many small concrete/air interfaces over a range 
of depths, and often they do not have a well-defined 
external boundary. The usual response of a 
honeycombed region to an impact-echo test includes 
a ‘displaced thickness frequency’, that is, a strong peak 
at a frequency smaller than that of the solid plate and 
one or more additional peaks corresponding to P-wave 
reflections from a range of depths within the 
unconsolidated region. 


7 TESTING OF CONCRETE STRUCTURES FOR 
DELAMINATION OF REINFORCED BARS 


The experimental setup for the testing of concrete 
structures for detection of delamination of reinforced 
rods is similar to that of impact-echo testing as described 
in earlier clauses. As discussed in 2, waves reflected 
between two concrete/air interfaces produce successive 
arrival of tension wave (Inward displacement) at the 
impact surface due to the phase reversion at both the 
interfaces. Whereas, waves reflected between a concrete/ 
air interface and a concrete/steel interface produce arrival 
of alternate compression wave (Outward displacement) 
and tension wave (Inward displacement) at the impact 
surface, which makes the frequency of the arrival of P- 
wave of similar nature (Compression/Tension) half to 
that when reflected between two concrete/air interfaces. 
It is this difference in the frequency of arrivals of similar 
nature of P-wave that is used for the identification of 
delamination of reinforced bars, as the delamination 
changes the type of interface from concrete/steel to 
concrete/air. 


Figure 7 (a) shows the typical impact-echo signal of a 
reinforced rod intact with the concrete, at a depth of 
50 mm. The frequency spectrum consists of a cluster 
of peaks centered at 17.1 kHz (116 mm). These 
clustered peaks are the characteristic response of steel 
reinforcement rods without delamination. As discussed 


IS 15987 : 2013 


E (a) 


ш 
© 
< 
= 
О 
> 

0 TIME , us 2048 

{r= \/tr (с) 

ш 
о 
D 
к- 
22 
a 
= 
< 

40 


FREQUENCY, kHz 


VOLTAGE 


2048 


о 


TIME, us 


AMPLITUDE 


40 


FREQUENCY, kHz 


Fic. 4 COMPARISON OF THE SOLID RESPONSE (LEFT) WITH THE RESPONSE FROM A REGION WITH 
A CRACK OF WIDE LATERAL EXTENT 


earlier; the frequency of the arrival of the wave of 
similar nature is half, and hence Equation 6 leads to 
the depth of the reinforced rod as double of that of the 
actual depth. Further, the exact depth of the 
reinforcement rod can be determined by applying the 
correction factor as per the equation given below: 


Depth calculated from 


frequency spectrum =: (0.6 Dit+ 15) ...(7) 


where D and / are diameter and actual depth of the 
reinforcement rod respectively. The correction factor 
has more importance when the D/t ratio is much less 
than 1. 


Figure 7(b) shows the typical response of a delaminated 
rod at a depth of 35 mm. The frequency spectrum shows 


the dominant peaks at 6.3 kHz and 59.6 kHz (33 mm). 
The peak at 59.6 kHz is due to the reflection from 
concrete/air interface at the depth of 35 mm 
(delamination) and the peak of 6.3 kHz corresponds 
to the flexural vibration of the concrete cover of 35 mm 
thickness. This is a typical response, if the section above 
the delamination is thin (less than 100 mm), as 
discussed earlier. 


8 ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES FOR IMPACT- 
ECHO TESTING 


The proper selection of digitizing frequency, data 
length and diameter of the steel balls for giving impact, 
are of significant importance. For example, when the 
main concern is to get the full thickness of the structure, 


IS 15987 : 2013 


П (а) (4) 


pa 


td (e) 
ш © 
< < 
є = 
= 
© S 
0 TIME, us 2048 0 TIME, us 2048 
т = 1/t (c) 
ш 
5 = 
- = 
a = 
2 % 
< < 
0 40 0 
FREQUENCY kHz FREQUENCY kHz 
Fic. 5 COMPARISON OF SOLID RESPONSE (LEFT) WITH RESPONSE IN THE VICINITY OF 
A FLAW OF LIMITED LATERAL EXTENT 
{ (а) (с) 
as d oe | | 
Т 
ы ш 
а f 
= Ө, 1 
= E ! 
z x i 
> > | 
4 < | 
П 
9 FREQUENCY kHz 0 FREQUENCY kHz 


Fic. 6 THE PRINCIPLE COMPONENTS OF THE RESPONSE PRODUCED BY IMPACT ON THE SURFACE OF A CONCRETE 
SLAB CONTAINING A SHALLOW DELAMINATION (a) FLEXURAL MODE AND (с) THICKNESS МОРЕ. THE 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE SPECTRUM ARE SHOWN IN (b) AND (d) 


7 


IS 15987 : 2013 


10 20 30 


40 50 


FREQUENCY, kHz 


10 20 


30 


40 50 


FREQUENCY , kHz 


Fic. 7 RESPONSE OF REINFORCED Rop (a) WITHOUT DELAMINATION AND (b) WITH DELAMINATION 


lower digitizing frequency, longer data length and larger 
diameter ball are suitable. Whereas, when detection of 
flaws near the surface is the main concern, higher 
digitizing frequency, shorter data length and smaller 
diameter ball are the best suited. In routine testing, it is 
usually recommended to start with a large impactor (10 
mm diameter or larger) and proceed to use a smaller 
impactor, if it is necessary to amplify or bring up 
features that are associated with frequencies of about 
20 kHz and higher. A 3 mm diameter impactor (the 
smallest practical size is about 1.5 mm in diameter) 
produces stress waves with useful frequencies up to 
almost 90 kHz, and wavelengths as small as 0.04 m. 
At the high end of this frequency range, the stress waves 
begin to be scattered and reflected by the natural 
inhomogeneous regions in concrete, such as small air 
inclusions and mortar/aggregate interfaces, with the 
result that there is more noise in the waveform and 
spectrum. Another consideration in selecting an 
impactor is the relationship between wavelength and 
size of a flaw or discontinuity that can be detected. A 
flaw of lateral dimension L is invisible to stress waves 
of wavelength greater than L. Combining the 
fundamental relationship between wave speed, 
frequency and wavelength, C, = fA (where A is the 
wavelength), with Equation 2 and by using a wave 
speed of 4 000 m/s in concrete, the minimum detectable 
lateral dimension of the flaw (Lmin) is given by: 


L, = 14D 22(8) 


Min — 


Thus the minimum lateral size of a flaw that can be 
detected is about 14 times the diameter of the impactor. 
Further, the response of the voids of different diameters 
at various depths has revealed that the voids can be 
detected, if the ratio of the depth of its location from 
the impacting surface to the lateral dimension of the 
void is less than 5. Similarly, a reinforced rod can be 
detected, if the ratio of the depth of its location from 
the impacting surface to the diameter of the reinforced 
rod is less than 3. 


9 ERRORS ASSOCIATED WITH VARIOUS 
MEASUREMENTS 


This method is based on the use of digital signal 
analysis methods. As a result, the time domain 
waveforms and frequency spectra are composed of 
discrete points with fixed intervals that depend upon 
the data acquisition parameters such as digitization rate 
and total length of the time domain waveform. This 
results in systematic errors in the velocity and thickness 
measurements. The maximum errors involved in the 
velocity measurements using the procedure as 


бї 
discussed in 4.1 is given as €, = + N ; where ôt is the 


sampling interval in time domain (equal to inverse of 
the digitization frequency) and Aż is the travel time of 
the wave between two transducers. For C= 4 000 m/s, 
ot = 2 us (digitization frequency = 500 kHz) and with 
a distance between two transducers as 300 mm; 


е,= + (2 x 105/75 x 10%) = + 0.0267, that is + 2.67 
percent or + 107 m/s. Similarly the maximum error 
involved in the thickness (depth of a defect) 
measurement due to frequency interval is given by 


1 
not’ 
where n is the number of samples recorded) and f is 
the frequency observed corresponding to the thickness 
(depth of a defect). For 6¢= 2 us, п = 2048, Cp= 
4 000 m/s, and thickness of concrete = 300 mm; 
ер- (+ 244.14/133 33.33) = + 0.018 3 that is + 1.83 
percent or + 5.5 mm. The percent error associated in 
the measurement of thickness due to the error involved 
with frequency measurement is the function of the 
frequency and in turn the thickness also. The percent 
error decreases with decrease in the thickness. 


A 
e=t = ; where Afis the frequency interval (= 


IS 15987 : 2013 


The upper limit of concrete thickness that can be 
measured by the impact-echo technique is limited by 
the low frequency resonant peaks of the receiver 
transducer appearing at ~1.1 to 1.4 kHz which 
correspond to ~1.4 to 1.8 m thickness. Impact-echo 
has been widely used for testing of concrete structures 
up to ~800 mm thickness and thickness peak for 1.2 m 
thick concrete structure is also reported, when a steel 
ball of 12.5 mm thickness was used as an impactor. 
For thick concrete structures (thickness = 1.2 m to 2 т), 
thickness peak obtained in an impact-echo test may be 
indecisive due to the possible presence of the transducer 
resonant peak. However, it can still be tested for defect 
detection by performing tests from both the sides of 
the structure covering half of the thickness from each 
side. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (4997). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. Р. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, ТУ Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


