**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 4420 (1967) : Methods for determination of conductivity 
of acqeous and organic extracts of textile materials [TXD 
5: Chemical Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISt4420«l9«7 



Indian Standard 



METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF 

CONDUCTIVrrY OF AQUEOUS AND ORGANIC 

EXTRACTS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 



UDC 67701:543 




C> Copyright 196S 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

M ANAK raAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAIt MARO 

NEW DPJOl 

_^^^ FehrmryVSiGi 



ISt4420.1967 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF 

CONDUCTIVITY OF AQUEOUS AND ORGANIC 

EXTRACTS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 



Textile Chemistry Sectional Committee, TDC 5 



Chotrmon 
Dr p. G. Mekta 

Mmbers 
Sbri K. D. Bahadurji 

Dr S. M. Betrabet 

Shri K. S. Bhujano 
Shri B. B. Ghakraverti 

Shri R. G. Bagghi ( Alternate ) 
Shrx R. C. Dasoupta 
Director of Handlooms 



Ripresentir^ 

Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 
Ahxnedabad 



Textile Auxiliaries Manufacturers' Association, 

Bombay 
The Gotton Technological Research Laboratory 

( IGAR ), Bombay 
Office of the Textile Gommissioner, Bombay 
Superintendence Gompany of India (Private) 

Limited, Galcutta 



Shri K, Ramamurthy ( ^Alternate) 



National Test House, Galcutta 
Government of Madras 



Dr a. S. Dutt 

Shri S. K. Dutta 

Shri Gunvant Mangaldas 

Dr V. P, KULKARNI 

Shri L. G. Makhijani 

Shri A. K. Ghosb ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. B. Mehta 
Shri S. S. Mehta 

Shri V. J. Vaishnav ( Alternate ) 
Dr $. H. MidiTRE 



Shri S. M. Mistry 

Dr G. N. K. MvKqaY 

Shri G. L. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Naokarni 
Dr K. L NARAsniHAN 
Dr V. N. NiOAM 

Shri N. D. Bhandari ( Alternate } 



Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 

Galcutta 
Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Galico ]^inting Go 

Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Ahmedabad Millowners' Association, Ahn^abad 
All India Handloom Board, Bombay 
Indian Rope Manufacturers' Association,JCalcutta 

The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 
LG.I. ( India ) Private Ltd, Galcutta 

The Bangalore Woollen, Gotton & Silk \fills Go Ltd, 
Bangalore; and the Buckingham it Gamatxc 
Gompany Limited, Madras 

Association of Merchants & Manufacturers of 
Textile Stores 8c Machinery India, Bombay 

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Ministry of Defence ( DGI } 

Office of the Textile Gommissioner, Bombay 

Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 



(Cotttimiidonpoii^) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAK MARQ 

NEW DELHI 2 



I8i 4420- 1967 



( Continued from page 1 } 



Members 

DR M. V. NlMKAR 

Dr D. V* Parikh 

Shri Gordkanbhai H. Patbl 

Skri I. L. Patbl 



Representing 

The Millowners* Association* Bombav 

The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri Dinesh Mills Ltd» Baroda 

Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies & 

Disposals (Ministry of Works, Housmg & 

Supply ) 
Shri A. K. Pramanigk ( Alternate ) 



Shri Y. G* Pathak 
Shri G. R. Podar 

Shri J. G. Parikk ( Alternate ) 
Rbpresbntativb 
Representative 
Shri Jamnadas K. Shah 
Shri R. C. Shah 

Shri S. J. Shah 

Shri G. V. Shirolrar 

Dr R. V. R. SUBRAMANIAN 

Shri S. M. Ckakraborty, 
Director (Tex) 



The Textile Processors* Association ( India ), Bombay 
Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association Ltd, Bombay 

Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab 
Shri Ram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
The Raipur Manufacturing Co Ltd, Ahmoclabad 
The Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Associa- 
tion, Ahmedabad 
Association of Merchants & Manufacturers of Textile 

Stores & Machinery ( India), Bombay 
The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, Delhi 
The Silk & Art Silk Milb' Research Association, 

Bombay 
Director General, ISI ( Ex^ojkio Member ) 

Secretary 



Shri G. S. Abhyankar 
Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI 

Undyed Textile Materials Subcommittee, TDC 5 : 2 



Contfemr 
Shri R. C. Shah 

Member 

Shri G. G. Kulxarni ( Alternate to 
Shri R. G. Shah ) 
Dr ( KuMARi ) M. D. Bhavsar 



Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Assodation^ 
Ahmedabad 



Shri B. B. Charravbrti 

Shri R. G. Bagchi ( AlternaU ) 
Shri R. J. Chiictb 

Shri G. L. Gupta 
Shri B, K. Kedia 
Shri K. Manivannah 
Dr V. N. NioAii 



Shri N. D. Bhanoari ( Alternate )_ 
Dr D. V. Parikh 
Rbprrbbntativi 
SttRi Jahnadai K. Shah 



The Silk & Art Silk MiUt^ Research Aisociation» 

Bombay 
Superintendence Company of India ( Private ) Ltd, 

Calcutta 

The Khatau Makanji Spini^ng & Weaving Co Ltd, 

Bombay 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
The Raymond Woollen Mills Limited, Bombay 
Shri Ram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Ministry of Defence (R&D) 



The Bombay Textile Research AsBodatioii^ Bombay 
Directorate of Industries, Government of Fiti^b 
Raipur Manufacturing Go Ltd, Ahmeda b ad 



ISs4420-1967 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF 

CONDUCTIVITY OF AQUEOUS AND ORGANIC 

EXTRACTS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 14 December 1967| after the draft finalized by the Textile Chemistry 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0*2 In material specifications for textile electrical-insulating materials^ the 
requirements of the conductivity of aqueous and organic extracts of 
textile materiab are specified. The conductivity values of these extracts 
give indications of the amount of harmful water solubles and organic 
impurities present in the textile materials. This standard will be| useful in 
determining the conductivity of aqueous and organic extracts of textile 
materials. 

0.3 Considerable assistance has been derived from the following: 

B.S. 2689 : 1956 Recommended methods for estimating the effect of 
deleterious substances in fibrous electrical insulating materiab. 
British Standards Institution. 

B.S. 3266:1960 Determination of conductivity, pH^ w^ter-soluble 
matter, chloride & sulphate in aqueous extracts, of textile 
materials. British Standards Institution. \ 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to lib rounded 
off, it shalHDe done in accordance with IS : 2-1960'*'. 



1. SCOPE 

1«1 This standard prescribes method for determination of conductivity of 
aqueous and organic extracts of textile materials, 

2. PRINCSPLB 

2J The aqueous extract of the textile material is prepared by using low« 

conductivity water* An organic extract of the textile mateHal is prepared 

' ' ' ' V ' 

^Rufesllpr roundiaf offauinerical values ( rmisid). 

3 



18:4420-1967 

by using trichlorocthylcnc. The conductivity of each of the two extracts b 
measured separately and expressed in conventional units. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sampling for Fibre and Yarn 

3.1.1 Lot ( Fibre or Tarn ) — The quantity of fibre or yarn from the same 
source shall constitute a lot. If the lot contains more than 200 kg of fibre 
or yarui it shall be divided in sub-lots each weighing 200 kg or less. 

3.1.2 From a sub-lot 15 increments, each approximately weighing 10 g, 
shall be taken from different parts so that a representative sample is 
obtained. All the increments thus collected shall be thoroughly mixed. 
This shall constitute the test sample, 

3.2 Sampling for Fabrics 

3.2.1 Lot ( Fabric ) — The quantity of fabrics manufactured essentially 
under uniform conditions shall constitute a lot. 

3.2.2 The number of pieces to be selected from a lot shall be as given 
below. The pieces thus selected shall constitute the gross sample: 

Lot Size Sample Size 

Up to 100 3 

101 to 300 4 

301 „ 500 5 

501 and above 7 

3.2.3 From each piece in the gross sample about 25 g of fabric shall be 
taken out from at least two different parts. The parts shall then be cut 
into further smaller pieces and thoroughly mixed. The pieces thus collected 
shall constitute the test sample. 

4. TEST SPECIMENS 

4.1 From the test sample, draw at least 4 test specimens ( 2 test specimens 
for preparing aqueous extracts and the other two for organic extracts) 
each weighing about 10 g. Cut the test specimens into small pieces. 

Note — If the sample, under analysis of loose fibre, take about 5 g of the test 
8i)ecimen. 

5. CONDITIONING OF TEST SPECIMENS 

5.1 In case of test specimens taken for preparing aqueous extract prior to 
testi the test specimens shall be conditioned for 24 hours to moisture 



IS14420.1967 

equilibrium in a standard atmosphere at 65 db 2 percent RH and 
270 J. 2«G temp ( see aUo IS : 196-1966* ). 

Note — No conditioning is required in the case of test specimens taken for preparing 
organic extract. 

6. QjlTAUTY OF REAGENTS 

6,1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals shall be employed in test and 
distilled water {see IS : 1070-1960t ) shall be used where the use of water 
as reagent is intended. 

Note — ' Pure chemicab ' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which 
affect the test results. 

7. CONDUCTIVITY OF AQjUEOUS EXTRACT 

7.1 Apparatus 

7.1.1 Flat Bottom Flask — made of chcmical-resfatant glass and of suitable 
capacity with a glass stopper incorporating a stopcock. 

7.1.2 Water Cooled Condenser 

7.1.3 Sintered Glass Crucible — porosity 4, 

7.1.4 Conductivity Cell — a convenient conductivity cell of known cell 
constant [see Fig. 1 ). 

NoTB — The cell should be calibrated with M/lOO potassium chloride solution which 
has a conductivity of 0*00 1 278 mho/cm at 20*^0. 

7.1.5 Conductivity Meter — consisting of a wheatstonc bridge network of 
resistors, fed from an alternating source of frequency not less than 1 000 c/s 
with a sui|^ble device for assessing bridge balance. One arm of the net- 
work is formed by the cell containing the liquid under test ( see Fig. 2 ). 

7.2 Reagents — distilled water of conductivity not greater than 
2 micromhos/cm. 

Note — The ri^uired quality of water may be obtained by passing it through mixed 
ion-exchange resins. 

7.3 Preparation of Aqveona Extract 

7.3.1 Condition the test specimens to moisture equilibrium in the 
standard atmosphere and weigh accurately each test specimen. 

^Atmospheric conditions for testing ( uvised), 
tSpedfication for water, distilled quality ( revised). 



ISi4420-1967 




RIGID 
STOPPER 



Fig. 1 Apparatus for Measuring the Electrical 
Conductivity of Liquids 




A Eltctrolytic Ctll 
a Variable Sundird R«slstanca with 
i VariabU Condenser In Parallel 

C Source of AUernatIng Current 



Current Detector 
/, m, n Uniform Graduated Wire or " 
Two Variable Resisunee Boxea 



Fio. 2 Conductivity Meter 
6 



ISs4420.1967 

7.3«2 Put one test specimen in the flask and add sufficient amount of 
water to it to make liquor to material ratio of 20 : 1 ( see Note ). Connect 
the flask to the condenser and bring rapidly to boil and continue to boil 
the liquor gently for 60 minutes. Disconnect and remove the flask while 
the liquor is still boiling and close it immediately with the glass stopper 
fitted with the stopcock. Rapidly cool the flask to room temperature. Do 
not remove or open the tap until ready for filtration. 

Note — If the test specimen is wool in any form, felt or loose fibre masses of any 
composition, the liquor to material ratio should be 50 : 1. 

7.3.3 Similarly prepare separate extracts of the remaining specimen (s). 

7.4 Measurement of Conduedvity 

7.4.1 Remove the stopper from the flask and transfer some of the extracts 
to the conductivity cell {see Note). Wash the electrodes twice or thrice 
with the extract. Measure the electrical resistance with the meter. Npte 
the temperature of the extract. 

Note — The flask should be restoppered as soon as possible. 

7.4.2 Calculate the conductivity of the aqueous extract in micromhos per 
centimetre by the formula given below: 

Conductivity of extract, A* x 10* 

micromho5/cmat27»C = j; [ i .^ o»02 (<- 27) ] 

where 

K s cell constant ( per centimetre ); 
R sss measured resistance in ohms; and 
t Bs temperature, in degrees celsius of extract. 

Note—- The cell constant, if not known, should be first determined by melisuring the 
resistance of M/lOO potassium chloride solution. 

7«4.3 Calfmlate separately the conductivity of the extract(s) prepared 
from the remaining test specimen (s). 

7.4.4 Calculate the average of the values obtained as in 7.4.2 and 7.4.3. 

8. CONDUCTIVITY OF ORGANIC EXTRACT 
8.1 Appatmtos 

8.1.1 Reflux Condenser 

8.1.2 Conductivity Cell — a convenient conductivity cell of known cell 
constant ( see 7.1.4 ). 

8*1 .3 An Electronic MuUi^Megohnmeier — using 85-V dc, or a sensitive 
galvanometer and battery. 



15:4420-1967 

8*1.4 Air-Oven — capable of maintaining a temperature of 80^ to 
lOO^C, 

8.2 Reagents 

8.2.1 Trichloroethylene {see IS : 245-1962* ). 

Note — The trichloroethylene used for the extraction should be purified by stirring in 
about 1 percent by weight of fuller's earth and filtering through a sintered glass filter. 
The conductivity of the solvent when determined shall be not greater than 
5 X 10"^2 mho/cm. 

8.3 Preparation of Organic Extract 

8.3.1 Take one test specimen ( see Note 1 ). Heat it gently in oven for 
about 2 hours at a temperature of 80** to lOO'^C to remove any amount of 
absorbed water and immediately transfer it to a suitable flask. Add 
trichloroethylene to the flask keeping the liquor to material ratio of 10 : 1 
( see Note 2 ). Connect the flask to the condenser. Extract the test speci- 
men by gently boiling the trichloroethylene for about 1 hour ( see Note 3 ) . 
Stopper the flask firmly and allow it to remain overnight in the dark. 
Make up the loss of volume through evaporation by addition of trichloro- 
ethylene before determining the conductivity. 

NoTE.l — Since the test specimen is dried before extraction, it is not necessary to 
condition it. 

NoTB 2 — If the test specimen is wool in any form, felt on loose fibre masses of any 
composition, the liquor to material ratio should be 25 : 1. 

Note 3 — The apparatus used should be all-glass apparatus and the joints should be 
made of ground glass. 

8.4 Measurement of Conductivity 

8.4.1 Rinse the conductivity cell several times with trichloroethylene and 
dry. Take the extract in conductivity cell and measure its resistance after 
application of current for I minute. 

8.4.2 Calculate the conductivity of the organic extract by the formula 
given in 7«4«2. 

8.4.3 Similarly determine the conductivity of the organic extracts 
prepared from remaining test specimen (sj. 

8.4.4 Calculate the average of the values obtained is in 8.4.2 and 8.4.3* 

9. REPORT 

9.1 Report the value obtained as in 7.4.4 and 8.4.4 as the conductivity 6f 
aqueous and organic extracts respectively. 

9.1.1 Report also the liquor to material ratio used in preparing the 

extracts. 

^Specification for trichloroethylene technical ( revised), 

8 



PUBLICATIONS OP INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
INDIAN STANDARDS 

About 4500 Indian Standards, broadly classified under the following 
main heads, have been issued so fart 



Agriculture ft Food 

Chemical 

Civil Engineering 

Consumer Products 



Electrotechnlcal 
Mechanical Engineering 
Structural ft Metais 
Textile 



Of these, the standards belonging to the Textile Group fall under 
the following catego ies: 



Aircraft Textile r itrterials 

Carpets and Druggets 

Chemical Test Methods 

Cotton Fabrics, Handloom 

Cotton Fabrics, Mill-Made 

Grading of Fibres 

Hosiery 

jute Bags 

Jute Fabrics 

Man-Made Fibre Fabrics, Hand- 
loom 

Man-Made Fibre Fabrics, Mill- 
Made 

Narrow Fabrics 



National Flag of India 

Pacicaging 

Physical Test Methods 

Ropes and Cordages 

Silk Fabrics, Handloom 

Sizing and Finishing Materials 

Spinning Machinery Components 

Terminology 

Textile Mill Accessories 

Twines 

Weaving Machinery Components 

Wool Fabrics, Handloom 

Wool Fabrics. Mill-Made 

Yarn and Similar Structures 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) 

Single Copx 

Annuel Subscription 
Annual Reporti ( from 1948^9 Onwards) 
Handbook of ISI Publlettlons» 1967 



Ri 

2*00 
15-00 
2-00 to 3-00 each 
5-00 



AvoJ/oble from 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I 

Teloplionoi 27 36 1 1 - 20 Tolegrami ManakitnatlMi 

branch Offices 
Toiegfftmi Manaktanitfui 



534 Sardar Vallabhbhal Patel Road 


Bombay 7 


Telephone 


35 70 27 


S Chowringhee Approach 
Industrial liuu Administrative 


Calcutu 13 


it 


23-18 23 


Hyderabad 18 


ff 


39229 


Building, Sanatnagar 








117/418 BSarvoda/a Nagar 


Kanpur 


ty 


3 76 95 


54 General Patters Road 


Mftdrai 2 


M 


8 72 79 



(gJI AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 1983 
^"^ TO 

IS ; 4420 - 1967 METHODS FOR DETERMINATION 

OF CONDUCTIVITY OF AQUEOUS AND ORGANIC 

EXTRACTS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 

( This amendment has been carried out to specify the SI units in 
the standard. ) 

Alterations 

( Page 5, clause 7.1.4, Note ) — Substitute the following for the exist- 
ing note: 

< NoTB — The cell should be calibrated with N/100 potassium chloride solution 
which has conductivity of 127 800 jJiS/m at aT'^C. • 

( Page 5, clause 7.2, line 2 ) — Substitute * 200 ^S/m * for *2 micro- 
mhos/cm '. 

( Page 7, clause 7.4.2 ) — Substitute the following for the existing 
clause: 

* 7.4.2 Calculate the conductivity of aqueous extract in (JtS/m by the 
formula given below: 

Conductivity of aqueous K X 10^ ^ 

extract at 27^C "^^ /^ [ i + 0*02 ( ^ — 27 ) ] 

where 

K ass cell constant in cm-i, 

R -e measured resistance in ohms, and 

t « temperature of extract in ''C* 

NoTB — The cell constant, if not known, should be first determined by mea- 
suring the resistance of N/ 100 potassium chloride solution. ' 

( Page 8,^clause 8.2.1, Note^ line 4 ) — Substitute ' 5 x IO-«|AS/m '/or 
*5 xl0-i«mh6/cm\ 



( TDC 5 ) 



Printed at New India Printhig Piess. Khurja* India 



