**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS/ISO 8637 (2004) : Cardiovascular Implants and Artificial 
Organs - Haemodialysers, Haemodiaf liters^ Haemof liters and 
Haemoconcentrators [MHD 6: Thoracic and Cardiovascular 
Surgery Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

(Superseding IS 13890 : 1994) 



/ncy/an Standard 

CARDIOVASCULAR IMPLANTS AND ARTIFICIAL 

ORGANS — HAEMODIALYSERS, HAEMODIAFILTERS, 

HAEMOFILTERS AND HAEMOCONCENTRATORS 



ICS 1 1 .040.40 



© BIS 2012 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 2012 Price Group 8 



Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee, MHD 06 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8637 : 2004 'Cardiovascular implants and artificial 
organs — Haemodialysers, haemodiafilters, haemofilters and haemoconcentrators' issued by the 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on the recommendation of the Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee 
and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. 

This standard is concerned with devices intended for haemodialysis, haemofilteration, 
haemodiafilteration and haemoconcentration in humans. The requirements specified in this Indian 
Standard will help to ensure their safety and satisfactory function. 

It was not found practicable to specify materials of construction. This standard, therefore, requires 
only that materials have been tested and that the methods and results are made available upon 
request. There is no intention to specify, or to set limits on, the performance characteristics of the 
devices because such restrictions are unnecessary for the qualified user and would limit the 
alternatives available when choosing a device for a specific application. 

The dimensions of the blood ports and the dialysate of filtrate ports have been specified to ensure 
compatibility of the device with the extracorporeal blood circuit specified in ISO 8638 : 2004 
'Cardiovascular implants and artificial organs — Extracorporeal blood circuit for haemodialysers, 
haemodiafilters and haemofilters'. The design and dimensions have been selected in order to minimize 
the risk of leakage of blood and the ingress of air. 

This standard reflects the consensus of physicians, manufacturers and other interested parties for 
devices that are approved for clinical use. 

This standard was first published as IS 13890 : 1994 'haemodialysers, haemofilters and 
haemoconcentrators — Specification'. This standard has been brought out it in alignment with 
International practices. After the publication of this standard, IS 13890 : 1994 shall be treated as 
withdrawn. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention 
is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian 
Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their respective 
places are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence 

ISO 594-2: 1991 Conical fittings with IS 3234 (Part 2) : 1995 Conical Identical 

6% (Luer) taper for syringes, needles fittings with a 6% (Luer) taper for 
and certain other medical equipment syringes, needles and certain other 
— Part 2: Lock fittings medical equipment: Part 2 Lock 

fittings (second revision) 

( Continued on third cover) 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

Indian Standard 

CARDIOVASCULAR IMPLANTS AND ARTIFICIAL 

ORGANS — HAEMODIALYSERS, HAEMODIAFILTERS, 

HAEMOFILTERS AND HAEMOCONCENTRATORS 

1 Scope 

This International Standard specifies requirements for haennodialysers, haemodiafilters, haemofilters and 
haemoconcentrators, hereinafter collectively referred to as "the device", for use for hunnans. 

This International Standard is not applicable to 

— extracorporeal blood circuits, 

— plasmafilters, 

— haemoperfusion devices, 

— vascular access devices, 

— blood pumps, 

— pressure monitors for the extracorporeal blood circuit, 
—- air detection devices, 

— systems to prepare, maintain or monitor dialysate, 

— systems used to perform haemodialysis, haemodiafiltration, haemofiltratlon or haemoconcentration, 

— reprocessing procedures and equipment. 

NOTE Requirements for the extracorporeal blood circuit for haemodialysers, haemodiafilters, and haemofilters are 
specified in ISO 8638. 

2 Normative references 

The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For dated 
references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document 
(including any amendments) applies. 

ISO 594-2, Conical fittings with 6 % (Luer) taper for syringes, needles and certain other medical equipment — 
Part 2: Lock fittings 

ISO 8638, Cardiovascular implants and artificial organs— Extracorporeal blood circuit for haemodialysers, 
haemodiafilters and haemofilters 

ISO 10993-1 , Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 1: Evaluation and testing 

ISO 10993-4, Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 4: Selection of tests for interactions with blood 

ISO 10993-7, Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 7: Ethylene oxide sterilization residuals 

ISO 10993-11, Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part11: Tests for systemic toxicity 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

3 Terms and definitions 

For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply. 

3.1 

blood compartment 

part of a haemodialyser, haemodiafilter, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator through which blood is intended to 
pass 

NOTE For hollow-fibre devices, the blood compartment includes the volume of the hollow fibres plus the headers. 

3.2 
clearance 

volume of a solution from which a solute is completely removed per unit time 

3.3 
convection 

transport of solutes across a semipermeable membrane, along with filtered fluid, caused by a pressure gradient 
or pressure differential across the membrane 

3.4 

dialysate 
dialysing fluid 

solution which is intended to exchange solutes and/or water in blood during haemodialysis or haemodiafiltration 

3.5 

dialysate compartment 

part of a haemodialyser or haemodiafilter through which dialysate is intended to pass 

3.6 
diffusion 

transport of solutes across a semipermeable membrane, caused by a concentration gradient 

3.7 
filtrate 

fluid removed from the blood across the seVRipermeable membrane Into the dialysate or filtrate compartment of 
a haemodialyser, haemodiafilter, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator, due to a pressure gradient across the 
semipermeable membrane 

3.8 
haemoconcentration 

process whereby plasma water and electrolytes are removed from diluted blood across a semipermeable 
membrane 

3.9 
haemoconcentrator 

device intended to perform haemoconcentration 

3.10 
haemodiafilter 

device intended to perform haemodiafiltration 

3.11 
haemodiafiltration 

process whereby solute imbalances in a patient's blood are corrected by means of simultaneous convection and 
diffusion across a semipermeable membrane and replacement with an appropriate physiological fluid 

NOTE Normally the process also includes a net fluid removal. 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

3.12 
haemodialyser 

device intended to perform haemodialysis 

3,13 
haemodialysis 

process whereby solute imbalances in a patient's blood are con-ected, mainly by diffusion across a 
semipermeable membrane 

NOTE Normally the process also includes a net fluid removal. 

3.14 
haemofilter 

device intended to perform haemofiltration 

3.15 
haemofiltration 

process whereby solute imbalances in a patient's blood are corrected, mainly by convection across a 
semipermeable membrane and replacement with an appropriate physiological fluid 

NOTE Normally the process also includes a net fluid removal. 

3.16 
labelling 

written, printed, graphic or electronic matter which is 

— affixed to a medical device or any of its containers or wrappers, or 

— accompanying a medical device, and is related to identification, technical description and use of the medical 
device, but excluding shipping documents 

3.17 

sieving coefficient 

ratio of a solute concentration in the filtrate to the simultaneous concentration of the same solute in the plasma 

3.18 

transmembrane pressure 

TMP 

Differential pressure exerted across a semipermeable membrane 

NOTE For practical reasons, the mean TMP is generally expressed as either 

— the difference between arithmetic means of inlet and outlet pressures of the blood and dialysate compartments of a 
haemodialyser or a haemodiafilter, or 

— the difference between the arithmetic mean of the inlet and outlet pressures of the blood compartment and the filtrate 
pressure of a haemofilter or a haemoconcentrator. 

4 Requirements 

4.1 Biological safety 

Parts of the device that are intended to come into direct or indirect contact with blood shall be evaluated for 
freedom from biological hazards, in accordance with 5.2. If the device is labelled for reuse, testing shall be 
performed after reprocessing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions for use. 

NOTE Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether national regulations or national standards governing toxicology 
and biocompatibility testing exist in the country in which the device is produced and, if applicable, in the countries in which 
the device is to be marketed. 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

4.2 Sterility 

The blood pathway of the device shall be sterile. Compliance shall be verified in accordance with 5.3. 

4.3 Nonpyrogenicity 

The blood pathway of the device shall be nonpyrogenic. Compliance shall be verified in accordance with 5.4. 

4.4 IVIeclianical characteristics 

4.4.1 Structural integrity 

When tested in accordance with 5.5.1, haemodialysers, haemodiafilters, haemofilters and haemo- 
concentrators shall not leak. The device shall be evaluated at 

a) 1,5 times the maximum pressure specified, and 

b) 1,5 times the recommended sub-atmospheric pressure specified by the manufacturer, not to exceed 
700 mmHg or the maximum obtainable sub-atmospheric pressure. 

NOTE This requirement refers to the external case integrity of the device. 

4.4.2 Blood compartment integrity 

When exposing the blood compartment to a validated test procedure performed at 1,5 times the manufacturer's 
maximum recommended transmembrane pressure, the blood compartment shall not leak. Compliance with this 
requirement shall be verified in accordance with 5.5.2. 

4.4.3 Haemodialyser, haemodiafiiter and haemofilter blood compartment ports 

Except where the haemodialyser, haemodiafiiter or haemofilter and the extracorporeal blood circuit are 
designed as an integral system, the dimensions of the blood ports shall be as given in Figure 1. Compliance 
with this requirement shall be verified in accordance with 5.5.3. 

4.4.4 Haemodialyser and liaemodiafilter dialysate compartment ports 

The dimensions of the dialysate compartment ports shall be as given in Figure 2. Compliance with this 
requirement shall be verified according to 5.5.4. 

4.4.5 Haemofilter filtrate ports 

The filtrate ports of haemofilters shall either comply with Figure 2 or comply with the requirements of the Luer 
taper lock fitting of ISO 594-2. Compliance with this requirement shall be verified in accordance with 5.5.5. 

4.4.6 Haemoconcentrator blood and filtrate ports 

The blood and filtrate ports of haemoconcentrators shall allow for a secure connection to the tubing which is to 
be used with the device. Compliance with this requirement shall be verified in accordance with 5.5.6. 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 



Dimensions in millimetres 



£10 



12 ±0.1 





nnVS\\\' 




1:0.06 



+ I 



^ Double thread. 

Figure 1 — Main fitting dimensions of blood inlet and outlet connections 

4.5 Perfornnance characteristics 

4.5.1 Clearance of haemodialysers and haemodiafilters 

The clearance of urea, creatinine, phosphate and vitamin B-12 shall be determined in accordance with 5.6.1. 
Blood and dialysate flowrates shall cover the manufacturer's recommended range. 

NOTE As a supplement, KqA results can be included. 

4.5.2 Sieving coefficient of haemodiafilters, haemofilters and haemoconcentrators 

The sieving coefficient for albumin, Inulin and myoglobin shall be determined in accordance with 5.6.2. Test 
conditions shall be as presented by the manufacturer in the labelling. 

4.5.3 Filtration rate 



The ultrafiltration rate shall be determined in accordance with 5.6.3. Testing shall be conducted over the 
manufacturer's specified range of transmembrane pressures and blood flowrates. 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 



Dimensions in millimetres 









/ 


/ I 


\ 




/ 






1 
cm" 
















\ 


o* 














— 


l^^ 
















Ji- 








\ 










7 




/ 




/ 


\ 


\ 




^v 




10.2 ±0,1 








/ 




13,1 ±0.1 






17,8 








+0,3 
22 







Figure 2 — Main fitting dimensions of dialysate inlet and outlet port 

4.5.4 Volumeof the blood compartment 

The volume of the blood compartment shall be determined in accordance with 5.6.4 over the specified range of 
transmembrane pressures. 

If the blood compartment is noncompliant, it is acceptable to determine the volume at one transmembrane 
pressure. 

4.5.5 Pressure drop 

4.5.5.1 Pressure drop of the blood compartment 

The pressure drop of the blood compartment shall be determined in accordance with 5.6.5.1. 

4.5.5.2 Pressure drop of the dialysate compartment 

The pressure drop of the dialysate compartment shall be determined in accordance with 5.6.5.2. 



4.6 Expiration date 

Biological safety, sterility and mechanical integrity of the device shall be proven after storage for a period 
corresponding to the expiration date. Compliance shall be in accordance with 5.7. 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

5 Test methods 

5.1 General 

The performance characteristics specified in 4.5 shall be determined prior to marketing a new type of device 
and shall be re-evaluated after changes in the device that may alter its performance. If labelled for multiple uses, 
devices shall be tested for clearances and ultrafiltration rate after reprocessing according to the manufacturer's 
instructions, in order to characterize the effects of the recommended cleaning agent and germicide on 
membrane performance. 

Sample devices for testing shall be drawn at random from the manufacturer's production and shall have passed 
all applicable quality control steps, as well as sterilization If applicable. They shall be prepared according to the 
manufacturer's recommendations as though they are to be used for a clinical procedure. 

Measurements shall be made in vitro at (37 ± 1) °C. When the relationship between variables is non-linear, 
sufficient determinations shall be made to permit interpolation between the data points. The techniques of 
measurement given In this document are reference tests. Other test methods may be used, provided it can be 
shown that they are of comparable precision and reproducibility. 

The test systems shown do not indicate all the necessary details of practicable test apparatus. The design and 
construction of actual test systems and their establishment shall also address the many factors contributing to 
measurement error, including, but not limited to, pressure measurement errors due to static head effects and 
dynamic pressure drops, parameter stabilization time, uncontrolled temperature variations at non-constant flow 
rates, pH, degradation of test substances due to heat, light and time, degassing of test fluids, trapped air, and 
system contamination by foreign material, algae and bacteria. 

NOTE Clause 5 contains tests that are of a type-testing nature, such as those described in 5.5.1 , 5.5.3, 5.5.4, 5.6.1 , 5.6.2, 
5.6.3, and 5.6.4, which are carried out prior to marketing of a new device or when changes are made (to the device or its 
manufacturing processes). Others are of a quality control nature, such those described in 5.3, 5.4, 5.5.2, which are repeated 
on a regular basis in accordance with quality management system requirements. 

5.2 Biological safety 

The biological safety of haemodialysers, haemodiafilters, haemofilters and haemoconcentrators that are 
intended to come into direct or indirect contact with the patient's blood shall be evaluated on samples of each 
new type of device prior to Its marketing, or after any change in the materials of construction of that type of 
device, or after any change In the method of sterilization. If labelled for multiple use, testing shall demonstrate 
the safety of the device before first use and after reprocessing according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
Testing shall be carried out in accordance with ISO 10993-1. ISO 10993-4. ISO 10993-7 or ISO 10993-11 as 
relevant. 

5.3 Sterility 

Compliance with the requirements in 4.2 shal! be verified by Inspection of the records to show that the device 
has been exposed to a validated sterilization process. 

5.4 Nonpyrogenicity 

Compliance with the requirement in 4.3 shall be verified In accordance with ISO 10993-11. 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

5.5 Mechanical characteristics 

5.5.1 Structural integrity 

5.5.1.1 General 

The requirements of 4.4.1 shall be verified by the following test methods. 

5.5.1.2 Positive-pressure test 

Completely fill the device with degassed water at (37 ± 1) °C. Seal all ports except the port to which pressure 
is applied. Apply a positive pressure 1,5 times the manufacturer's recommended pressure and seal the 
apparatus. After 10 min, record the pressure and examine the device visually for leaks. 

5.5.1.3 Sub-atmospheric pressure test 

Completely fill the device with degassed water at (37 ± 1) °C. Seal all ports except the port to which pressure 
is applied. Put the device under sub-atmospheric pressure, 1,5 times the manufacturer's recommended 
pressure, unless that sub-atmospheric pressure exceeds 700 mmHg or is not specified; in that case, apply a 
sub-atmospheric pressure of 700 mmHg and seal the apparatus. After 10 min, record the pressure and examine 
the device visually for leaks. 

5.5.2 Blood compartment integrity 

Compliance shall be determined by review of the validation records for the test procedure. 

5.5.3 Haemodialyser, haemodiafilter and haemofilter blood compartment ports 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.4.3 shall be determined by inspection. See Figure 1 and 
Figure 3. 

5.5.4 Haemodialyser or haemodiafilter diaiysate compartment ports 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.4.4 shall be determined by inspection. See Figure 2. 

5.5.5 Haemofilter filtrate ports 

Compliance with the requirements of 4.4.5 shall be determined by inspection and shall meet the requirements 
of Figure 2 or the requirements of ISO 594-2. 

5.5.6 Haemoconcentrator blood and filtrate ports 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.4.6 shall be determined by inspection and shall not separate 
under an axial force of 15 N. 

5.6 Performance characteristics 
5.6.1 Clearance 

5.6.1.1 General 

Compliance with 4.5,1 shall be determined as stated below. 



8 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 



Dimensions In millimetres 







s9 




2 










/ 




\ 




'/////y 


m^ 


%W/ 




\ 



06 -0.075 , 






o 




^ 0.06:1 




m 
rn 


r 


•© 




^^ 


y^77//////. 




8 
5.5 








>10 





Key 

1 outer cone 

2 inner cone 

Figure 3 — Gauge for measuring lengtli of engagement of the male cone of blood inlet 

and outlet connectors 

5.6.1 .2 Test solutions 

Perfuse the blood connpartment with a nornnal dialysate containing one or more of the test substances listed in 
Table 1 below. 

Perfuse the dialysate connpartment of haemodialysers and haemodiafilters with dialysate. 

NOTE The molar concentrations of the solutes listed in Table 1 vary depending on the test procedure. The listed solutes 
are only given as a starting point. 

Table 1 — Reference molar concentrations of test solutions 



Solute 


Molar concentration 


Urea, mmol/1 


15 to 35 


Creatinine, [xmol/l 


500 to 1 000 


Phosphate, mmol/l 


1 to 5, adjusted to pH 7.4 i 0,1 


Vitamin B12, p-mol/l 


15 to 40 



5.6.1 .3 Clearance test procedure 

Set up the test circuit as shown in Figure 4. Establish stable blood and dialysate flowrates. Make certain that the 
temperature, pressures and ultrafiltration rates are stable. Collect test samples after steady state has been 
reached, over the specified range of blood and dialysate flowrates. The ultrafiltration rate shall be stated for 
each condition. Analyse samples and calculate clearance according to the formula in 5.6.1 .4. 

NOTE A practical method of confirming the reliability of the measurement Is to monitor the mass balance error. 



9 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 














Key 

1 pressure control 

2 haemodialyser 

3 dialysis fluid supply system with ultrafiltration controller 

4 waste 

5 test solution reservoir 

6 blood pump 

7 gauge for j?bi, blood pressure, in 

8 gauge for pso, blood pressure, out 

9 gauge for poi, haemodialyser pressure, in 

10 gauge for poo, haemodialyser pressure, out 

Figure 4 — Diagram of open-loop system for measuring clearance of haemodialyser or haemodiafilter 

5.6.1 .4 Formula for calculating clearance 

For haennodialysis and haennodiafiltration, calculate the clearance, K, using Equation (1): 



K = Ubi H Qf 

\ Cbi / Cbi 

In the equation it is necessary to use the same units of concentration for Csi and Cbo- 
where 

Cbi is the concentration of solute on the blood inlet side of the haemodialyser or haemodiafilter; 

Cbo is the concentration of solute on the blood outlet side of the haemodialyser or haemodiafilter; 



(1) 



10 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

Qbi is the blood flowrate at the inlet of the device; 
Qf Is the filtrate flowrate (ultrafiltration rate). 

5.6.2 Sieving coefficient for haemofilters, haemodiafilters and haemoconcentrators 

5.6.2.1 General 

Compliance with 4.5.2 shall be determined according to the test below. 

5.6.2.2 Test solutions 

The preferred test fluid is anticoagulated bovine plasma with a protein content of (60 ± 5) g/l. 

Perfuse the blood compartment with a test fluid containing one or more of the substances listed in 4.5.2. 

5.6.2.3 Test procedure 

Set up the test circuit as shown in Figure 5. Establish stable (temperature, flowrate and pressure) blood and 
filtrate flows. Adjust the ultrafiltration rate to cover the manufacturer's specified range. Collect paired test 
samples of blood and filtrate fluid flows. Calculate sieving coefficient according to the formula In 5.6.2.4. 

5.6.2.4 Formula for sieving coefficient 

Cbi + Cbo 

where 

S is the sieving coefficient; 

Cbi is the concentration of solute on the blood inlet side of the haemodlafllter, haemofilter or 
haemoconcentrator; 

Cbo is the concentration of solute on the blood outlet side of the haemodlafllter, haemofilter or 
haemoconcentrator; 

Cf Is the concentration of solute on the filtrate side of the haemodiafilter, haemofilter or 
haemoconcentrator. 

In the equation it Is necessary to use the same units of concentration for cbi , cbo and cp. 



11 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 








D 



10 



u 










u 



UJ 



Key 

1 pressure control 

2 haemodialyser, haemodiafi!ter, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator 

3 filtrate pump 

4 filtrate 

5 test solution reservoir 

6 blood pump 

7 waste 

8 gauge for pso, blood pressure, out 

9 gauge forpei, blood pressure, in 

10 gauge for ppi, filtrate pressure 

Figure 5 — Diagram of system for measuring ultrafiltration or sieving coefficients of parallel-plate or 
hollow-fibre haemodialyser, haemodiafllter, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator 



12 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

5.6.3 Filtration rate 

5.6.3.1 Test solution 

The test solution shall be anticoagulated bovine or human blood, with a haematocrit of (32 ± 2) % and a protein 
content of (60 ± 5) g/l. 

No fluid shall perfuse the dialysate or filtrate compartment. 

5.6.3.2 Test procedure 

Set up the test circuit as shown in Figure 5. Establish stable (temperature, flowrate and pressure) blood and 
filtrate flows. Measure the ultrafiltration flowrate over the manufacturer's specified range. The sequence of 
measurement shall be from minimum to maximum transmembrane pressure. 

5.6.4 Volume of the blood compartment 

For hollow-fibre dialysers, the cell volume can be calculated from the dimensions of the dialyser and the number 
of fibres in the bundle. If the membrane is known to significantly change dimensions after wetting, the 
alternative method below should be used. 

Alternatively, fill the blood compartment with a fluid which is easily removable but will not pass through the 
membrane. Measure the volume of the fluid needed to fill the blood compartment. Perform measurements over 
the specified range of transmembrane pressures. If the blood compartment is noncompliant, measurement at a 
single pressure is acceptable. 

5.6.5 Pressure drop 

5.6.5.1 Pressure drop in the blood compartment 

5.6.5.1.1 General 

Compliance with 4.5.5.1 shall be determined using the following test method. 

5.6.5.1.2 Test fluids 

Fill the blood compartment with a test solution of anticoagulated bovine blood, with a haematocrit of (32 ± 2) % 
and a protein content of (60 ± 5) g/l or a fluid of similar viscosity. 

Fill the dialysate or filtrate compartment with normal dialysate. 

5.6.5.1.3 Test procedure 

Establish blood flowrate. Read the inlet and outlet pressures of the blood compartment. Determine the pressure 
drop. Repeat over the manufacturer's specified range of blood flowrates. 

For plate dialysers, it is also necessary to establish dialysate flowrates and measure pressures and blood 
flowrates. 

5.6.5.2 Pressure drop in the dialysate compartment 

5.6.5.2.1 Test fluids 

Fill the dialysate compartment with a test solution of normal dialysate. 



13 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

Fill the blood compartment with bovine blood and seal it. 

5.6.5.2.2 Test procedure 

Establish dialysate flowrates. Read the Inlet and outlet pressures to the dialysate compartment. Determine the 
pressure drop. Repeat over the manufacturer's recommended dialysate flowrate. 

For dialysers with compliant membranes, it Is also necessary to establish blood flowrates and measure 
pressures over the range of blood flowrates specified by the manufacturer. 

5.7 Expiration date 

Compliance with the requirements in 4.6 can be met by accelerated or real-time testing for biological safety, 
sterility and mechanical integrity of the device after storage for a period corresponding to the expiration date. 

6 Labelling 

6.1 Labelling on tlie device 

The device shall be labelled with at least the following information: 

a) the manufacturer's name; 

b) the proprietary device name; 

c) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

d) the lot number; 

e) the direction of blood flow and dialysate flow, if applicable; 

f) the maximum transmembrane pressure; 

g) the expiration date stated as mm/yyyy or yyyy/mm; 
h) the method of sterilization; 

I) a statement of single use, if appropriate. 

NOTE In all cases above, symbols from ISO 15223 may be used where appropriate. 

6.2 Labelling on the unit containers 

At least the following information shall be visible on or through the unit container: 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the proprietary device name; 

c) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

d) the lot number; 

e) a statement of sterility and nonpyrogenicity. There are three possibilities: 

1 ) that the entire contents of the package are sterile; 

2) the fluid pathways (blood and dialysate) are sterile; or 

3) that only the blood pathway is sterile; 

f) the method of sterilization; 

g) the expiration date stated as mm/yyyy or yyyy/mm; 
h) a statement of single use or multiple use; 



14 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

i) the statement, "Read the instructions before use"; 

j) if applicable, a statement that an ultrafiltration control machine is required. 

NOTE In all cases above, symbols from ISO 15223 may be used where appropriate. 

6.3 Labelling on the outer containers 

At least the following information shall appear on the outer container: 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the name and address of the distributor, if different from the information given under a), if applicable and in 
accordance with national requirements; 

c) the proprietary device name, description of contents and number of devices contained within the outer 
container; 

d) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

e) the lot number; 

f) a statement of sterility and nonpyrogenicity; 

g) Instructions and warnings regarding handling and storage; 
h) the expiration date, stated as mm/yyyy or yyyy/mm; 

i) a statement that an ultrafiltration control machine is required, if applicable. 

NOTE In all cases above, symbols from ISO 15223 may be used where appropriate. 

6.4 Accompanying documentation 

At least the following information shall be supplied with each outer container: 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the proprietary device name; 

c) directions for use: 

1) a statement to follow the machine manufacturer's instructions (if provided) for the orientation of the 
device in the support; 

2) the positioning of the extracorporeal circuit connection and, if appropriate, the positioning of the 
dialysate tubing connections; 

3) the recommended priming, rinsing and termination of haemodialysis, haemodiafiltration, haemofiltration 
or haemoconcentration procedures; 

4) the direction of blood flow, if applicable; 

5) a typical circuit diagram; 

6) the need for anticoagulation and a statement to follow the physician's prescription; 

7) details of any ancillary equipment required; 

d) cautions and warnings: 

1 ) pressure limitations; 

2) dialysate flow rate limitations (applicable only to haemodialysers and haemodiafilters); 

3) blood flow rate limitations; 

4) instructions to rinse the device as recommended before use; 

5) the need for any special equipment; 

6) a list of known adverse reactions; 



15 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 

7) a list of general and specific contra-indlcations, such as "Not recommended for paediatric use", "Do not 
use on non-de-aerated dialysate delivery systems"; 

8) appropriate warnings and contra-indlcations of diminished performance if the device is used below 
certain flowrates or below a certain pressure or in particular orientations (horizontal, vertical, etc.); 

e) the manufacturer's identifying code (catalog number) for the device; 

f) a statement of sterility and nonpyrogenicity and the method of sterilization; 

g) a statement of single use, or multiple use; if labelled for multiple use, a statement where data supporting 
multiple use may be obtained. If required by national or regional regulations, the data supporting reuse shall 
be Included in the package insert; 

h) performance data for the device shall be included or refenred to. Performance data for the dialyser shall 
include membrane surface area, clearances, sieving coefficient, ultrafiltration rates, ultrafiltration coefficient 
(A;uf), dialysate and blood side pressure drops, and blood-compartment volume for new devices; 

Performance data should include or make reference to 

1 ) a statement. If appropriate, that in vitro results are likely to differ from in vivo results, with an estimate of 
the magnitude of the difference, if known, 

2) a statement, if appropriate, that the performance may change with the duration of observation, 

3) the test methods used for determination of performance characteristics. 

i) Instruction for reprocessing of the dialyser, if so labelled. Instructions shall include but not be limited to 

1 ) instructions for header and o-ring disassembly, cleaning and assembly, if applicable, 

2) recommended reprocessing agents and processes, 

3) a method for determining chemical residuals before use, 

4) instructions on performance tests needed prior to reuse of the dialyser, 

5) a warning against the use of any agent or process known to adversely affect the dialyser, 

6) if labelled for reuse, a statement that the dialyser shall only be reused on the same patient, 

7) a statement, if applicable, of the effect of dialyser reuse on the performance of the dialyser. 
j) the generic name and. if applicable, the brand name of the membrane; 

The generic name of the membrane should include the complete chemical name of the membrane material. 

k) a general description of the device. This information should Include special features, such as filtration rates 
requiring special controllers or adverse effects of bubbles In the dialysate. 

I) the connectors recommended for the dialysate ports or filtration port; 

m) if blood compartment connectors are not as in Figure 1 and Figure 3, specify the type of blood tubing 
connectors that are compatible with the device; 

n) the generic names of materials of construction of the device intended for direct or indirect contact with 
blood. 

NOTE In all cases above, symbols from ISO 15223 may be used where appropriate. 



16 



IS/ISO 8637 : 2004 
Bibliography 



[1] ISO 15223, Medical devices— Symbols to be used with medical device labels, labelling and information 
to be supplied 

[2] ISO 11134, Sterilization of health care products^ Requirements for validation and routine control — 
Industrial moist heat sterilization 

[3] ISO 11135. Sterilization of health care products— Ethylene oxide— Requirements for development, 
validation and routine control of a sterilization process for medical devices 

[4] ISO 1 1 1 37-1 , Sterilization of health care products — Radiation — Part 1: Requirements for development, 
validation and routine control of a sterilization process for medical devices 

[5] ISO 14937, Sterilization of health care products— General requirements for characterization of a 
sterilizing agent and the development, validation and routine control of a sterilization process for medical 
devices 



17 



(Continued from second cover) 



International Standard 

ISO 10993-1 : 1992 Biological 
evaluation of medical devices — 
Part 1 : Evaluation and testing 

ISO 8638 : 2004 Cardiovascular 
implants and artificial organs — 
Extracorporeal blood circuit for 
haemodialysers, haemodiafilters and 
haemofilters 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

IS 1 2572 ( Part 1 ) : 1 994 Biological 
evaluation of medical devices: Part 1 
Guidance on selection of tests (first 
revision) 

IS/ISO 8638 : 2004 Cardiovascular 
implants and artificial organs — 
Extracorporeal blood circuit for 
haemodialysers, haemodiafilters and 
haemofilters 



Degree of Equivalence 
Identical 



do 



The technical committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standards referred 
in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this 
standard: 



International Standard 
ISO 10993-4: 2000 

ISO 10993-7: 2008 



Title 

Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 4: Selection of tests for 
interactions with blood 

Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 7: Ethylene oxide 
sterilization residuals 



ISO 10993-11 :2006 Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 11: Tests for systemic 

toxicity 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of imple- 
menting the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No. : MHD 06 (01 1 9). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 1 0002 

Telephones: 2323 01 31 , 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 1 2323 761 7 

NEW DELHI 1 1 0002 \ 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I. P. Road, Kankurgachi ( 2337 8499,2337 8561 

KOLKATA 700054 { 2337 8626, 2337 91 20 

Northem : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60022 1 260 3843 

(260 9285 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 (22541216,22541442 

(2254 2519,2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 ( 2832 7891 , 2832 7892 

Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANATHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Published by BIS, New Delhi 



