RAI UTAH IS 11315 (Part 12) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Tek ATA A gii Фф UTATEHCH TATARUT ch 
ali 
mr 12 Teer MR Test 


(чест TAT ) 


Methods for Quantitative Description 
of Discontinuities in Rock Masses 


Part 12 Drill Core Study 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.060 


© BIS 2023 


arie Arie St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR ЧӘЧ, 9 SEEL ЭТТЕ STR API, 95 Й - 110002 
Nese” МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in  www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 12) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


A series of Indian Standard on test methods for assessing the strength characteristics of rocks and rock masses 
are being developed/revised in view of recent advances in the field of rock mechanics. The majority of rock 
masses, in particular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the 
discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that structure of a rock 
mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified 
descriptions of rock masses and discontinuities. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ tests 
that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 


Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has 
zero or low tensile strength. Itis the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistosity 
planes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe 
discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number 
of sets and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on 
the discontinuities. 


It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described 
for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard, covering various parameters to describe 
discontinuities in rock masses. 


This standard (Part 12) covers the methods for quantitative description of discontinuities in rock masses for drill 
core study. This standard (Part 12) was first formulated in 1992. This revision incorporates the latest advancement 
and modifications based on the experience gained in the use of this standard. The other parts formulated in the 
series are: 


Part 1 Orientation 
Part 2 Spacing 
Part 3 Persistence 


Part 4 Roughness 

Part 5 Wall strength 

Part 6 Aperture 

Part 7 Filling 

Part 8 Seepage 

Part 9 Number of sets 

Part10 Block size 

Part ll Core recovery and rock quality designation 


This standard is based on suggested method of International Society for Rock Mechanics. Following standards on 
core drilling and core study have also been published by the BIS: 


IS 4464 : 2020 Code of practice for presentation of drilling information and core description in 
geotechnical investigation (second revision) 


IS 5313 : 2020 Guide for core drilling observations (second revision) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


(Continued on third cover) 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF 


DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 
PART 12 DRILL CORE STUDY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


The standard (Part 12) covers the method of 
quantitative description of discontinuities from drill 
core study. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. Any standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of these 
standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1269 Legal metrology — 
Material measures of length: 


(Part 1) : 1997 Woven metallic and glass fiber 


tape measures (second revision) 


(Part 2) : 1997 Steel tape measures 


IS 5529 Code of practice for in-situ 
permeability test: 


(Part 1) : 2013 Test in overburden (second 


revision) 
(Part 2) : 2006 Test in bedrock (second 
revision) 

IS 11315 Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock mass: 

(Part 4) : 2023 Roughness 
(Part 5) : 2023 Wall strength 


(Part 10): 2023 Block size 


(Part 11): 2023 Core recovery and rock quality 
designation 


IS 11358: 1987 Glossary of terms and symbols 


relating to rock mechanics 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definition of 
terms given in IS 11358 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Very high (nearly 100 percent) core recovery is 
necessary for accurate quantitative assessment of the 
discontinuity in a rock mass. This fact is illustrated 
by Fig. 1, Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 showing nearly 
100 percent core recovery in all the three drill holes. 
Suppose there is no core recovery for the zone 
‘X’ (extremely broken cores) and ‘Y’ (shattered 
cores) in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 respectively and if 
quantitative measurements are done only on the 
remaining portions of cores (with few 
discontinuities), it will show a different picture. 
Even if the zone marked ‘F’ in Fig. 1, is not 
recovered during drilling the main defect of the rock 
will remain unassessed. 


4.2 For quantitative descriptions of the discontinuities 
NX diameter (54 mm) or NQ diameter (48 mm) size 
cores shall be used. Recovery of high percentage of 
cores, irrespective of the nature of rock (hard, soft or 
highly fractured) depends on the techniques of 
drilling, applied pressure and the efficiency level of 
the drilling personnel. Generally good core recovery 
may be assured by adopting correct drilling 
techniques and special coring equipment. In this 
connection, the use of double or triple tube core 
barrel with bottom discharge bits would be found 
useful in ensuring the maximum possible core 
recovery in soft rock or fractured hard rock. Special 
drilling techniques in such cases may call for short 
runs of drilling and judicious control of water 
supply and speed of drilling. Core recovery may be 
ruined by drilling too fast, over drilling a run, or 
dropping core and grinding it, or not pulling out the 
tools when the barrel is jammed and thereby 
grinding the core. This also damages the bit. 
Vibration in the drill string causes poor core 
recovery, diamond losses in bits and shells, wear 
and tear on drills and loss of footage. 


IS 11315 (Part 12) : 2023 


4.3 Colour photographs provide a useful and 
convenient method of recording, the appearance of 
cores and are of considerable value as a permanent 
record land means of rapid reference. The 
photograph of each core box should incorporate a 
suitable metric scale along with the entire length of 
the box. 


4.4 The drill core can first be described by means of 
the following parameters: total appearance core 
recovery (R), discontinuity frequency (F), and rock 
quality designation (RQD). However, these 
parameters alone do not usually provide sufficient 
information for design purposes. 


4.5 Drill cores (and drill holes) represent line 
samples of the rock mass. Structural features such as 
discontinuity orientation, spacing and the number of 
sets cannot normally be adequately studied from one 
hole. 


4.6 Carefully planned and executed core drilling 
followed by detailed core description and hole 
inspection can provide approximate information 
about many of the ten specific rock mass parameters. 


4.7 Attitudes of the discontinuities may be measured 
in quantitative terms with reference to the long axis 
of the drill core. In case the drill hole is inclined, 
some corrections are necessary in the measured 
values depending upon the inclination of the drill 
holes or prior knowledge of the attitudes of the 
discontinuity from rock outcrops. 


4.8 Measuring tape of at least 3 m length calibrated 
in mm divisions and protractor, or similar scale 
equipment shall be used for measuring lengths and 
angles between the core axis and the 
discontinuities. The detail of measuring tape is 
given in IS 1269 (Part 1 and 2). 


4.9 Measurements in drill holes for collecting 
information on the discontinuities from drill core 
information, require the use of borehole periscope 
camera or TV camera or borehole imagery by 
acoustic methods. Water level measurements and 
water percolation tests conducted at regular intervals 
in the drill hole also provide proper information of 
the nature and intensity of discontinuity at depths. 


5 PROCEDURE 


5.1 At the beginning, the major geological features 
like the rock types, lithological boundaries and the 
geological structures should be examined. The 
details of the discontinuity in each run and in each 
rock type may then be carefully recorded. The nature 
of the discontinuity should also be identified. 


5.2 Total core recovery (R) defined as the summed 
length of all pieces of recovered core expressed as a 
percentage of length drilled should be accurately 
measured. When the core is highly fragmented the 
length of such portions is estimated by assembling 
the fragments and estimating the length of core that 
the fragments appear to represent [see IS 11315 
(Part 11)]. 


The cores in the box should be kept with proper care 
so that it represents the actual order of recording 
with reference to depths. Cores of each run should 
be kept separately using wooden blocks. The drill 
cores thus arranged in the core boxes should not be 
disturbed during transportation or by rough 
handling. 


5.3 Frequency (F) defined as the number of natural 
discontinuities intersecting a unit length of 
recovered core, should be counted for each metre of 
core. The procedure given in 5.4.1.1 may be 
followed to differentiate natural discontinuity from 
artificial one. 


5.4 Rock quality designation (RQD) is a modified 
core recovery percentage in which all the pieces of 
sound core over 10 cm long are counted as recovery, 
and are expressed as a percentage of the length 
drilled. The smaller pieces resulting from closer 
jointing, faulting or weathering are discounted 
[see IS 11315 (Part 11)]. 


5.4.1 RQD values should be determined for variable 
rather than fixed lengths of core run. Values of 
individual beds, structural domains, weakness 
zones, etc, should therefore be logged separately, so 
as to indicate any inherent variability, and provide a 
more accurate picture of the location and width of 
zones with low or zero RQD values. 


5.4.1.1 When estimating frequency or RQD from 
drill core it is necessary to discount artificial or 
mechanical breaks (fractures) caused by the drilling 
process, or handling when fitting core into the core 
boxes. The following criteria are suggested: 


a) А rough brittle surface with fresh cleavage 
planes in individual rock/minerals indicates 
an artificial fracture; 

b) A generally smooth or somewhat 
weathered surface with soft coating or 
infilling materials such as talc, gypsum, 
chlorite, mica or calcite obviously indicates 
a natural discontinuity; 

c) Inrocks showing well developed foliation, 
schistosity, cleavage or thin bedding, the 
cores may split easily during drilling or by 
wrong handling. It may be difficult to 
distinguish between natural discontinuities 


and artificial fractures. It is suggested that 
the questionable breaks should be counted 
as natural features, to be on the 
conservative side; 

d) Depending upon the drilling equipment and 
nature of rock formation part of the length 
of core being drilled may occasionally 
rotate with the inner barrels in such a way 
that grinding of the surfaces of 
discontinuities and fractures occurs. In 
weak rock types it may be very difficult to 
decide if the result in grounded surface 
represent natural or artificial features. 
When in doubt the conservative 
assumption should be made to assume that 
they are natural; and 

e) It may be useful to keep a separate record 
of the frequency of artificial fractures (and 
associated lower RQD) for assessing the 
possible influence or blasting on the 
weaker sedimentary and foliated or 
schistose metamorphic rocks. 


5.4.1.2 The degree of fracturing of the core during 
the drilling process may be partly a function of core 
diameter in the weaker rock types. As suggested in 
4.2, NX diameter (54 mm) or NQ diameter (48 mm) 
cores should be drilled to minimise fracturing. 
Smaller diameter like BX (41 mm) or AX (29 mm) 
causes more fractures and more core loss. 


5.4.1.3 The different types of measurements for core 
lengths have been illustrated in Fig. 4. A tip to tip 
measurement, ‘X’ may give double counting. The 
measure ‘Y’ which includes the total length of the 
full surface core ‘Z’ and half of the split portion may 
be adopted so that the total core recovery for all the 
pieces together is equal to the total recovery of the 
run. Then length, ‘Z’ alone may be considered for a 
conservative estimate. 


5.4.1.4 The results of core logging (frequency and 
RQD), can be time dependent and moisture content 
dependent in the case of certain varieties of shales 
and mudstones having relatively weakly developed 
diagenetic bonds and containing sulphide minerals. 
A frequent problem is ‘discing’ in which an initially 
intact core separates into discs on incipient places 
after exposure to nature. The phenomena are 
experienced in several different forms as follows: 


a) Stress relief cracking (and swelling) by the 
initially rapid release of strain energy in 
cores recovered from areas of high stress, 
especially in the case of shally rocks; 

b) Dehydration cracking experienced in the 
weaker mudstones and shales under 
atmospheric condition, may reduce RQD 
from 100 percent to O percent; and 


c) Slaking cracking experienced by some of 
the weaker mudstones and shales when 
subjected to wetting. 


5.4.1.5 The phenomena described in 5.4.1.4 make 
core logging of frequency and RQD unreliable. 
Whenever such conditions are anticipated core 
should be logged by an engineering geologist. An 
added advantage is that the engineering geologist 
can perform mechanical index tests such as the point 
load or Schmidt hammer test, while the core is still 
in a saturated state. 


5.5 Subsequent to the general procedure for logging 
total core recovery (R), frequency (F), and rock 
quality designation (RQD), the following 
supplementary procedures are suggested for 
determining as much quantitative data as possible 
concerning the following ten parameters: 


a) Orientation; 
b) Spacing; 

c) Persistence; 
d) Roughness; 

e) Wall strength; 


f) Aperture; 
g) Filling; 
h) Seepage; 


j) Number of sets; and 
k) Block size. 


5.6 Out of the above parameters mentioned in 5.5, 
spacing, roughness, wall strength and number of sets 
are measurable from the drill cores. The filling may 
be examined if the filled materials are recovered by 
the hole or if the recovery of the drill cores is cent 
percent as illustrated in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3. The other 
parameters like orientation, persistence, aperture, 
seepage and block size are best studied from the rock 
outcrops or in drift, adit or tunnel rocks; but use of 
borehole periscope, borehole camera or TV camera 
or bore hole imagery by acoustic methods and water 
injection tests help measurement of these parameters 
in drill cores or in drill holes. 


5.7 There is distinct relation of seepage/permeability 
with apertures. It is suggested to study results of 
water percolation tests in consideration of the core 
recovery percentage, RQD, spacing and frequency 
of discontinuities. This will help to understand the 
openness of the apertures, seepage, intensity and 
persistence of the discontinuity at depth in the drill 
holes. This fact has been illustrated in Fig. 5. In 
general low RQD indicates high fracture frequency 
or close spacing of discontinuities and if high order 
seepage/permeability is observed at same depth in 
the water injection test, it is indicative of open nature 
of fracture apertures (see Fig. 5). 


IS 11315 (Part 12) : 2023 


6 ORIENTATION 


6.1 Effort should be made to log the apparent 
orientation of discontinuities intersecting the core, 
using a protractor to measure the acute angles of 
intersections (Ө) relative to core axis (0 + 5°). If the 
relevant hole is vertical the angles (90° — Ө) will 
represent the true dip of the discontinuities, but 
without orientated core the dip direction will remain 
unknown. 


6.2 If two or more non-parallel drill holes have been 
drilled in a rock mass where there are recognisable 
markers such as bedding or foliation, the dip 
direction and dip of these features can be deduced 
using graphical techniques. But it may not be 
possible to measure true dips of all the fractures by 
this technique. 


6.3 If existing surface mapping has already indicated 
the approximate orientation of certain joint sets, then 
carefully orientated drill holes can be used to check 
the orientation of these features at depth. In the case 
of anticipated vertical and horizontal jointing it is 
helpful to drill steeply inclined holes (that is, 60°) in 
preference to 45°, so that the differently orientated 
sets can be recognised during core logging by their 
different core intersection angles 


6.4 The true orientation of discontinuities (dip 
direction and dip) may be obtained from a single 
drill core if orientation devices are employed during 
the drilling process, several methods are available: 


a) Orientation of the core based on the 
measured orientation in each run (Craclius 
method). This method works well if 
adjacent pieces of core can be matched. 
Zones of core loss and perpendicularly 
intersected discontinuities reduce the 
effectiveness of the method locally; 

b) Orientation of the core by means of a 
hardened steel groove scriber and compass 
photo device; and 

c) Integral sampling method in which the 
cores that are recovered have previously 
been reinforced with a grouted bar whose 
azimuth is known from positioning rods. 
The reinforcing bar is co-axially covered 
with a larger diameter coring crown. 


6.5 The orientation of discontinuities (dip direction 
and dip) may be obtained by drill hole inspection 
using special television cameras and periscopes, TV 
cameras may be oriented such that a discontinuity 
plane shows as a straight line on the CRT screen. 
The dip direction and dip may be readily 
determined. Cameras may be used to depths of 
400 m, though generally 150 m is seldom exceeded 


due to water pressure problems. Minimum hole size 
for the cameras is generally 76 mm. 


6.6 The borehole periscope may be used in smaller 
holes, but due to distortion of the optical path the 
depth is usually limited to about 30 m. 


6.7 Borehole Televiewer (BHTV) may be used for 
borehole imagery either be acoustic borehole 
imaging (ABI) or optical borehole imaging (OBI) 
to get true dip amount and dip direction. Correction 
for inclination of boreholes could be done during 
processing of borehole images. OBI could not be 
used if water filled in the borehole obstructs clear 
visibility. 


7 SPACING 


7.1 In rock with marked foliation or bedding features 
it should be possible to match the individual core 
pieces such that the actual spacing of obliquely 
intersected foliation joints, bedding joints or other 
regular intersecting joint sets may be estimated. The 
spacing (S) will depend on the length (L) measured 
along the core axis between adjacent natural 
discontinuities of one set, and the acute angle (8) 
that these features subtend with the core axis. Thus: 


S=Lsin0 


7.2 The angles (0) between the core axis and the 
individual joints of a given set will be inherently less 
reliable than these recorded from observations of 
rock exposures due to the possibility of joint 
undulation and roughness. 


7.3 When a joint set is intersected perpendicularly 
by the drill hole, spacing can obviously be measured 
directly since (S) is equal to (L). Thus a vertical drill 
hole will measure accurately the spacings of 
horizontal discontinuities. 


7.4 When the rock has no consistent or clear marker 
features, such as foliation or bedding, the estimation 
of spacing for any given set of joints will depend on 
the degree to which the core pieces can be matched. 
Zones of core loss will clearly frustrate this 
objective. However, if the joints that intersect the 
core have markedly different core intersection 
angles (Ө) and/or markedly different surface features 
(that is, mineral coatings, roughness) it may be 
possible to estimate the relevant spacings in a 
sufficient number of places along the core to make 
the exercise worthwhile. 


7.5 Borehole viewing devices that may be oriented 
(periscope, TV camera) shall clearly increase the 
reliability of spacing measurement. 


8 PERSISTENCE 


Unless holes are drilled in a very closely space 
pattern, as may be the case for operations such as 
grout curtain injection, it shall usually not be 
possible to access the persistence from drill core or 
drill hole observations. If closely spaced holes are 
available, very careful correlation of discontinuities 
shall be required before any reliable conclusions is 
drawn concerning the persistence of a given 
discontinuity or set. But persistence of certain major 
discontinuities like fault or shear zones or a contact 
of two rock units may be traced from the cores of 
several drill holes of the same locality. 


9 ROUGHNESS 


9.1 Gross features of discontinuity wall roughness 
and corresponding full scale shear strength may not 
obviously be assessed by means of drill core along. 
However, it is usually possible to assign to a surface 
some degree of planarity (planer, curved, irregular) 
and suggested procedure is broadly consistent with 
the roughness description in IS 11315 (Part 4). 


9.2 Roughness in core piece may be well studied 
from the surface of the natural fractures by visual 
observations or by profile gauge and comparison 
with the standard chart (for example, Barton’s chart) 
to measure the roughness by fixed number. 


9.3 Drill hole inspection with periscope or TV 
cameras shall not generally provide an improved 
picture of roughness unless the rock type is so weak 
and/or the drilling so poorly performed that grinding 
of the core pieces has occurred. 


10 WALL STRENGTH 


10.1 The individual methods for describing wall 
strength like weathering grade of rock mass, 
weathering grade of rock material, manual index 
tests and Schmidt hammer test in accordance with 
IS 11315 (Part 5) may also be applied to the 
description of drill core. 


10.2 Since the drill core provides a readymade line 
samples of rock mass, such features as the depth of 
penetration of weathering into the discontinuity 
walls can be directly observed and therefore 
described quite accurately. Furthermore, the drill 
core provides readymade samples for mechanical 
testing (that is, Schmidt hammer testing of rigidly 
clamped core pieces for describing wall strength or 
point load testing across the core diameter for 
describing material strength). Logging the point load 
strength index (/,) simultaneously with recovery of 
the core from the core barrels provide reliable 
estimates of in-situ strength. 


10.3 When assessing wall strength, care should be 
taken to check if the relevant core pieces fit together. 
Lack of fit may indicate lost filling material, shear 
displacement, or partial grinding away of strongly 
weathered walls during the drilling process. 


11 APERTURE 


11.1 The aperture of discontinuities is not preserved 
in rock cores and as such this parameter is not 
possible to measure unless undisturbed samples are 
available which will require special sampling 
techniques. 


11.2 Drill hole inspection using BHTV should be 
successful in distinguishing between the above tight 
and open categories, although it is unlikely that the 
apertures of the finest joints can be measured 
accurately. From the point of view of seepage 
potential, the open discontinuities are most 
important, so this limitation should be important 
where highly permeable rock masses are concerned. 
Methods are available for estimating the theoretical 
smooth wall apertures of water conducting 
discontinuities by statistical analysis of water 
injection tests. However, the real apertures may be 
several times the theoretical smooth wall apertures 
due to wall roughness and tortuosity effects. 


11.3 The most important factor for design purposes 
is the nature of aperture with respect to its openness. 
The water injection test results if considered with 
other factors like RQD and fracture frequency (as 
discussed in 5.7 and illustrated in Fig. 5) may be 
used to assess whether tight. 


12 FILLING 


12.1 Unless the integral quality drilling equipment 
sampling method or best is used (that is, double or 
triple tube core barrels, split inner tubes, and 
controlled flushing the softer filling materials are 
unlikely to be recovered in significant amounts. 
Possibly only traces of clay minerals shall be visible 
on the discontinuity walls sampled by conventional 
drill core. Both traces and larger amount of 
recovered filling should be described as to width, 
minerology and strength. The interpretative nature 
of these descriptions should be made clear. 


12.2 Where total core recovery is less than 
100 percent and is suspected that significant 
amounts of filling or weathered material has been 
lost in the drilling process attempts should be made 
to assess the thickness, location and orientation of 
the suspected filled zones. The drillers log 
describing the rate of advance and water loss, type 
of cutting and colour of flushing fluid may be 
invaluable here. 


IS 11315 (Part 12) : 2023 


12.3 The uncertainties surrounding the parameter 
filling and its extreme importance where 
deformation, stability and water seepage are 
concerned, strongly justify the use of special 
recovery techniques and the use of borehole viewing 
techniques. 


13 SEEPAGE 


13.1 Observations of drill core may provide indirect 
evidence of water seepage levels. Reddish-brown 
iron (Fe3*) staining usually indicates the zone of 
rock mass that lies above the mean ground water 
level. Oxidation in discontinuity walls lying beneath 
the ground water level may also occur, but at a 
greatly reduced rate. Frequently the strongest iron 
staining is found in the zone where the ground water 
level commonly fluctuates. 


13.2 Drill holes obviously provide the means of 
checking ground water levels directly using simple 
battery operated electrical contact devices which are 
lowered into the holes. Additional information on 
standing water levels should be obtained from the 
drillers log for each drill hole. Drill hole walls may 
be surveyed for seepage horizons using BHTV. 


13.3 Testing performed in drill holes that is falling 
head test [see IS 5529 (Part 1)], Lugeon Packer tests 
[see IS 5529 (Part 2)] tracer tests, piezometer 
measurements for estimating rock mass 
permeability, and for estimating the hydraulic 
conductivity of individual discontinuities also 
provide estimate of seepage along set of 
discontinuities. The logging and presentation of any 
available Lugeon values give important 
supplementary data, which may be presented as a 
log, parallel with that for total core recovery 
frequency and RQD, etc (see Fig. 5). 


13.4 Thermal borehole flowmetry tests can be used 
to measure the rate and the direction of water flow 
(from the rock mass towards the borehole or reverse) 
in the tested boreholes, this allows to identify water 
bearing fractures crossed by the considered holes as 
well as the flow pattern along the borehole. This 
allows for a first approximation of the hydraulic 
conductivity profile along the borehole as well as a 
preliminary quantification of the hydraulic gradients 
within the borehole. Thermal borehole flowmetry is 
generally used to measure very small flow rates and 
to identify hydraulic active fractures along a 
borehole. The type of flowmeter test consists in 
applying the heat pulse method to determine 
temperatures along the entire length by applying an 
artificial heat pulse. This test is always coupled to a 
caliper log, borehole imagery and electrical 
conductivity logging. 


14 NUMBER OF SETS 


14.1 The amount of information obtainable from 
drill core and drill hole observation will obviously 
depend on the orientation of the holes relative to the 
joint spacing. If existing surfaces mapping has 
already indicated the approximate orientation of 
certain discontinuity sets, then carefully oriented 
holes may be used to check the number of sets at 
depth. Drill core observation shall be easier if holes 
are drilled to intersect the different sets at 
recognisably different angles. Usually at least two 
non-parallel holes shall be required. 


14.2 The number of sets observed at the surface is 
likely to be more than the number observed at depth. 
Comparison of surface observations with tunnel 
excavations suggests that this is not just due to the 
limitations of drill hole sampling. 


15 BLOCK SIZE 


The term block size is a composite description of 
rock mass which is influenced by spacing, number 
of sets, persistence and orientation. A log of block 
size produced from observations of rock core may 
clearly only give an approximate picture of the true 
block size from drill core. It is desirable to select by 
eye several typical pieces of core and take their 
average dimensions (+ 10 percent). Each rock unit 
or domain may be assessed in this way. If the 
relevant hole is orientated such that all sets present 
are intersected (that is, a diagonal hole in the case of 
a cubic joint system) then these average core pieces 
shall roughly represent the block size index (1) as 
defined in IS 11315 (Part 10). A depth log showing 
the variation of this index may be very useful 
supplement to drill core description. 


16 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 


16.1 Core log format should be based on the specific 
requirements of the rock engineering project for 
which the core study is being done. Following 
should be used as check list, so that relevant 
information is included, but irrelevant data 
excluded. 


16.2 The following information should generally be 
furnished. This information may be written at the top 
of the log sheet/chart: 


a) Name of the project; 

b) Drill hole No.; 

c) Degree of inclination of the hole with 
direction in case of inclined hole; 

d) Collar elevation; 

e) Size of the core, NX, BX or AX, NQ etc; 

f) Type of drilling machine and accessories 
used; and 

g) Dates of starting and completion of the hole 
with total depth drilled. 


16.3 The log 


sheet/chart or diagrammatic 


representation data should the following parameters 
(see the illustration in Fig. 5) 


a) 


Rock type by symbols with traces of 
bedding/ foliation/ discontinuities 
representing approximate dip; 

Depths of each run of drill hole; 

Core recovery percentage of each run/or 
core recovery of particular rock type; 
Frequency (F) or number of sets; 

Rock quality designations (RQD); and 
Results of water injection test (preferably 
in Lugeon values). 


16.4 The other important data including the strength 
parameter which should be presented specially to 
satisfy the specific design requirements are as 


follows: 


a) 


b) 
c) 


d) 


e) 


Point load or Schmidt hammer tests for 
strength index; 

Block size index (Ip); 

Roughness number (comparing standard 
chart); 

Degree of weathering or slake-durability 
test in case of soft rock, for example, shale, 
mudstone; and 

Filling material including clay minerals. 


ЕС. 1 2.5 cm WIDE CRUSHED ZONE (F) WITH CALCITE AND MONTMORILLONITE EXCEPT THIS DISCONTINUITY 
(MAJOR DEFECT IN ROCK MASS) THE CORES OF THE REMAINING PORTIONS SHOW HIGH RQD AND LOW 
FREQUENCY OF DISCONTINUITIES 


F = Fault zone/shear zone 
N = Natural discontinuity 
A = Artificial discontinuity 


SKETCH OF FIG. 1 


IS 11315 (Part 12) : 2023 


x | 


FIG. 2 INTENSELY FRACTURED ROCK IN THE PORTION MARKED ‘X’ (4TH LINE). THERE IS ANOTHER ZONE OF 
FRACTURING IN 3RD LINE. BECAUSE OF THE FRACTURING THE OVERALL. RQD ID LOW AND FREQUENCY OR 
DISCONTINUITIES VERY HIGH 


FIG. 3 INTENSITY CRUSHED ROCK WITH CLAY FILLING OR CLAY GOUGE IN THE PORTION MARKED 
“Y? (4TH LINE) THE CORES IN THE REMAINING PORTIONS SHOW COMPETENT ROCKS WITH FEW 
DISCONTINUITIES 


INDEX 


FIG. 5 DIAGRAMMATIC REPRESENTATION OF ROCK TYPE WITH TRACE OF FOLIATION DIP, CORE 
RECOVERY, ВОР, FRACTURE FREQUENCY AND WATER TRANSMITTABILITY IN LUGEONS THROUGH THE 
FRACTURES/DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK OF THE DRILL HOLE AT DIFFERENT DEPTH 


IS 11315 (Part 12) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Technologies, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organisation, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Soil ś Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 


Dhanbad 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology - ISM, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 
Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Representative(S) 
DR М. K SAMADHIYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


LT COL ANIL RAJ 


SHRI G. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI DEV 
SHRI MAHABIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
DR S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


SHRI DARPAN TALWAR 
M. S. HARSHITHA (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


DR J. К. MOHNOT 
DRR. D. DWIVEDI (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRIR. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 
SHRI D. Р. DANGWAL (Alternate) 


PROF R. AYOTHIRAMAN 
PROF PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


PROF A. K. MISHRA 
DRR. K. SINHA (Alternate) 


DRC. S. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 


SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


IS 11315 (Part 12) : 2023 


Organization 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


National Highways & Infrastructure 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 


Development 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 


National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurugram 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


In Personal Capacity, (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, ACE 
Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida - 201310) 


In Personal Capacity (Naimex House, A-8, Mohan 
Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 
New Delhi - 110044) 


In Personal Capacity (Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21-C, 
Faridabad - 121001) 


In Personal Capacity (A-125. Prodhyagiki Apartment, 
Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi - 110059) 


In Personal Capacity (C-1004, Park View City-2, Sector- 49, 
Gurugram - 122018) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


JS (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate I) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYAK (Alternate П) 


DR A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH RAWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI VIJAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 


SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI Т. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. GOEL 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


DR MANOJ VERMAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www .standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (19675). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


