NAT HIAF IS 8888 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ygi Aa Ñ area amta aA anara AT 
adari — antafstent 


( FET GRIT ) 


Requirements of Low Income 
Housing for Urban Areas — Guide 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.040 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 4 


Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee, CED 51 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1978 on the recommendations of the Housing Ministry’s Conference held in 
1975. In this standard the requirements of that section of the population, who had very low family income and 
who really could not afford to build a house, was considered. Hence, the approach of this standard had been 
directed towards housing for the low income and not for low cost housing as such which might be needed by 
those having high income compared to others. The attempt, therefore, was made in this standard to find out how 
far low the requirements of housing could be brought down without jeopardizing certain safeties, namely, fire 
safety, health safety and structural safety. Though in this standard certain modifications have been attempted in the 
planning and general building requirements, requirements regarding structural safety, health safety and fire safety 
have been specified in accordance with the National Building Code of India. 


The standard was first revised in 1993 as IS 8888 (Part 1) : 1993 ‘Requirements of low income housing — 
Guide: Part 1 Urban areas’. It was decided to bring out the two more parts to cover such requirements for rural 
areas and slum upgradation. The first revision was taken up keeping in view the experience gained over the 
years by various housing organizations in implementing this standard. The following major modifications were 
incorporated in the first revision of the standard: 


a) Single room dwelling was discouraged; 
b) Guidelines for water seal latrine was incorporated; and 
c) Cluster planning approach was recommended. 


In this revision of the standard, following modifications have been incorporated: 


a) The standard has now been published as an independent standard considering that the requirements for 
low income housing in rural areas and slum upgradation may also be covered in separate independent 
standards. Accordingly, the title of the standard has been modified. 


b) Provisions have been aligned with those given for low income housing in urban areas in SP 7 : 2016 
‘National Building Code of India 2016’; 


c) Minimum plot size requirement has been reduced for mega cities; 

d) Requirement for community open space has been added; 

e) Option for planning based on net residential density has also been provided; 

f) Provision for off-street parking spaces has been added; 

g) Provision for four storeyed walk ups with future expansion possibility has been added; and 

h) Requirements for openings for lighting and ventilation have been modified. 
It is generally felt that planning and general building requirements would have an important bearing on cost of 
construction. Therefore, some relaxation vis-a-vis the provisions of National Building Code of India and also 


the generally understood planning norms according to master plans available have been recommended to 
achieve higher densities which are quite possible and achievable. 


This standard discourages plotted development since it would cost more in terms of land, except in the case 
of incremental housing and also site and services schemes. Instead, recommendations have been made for 
row housing and group housing on cluster planning approach. 


In so far as reduction in general building requirements are concerned, though it is difficult to justify all the 
relaxations made in their totality, it is felt that in the interest of cost of construction, without sacrificing any safeties 
mentioned, as also durability and quality of the built asset, some relaxations could be attempted. This must be 
clearly understood in the use of this standard and to that extent comfort would be reduced. 


In so far as specifications for low income housing are concerned, it is felt that the National Building Code of India 
gives a variety of specifications among which the cheaper ones could be chosen, where desired. Therefore, no 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 8888 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


REQUIREMENTS OF LOW INCOME 
HOUSING — GUIDE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard provides guidelines for the planning 
and general building requirements of low income 
housing in urban areas for houses having a maximum 
plinth area of 40 m? including future expansion. 


1.2 The requirements given in this standard for 
layout planning of low income housing colonies are 
applicable to public and private agencies/government 
bodies. 


1.3 The requirements given in this standard for design 
and construction of buildings for low income housing 
in approved layouts are applicable to all private and 
public agencies. 


1.4 SP 7, IS 12314 and IS 13727 are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 

12314: 1987 Code of practice for sanitation 
with leaching pit latrines in rural 
communities 

13727 : 2020 Requirements of cluster planning for 
housing — Guide (first revision) 

SP 7 : 2016 National Building Code of India 2016 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Cooking Alcove — A cooking space having 
direct access from the main room without any 
inter-communicating door. 


3.2 Covered Area — Ground area covered by the 
building immediately above the plinth level. The area 
covered by the following in the open spaces is excluded 
from covered area: 


a) Garden, rockery, well and well structures, 
plant nursery, water pool, swimming pool (if 
uncovered), platform round a tree, tank, fountain, 
bench Chabutra with open top and unenclosed on 
sides by walls and the like; 


b) Drainage culvert, conduit, catch-pit, gully pit, 
chamber, gutter and the like; 


c) Compound wall, gate, unstoreyed porch and 
portico, canopy, slide, swing, uncovered staircases, 
ramp, area covered by Chahhja and the like; and 


d) Watchmen’s booth, pump-house, garbage shaft, 
electric cabin or sub-stations and such other utility 
structures meant for the services of the building 
under consideration. 


NOTE — For the purpose of this standard, covered area equals 
the plot area minus the area due for open spaces. 


3.3 Density —The residential density is expressed in 

terms of number of dwelling units per hectare. 
NOTE — Where such densities are expressed exclusive of 
community facilities and provision of open spaces and major 
roads (excluding incidental open spaces), these will be net 
residential densities. Where these densities are expressed 
taking into consideration the required open space provision 
and community facilities and major roads, these would be 
gross residential densities at neighbourhood level, sector 
level or town level, as the case may be. The provision of open 
spaces and community facilities will depend on the size of the 
residential community. 


Incidental open spaces are mainly open spaces required 
to be left around and in between two buildings to 
provide light and ventilation. 


4 PLANNING 


4.1 Type of Development 


The type of development for low income housing 
shall be plotted development as row housing or group 
housing on cluster pattern (see IS 13727). 


4.2 Layout Pattern 


4.2.1 In the land to be developed, at least 75 percent 
of the plots may be of the size less than or up to 60 m? 


IS 8888 : 2020 


per dwelling unit in metropolitan towns and 100 m? 
in other towns and hill areas. Remaining 25 percent 
of the plots may be more than 60 m*. However, no 
plot shall be more than 200 m’. In case of group 
housing or flatted development, at least 75 percent 
units should have a plinth area (excluding external 
circulation, such as stairs, lifts, lobbies, etc) up to or 
not exceeding 40 m? including future expansion. 


4.2.2 The mix of plots of different sizes should 
have a wide range to accommodate the need of 
lower income group. The project may include more 
than one site provided they are in the same 
neighbourhood. 


4.2.3 The layout should generally conform to the 
following land use: 


Sl Land Use Percentage of Land 
No. Under Each Use 
— 
General Hill 
Area 
() (2) (3) (4) 


i) Saleable: 


a) Residential 50 percent 35 


minimum percent 
b) Work places, 20 percent 15 
schools, institu- maximum percent 
tions, shops, 
community places, 
etc 


ii) Non-saleable: 


Roads, pedestrian paths, 
drains, public and semi- 
public open spaces 


30 percent 50 
maximum percent 


NOTES 


1 Any neighbourhood development should have provision 
for basic civic and community facilities, however, where 
such facilities are available in proximity the same could be 
considered and, in that case, the area under residential use 
could be increased correspondingly. 


2 If land required under statutory provisions of master plan/ 
development plan is proportionately higher but serves larger 
city needs, readjustment of the recommended land use 
pattern can be considered. Such provisions should, however, 
be carefully reviewed by the planning authorities to keep 
them to the barest minimum levels. 


4.3 Plot Area 
4.3.1 Plot Size 


The minimum plot size with ground coverage not 
exceeding 75 percent, shall not be less than 40 m? in 
small and medium town and not less than 30 m° in 
metropolitan cities. Plot sizes below 30 m° but not less 


than 15 m? may be permitted in case of cluster planning, 
however, in such cases the ground coverage and FAR 
shall be 100 percent and 2, respectively (see also 
IS 13727 for special requirements for cluster planning 
for housing). 


NOTES 


1 In exceptional cases in metropolitan cities with population 
more than | million, the size of plots may be brought down 
to 25 m? in cases of low income housing colonies located in 
congested areas as decided by the Authority. In mega cities it 
may be further reduced to 15 m?. In such cases where plot size 
is below 25 m?, only cluster planning or group housing may be 
adopted. 

2 A minimum of 25 percent of the plot size shall be left open 
without adversely affecting light and ventilation for habitable 
spaces and toilet. It shall not be made mandatory to leave set 
back on any side. 


4.3.2 Minimum Frontage 


The minimum frontage of the plot shall be 3.6 m in 
width. 


4.4 Density 


4.4.1 The density norms for plotted development and 
mixed development shall be as follows: 


SI Type of Development Range of Densities 
No. (Gross) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Plotted development 65-120 plots per 
hectare 


ii) Mixed development: 


a) Small towns 75-100 dwelling units 


per hectare 


b) Cities 100-125 dwelling 
units per hectare 
c) Metropolitan cities 125-150 dwelling 


units per hectare 


NOTE — The Planning Authorities may adopt and specify 
the Gross/Net Residential Density based on the scale and 
size of the community planned for (see Note under 3.3). In 
case net residential density has been specified, provision 
of open spaces and community facilities shall be made 
by the Authority depending on the size of the residential 
community. 


4.4.1.1 In case of developments with per dwelling unit 
covered area of 15 m’, four storeyed walk ups without 
future incremental growth with maximum densities of 
500 dwelling units per hectare shall be permissible. In 
case of four storeyed walk ups, having two roomed 
dwelling unit where one room is for future expansion, 
maximum density of 400 dwelling units per hectare 
shall be permissible. 


4.5 Height of Building 
The height of building shall not exceed 15 m. 


NOTES 
1 For buildings up to this height of 15 m, there is no need to 
provide lifts. 


2 Housing for the low income group shall be preferably be up 
to a maximum of two storeys. 


3 Building for housing beyond 15 m in height should be 
resorted to in exceptional circumstances and it should be 
governed by provisions laid down in SP 7. 


4.6 Cluster Planning 


For size of open cluster, and cluster open space, 
setbacks, vehicular access, and pedestrian paths in 
cluster planning, the provisions given IS 13727 shall 


apply. 
4.7 Community Open Space 


4.7.1 In any layout or sub-division of land measuring 
0.3 hectares or more in residential zone, the community 
open spaces shall be reserved for recreational purposes 
which shall as far as possible be provided in one place 
or planned out for the use of the community in clusters 
or pockets. 


4.7.1.1 The community open spaces shall be provided 
catering to the needs of area of layout, population for 
which a layout is planned and the category of dwelling 
units. The following minimum provision shall be made 
for low income housing: 


a) 15 percent of the area of the layout, or 
b) 0.3 hectares/ 1 000 persons. 


4.7.2 No recreational space shall generally be less 
than 450 m?. 


4.7.2.1 The minimum average dimension of such 
recreational space shall be not less than 7.5 m; if 
the average width of such recreational space is 
less than 24 m, the length thereof shall not exceed 
2.5 times the average width. However, depending on 
the configuration of the site, commonly open spaces of 
different shapes may be permitted by the Authority, as 
long as the open spaces provided serve the needs of the 
immediate community contiguous to the open spaces. 


4.7.2.2 In such recreational spaces, a single storeyed 
structure as pavilion or gymnasia up to 25 m° in area 
may be permitted; such area may be excluded from 
FAR calculations. 


4.7.3 Each recreational area and the structure on it shall 
have an independent means of access. Independent 
means of access may not be insisted upon if recreational 
space is approachable directly from every building in 
the layout. Further, the building line shall be at least 3 m 
away from the boundary of recreational open space. 


IS 8888 : 2020 


5 GENERAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 General 


The requirements of parts of buildings shall be as 
given in 5.2 to 5.9. The provisions contained in 
Part 3 ‘Development control rules and general building 
requirements’ of SP 7 shall apply excepting for the 
specific provisions given in this standard. 


5.2 Plinth 


The minimum height of the plinth shall be regulated on 
the basis of environmental and topographical condition 
and higher plinth height may be required in areas prone 
to flooding. 


5.3 Size of Room 
5.3.1 Habitable Room 


Every dwelling unit to be provided should have at least 
two habitable rooms. Even if one room house is provided 
initially it should be capable of adding a new second 
room in future. However, in case single room tenements 
are required to be provided where future additions are 
not possible, the carpet area of the multi-purpose single 
room, should be at least 12.5 m*. One room dwelling 
units with 12.5 m° carpet area of habitable space is 
permitted only in case of on-site rehabilitation of slum 
dwellers. In a house of two rooms, first room shall 
not be less than 9.0 m? with minimum width of 2.5 m 
and second room shall be not less than 6.5 m? with a 
minimum width of 2.1 m provided the total area of 
both the rooms is not less than 15.5 m’. In incremental 
housing, the bigger room shall always be the first room. 


5.3.1.1 To facilitate incremental housing in case of 
flatted development or otherwise, habitable space at 
mezzanine level may be permitted. The minimum size 
of such a mezzanine floor should not be lesser than 
6.5 m’and such a floor should occupy not more than 
50 percent of the room area of which it is a part. Such 
a mezzanine floor should have appropriate openings to 
facilitate light and ventilation as per 5.6 of this standard. 
Minimum clear height below and above the mezzanine 
floor should be 2.4 m and 2.1 m, respectively. 


As far as possible mezzanine floor should have direct 
ventilation from the external face of the building. 
Where this is not possible, ventilation through main 
room maybe allowed provided total area of openings 
in the main room is provided taking into consideration 
area of mezzanine floor. 


Such mezzanine floor may be accessible through the 
main room by a ladder, whose minimum angle with 
vertical plane should be 22.5°. Height of the riser 
should be less than 250 mm. 


IS 8888 : 2020 


5.3.2 Water -Closet/ Bath Room 


a) The size of independent water-closet shall be 
0.90 m? with minimum width of 0.9m; 


b) The size of independent bath room shall be 
1.20 m? with minimum width of 1.0 m; and 


c) The size of combined bathroom and water-closet 
shall be 1.80 m? with minimum width of 1.0 m. 


5.3.3 Kitchen 


The size of a cooking alcove serving as cooking space 
shall not be less than 2.4 m? with a minimum width 
of 1.2 m. The size of individual kitchen provided in 
tworoomed house shall not be less than 3.3 m? with a 
minimum width of 1.5 m. 


5.3.4 Balcony 


The width of individual balcony, where provided 
shall be 0.9 m and shall not be more than 1.2 m and it 
shall not project beyond the plot line and on roads or 
pathway. 


5.4 Minimum Height 


The minimum height of rooms/spaces shall be as 
follows: 


a) Habitable room 2.6m 
b) Kitchen 2.6m 
c) Bath/ water-closet 2.1m 
d) Corridor 2.1m 


5.4.1 In the case of sloping roofs, the average height 
of roof for habitable rooms shall be 2.6 m and the 
minimum height at eaves shall be 2.0 m. 


5.5 Lighting and Ventilation 


The openings through windows, ventilators and other 
openings for lighting and ventilation, excluding the 
doors inclusive of frames shall be not less than, 


a) one-tenth of the room floor area for dry-hot 
climate; 


b) one-sixth of the room floor area for warm-humid 
climate; 


c) one-eighth of the floor area for temperate and 
composite climate; and 


d) one-twelfth of the floor area for cold climate. 


NOTES 
1 If window is partly fixed, the openable area shall be counted. 


2 No portion of a room shall be assumed to be lighted, if it is 
more than 7.5 m away from the opening assumed for lightning 
that portion. 

3 The area of openings as given in (a) to (d) above shall be 
increased by 25 percent in the case of kitchen. 

4 The windows and other openings shall abut on to open spaces 
either through areas left open within the plot or the front, side 
and rear spaces provided in the layouts which shall be treated 
as deemed to be sufficient for light and ventilation purposes. 


Wherever ventilation/lighting is provided by means of JALI or 
grills of any material, total area of openings shall be calculated 
excluding solid portion of the jali or grill. 


5.6 Stairs 


The following criteria shall be adopted for internal 
individual staircase: 


a) Minimum clear width: 


1) 2 storeyed — straight : 0.60 m 

2) 2 storeyed — winding :0.75 m 

3) 3 or more storeyed — straight : 0.75 m 

4) 3 or more storeyed— winding :0.90m 
b) Riser : 200 mm, Max 
c) Tread: 

1) 2 storeyed : 225 mm, Min 

(see Note) 

2) 3 storeyed or more : 250 mm, Min 

d) Head Room — The minimum clear headroom 


shall be 2.1 m. 


NOTE — This could be reduced to 200 mm as the clear tread 
between perpends, with possibility of open riser as well as 
nosing and inclined riser to have an effective tread of 225 mm. 


5.7 Circulation Area 


Circulation area on any floor including staircase shall 
not exceed more than 8 m?/dwelling unit. 


5.8 Water Seal Latrine 


5.8.1 No building plan shall be approved and no 
building shall be deemed to have been completed and 
fit for human occupation unless provision is made for 
water seal latrine. No dry latrine shall be allowed. All 
efforts should be made to provide one toilet for each 
dwelling unit. Water seal latrines can also be provided 
on the basis of community toilets or shared toilets as 
given in IS 13727 and in 5.8.1.1. 


5.8.1.1 In cluster housing for economically weaker 
section families, group toilets at the rate of one water- 
closet, one bath and a washing place for three families 
may be provided. These shall not be community toilets, 
as keys to these toilets shall be only with these three 
families, making them solely responsible for the 
maintenance and upkeep of these toilets. 


5.8.2 Efforts to use decentralized waste water system, 
faecal sludge management system along with hygienic 
safe sludge disposal system as given in SP 7 should be 
made. Sanitary sewer with septic tank and soak pit or 
sanitary sewer with sump pump and sewage treatment 
plant can also be used. 


5.8.3 Where leaching pits, are used, it should be 
constructed within the premises of the households as it 


would be economical as well as facilitate their cleaning. 
However, where, due to space constraint, construction 
of pits within the premises may not be possible, pits 
may be constructed in places like lanes, streets and 
roads. Twin leaching pits should be preferred over 
single leach pits. 


5.8.3.1 In case the pit is located under the road, street or 
foot path the inverted level of the pipe connecting the 
level of the pipe connecting the latrine pan with the pit 
shall be at least 1.1 m below ground level or below the 
bottom of the water main existing within a distance of 
3 m from the pits whichever is more. For construction 
of such pits, IS 12314 may be referred. 


5.8.5 The water seal latrine should be properly 
maintained and kept in sanitary condition by the 
owner or the occupier. The contents of the septic tanks, 
soak pits, leach pits, twin leach pits, etc, should be 
periodically emptied. 


The leach pits should be cleaned only after 2 years of 
their being put out of service after they were full. 


6 ROADS AND PATHWAYS 


6.1 The area under roads and pathways in such housing 
projects should normally not exceed 20 percent of the 
total land area of the project. 


6.1.1 Access to the dwelling units, particularly where 
motorised vehicles are not normally expected should be 
by means of paved footpaths with a right of way of 6 m 
and a pathway of 2 m only. The right of way should be 
adequate to allow for the plying of emergency vehicles 
and also for road side drains and plantation. 


6.1.2 Where pedestrian pathways are not meant for 
motorable access to the minimum, right of way of 
such pedestrian pathway shall be 3 m. Where houses 
are accessible from one side only, pathway can be 2 m 
width. The maximum length of such pathways should 
not be more than 60 m. 


7 OTHER REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 Requirements of fire safety, structural design, 
building services and plumbing services shall be as 
specified in SP 7. Luminaries for road and street lighting, 
flood lighting, external hydrant system consisting of 
water storage, pumping system and hydrant system, 
boundary walls/fencing, landscaping and plantation 
shall be provided as per the relevant provisions of SP 7. 
NOTE — All efforts should be made to provide maximum 
amenities/benefits in low income housing within the 
estimated cost of such houses. For achieving the aim of 
providing higher quality of life and to ensure higher order of 
operational efficiency at affordable cost, as also environmental 
sustainability, measures such as integrated waste management, 


IS 8888 : 2020 


water conservation including rainwater harvesting, integrated 
multi modal public transportation, energy generation from 
renewable resources like sun and wind, use of passive 
technologies for energy generation, use of eco-friendly 
materials, etc may be adopted. 


7.2 One water tap per dwelling units may be provided, 
where adequate drinking water supply is available. If 
supply is inadequate, public hydrants shall be provided. 
In the absence of piped water supply, hand pumps may 
be used for provision of water supply. 


7.3 Recognizing the need for informal use of space 
for shopping and informal occupation like, road side 
repairs, pan shops etc, it is suggested that about 1/4 of 
the total shopping area in a layout should be reserved 
for such informal uses to cater to the needs of low 
income families. 


7.4 Off-Street Parking Spaces 


Off-street parking space for motorcycle/scooter/two- 
wheeler and bicycle to be not less than 1.25 m? and 
1.00 m’, respectively shall be provided at the rate of one 
for each tenement. In case of cluster planning, parking 
space may be provided at community level. In such a 
case, in addition to the parking space to be provided 
as above for each tenement, space provisions shall be 
made for other types of vehicles such as ambulance and 
disaster management vehicle, and also for additional 
spaces required for other vehicles, which shall be as 
decided by the, keeping in view the nature of traffic 
generated in the city. 


7.5 The infrastructural services shall be provided before 
the plots are handed over to individual owners. 


8 SITE AND SERVICES SCHEMES 


8.1 The developed plot sizes shall be as specified 
in 4.3. Services should be laid by the agency concerned 
as per the provisions of SP 7. In so far as roads and 
pathways are concerned they should be in line with 6. 


8.2 Site and services schemes should provide for the 
following: 


a) Complete infrastructural needs for a permanent 
housing, on the periphery of individual plot or a 
group/cluster plots; 

b) Aservice sanitary core in the plot; 

c) A skeletal structure of columns and roof or a 
developed plinth; and 

d) Permission to allow temporary construction on the 
plot. 

While provisions in 8.2 (a) and 8.2 (d) are essential in 
site and services projects provisions, recommendations 
in 8.2 (b) and 8.2 (c) are additional provisions depending 
upon affordability. 


IS 8888 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


Composition of Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee, CED 51 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity Usavasyam TC 18/1023, SHRI V. SuRESH (Chairman) 
B-8/2, Lakshmi Nagar, Kesavadasapuram, 
Pottam P.O, Thiruvananthapuram 695 004) 
Army Welfare Housing Organization, New Delhi Bric PrANv Dev 
Cot Pankaj Mitta (Alternate) 


B. G. Shirke Construction Technology Limited, Suri V. G. JANA 


Pune SHRI YOGESH P. KAJALE (Alternate) 
Bhardwaj Bhardwaj & Associates (P) Ltd, SHRI A. BHARDWAJ 
New Delhi 
Biltech Building Element Ltd, New Delhi SHRI RAJDEEP CHOWDHURY 
Suri D. V. KULKARNI (Alternate) 
Border Roads Organization, New Delhi Suri A. P. PITTULE 
Building Materials and Technology Promotion DR SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 


Council, New Delhi 


Central Government Employees Welfare Housing SHRI BHUPINDER SINGH 
Organization, New Delhi SHRI M. NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI MANU AMITABH 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


City and Industrial Development Corporation of | Suri S. K. CHOTALIA 


Maharashtra Limited, Navi Mumbai Dr K. M. Gopsote (Alternate) 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Dr ASHOK KUMAR 

Roorkee Suri S. K. Nea! (Alternate) 
CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Dr J. PRABHAKAR 

Chennai Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi ENGINEER MEMBER 

COMMISSIONER (PLANNING) (Alternate) 

Delhi State Industrial & Infrastructure SHRI BHAVESH GUPTA 

Development Corporation, Delhi SHRI MANISH SAGAR (Alternate) 
Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, SHRI S. K. MAHAJAN 

New Delhi SHRI JEET Ram (Alternate) 


Department of Science & Technology, Ministry DR DEBAPRIYA DUTTA 
of Science & Technology, New Delhi 


Development Alternatives, New Delhi Ms ZEENAT NIAZI 
Dr Soumen Marty (Alternate) 


Engineering Consultants (India) Ltd, New Delhi SHRI SUKHBIR SINGH MANN 
SHRI ADITYA SHARMA (Alternate) 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI SAMIR Das 
SHRI ANISH Kunbu (Alternate) 


G.B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & SHRI KIREET KUMAR 


Development, Almora Dr Varun Josui (Alternate) 
Himachal Pradesh Urban Development SHRI DINESH KASHYAP 

Authority, Shimla SHRI DEWAN C. SHARMA (Alternate) 
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi SHRI RAJESH GOEL 


Suri S. K. Jain (Alternate) 


Organization 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Green Building Council, Hyderabad 


Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineers- in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


Ministry of Rural Development, Govt of India, 
New Delhi 


Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development 
Authority, Mumbai 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Housing Bank, New Delhi 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


North Eastern Council, Shillong 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shirish Patel and Associates Consultants Pvt 
Limited, Mumbai 


Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Telangana State Housing Corporation Limited, 
Hyderabad 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


Town and Country Planning Organization, 
New Delhi 


Ultratech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 8888 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI AKHILESH KUMAR 


Suri M. ANAND 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR Soma (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. KULSHRESTHA 


Suri K. P. RAGHAVAN 
SHRI S. KANAPPAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI AMIT BARDE (Alternate II) 


SHRIMATI Rivoo MAHENDRU 
SHRI S. K. Misura (Alternate) 


Suri D. S. NEGI 
SHRI ZILE SINGH DisHnonia (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Ms Uma ADUSUMILLI 
SHRI VISHRAN G. Parıl (Alternate) 


Suri B. P. RANGA Rao 

Suri Amit TRIVEDI (Alternate) 
SHRI K. CHAKRAVARTHY 

SHRI VISHAL GoyaL (Alternate) 
SHRI ALOK MAHAWAR 

SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL (Alternate) 
Suri P. K. H. SINGH 

Suri Dosa Jini (Alternate) 
Dr P. S. N. Rao 

Dr Aruna R Grover (Alternate) 
Suri N. M. AJuGIA 

SHRI P. S. BADRINARAYAN (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAY GUPTA 
SHRI PRAVEEN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI CH MALLIKARJUNA RAO 
Sur! P. SRIRAMULU (Alternate) 


SHRI BALBIR VERMA 
Suri Divya Kusu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI SUDEEP Roy (Alternate) 


Dr VENKATACHALAIAH RAMACHANDRA 
SHRI SRINIVASA GOVINDAPPA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 


ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CiviL ENGINEERING), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


attempt is being made to recommend any particular specification for this type of housing; it is entirely up to the 
concerned agency to decide what specifications they would provide in relation to the total cost of the unit keeping 
in view the performance requirements. 


To get the maximum benefit out of these relaxations, mass housing schemes may be considered for such type 
of housing so that system building and other techniques would become possible, where necessary and cost of 
construction reduced. 


This standard would be kept under constant review and revised provisions may have to be brought out from time 
to time based on experience resulting from implementation of the standard. 


This standard applies essentially to permanent structures except in the case of site and services scheme. 


For maintaining and preserving the environment so created by this housing, it is necessary that the authorities 
themselves assume the responsibility of management of the open spaces. In the event it is not always possible 
to do so, appropriate cooperative societies or other mechanisms could be attempted to see that the open spaces 
provided are utilized for the purpose for which they are meant. 


In preparing this standard, it is pointed out that this should be applicable to: 


a) local bodies for suitably adopting these provisions in their local building byelaws/ regulations for 
providing low income housing; 


b) layout planning of low income housing colonies by all private and public agencies; and 


c) designing and construction of buildings under low income housing either by public agencies, government 
bodies or by private builders. 


This standard provides for incremental housing. This would mean that in the case of housing for low income 
groups where the construction of a unit cannot be completed at one time depending on there source of the family 
they should be permitted to add another room at a later stage. For this purpose it has been felt necessary to give 
scope for incremental housing which would permit both horizontal and vertical increment. 


It is felt that site and services schemes should generally follow the pattern of low income housing and therefore 
it is suggested that the plot size should be limited to 40 m? in normal areas and 25 m’ to 30 m? for metropolitan 
cities and the services should be provided by the public agencies. Here again, the road and pathways have been 
brought down to the level recommended for low income development. 


Having provided site and services, the authorities may decide to provide wherever possible a skeletal structure of 
columns and a roof or a developed plinth so that the owner of the site could build up the rest depending upon his 
resources. Here again, the question of maintenance of open spaces and services would be of great importance and 
the public agency should take responsibility for the same. 


The experience and feedback of sites and services schemes, recently executed in country, have revealed that 
some of the schemes are designed only for providing developed plots. They neither provide the optimum 
level of quality of living in terms of physical and social environment nor do they help beneficiaries of 
economically weaker section (EWS) of the community by providing them benefits of differential pricing based 
on the principle of cross subsidization. Studies on other schemes, particularly those financed by World Bank, 
have revealed that the provision of commercial and industrial land use in the schemes provides an integrated 
environment and helps in reducing the price of EWS plot to be within the affordable limits of weaker section. 
Besides this, integration of housing area with commercial and industrial land uses renders it to be self-supporting 
and also offers the residents, facilities existing in the heart of the city. The minimum plot size should however be 
formulated, keeping in view, the built up spaces at the ground floor and the environment requisites. 


The composition of the technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 51 (13082). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


