( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
VERNIER THEODOLITE SPECIFICATION

f First Revision /

ICS

17*180*30

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

November 1995

Price Group 4

Optical

and Mathematical

Instruments

Sectional

Committee,

LM 20

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian draft finalized by the Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. Standards, after the had been approved

Theodolite is an instrument for precise measurement of horizontal and vertical angles. The vernier theodolite is provided with graduated horizontal and vertical circles and two small vernier scales. The vernier scales are movable and remain in sliding contact with the graduated circles. The vernier theodolite is not so precise as other advanced designs, such as optical theodolite but is still used largely due to lower cost and simplicity of design. Vernier theodolite may be used for all types of survey\ required for small and large scale mapping. This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards dealing with surveying instruments. Indian Standard has also been prepared to cover the requirements of optical theodolites !964 `Optical theodolite' ). A separate ( IS 2976 :

The standard was originally published in 1965 and since then three amendments have been issued. There have been changes in the referred Indian Standard. In the present revision, besides, incorporating all the amendments and updating the reference of Indian Standards, the sensitivity of azimuth bubble and altitude bubble have been modified. Jolting test has been renamed as drop test for better understanding. This standard is intended chiefly does not include all the necessary to cover the technical provisions provisions of a contract. relating to vernier theodolite and it

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rrvised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value rn this standard.

IS 2988 : 1995

Indian Standard

VERNIERTHEODOLITESPECIFICATION (First Revision )
I SCOPE
1.1 This standard covers the functional and general requirements of vernier theodolites. The theodolite shall be referred to not by the size of its horizontal circle but by the least count of its vernier, such as vernier theodolite of 20 seconds: A typical vernier theodolite is shown in Fig. 1. IS No.

Title

10236 Procedure for basic climatic and ( Part 14 ) : 1986 durability tests for optical instruments : Part 14 Driving rain test (Reaffirmed 1991 ) 10236 Procedure for basic climatic and (Part 15 ) : 1986 durability tests for optical instruments : Part 15 Drop test (Reaffirmed 1991 ) 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. 3.1 Alidade T'he term alidade is applied to the whole of that part of the theodolite that rotates with the telescope. 3.2 Centring Bringing the vertical axis of the theodolite immediately over a mark on the ground or under a mark overhead. 3.3 Dark Glasses Coloured glasses used over the eyepiece to protect the eye during observation of the sun. 3.4 Diagonal Eyepiece the following

An eyepiece fitted with a reflecting prism to reflect the rays of light at right angles to the ordinary line of sight and is used for astronomical and high angle observations. FIG. 1 VERNIERTHEODOLIE 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard : IS No. 988 : 1959 1632: 1993 1764 : 1961 Title General requirements for optical components ( Reaffirmed 1991 ) Optical instruments-BubblesSpecification (first revision ) Trough 1991 ) compass ( Reaffirmed 3.5 Least Count Measure resolve. 3.6 Limb The limb consists of the vertical axis, the horizontal circle and the illumination system. 3.7 Standard Two vertical arms of the theodolite which bear the transit axis, telescope, vertical circle and vernier frame. 3.8 Striding Level of the smallest unit which a vernier will

Procedure for basic climatic and 10236 ( Part 11 ) : 1985 durability tests for optical instruments : Part 11 Vibration test (Reaffirmed 1990 )

Asensitive level mounted at right angle to the telescope axis and used mainly in astronomical observations for levelling the horizontal axis or measuring any error ill the level of the axis.

IS 2988 : 1995 3.9 Transit, Horizontal or `kunnion Axis The axis about which the telescope and vertical circle rotate. 3.10 tinsit 5pe Theodolite 5.1 lkibrach This shall be so designed as to accommodate the theodolite or a target or a subtense bar, without affecting the centring and levelling of the tribrach. 5.1.1 A clamp which should be firm and non-slipping shall be provided for locking the tribrach with the theodolite or the target or the subtense bar. 5.1.2 A foot screw tension plate shall be provided to keep the foot screws firm in the'sleeves of the base plate. 5.1.3 The foot screws shalF operate smoothly and be adjustable in run and enclosed so as! to make it dusttight. 5.1.4 A suitable fixing arrangement shall be provided for clamping the trivet to the head of the tripod ( see also 5.4 ). 5.1.5 A circular bubble shall be provided on the tripod stand or tribrach to allow for quick pre-levelling of the instrument. 5.2 Limb The limb shall turn smoothly about the vertical axis. 5.2.1 Graduation on verniers shall be engraved on nickel silver and the strip comprising the vernier shall be inset into the outer rim of the upper plate so as to lie against and in the same plane as the graduated arc on the lower plate. 5.2.2 Circles shall be graduated as to give direct readings up to 20 minutes and verniers to give reading up to 20 seconds. Each fifth degree line shall be numbered. 5.23 Index marks along the verniers shall be attached to both lower and upper plates to facilitate accurate measurements of small angular values. 5.2.4 The centring device shall preferably be placed above the tribrach and below the lower plate. This arrangement has an advantage in that the centring may be done after the instrument has been levelled. 5.2.5 On most theodolites the outer run of the lower circleis not flat but is bevelled off and the nickel silver graduated ring lies on the bevelled surface. This is convenient for observations. 5.2.6 The magnifiers normally fitted in the vernier theodolites are attached to special arms which permit a certain amount of lateral motion along th.e vernier scale to enable the magnifiers to be brought over any desired graduations. 5.3 Alidade It shall be secured to the limb or to the base. A springloaded slow motion screw, without backlash, shall be fitted for fine setting of the theodolite in azimuth. 5.3.1 An azin,uth bubble shall be mounted, preferably at the middle of the vertical supports. Capstan screw working against spring shall be provided at one end of the bubble for adjustment, the other end being hinged. A bubble guard shall be provided. 2

The possibility of reversing the line of sight by rotation of the telescope constitutes the necessary and distinguishing feature of the transit theodolite. These are made so that the sighting telescope will transit on its horizontal axis, so that it may be reversed end for end without removing it from its bearings. 3.11 lkibrach The part of the theodolite carrying the levelling screws. 3.12 Trivet An underpart of the theodolite which may be secured to the tripod top with which the toes of the levelling screws make contact. 3.13 Vernier It is a device for resolving divisions of a scale. 3.14 Vertical Axis The axis about which the alidade rotates. 4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

4.1 Each part of the theodolite shall be made Gem material of suitable strength and shall be suitably finished. 4.1.1 Different parts of the theodolite, as far as possible, shall be manufactured from metals with similar thermal expansion, so that its accuracy is unaffected by large variations in temperature. 4.1.2 Coating and plating on each part shall be durable to resist discolouration, wear and rust. 4.2 The theodolite shall be carefully adjusted 90 that it rotates uniformly on its axes. It shall be thoroughly tested by the manufacturers, particularly against vibration and variation in temperature. 4.3 The optical parts shall be clear of The optical parts shall conform to IS telescope shall be hermetically sealed growth. The optical system shall be from aberrations. fog and moulds. 988 : 1959. The to avoid fungus reasonably free

4.3.1 The optical parts shall preferably be coated with antireflection coating. 4.4 The clamps shall be positive and shall not strain the axes of the theodolite. To avoid inadvertent wrong handling, the heads of different screws, which are placed together, shall have different designs. 5 FUNCTIONAL KEQUIREMENTS

5.0 The essential parts of the instruments shall meet the following requirements.

IS 2988 : 1995 5.3.2 The movement of the telescope about the horizontal axis shall be smooth. Two concentric rings shall be provided on the horizontal axis on either side of the telescope on to which a striding level may be fitted. 5.3.3 Telescope, free to transit from both ends, shall be mounted on the horizontal axis. A spring-loaded slow motion screw, without backlash, shall be fitted to the telescope for its fine setting in altitude. 100 m. The field ofview shall be 2" + 5 percent for 25x, and lo 40' * 5 percent for 30x. 6.1.1 The minimum focusing distance shall be 1.5 m and the telescope shall have the stadia multiplication constant 100 and addition constant zero. 6.2 The sensitivity bubble shall not be The sensitivity of tribrach shall be 10 of the azimuth bubble and altitude less than 45 seconds per 2.5 mm. the circular bubble fixed to the minutes per 2.5 mm.

5.3.4 The telescope shall have internal focusing mechanism capable of smooth movement. It shall be provided with a graticule, with cross lines and stadia lines, as shown in Fig. 2. The telescope shall be of astronomical type.

-6ii3
I

6.3 The error due to vertical axis strain shall not exceed 20 seconds.

6.3.1 The horizontal axis shall be accurate when au elevated point 1.5 m away at an altitude of 45" is transferred on the ground, the error in transference shall not exceed 0.1 mm.

6.3.2 Horizontal and vertical circle graduation errors shall not exceed 10 seconds. In the vernier, error due to its graduations and run error shall not exceed 5 seconds.

6.4 The graticule line thickness shall be such that it subtends an angle of one second of arc * 2.5 percent at the objective of the telescope. 6.5 The magnification of the magnifiers the verniers shall not be less than 8x. 7 ACCESSORIES used to read

FIG. 2 GRATRXJLE

5.3.5 Sighting vanes or optical sights shall be provided on the telescope for ease of initial laying. 5.3.6 A trough compass may be provided, if required bv the indenter. with the hastrument so that it mav fit i&o one of the standards. The trough compass ihall conform to IS 1764 : 1961. 5.3.7 The vertical circle shall be mounted concentrically with the horizontal axis and enclosed, so as to make it dust-tight. It shall be coupled to the telescope. 5.3.8 The altitude bubble shall be capable of adjustment by a tilting screw. A mirror or a rotatable prism shall be provided so that the altitude bubble may be viewed by the observer from either side, without changing his position. 5.3.9 An arrangement for centring the theodolite to an extent of 30 mm to 50 mm shall be provided either on the stand or in the instrument. 5.4 `IKpod The tripod may be 1 600 mm in length and shall be made of well- seasoned wood or light and strong alloy. Tripod shall be either of telescope or of rigid design. The tripod shall be fitted with a metal stirrup to mount the battery case and with a provision for mounting the illuminating unit. 6 TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS

7.1 The following accessories shall be provided with each theodolite:

a) b)

Diagonal eyepiece

Dark glasses (to be so designed as to fit on without eyepiece change of eyepiece adjustment ) cover Cl Waterproof ( made of durable waterproof material ) with 4 Plumb-bob adapter plug Tripod spanner Adjusting pins f) Screwdriver g) h) Cleaning brush j) Oil bottle k) Electrical illuminating unit m) Desiccating material which may be reactivated ( silicagel )

One (for telcscope) Three ( dark green, light green and light blue )

One

One
One

e>

Two One One One One One packet

7.2 The following complementary instruments provided ( if required by the indenters ): a) Beacon lamps b) Centring rod c) Compass ( desirable ) Six One One

may be

6.1 The magnification of the telescope shall be between 2.5~ and 30x and the resolving power of the telescope shall be 1.3 mm and 1 mm for 35 mm and 4.5 mm free aperture of the objective, respectively, at 3

IS 2988 : 1995

4

Spare graticule

e) Striding level f) Subtense bar Ii9 Suitable base plate with a centring pin to enable observations from a pillar instead of a tripod h) Levelling tape j) Targets, fitted with longitudinal levels, tripods and with plumb- bobs
8 TESTS

One One One One

a)

b)
One Two

Turn all the levelling screws through their full range of movement, turning each one about half a turn at a time. Bach screw should turn smoothly and be free from play or backlash in any position. The toes of the levelling screws should be held in fii contact with the trivet stage by spring plate or locking plate.

8.5 The centring movement shall be tested as follows: Tighten the clamp without using force; this should secure the theodolite firmly against lateral movement. Release the clamp and it should be possible to slide the theodolite laterally to any position within the limits of the movement. The movement should be smooth in all positions. 8.6 The focusing movements shall be tested as follows: Turn the telescope focusing head a> through its full range. The movement or collar should be smooth and free from play or backlash. The telescope focusing eyepiece should move smoothly and be free from play or backlash. Focusing eyepiece for the circle reading microscope should move smoothly and be free Gem play or backlash.

8.1 The theodolite shall initially be examined for the following possible external faults:

a) b) 4 d) e)
8.2

Loose, missing or damaged screws, nuts and other small parts; Scratched, broken or dirty object glass, eye lenses, bubble and dark glasses, deterioration of balsam in the optical components; Damage to telescope body, standards, tribrach and trivet stage, eye cups, focusing heads, open sight and ray shades; Bent or othenvise damaged clamps, slow motion screws and levelling screws; and Damage to general external finish. and associated controls

b) 4

8.7 The tripod shall be examined for stability, damage to legs and other parts. 8.8 The carrying case shall be examined for the general condition of the box, hinges, catches, locks and carrying strap, internal fittings and accessories. 8.9 The mechanical examination be completed as follows: of the theodolite shall

The azimuth movement

shall be tested as follows:

a)

b)

Tighten the azimuth clamp and see that the respective assemblies are properly secured. Release the clamp and rotate the alidade; the movement should be smooth. Tighten the clamp and turn the slow motion screw in e,-ch direction. The screw should turn smoothly aud be free from any play or backlash. The spring loaded plunger should maintain the lug in firm contact with the screw whichever direction the screw is rotated. and associated controls

Mount the theodolite firmly on its tripod; direct and focus the telescope on to a distant object. Ensure that all clamps are tightened. Observe while gently twisting the tribrach in each direction. The cross wires shall move off the object but should spring back when the hands are removed.
8.10 To test the tangent to the plate vial curve is normal

to the vertical axis, proceed-as under: Make a rough levelling bf the instrumeut wilh the tripod legs with the help of the circular bubbles. This will save time and also wear on the footscrew
threads. Then proceed as follows:

8.3 The elevation movements shall be tested as follows:

a)

b)

Tighten the telescope clamp and see that the telescope is properly secured. Release the clamp, the telescope should elevate or depress smoothly. Frictiou of the trunnion bearings should be just sufficient to maintain the telescope in auy position. Tighteu the clamp and turn the telescope slow motion screw in each direction. The screw should turn smoothly a!ld be free from any play or backlash. The spring-loaded plunger should maintain the lug in firm contact with the screw whichcvcr dirertiou the screw is rotated.

Turn a>

b)

the plate so that the bubble is parallel to a line joining two of the footscrews; Turn these two screws in opposite directions until the bubble is in the exact centre of its run; the plate through 90" to bring the bubble at right angle to its previous position and operate the third screw until the bubble is ouce more centred. If the bubble is displaced considerably, repeat (a), (b) and (c); and Now return to the first position aud make whatever correction is uecessary as at (a) above. Turn the plate through 180� aud if the bubble

C>Turn

d)

8.4 The Icvclling screw assemblies shall be tested as follows: 4

IS 2988 : 1995

moves away from the ccntre tangent to the curve of the bubble vial, it is not correctly set to the vertical axis of rotation. This may easily he adjusted by taking halfthe indicated error by means of the footscrews and half by means of the adjusting screws or nuts of the bubble case. The above adjustment should l-e carried out with the horizontal circular plate clamped.
X.11 To test that the tangent to the altitude vial curve is

2)

3) 4)

normal to the vertical axis, proceed as follows: Having obtained verticality of the main axis of rotation, bring the altitude bubble to the centre of its run by means of the index setting screw, and re-level the instrument by this more sensitive bubble. 8.12 To eliminate parallax, proceed as follows: Focus the eyepiece OII the cross wires by first screwing outwards and then inwards, until the cross wires are clearly focused. This eyepiece setting will now be correct for objects at all distances. Pick up a distant object by means of the open sight and see that the inverted image of the same object is seen in the field of view of the telescope. Focus the image of the distant object until a movement of the eye sideways causes IIO appreciable relative movement between the image and the cross wires. This adjustment shall of course be made for every object distance. It shall be ensured that there is no parallax. 8.13 Collimation of the telescope shall be done as
~01l0ws:

Transit the telescope, and observe the exact position of the same wire upon an object ( for example, a staff held horizontal ) situated at about the same distance and level, but in opposite direction. Let this reading be Y: Turn the upper part of the instrument through approximately 180' to sight X again; and Transit the telescope, and note whcrc the vertical cross wire now appears with rcference to Y. Let this point be Y'. is correct

If Y and Y' coincide, the collimation

b) To test collimation in azimuth by reference to the horizontal circle, proceed as follows: 1) Set the circle to read zero 011 the horizontal circle, and sight a distant target X ; and 2) Turn the alidade exactly through 180" as indicated by the circle; transit the tclcscopc to bring, the target OII the horizontal wire. The vertical wire will now be at Y. If there is no error, X and Y shall coincide. NOTE-This method assumes the absence of errors in dividing and mounting the circle. 8.14.1 A repetition of either of the tests given in 8.14 on a near object should give results which correspond with those obtained on a distant object. Any discrepancy would be due to the lack of parallelism of the sides along which the focusing lens is translated with the line of collimation. Only the vertical cross wire shall be used for these tests: To test for collimati&l a> in altitude ( for all focusing distances ), proceed as follows: 1) Direct the telescope to some small clearly defined object situated 60 m to 90 m away and make the horizontal cross wire coincide with the target; 2) Set up a vertical scale at the nearest focusing distance, and without unclamping in alread against the point of titude, intersection of horizontal wire; 3) Transit the telescope and rotate it through 180" and bring the horizontal cross wire on to the distant point and close the altitude clamp; and 4) Refocus the scale, and again read the point of intersection. The absence of coincidence in the two readings indicates error. To check centring of the vertical circle and aligmnent of the altitude bubble, proceed as follows: 1) Check !he verticality of the axis before proceeding further; 2) Adjust the altitude bubble and set the zero of the vertical circle exactly against the zero of the micrometer using the slow motion

The line of collimation is the line of sight of telescope, passing through the optical centre of the objective system and the point of intersection of the vertical and horizontal cross wires situated in the focal plane. The direction of this Iinewill, there.fore, depend on the position of the cross wires, and the latter should be adjusted until the line of sight is normal to the transit axis. It is also required that the transit axis and the line of sight shall meet in a point and that point shall lie on the prolongation of the vertical axis. The line of collimation, as the telescope is turning, sweeps out a plane normal to the transit axis, and if the latter, is horizontal, it is coincident with the vertical axis of rotation. 8.14 After the instrument has been tested and adjusted in the manner prescribed in 8.1 to 8.13, it should be subject to the following tests to ascertain the accuracy of the adjustments: a) To test for collimation in azimuth (that is, the plane of vision through the vertical line is perpendicular to the transit axis), procccd as I`ollows: 1) Direct the tcltxopr to scmc mall clearly

defined Bbjrct situated 60 m to 90 m away, and by means of the slow motion screws, cause the vertical cross wire to bisect it. Let this point be X.

IS 2988 : 1995 screw; 3) Sight on a staff held vertically at such a distance that it can be accurately read, and take the reading A of the horizontal cross wire; 4) Release the clamp screw, transit the telescope and against set the zero or 180' of the circle exactly to the zero of the micrometer; and 5) Turn the hand of the instrument through 180' in azimuth and again read B on the staff. If the readings A and B are the same, the index setting is correct. 8.15 Climatic and Durability Tests
Sl No.

Test Diopter scale Definition

Expected Accurncy 2 0.5 D Should be very good at least for the 2/3 of the field of view in the and fair centre elsewhere According to 1s 1632: 1993 According to IS 1632: 1993 According to IS 1632: 1993 20 seconds 20 seconds Combined 20 seconds error

1) 2)

3)

Azimuth bubble sensitivity (45 mm ) Altitude bubble sensitivity ( 45 mm ) Bubble spacing ( 2.5 mm division ) Dividing of circles Dividing of vernier Circles of concentricity and misplacement of vernier Perpendicularity cross lines Collimations i) With reference to distant object ( in azimuth ) ii) With reference to horizontal circle iii) All focusing ( in azimuth ) of

4) 5) 6) 7) 8)

These tests are type approval tests and shall be carried out onIy when agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. These are not to be used in routine testing for performance of instrument during bulk production, although these may be used for control testing of batch samples by arrangement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. The tests shall be carried out in accordance with IS 10236 ( Part 11 ) : 1985, IS 10236 ( Part 14 ) : 1986 and IS 10236 ( Part 15 ) : 1986. The outline of tests and degree of severity shall be as given in 8.15.1 to 8.15.3 or as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 8.15.1 Rain Test The theodolite shall be put in the rain chamber with taps on, and allowed to remain there for at least 10 minutes. The water spray shall be adjusted to represent a heavy shower of rain. No damage should be done to any part of the instrument including its telescope, the interior ofwhich should not show any sign of moisture. 8.15.2 Vibration Test The theodolite in its case shall be clamped on vibrating table giving approximately 450 vibrations per minute with an amplitude of 3 mm, for a period of 5 minutes. The direction of the vibrations should be parallel to the line of sight of the telescope. The telescope should be in correct adjustment after this test. 8.15.3 Drop Test The theodolite housed in its case shall be held in a vertical position and dropped over from a height of 300 mm on to a 225 mm layer of sand contained in a box and covered with a cloth. The telescope shall be in correct adjustment after this test. 9 *ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS 9.1 The following nary theodolite: accuracies are expected in an ordi-

9) 10)

Line thickness graticule

of

+ 20 seconds

I 0.75 mm between nearest point of focus and distant object f 20 seconds

iv) All focusing ( in altitude )

11) 12)

Adjustment of the vertical circle index and altitude bubble Concentricity of the trunnion axis and fitting carrying altitude bubble Sighting vane

1R division of bubble spacing

13)

10 minutes

10 WEIGm 10.1 The weight of the theodolite than 8 kg. shall be not more

10.2 The weight of the metal container of the theodolite shall not exceed 3 kg and the weight of the tripod shall not exceed 6 kg.

6

IS 2988 : 1995 11 MARKING 11.1 The theodolite, tripod and other attachments, which are packed separately, shall be suitably numbered. The manufacturer's name or trade-mark and the year of manufacture, if desired by the purchaser, shall be legibly and indelibly marked on each instrument and their container. 12 PACKING 12.1 A box made of a suitable light material shall be provided for adequately protecting the theodolite and accessories.

12.2 The box shall be provided with a convenient carrying device preferably a sling, padding for carrying as a man-pack and a suitable locking arrangement. 12.3 The box shall be so designed that the theodolite may be fitted only in one position. 12.4 Attachments and any accessories, which cannot be accommodated with the theodolite or the tripod, shall be suitably packed separately. 12.5 An instruction booklet containing the broad features of the instrument, the reading devices, the system of adjustment and the like shall be provided with each theodolite.

11.2 BIS CERTIFICATION

MARKING

The product may also be marked with Standard Mark. 11.2.1 The use of Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details of conditions under which the licence for the use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

7

Bnreau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution esrablished under the Bureau oflndiun Sfandurds Ad, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization. marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BlS has the copyright of all its publicattons. No part of these publications may be reproduced tn any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No: LM 20 (0223).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publicatioo Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Offices : : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 335-336, Sector Marg.

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

New Delhi

110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all ofices Telephone

)

Shah Zafar

Marg Maniktola 160022 600113

331 01 31 1 331 13 7s 37 84 99, 37 86 26, t 37 85 61 37 86 62

VII M, V. 1. P. Road, 34-A, CHANDlGARH Road, MADRAS Andheri

60 38 43 60 20 25 r 235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 832 92 95, 832 78 58 t 832 78 91, 832 78 92

: C. 1. T. Campus,

IV Cross

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

Marol,

( East )

Branches

BHUBANESHWAR. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. IAIPUR.
Prluted
a`

New India

Prlutlns

Prens.

Khurja.

Lndl,

