**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2604 (1988): Lead Anodes for Electroplating [MTD 24: 
Corrosion Protection] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 2604 - 1988 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LEAD ANODES FOR ELECTROPLATING 

( Second Revision ) 



UDC 621-3-035-22123 : 62135T7 



© Copyright 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

q, j March 1989 



IS : 2604 - 1988 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LEAD ANODES FOR ELECTROPLATING 

( Second Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
10 August 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Metallic and Non-Metallic Finishes Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Structural 
and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1964 and 
subsequently revised in 1979. Keeping in view 
the experience gained during the years, it was felt 
necessary to revise this standard. In this 
revision, the limit of minimum lead content has 
been raised to 99'95 percent and the percentage 



limits of the various elements present as impurities 
iti lead anode have been modified. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a parti- 
cular requirement of this standard is complied 
with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing thejesult of a test or analysis, shall 
be rounded ott in accordance with is IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that 
of the specified value in this standard. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requirements of 
lead anodes used in electroplating. 

2. CHEMICAL COMPOSITION 

2.1 Lead anodes shall contain not less than 99*95 
percent metallic lead but in the event of copper 
being present, the lead content may be reduced 
by an amount not exceeding the amount of such 
copper and shall meet the requirements of the 
following chemical composition when analyzed 
in accordance with IS : 403-1964* or by spectro- 
graphic method, if mutually agreed between the 
supplier and the purchaser: 



Element 




Percent 


Copper, Max 




08 Max 


As + Sb + Sn, 


Max 


0*002 


Bismuth, Max 




0005 


Iron, Max 




0'002 


Silver 




0'002 


Zinc, Max 




0*001 


Total of all impurities, Max 


010 


Lead, Min 




99*95 



3. SHAPE AND SIZE 

3.1 Lead anodes shall be supplied in as-cast, 
rolled or extruded form as specified by the 



purchaser, 
agreed to 
supplier 



Dimensions of anodes shall be as 
between the purchaser and the 



3.1.1 As-cast lead anodes may be of rectan- 
gular, multi-edges or corrugated cross sections 
and with positive contact hooks cast integrally 
with the anode or soldered in a hole in the top. 
When rolled lead sheets are used for anodes, it 
shall be supported by bolting between two bus 
bars. 

4. FREEDOM FROM DEFECTS 

4.1 Anodes shall be clean, and free from defects, 
such as cracks, warps, inclusions, porosity, ragged 
edges, surface film such as rolling skin, which 
may adversely affect its uniform dissolution while 
in use. 



5. SAMPLING AND PREPARATION 
SAMPLE FOR ANALYSIS 



OF 



♦Methods of chemical analysis lead and antimonial 
lead ( revised). 



5.1 Sampling of lead anodes for chemical analysis 
shall be agreed to between the manufacturer and 
the purchaser. From each of the anodes selected, 
sawings shall be obtained from not fewer than 
three widely spaced positions. The sawings shall 
be thoroughly mixed and quartered, and the 
sample for chemical analysis taken from the 
mixed material. The sawings shall be treated with 
a magnet to remove any free iron or steel 
particles. 



IS : 2604 - 1988 

6. PACKING 7. MARKING 

7.1 The anodes shall be marked with the name, 

6.1 Unless otherwise specified, anodes shall be Glials or trade-mark of the manufacturer. In 

separated according to their sizes and shall be case of anodes with hooks, the mark shall be 

packed in such a manner as to ensure safe trans- placed near the hooks. 

portation to the point of delivery. Wherever 7.1.1 Anodes may also be marked with the 

practicable, one size of anodes shall be packed Standard Mark. Details are available with the 

in a single container. Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Printed at Saini Printers, Delhi, India 



