NTI Wah IS 16590 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


am ak SAA A — Te 


Water cooled Chilling Packages Using 
the Vapour Compression Cycle — 
Specification 


ICS 97.130.20 


© BIS 2017 


RAA an Set 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


@ AM TA, 9 JE set arf, ag feeeit-110002 
r MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2017 Price Group 10 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Refrigeration and Air-conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Refrigeration and Air-conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Divisional Council. 


This standard is primarily intended to introduce testing standards for water cooled chillers using vapour 
compression cycle and prescribes the method of measurement of performance and energy efficiency rating 
and testing for performance. 


While formulating this standard considerable assistance has been drawn from standards and guidelines as 
listed below: 


ISO 817 : 2014 Refrigerants — Designation and safety classification. 


AHRI Guideline 1997 E — Fouling factors: A survey of their application in today’s air conditioning and 
refrigeration industry 


ISO 9614-1 : 1993 Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources using sound 
intensity — Part 1: Measurement at discrete points 


ISO 9614-2 : 1996 Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources using sound 
intensity — Part 2: Measurement by scanning 


Voltages IEC Standard Publication 38 


EN 14511-1 : 2011 Air conditioners, liquid chilling packages and heat pumps with electrically driven 
compressors for space heating and cooling — Part 1: terms and definitions 


EN 14511-2 : 2011 Air conditioners, liquid chilling packages and heat pumps with electrically driven 
compressors for space heating and cooling — Part 2: Test conditions 


EN 14511-3 : 2011 Air conditioners, liquid chilling packages and heat pumps with electrically driven 
compressors for space heating and cooling — Part 3 : Test methods 


AHRI 550/590 (I-P)-2011,with addendum 3: Performance rating of water-chilling and heat pump water- 
heating packages using vapour compression cycle 


AHRI 551/591 (SI)-2011, with addendum 3: Performance rating of water-chilling and heat pump water- 
heating packages using vapour compression cycle 


AHRI 370 2011 Standard for sound performance rating of large air-cooled outdoor refrigerating and air- 
conditioning equipment 


ANSI/ASHRAE 30-1995 Method of testing liquid-chilling packages 


ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 37-2009 Method of testing for ratings electrically driven unitary air conditioning 
and heat pump equipment 


ASHRAE Standard 116-1995 Methods of testing for rating for seasonal efficiency of unitary air 
conditioners and heat pumps 


ASHRAE Standard 51-1999/210-1999 Laboratory methods of testing fans for aero-dynamic performance 
rating 


AMCA Standard 210-1999 Laboratory methods of testing fans for aerodynamic performance rating 
ASHRAE 34 : 2013 Designation and safety classification of refrigerants 


IS 16590 : 2017 


The manufacturers of factory packaged water cooled chillers offer a complex array of equipment to meet the 
diverse applications of markets. The complexity of the product offering precludes the testing of each and 
every model. However, in order to promote consistency in the representation of chiller performance by all 
manufacturers, this standard establishes uniform rating and testing methods.It is intended that equipment 
testing will be done in laboratory where the instrumentation and load stability as defined in the standard can 
be provided. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Indian Standard 


WATERCOOLED CHILLING PACKAGES USING THE 
VAPOUR COMPRESSION CYCLE — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the general requirements, 
method of test for the measurement of performance 
and energy efficiency of water cooled chilling units 
covering all types and sizes for rated voltage up to 
and including 250 V, 50 Hz, for single phase and up 
to and including 11 kV, 50 Hz for three phase power 
supply. 


1.2 All tests mentioned in this standard are type 
tests. 


1.3 This standard covers full load and part load 
ratings test methods. 


1.4 This standard does not cover the test method 
for, 


a) packages with condensing unit provided 
with heat reclaim; 


b) systems with remote condensing unit; 

c) systems with evaporative cooled condenser; 
d) condenser less chillers; and 

e) heat pumps 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of the standards. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 


ISNo./International Title 
Standards 
101 (Part6/Sec1): Methods of sampling and 
1988 test for paints, varnishes and 


related products : Part 6 
Durability tests, Section 1 
Resistance to humidity under 
conditions of condensation 


101 (Part 6/ Sec 5): 
1997 


Methods of sampling and test 
for paints, varnishes and 
related products : Part 6 
Durability test on paint films, 
Section 5 Accelerated 
weathering test 


ISNo./International 


Standards 


101 (Part 7/Sec 1): 


1989 


101 (Part 7/Sec 2): 


1990 


101 (Part 7/Sec 3): 


1990 


196: 1966 


325 : 1996 


8148 : 2003 
12360 : 1988 


3615 : 2007 


ISO 817:2014 


ISO 3744 : 2010 


ISO 9614 -1 : 1993 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Title 


Methods of sampling and test 
for paints, varnishes and 
related products : Part 7 
Environmental tests on paint 
films, Section 1 Resistance to 
water 


Methods of sampling and test 
for paints, varnishes and 
related products : Part 7 
Environmental tests on paint 
films, Section 2 Resistance to 
liquids 

Methods of sampling and test 
for paints, varnishes and 
related products : Part 7 
Environmental tests on paint 
films, Section 3 Resistance to 
heat 


Atmospheric conditions for 
testing (revised) 


Three phase induction motors 
(fifih revision) 
Packaged air conditioners 


Voltage bands for electrical 
installations including 
preferred voltages and 
frequency 


Glossary of terms used in 
refrigeration and air 
conditioning 

Refrigerants — Designation 
and safety classification 


Acoustics — Determination of 
sound power levels and sound 
energy levels of noise sources 
using sound pressure — 
Engineering methods for an 
essentially free field over a 
reflecting plane 


Acoustics — Determination of 
sound power levels of noise 
sources using sound intensity 
— Part 1: Measurement at 
discrete points 


IS 16590 : 2017 
ISNo./International Title 
Standards 


ISO 9614-2:1996 Acoustics — Determination of 
sound power levels of noise 
sources using sound intensity 
— Part 2: Measurement by 


Scanning 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms given in 
IS 3615 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Bubble Point — Refrigerant liquid saturation 
temperature at a specified pressure.It is the 
temperature at which the first bubble of vapour forms 
in liquid refrigerant (saturated liquid). 


3.2 Condenser — A refrigeration system component 
which condenses refrigerant vapour. Sub-cooling of 
the refrigerant may occur as well. 


3.2.1 Air Cooled Condenser — A refrigeration 
system component that condenses refrigerant vapor 
by rejecting heat to air circulated over its heat transfer 
surface causing a rise in the air temperature. Sub- 
cooling of the refrigerant may occur as well. 


3.2.2 Water-Cooled Condenser — A component 
which utilizes refrigerant-to-water heat transfer 
means, causing the refrigerant to condense and the 
water to be heated. Sub cooling of refrigerant may 
occur as well. 


3.3 Condenser Heat Rejection Capacity 


The heat removed by the heat transfer medium of the 
condenser per unit of time (kW). 


3.4 Cooling Capacity — Heat given off from the 
liquid to the refrigerant per unit of time, (kW) 


3.5 Coefficient of Performance (COP) — A ratio of 
the cooling capacity in kilo watts to the total power 
input in kilo watts, 


NOTE — Definition of COP refers to chilling units only. 


3.6 Dew Point — Refrigerant vapour saturation 
temperature at a specified pressure. It is the 
temperature at which the first droplet of liquid forms 
in refrigerant vapour (saturated vapour). The 
evaporating and condensing temperatures should 
correspond to the mean of bubble and dew points. 


3.7 Fouling Factor — The thermal resistance due to 
fouling on the fluid side of the heat transfer surface 
(m?°C /kW). 


3.8 Fouling Factor Allowance — Provision for 
anticipated fouling during use, specified in 
(m?°C /k W). 


3.9 Liquid-Chilling Packages — A refrigeration 
machine using the vapour compression cycle. 


NOTE — Liquid-chilling packages may be operated with 
any type of compressor and be equipped with air-cooled 
and liquid-cooled, condensers. Liquid chilling packages can 
be supplied with or without pumps. 


3.10 Liquid Refrigerant Temperature — 
Temperature ofthe refrigerant entering the expansion 
device (°C). 


3.11 Ratings 


3.11.1 Performance Rating — Performance data 
over the operating range of the unit at full load in the 
form of performance curves or catalog or output from 
a computer selection code. 


NOTE — The published ratings are the ratings declared 
by the manufacturer in any form as defined above. 


3.11.2 Standard Rating — A rating based on 
standard rating conditions (see 6.2.2). 


3.11.3 Application Rating — A rating based on 
Application Rating Conditions other than Standard 
Rating Conditions (see 6.2.3). 


3.12 Saturated Discharge Temperature — For 
single component and azeotropic refrigerants, it is 
the saturated temperature corresponding to the 
refrigerant pressure at the compressor discharge. 


For zeotropic refrigerants, it is the arithmetic average 
of the dew point and bubble point temperatures 
corresponding to refrigerant pressure at the 
compressor discharge. 


NOTE — The refrigerant saturation pressure is generally 
measured at or immediately downstream of the compressor 
discharge service valve (in either case on the downstream 
side of the valve seat), where discharge valves are used 
(see also Table 1). 


3.13 Standard Barometric Pressure — Barometric 
pressure of 101.325 kPa (1 bar). 


NOTE — See also Note under Table 1 and Annex E. 


3.14 Total Power Input of the System— Power input 
of all components of the unit in operation shall 
include: 


3.14.1 The power input for operation of the 
compressor (kW). 


3.14.2 The power input of all controls, safety 
devices, starters, and drives of the unit, including 
devices necessary for correct operation of the 
refrigerating circuit (for example oil pump, refrigerant 
pump) (kW). 


3.14.3 The power for fans for air cooled liquid 
chillers (kW). 


3.15 Sound Power Level — Ten times the logarithm 
to the base 10 of the given sound power to the 
reference sound power which is 1 pW(10°'* W), and 
expressed in decibels (dB). 


3.16 Type Test— Conformance testing or type 
testing is testing to determine whether a product or 
system complies with the requirements of a 
specification, contract or regulation. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


4.1 Liquid chilling packages shall be classified 
according to method of cooling of condenser. 


4.1.1 Air Cooled Condenser 
4.1.2 Water Cooled Condenser 
5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
5.1 Construction 


5.1.1 The unit shall be constructed with sufficient 
strength and rigidity to withstand normal manual and 
mechanical handling, transportation and usage 
without damage or failure. 


5.1.2 All parts that require periodic cleaning or 
maintenance shall be easily accessible when the unit 
is installed in accordance with manufacturer’s 
installation manual. 


5.1.3 Self-tapping screws shall not be used for any 
load bearing parts 


5.1.4 All parts that constitute an accident hazard 
shall be suitably guarded. 


5.1.5 Pipes and connections to moving or resiliently 
mounted parts shall be so arranged as not to foul or 
to transmit undue vibrations to other parts and shall 
be so designed as to prevent failure due to fatigue. 
All other pipes and connections shall be securely 
anchored. 


5.1.6 Water cooled condenser shall have cleanable 
water passages, either by mechanical means or 
chemical or both. An opening shall be provided in 
the casing, so as to have access to passages bearing 
water, from either end, for the design amenable to 
mechanical cleaning. 


5.1.7 All valves and refrigeration piping shall be 
properly clamped so as to avoid excessive vibration. 


5.1.8 Structural constructional parts shall be suitably 
provided with corrosion resistant coating. 


5.2 Safety and Installation Requirements 


Following safety requirements and information shall be 
provided by the chiller manufacturer. The requirements 
are basic and are not limited to the list below: 


IS 16590 : 2017 


5.2.1 Safety Requirements 


5.2.1.1 The liquid chilling package shall be complete 
with differential pressure switch or flow 
switch, vibration isolators/cushy mounts; Emergency 
Power OFF (EPO) / Isolator switch. 


5.2.1.2 Terminal box for termination of cables to the 
chiller shall be a part ofthe chiller panel. 


5.2.1.3 An add on terminal block suitable for using 
aluminum cables will in the scope of chiller supplier 
and can be supplied separately. 


5.2.1.4 Condenser heat exchanger guard shall be 
provided for air cooled condenser. 


5.2.2 Installation and Commissioning Requirements 


5.2.2.1 Liquid chilling package manufacturer shall 
provide manual for installation, operating, 
maintenance and safety precautions. 


5.2.2.2 The liquid chilling package manufacturer has 
to submit the dimensional drawing with point loads 
and dimensions enabling the structural supporting 
system to be designed for installation. 


5.2.2.3 Liquid chilling package manufacturer should 
advise on the minimum spacing required for the air 
movement around the chillers and the suggested 
maintenance space including access to the liquid 
chilling package unit yard. 


5.2.2.4 The liquid chilling package manufacturer 
shall provide shipping weight of the unit, 
recommended handling and transportation method(s) 
including transportation from manufacturer location 
to the installation location. 


5.2.2.5 Commissioning ofthe liquid chilling package 
shall be done by qualified personnel as recommended 
and qualified by the manufacturer or accredited 
training organization. The qualified commissioning 
personnel shall test and provide the test data to the 
customer containing relevant electrical and 
refrigerant parameters for assessing the performance 
ofthe liquid chilling package. 


5.2.2.6 Commissioning personnel shall train 
representative of the customer / user of the liquid 
chilling package on operation and routine 
maintenance. 


5.2.2.7 Liquid chilling package manufacturer shall 
provide the complete details to the customer/user, 
for example dimensions and any additional 
information as requested by customer. 


5.2.2.8 Liquid chilling package manufacturer shall 
suggest the quality of water in the closed loop 
evaporator and open loop condenser and the 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Table 1 Standard Rating Conditions 
(Clauses 6.1 and 6.2.1) 


SI No. Liquid/Air-cooled Condenser Liquid-cooled Air-cooled 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Liquid / Air-cooled condenser: 
a) Entering temperature 30 °C Not applicable 
b) Delta T se Not applicable 
c) Liquid-side fouling factorallowance Nominal 0.088 m?.°C /kW Not applicable 
d) Entering dry-bulb temperature Not applicable 39°C 
e) Air-side fouling factor allowance Not applicable 0.000 m?.°C /kW 
ii) Evaporator liquid temperature: 
a) Leaving TPG 
b) T 5 °C 
iii) Evaporator fouling factor allowance: 
a) Liquid-side Nominal 0.044 m?.°C /kW 
b) Barometric pressure 101.325 kPa 


NOTE — Air cooled unit ratings shall be corrected to a Barometric Pressure of 101.325 kPa as per Annex E. 


suggested make up water quality. 
6 RATING REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Standard Rating Conditions 


Published ratings for all liquid-chilling packages shall 
include the standard ratings, corresponding to the 
standard rating conditions shown in Table 1 within 
the operating limits ofthe unit. 


6.2 Ratings 
6.2.1 Published Ratings 


Published ratings shall meet the requirements of this 
standard.Performance ratings shall be based on test 
data or models derived from test data. Published 
ratings shall be presented in the form of a 
performance curve or catalogue or output from a 
computer selection code and shall include the 
following: 


a) Name and address of the manufacturer; 


b) Refrigerant in accordance with IS/ISO 817; 

c) Unit type, model number, model number 
designations providing identification of the 
liquid-chilling packages to which the ratings 
shall apply; 

d) Power supply in “...... V;.... Phase; .....Hz 
(Rated voltage; Phase and frequency); 

e) Maximum starting current in Amperes; 

f) Full load current in Amperes; 

g) COP atrated condition; 

h) ISEER — Indian Seasonal Energy Efficiency 
Ratio; 

D Sound power level (dB); 

k) Fouling allowance-Published ratings shall 
clearly state the fouling allowance. 


Corrections and calculations for different 
fouling factors shall be made as per Annex 
A. Ratings shall be published using Nominal 
fouled rating as per Table 1. 


NOTE — In Air cooled condensers, if variable speed 
condenser fans or fan staging is used, the manufacturer 
shall publish the capacities and COPs taking into 
consideration the different performance parameters 
according to the fan control of the unit 


6.2.2 Standard Ratings 

6.2.2.1 Total power input to chiller, kW 
6.2.2.2 Cooling capacity, kW 

6.2.2.3 COP at rated condition 


6.2.2.4 ISEER (India seasonal energy efficiency 
ratio) 


6.2.2.5 Any two of the following: 


a) Entering evaporator liquid temperature, °C; 

b) Leaving evaporator liquid temperature, °C; 

c) Liquid temperature difference through the 
evaporator, °C. 


6.2.2.6 For all units without integral evaporator 
pump, evaporator liquid pressure drop (kPa). For 
units with integral pumps the available static 
pressure (kPa). 


6.2.2.7 Chilled liquid flow rate, l/s 
6.2.2.8 Liquid-cooled condenser packages 


a) For water cooled units without integral 
pump condenser liquid pressure drop (kPa). 
For units with integral pump the available 
static pressure (kPa). 


b) Any two of the following : 


1) Entering condenser water temperature, °C; 
2) Leaving condenser water temperature, °C; 


3) Water temperature difference through 
the condenser, °C. 


c) Condenser water flow rate, l/s; 
Air-cooled condenser units; and 
e) Entering air dry-bulb temperature, °C. 


6.2.3 Application Rating 


Application ratings (other than standard rating) shall 
include published ratings at full load and the range 
of conditions within the operating limits of the 
equipment which shall be presented in the form of a 
performance curve or catalog or output from a 
computer selection code. 


The conditions and the operating limits are as 
defined below: 


a) All condenser types— Leaving chilled water 
temperature 4.4°C to 10.0°C in increments 
of 2°C or less and temperature difference 
between 2.5°C and 8°C. 


Liquid-cooled condenser— Entering 
condenser water temperature 20°C to 35°C 
in increments of 2°C or less and temperature 
difference between 2.5°C and 8°C. 


c) Air-cooled condenser— Entering condenser 
air dry-bulb temperature 20°C to 46°C dry- 
bulb in increments of 3.5°C or less and 
temperature difference between 2.5°C 
and 8 °C. 


b) 


NOTE — The rating conditions and the operating limits 
other than those prescribed above shall be mutually agreed 
upon between the manufacturer and the buyer. 


6.2.4 Part-load Performance 


6.2.4.1 Part load rating data shall be published or 
available upon request over the application rating 
conditions (see Annex B). These include cooling 
capacity, power input and ISEER. 


IS 16590 : 2017 


6.2.4.2 Hundred percent load refers to the full rated 
capacity as defined by the standard rating conditions 
given in Table 1, and with the following condition 
for air-cooled units: 


a) Rating condition, and 
b) AT:5°C. 


For continuously variable unloading machines part 
load data shall be provided at a minimum of 75 
percent, 50 percent, and 25 percent or to the minimum 
load point. 


6.2.4.3 For discrete step unloading machines, part 
load rating data shall be provided at each stage of 
capacity. 


6.2.4.4 Method of representing part load 
performance as a single value shall be as described 
in Annex B. The corresponding part load rating data 
to be required in order to calculate this single value 
also shall be as described. 


In cases where this value is declared by the 
manufacturer, all part load rating data necessary for 
its calculation shall also be published. 


NOTE — Typical examples to calculate the rating 
tolerance and COP are described in Annex C. 


7 RATING TOLERANCES 
7.1 The tolerance shall be as per Table 2. 


7.2 Ratings published and claimed to be in 
compliance with this standard shall be as specified 
in 6.2. 


7.2.1 Full load capacity and full and part load COP 
shall not be less than 100 percent ofthe rating minus 
the allowable tolerance as calculated in 7.1. 


7.2.2 Water pressure drop in the evaporator or 
condenser shall not exceed 115 percent of the rated 
pressure drop at the specified water flow rate at any 
rated condition. 


Table 2 Tolerances 


(Clause7.1) 


SI No. Ratings Related Tolerance Calculation 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Cooling capacity (full Full load minimum : where, Tol,= 10.5 — (0.07 % Full load) + 
load and part load) 100 % - Tol, ((833.3/AT,, Yo Load)} 
11) COP (full load and (Rated COP)/(100% + ` 
part load) Tol,) Yo FL = percent of selected full load 
Te FR rating conditions 
iii) ISEER: COP (see Minimum ót : (Rated FL = full load rating condition 
Annex B) COP) /(100% + Tol,) AT „= difference between entering and 
leaving chilled water temperature at full- 
load in °C 
iv) Water pressure drop Maximum of: 
1.15 x rated pressure drop at rated flow rate or rated pressure plus 600 mm 
of water column, whichever is greater 


5 


IS 16590 : 2017 


7.2.3 The pump head for units with integral pump(s) 
in the evaporator or condenser shall not be less than 
85 percent of the rated pump head at the specified 
water flow rate at any rated condition. 


7.2.4 Sound power level shall not exceed 3dB of 
published rating. 


7.3 Typical examples on calculation are given in 
Annex C for guidance only. 


NOTE — The pressure drop measurement shall be as described 
in Annex F. 


8 TESTING 


8.1 The type test shall be carried out for all types, 
sizes and capacity of liquid-chilling packages. 


8.2 The manufacturers of factory packaged liquid 
chillers offer a complex array of equipment to meet 
the diverse applications ofmarkets. The complexity 
of the product offering precludes the testing of each 
and every model. However, in order to promote 
consistency in the representation of chiller 
performance by all manufacturers, this standard 
establishes uniform rating and testing methods. 


8.3 In order for a manufacturer to comply with this 
standard, conformance to this standard is required 
in entirety. Only those agencies or companies that 
offer testing services can refer to the relevant clauses 
for testing method defined in this standard. This 
standard may also be used for customer specific tests 
conducted at appropriate test facilities. 


8.4 Sound Power Measurement Test 


8.4.1 The sound power measurement shall be done 
at rated condition specified in Table 1. In case, if the 
conditions as per Table 1 cannot be maintained, the 
sound power measurement shall be done at possible 
temperature conditions and data shall be noted in 
the test report. The measurement shall be done in 
accordance with standard ISO 9614-1, ISO 9614-2 and 
ISO 3744 for water cooled by sound intensity method 
under free field condition. 


8.4.2 For sound power measurement test the 
following conditions shall be used: 


a) Test unit shall be set to operate at full load 
in cooling mode, 

b) With the pump running, and 

c) All fans running for air cooled chiller. 


8.5 Basic Principles of Testing 
8.5.1 Cooling Capacity (q,) 


The cooling capacity is the heat removed from the 
chilled liquid. It is determined from the measurement 
of the volume flow (Q) of the chilled liquid and the 


entering and leaving temperatures at the evaporator 
side, taking into consideration the specific heat 
capacity (Cp) and density (p) of the liquid. 


The cooling capacity shall be determined using the 
following equation: 


I= (Q. P. c, At)/ 1 000 


where 
4, = cooling capacity,kW; 
Q = volume flow rate, m°/s; 
P = fluid density, kg/m’; 
c= specific heat at constant pressure, 
J/kg-°C; and 
At = difference between inlet and outlet 


temperatures, °C. 
8.5.2 Water Cooled Condenser Heat Rejection (q 


The condenser heat rejection capacity is the heat 
rejected through the condenser. It is determined from 
the volume flow of the water and the entering and 
leaving temperatures at the condenser, taking into 
consideration the specific heat capacity and density 
of the heat transfer medium. 


The heat rejection capacity shall be determined using 
the following equation: 


q= (Q. P. c, At)/ 1.000 


where 
a = heat rejection capacity,kW; 
Q = volume flow rate, m"/sec ; 
© = density, kg/m’; 
C = specific heat at constant pressure, 
J/kg-°C; and 
At = difference between inlet and outlet 


temperatures, °C. 
8.6 Test Apparatus and Installation of the Test Unit 
8.6.1 General Requirements 


The test apparatus shall be designed in such a way 
that all requirements on adjustments of set values, 
stability criteria and permissible variation in 
measurement can be achieved according to this 
standard. 


8.7 Test Room for the Air Side 


8.7.1 The size ofthe test room shall be selected such 
that any resistance to air flow at the air inlet and air 
outlet of the test unit is avoided. The air flow through 
the room shall not be capable of initiating any short 
circuit between these two openings. The ambient air 
velocity in the room shall not be greater than the 


mean velocity ofair through/at the unit inlet. Unless 
otherwise stated by the manufacturer, the air inlet or 
air outlet to the test unit shall be not less than 1 m 
distant from the surfaces of the test room. 


8.7.2 Any direct heat radiation by heating units in 
the test room onto the unit or onto the temperature 
measuring points shall be avoided. 


8.8 Appliances with Integral Pumps 


For appliances with integral and adjustable water 
pumps, the pressure head and temperature difference 
shall be set simultaneously. 


8.9 Installation and Connection of the Test 
Appliance / Artifact 


8.9.1 General 


The test appliance/artifact shall be installed and 
connected for the test as recommended by the 
manufacturer in the installation and operation 
manual. The accessories provided by option are not 
included in the test. If a back-up heater provided in 
option or not, it shall be switched off or disconnected 
and to be excluded from the testing. 


When the water pump is an integral part of the unit 
and the external head pressure setting possible, the 
setting shall be made in order to reduce this external 
head pressure to approach zero. 


For unit with open-type compressor, the electric 
motor shall be supplied as specified by the 
manufacturer. The compressor shall be operated at 
the rotational speed specified by the manufacturer. 


If the manufacturer instruction indicates value for 
the temperature to be set on the control device for a 
given rating condition, then this value shall be used. 


NOTE — If skilled personnel with knowledge of control 
software are required for the start of the system, the 
manufacturer or the nominated agent should be available 
when the system is being installed and prepared for tests. 


8.9.2 Installation and Connection of the Test Unit 


The equipment to be tested shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation 
instructions using recommended procedures and 
accessories. 


No alterations to the equipment shall be made except 
for the attachment of required test apparatus and 
instruments in the prescribed manner. 


8.10 Test Method 
8.10.1 Conditionsof Heat Transfer Surfaces 


All heat transfer surfaces shall be assumed to have 
fouling allowances of 0.000 m? °C/kW during the test. 
Tests conducted in accordance with this standard 


IS 16590 : 2017 


may require cleaning (in accordance with 
manufacturer’s instructions) of the heat transfer 
surfaces. 


8.11 Measurements 
8.11.1 Temperature and Pressure Measurement 


Temperature and pressure measuring points shall be 
arranged in order to obtain mean values. The accuracy 
and precision ofthe measuring instruments including 
read-out devices, for temperature measurements shall 
meet or exceed the accuracy and precision 
requirements defined in Table 3. 


Table 3 Permissible Variation in Measurement for 


Indicated Values 
(Clauses 8.11.1 and 10.1) 
SI Measured Quantity Measurement 
No. Accuracy 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Water : 
a) Temperature, °C + 0.1 


b) Temperature difference, °C | + 0.1 
c) Volume flow, m/s + 1.0 percent of 


reading 
d) Static pressure difference, Pa | + 5 Pa 
ii) | Air: 
Dry bulb, °C + 0.2 


iii) | Refrigerant : 
a) Temperature, °C + 0.5 

b) Pressure, kPa + 1 percent of 
reading 


iv) | Electricalquantities : 


a) Electric power, W + 1 percent of 


reading 

b) Voltage, V + 0.5 percent of 
reading 

c) Current, A + 1 percent of 
reading 

d) Frequency, Hz + 0.5 percentof 
reading 


v) Compressor rotational|+ 0.5 percentof 
speed, s'! (for open drive only) | reading 


To ensure adequate air distribution, thorough mixing, 
and uniform air temperature, the room and set up 
shall be properly designed and operated. The test 
room conditioning equipment airflow should be set 
such that recirculation of condenser discharged air 
is avoided. The recirculation of the condenser 
discharged air back into the condenser coil(s) shall 
be verified by method as below: Multiple individual 
reading thermocouples (at least one per sampling tree 
location) will be installed around the unit air 
discharge perimeter so that they are below the plane 
of condenser fan exhaust and just above the top of 
the condenser coil(s). The temperature difference 
indicated by these thermocouples shall not be greater 
than 5.0 °C from the average inlet air. Air distribution 
at the test facility point of supply to the unit shall be 
verified prior to beginning of the test and shall be 


IS 16590 : 2017 


adjusted if required. Mixing fans can be used to 
ensure adequate air distribution in the test room. The 
mixing fans shall be placed such that the air from 
fans shall be in a direction away from air intake to 
the condenser and mixing fan exhaust direction is at 
an angle of 90°-270° to the air entrance to the 
condenser air inlet. Precaution to be executed to 
ensure no recirculation of condenser fan exhausts 
air back through the test unit. 


Correct test shall meet the criteria for adequate air 
distribution and control of air temperature as defined 
in Table 4. Annex D provides the check list of 
verification for air flow and temperature distribution. 
The verification shall be done before starting of any 
new test. 


8.11.2 Air Sampling Device Requirements 


Air sampling device is defined as an air sampling 
tube assembly that draws air through sampling tubes 
in a manner to provide a uniform sampling of air 
entering the air-cooled condenser coil. The design 
of air sampling device is described as below: 


The air sampling device is designed to draw a 
uniform sample of the airflow entering the Air-Cooled 
Condenser section for measurement of air 
temperature. A typical configuration for the sampling 
device is shown in Fig. | for a device with overall 
dimensions of 1.2 m by 1.2 m sample. Other dimension 
and rectangular shapes may be used and should be 
scaled accordingly as long as the aspect ratio (width 
to height) of no greater than 2 to | is maintained. 
The air sampling device shall be constructed of 
stainless steel, plastic or other suitable, durable 
materials. It shall have a main flow trunk tube with a 
series of branch tubes connected to the trunk tube. 
It must have from 10 to 20 branch tubes. The branch 
tubes shall have appropriately spaced holes, sized 
to provide equal airflow through all the holes by 
increasing the hole size as you move further from 
the trunk tube to account for the static pressure 
regain effect in the branch and trunk tubes. 


The number of sampling holes shall be greater than 
50. The average minimum velocity through the 
sampling tree holes shall 0.75 m/s as determined by 
evaluating the sum of the open area of the holes as 
compared to the flow area in the aspirating 
psychrometer. The assembly shall have a tubular 
connection to allow a flexible tube to be connected 
to the sampling device and to the aspirating 
psychrometer. 


The sampling device shall also be equipped with a 
thermocouple thermopile grid to measure the average 
temperature of the airflow over the sampling device. 
The thermopile shall have at least 16 junction points 
per sampling device, evenly spaced across the 


sampling device, and connected in a parallel wiring 
circuit. On smaller units with only two sampling 
devices it is acceptable to individually measure the 
16 thermocouple points as a determination of room 
stratification. The air sampling devices shall be 
placed within 150 to 300 mm of the unit to minimize 
the risk of damage to the unit while ensuring that the 
air sampling tubes are measuring the air going into 
the test unit rather than the room air around the unit. 


NOTE — The 15 mm x 25 mm slots shown in Fig. | are 
cut into the branches of the sampling device and are located 
inside of the trunk of the sampling device. They are placed 
to allow air to be pulled into the main trunk from each of 
the branches. 


8.11.3 Aspirating Psychrometer 


Aspirating psychrometer is a piece of equipment with 
a monitored airflow section that draws a uniform 
airflow velocity through the measurement section 
and has probes for measurement of air temperature. 
The design of an aspirating psychrometer is as 
described below. 


a) It consists of a flow section and a fan to 
draw air through the flow section and 
measures an average value of the sampled 
air stream from air sampling device. 


b) The flow section shall be equipped with two 
dry-bulb temperature probe connections, 
one of which will be used for the facility 
temperature measurement and one of which 
shall be available to confirm this 
measurement using an additional or a 
reference validation temperature sensor 
probe. 


c) The psychrometer shall include a fan that 
either can be adjusted manually or 
automatically to maintain average velocity 
across the temperature sensors. A typical 
configuration for the aspirating 
psychrometer is shown in Fig. 2. 


The distance between the sensor probe and the fan 
shall be such that there is no abnormal impact of air 
velocity from the fan. 


8.12 Test Setup Description 


The air dry-bulb temperature shall be measured at 
multiple locations entering the condenser, based on 
the airflow nominal face area at the point of 
measurement. Multiple temperature measurements 
will be used to determine acceptable air distribution 
and the mean air temperature. 


The use of air sampling device as a measuring station 
reduces the time required to setup a test and allows 
an additional or a reference validation temperature 
sensor(s) probe for redundant dry-bulb 
temperatures. 


1200 


IS 16590 : 2017 


B12 


140 


140 


140 


15 mm X 25 mm SLOTS 


140 


210 


140 


140 


THERMOPLE JUNCTION 
POINT DN 100 DN 80 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL AIR SAMPLING DEVICE 
9 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Location for 
laboratory dry 
bulb sensor 


Flexible tube Dry buib sensor 


connected to 
sampler trees 


air flow —=— 


Velocity across 
probs should be 
5.0 +/- 1.0 m/s 


Centrifugal fan 
variable speed 
recommended 


Aspirating Psychrometer 
header 10.16 cm. 
Clear plastic tube 


Fic. 2 ASPIRATING PSYCHROMETER 


The nominal face area may extend beyond the 
condenser coil depending on coil configuration and 
orientation, and must include all regions through 
which air enters the unit. The nominal face area of 
the airflow shall be divided into a number of equal 
area sampling rectangles with aspect ratios no greater 
than 2 to 1. Each rectangular area shall have one air 
sampling device. 


A minimum of one aspirating psychrometer per side 
of a chiller shall have to be used. For units with three 
(3) sides, two (2) sampling aspirating psychrometers 
shall have to be used but will require a separate air 
sampler device for the third side. For units that have 
air entering the sides and the bottom of the unit, 
additional air sampling device should be used. 


A minimum total of two (2) air sampling device should 
be used in any case, in order to assess air 
temperature uniformity. 


The air sampling device shall be located such that it 
is at geometric centre of each rectangle condenser 
coil; either horizontal or vertical orientation of the 
branches is acceptable. The sampling device shall 
cover at least 80 percent of the height and 60 percent 
of the width of the air entrance to the unit (for long 
horizontal coils), or shall cover at least 80 percent of 
the width and 60 percent of the height of the air 
entrance (for tall vertical coils). The sampling device 
shall not extend beyond the face of the air entrance 
area. It is acceptable to block all branch inlet holes 
that extend beyond the face of the unit. Figure 3 
gives examples of how an increasing number of air 
sampling devices are required for longer condenser 
coils. 


A maximum of only four (4) sampling devices shall 
be connected to each aspirating psychrometer. The 
sampling device should be connected and routed to 
the aspirating psychrometer using insulated flexible 
tubing so that heat transfer to the air stream is 


prevented. In order to proportionately divide the flow 
stream for multiple sampling devices for a given 
aspirating psychrometer, the flexible tubing shall be 
of equal lengths for each sampling device. 


Figure 4 gives some typical examples of air sampling 
device and aspirating psychrometer setups. 


Suitable measures shall be taken to ensure that the 
water temperatures are the average bulk stream 
temperatures. This shall include provisions for mixing 
of the fluid. 


For free air intake temperature measurements, it is 
required, 


a) either to have at least one sensor per m? and 
not less than four measuring points equally 
distributed on the air surface; and 

b) or to use a sampling device. It shall be 


complemented with a minimum of four 
sensors for checking uniformity, if the 
surface area is greater than | m?. 


8.12.1 Units with Integral Pumps 


Units that include an integral evaporator fluid pump, 
and / a condenser fluid pump shall have to be tested 
for both condition A and test condition B as defined 
below. 


8.12.2 Test Condition A — Integral Water Pumps 
Operating 


The unit shall be run with the integral pumps running 
and the external loop resistance of the test facility 
adjusted to obtain the desired rating fluid flow rates. 
The following values shall then be measured: 


a) 


Evaporator and/or condenser entering and 
leaving water temperatures,°C; 


b) 
c) 


Evaporator water flow rates, m?/s; 


Evaporator water static pressure, kPa; and 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Legend 


Condenser air inlet 
Nominal Face Area 


Equal Area Rectangles 


Air Sampler Tree 


O.8BLSLWSL 


0.6Loveral (A L +B+C+D+...) SLOVERALL 


Fic. 3 DETERMAINATION OF MEASUREMENT RECTANGLES AND REQUIRED NUMBER OF AIR SAMPLER TREES 


d) Total power input to the unit (compressor + 
pumps + controls), kW. 


The calculated test capacities for this test will 
represent the cooling capacity, condenser heat 
rejection. 


8.12.3 Test Condition B — Water Pumps Turned Off 


A second test shall be run with the integral pumps 
turned off. The following values shall be measured: 


a) 


Evaporator and condenser entering and 
leaving water temperatures, °C; 


b) Evaporator and condenser water flow rates, 
m?/s; and 
c) Total power input to the unit (compressor + 


controls), kW. 


The calculated test capacities for this test will 
represent the cooling capacity and condenser heat 
rejection. 


Figure 5 and Fig. 6 are representing typical 
arrangements of test facility and measurement 
locations for the test conditions A and B, 
respectively. 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Chiller 
with coils 
on 2 sides 


Chiller 
with coils 
on 3 sides 


Tail coil 
Chiller 


Large Chiller 


Fic. 4 TYPICAL TEST SETUP CONFIGURATIONS 


Adjust valve to get 
rated Delta T 
Loop condenser 
pump 


Loop heat exchanger 


Unit condenser 
pump 


UNIT KW 
(COMP-PUMPS) 


COMPRESSOR 


Adjust valve to get rated delta T 


Loop heat exchanger 


Loop heat exchanger 


Loop Evaporator 
pump 


Fic. 5 TEST A CONFIGURATION—UNIT UNDER TEST WITH INTEGRAL LIQUID PUMPS ON. 


12 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Adjust valve to get 
rated Delta T 
Loop condenser 
pump 


Loop heat exchanger 


Unit condenser 
pump 


UNIT KW 


LCDWT 
(COMP) | 


= 
| 

COMPRESSOR W-PRESS | 
| 

| 

| 

Så 


ECLWT W--PRESS 


FLOW LCLWT 


W-PRESS 


Adjust valve to get rated delta T 


Loop heat exchanger 


Loop Evaporator 
pump 


Fic. 6 TEST B CONFIGURATION—UNIT UNDER TEST WITH INTEGRAL LIQUID PUMPS OFF. 


9 TEST VERIFICATION 9.1.3 In packages using an open-type compressor 


with prime mover and external gear drive 
Heat balance method as given in 9.1 shall be used P B 


for water cooled condensers. W. = q q 
input prime mover gear 
9.1 Heat Balance — Substantiating Test where 
9.1.1 Calculation of the Heat Balance W ipsi = power input to the compressor 


shaft, expressed, in kW; 
Heat losses or gains through radiation, convection, 


bearing friction, oil cooler, etc, in most cases is Ren RON 
negligible and hence are not be considered in the 


= power delivered by prime mover, 
expressed, in kW; and 


övetall heat balance: d gear = friction loss in gear box, expressed, 
in kW. 
By omitting the effects of the negligible heat losses i 
The value of q shall be determined from the 


and gains mentioned above, the general heat balance 
equation shall be as follows: 


prime mover 


power input to prime mover using certified data from 
the prime mover manufacturer. 


Vey + as = d ca r es 
The value ofq, shall be determined from certified 


ear 


where gear losses provided by the gear manufacturer. 
q„ = cooling capacity, 


P a 9.1.4 Percent Heat Balance 
a = heat rejection capacity, and 


= compressor work input as defined in 9.1.2 Heat balance, in percent, is defined as: 


and 9.1.3. (a. + Waw) = (a...) 
9.1.2 Ina hermetic package, where the compressor a) OO di 
motor is cooled by refrigerant, chilled liquid or Tea 
condenser water the motor cooling load will be The heat balance (percent) shall be within the 
included in the measured condenser load, hence tolerance calculated per 9.1.5. For the applicable 
conditions for any test of a water chilling package 
unit to be acceptable. 


input 


100 


Wu electrical power input to the 
compressor motor, expressed in kW. 


13 


IS 16590 : 2017 


9.1.5 Verification Test Tolerance on Heat Balance 


The verification test tolerance shall be determined 
from the following equation. 


is Dore PE 
ATy X FL 
where 
%FL = percent full-load; 
FL = load factor; and 
AT, = difference between entering and 


leaving chilled water temperature at 
full-load, in °C. 


10 INSTRUMENTATION 
10.1 Permissible Variation in Measurement 


The permissible variation in measurement shall not 
exceed the values specified in Table 3. 


Table 3 Permissible Variation in Measurement for 
Indicated Values 
(Clauses 8.11.1 and 10.1) 


b) Pressure, kPa 


SI Measured Quantity Measurement 
No. Accuracy 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) | Water: 
a) Temperature, °C + 0.1 
b) Temperature + 0.1 
difference, °C + 1.0 percentof reading 
c) Volume flow, m?/s +5 Pa 
d) Static pressure 
difference, Pa 
ii) | Air : 
Dry bulb, °C + 0.2 
iii) | Refrigerant : 
a) Temperature, °C + 0.5 


1 percentof reading 


iv) 


a) Electric power, W 


Electricalquantities : 


+ 1 percentof reading 


b) Voltage, V + 
c) Current, A + 
d) Frequency, Hz pe 


0.5 percentof reading 
1 percentof reading 
0.5 percent of reading 


Compressor rotational | + 
speed, s“! 
(for open drive only) 


v) 0.5 percentof reading 


NOTE — The cooling capacity shall be determined with 
a maximum uncertainty of 5 percent independent of the 
individual uncertainties of measurement including the 
uncertainties on the properties of fluids. 


10.2 Accuracy of the instruments used for testing 
shall be as given in Table 4: 


11 TEST PROCEDURE 
11.1 General 


The test shall not be started until all non- 
condensable have been removed from the system. 


14 


Table 4 Accuracy of Testing Instruments 
(Clauses 8.11.1 and 10.2) 


SI Measurement Measurement |Display 
No. System Resolution 
Accuracy 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) | Water temperature, °C |+ 0.11 0.005 

ii) | Air temperature, °C |+ 0.11 0.05 

iii) | Differential pressure |+ 1 percent RDG | 3 Significant 
figures 


Electrical power 


+1.0 percent FS 


400V +2.0 percent RDG | 4 Significant 
figures 
(V, A, kW, Hz) 
> 400V +1.5 percent FS 
+2.5 percent RDG 
v) |Barometric pressure, |+ 1 0.1 
kPa 
vi) | Water mass flow rate |+ 1 percent RDG | 4 Significant 


figures 


11.2 Steady State Conditions 


Steady state conditions is considered obtained and 
maintained when all the measured test parameters 
remain constant without having to alter the set 
values, for a minimum duration of 15 min, with respect 
to the tolerances given in Table 4. Periodic 
fluctuations of measured test parameters caused by 
the operation of regulation and control devices are 
permissible. However, the mean value of such 
fluctuations shall not exceed the permissible 
deviations listed in Table 5. 


11.3 Output Measurement of Cooling Capacity 


For the output measurement it is necessary to record 
all the meaningful data continuously. In the case of 


Table 5 Permissible Deviations from Set Values 
(Clause11.2) 


SI Quantity Permissible Permissible 
No. Deviation of Deviation of 
the Arithmetic Individual 
Mean Values Measured 
from Set Values from Set 
Values Values 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) | Water + 0.2 + 0.5 
a) entering + 0.3 + 0.6 
temperature, °C + 2 percent + 5 percent 
b) leaving - + 10 percent 
temperature, °C 
c) volume flow 
d) Static pressure 
difference 
il) Air + 0.3 +1 
Dry bulb 
temperature, °C 
iii) | Voltage 
Single / Three- + 5 percent 
phaseFrequency + 2 percent 


recording instruments which operate on a cyclic 
basis, the sequence shall be adjusted such that a 
complete recording is effected at least once every 
30 s. 


The output shall be measured in the steady state 
condition-recording 4 sets of reading at every 5 min 
interval. 


11.4 Calculation of Test Results 
11.4.1 Cooling Capacity 


Cooling capacity shall be determined from the 
average of the capacities calculated from the four 
sets of data collected as described in 11.3. 


11.4.2 Power Consumption 


a) For test units with a frequency conversion 
device or motor starter furnished as part of 
the compressor circuit, the compressor 
power input shall be measured at the input 
terminals of the frequency converter or 
motor starter. For water-chilling package 
units for testing not supplied with the starter 
or frequency converter furnished for it, then 
a starter or frequency converter of similar 
type shall be used for the test. 


IS 16590 : 2017 
b) Power consumed by auxiliaries, during 
normal operation of the package shall be 
included in the total power consumption for 
test units which are supplied as part of the 
unit. 


In case of open-type compressors, where 
the motor and/or gear set is not supplied by 
the manufacturer, or for the compressor shaft 
input shall be determined as stated in 9.1.3 or 
9.1.4. 


In case of air-cooled condensers, the power 
consumption of condenser fan shall be 
included in the total power consumption of 
the package. 


d) 


11.5 Data to be Recorded 
11.5.1 Measurement Data 


The data to be recorded for the capacity tests are as 
described in Table 6. The table provides the general 
information required but is not intended to limit the 
data to be obtained. 


11.5.2 Supplementary Data to be Recorded for 
General Information 


Following additional information shall also be 
recorded and reported along with test report: 


Table 6 Data to be Recorded 
(Clause 11.5.1) 


SI No. Measured Quantity or Result Liquid Cooled Air Cooled 
Condenser Condenser 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Ambient conditions 
a) Air temperature, dry bulb, °C — V 
b) Atmospheric pressure, kPa V V 
ii) Electrical quantities 
a) Voltage, V V V 
b) Total power input, W (see3.14) V V 
c) Frequency, Hz V V 
iii) Chilledliquid 
a) Inlet temperature,°C V V 
b) Outlet temperature, °C V V 
c) Volume flow, m?/s V V 
d) Pressure drop /ESP, kPa V V 
e) Concentration,percentage V V 
(for fluidsotherthan water) 
iv) Condenser liquid 
a) Inlet temperature, °C V 
b) Outlet temperature, °C V — 
c) Volume flow, m?/s V 
d) Pressure drop /ESP, kPa V 
v) Air 
a) Dry bulb inlet temperature, °C V 
vi) Refrigerant 
a) Refrigerant charge, kg (if adjusted) V V 
vii) Heat balance, percentage V 
viii) Cooling capacity, kW \ NI 
ix) COP, kW / kW V V 


15 


IS 16590 : 2017 


a) Nameplate data which includes but not 
limited to make, model, size and type of 
refrigerant, sufficient to completely identify 
the water chiller. 

b) For units with open-type compressors 

where motor and or gear set are not supplied 

by manufacturer, or for engine or turbine 
drives, record compressor driver or input 
rotational speed. 


c) Wherever applicable, motor nameplate data. 
d) Date, place and time of test. 


12 FOULING FACTOR CONSIDERATIONS 
FOR TESTING 


12.1 For all rated condition testing, Evaporator 
water-side and condenser water-side or air-side heat 
transfer surfaces shall be considered clean during 
testing. Tests will be assumed to reflect fouling 
factors of 0.000 m?.°C/kW. 


12.2 To determine the capacity of the chiller package 
at the nominal fouling conditions, the procedure 
given in Annex A shall be used to determine an 
adjustment for the evaporator and or condenser 
water temperatures. 


13 MARKING 


13.1 A name plate of corrosion-resistant material 
shall be affixed on the chiller with the following 
details: 


a) Manufacturer’s name and address; 

b) Model number designation; 

c) Serial number; 

d) Refrigerant designation (in accordance with 
IS/ISO 817); 

e) Rated voltage, phase and frequency (in 


accordance with IS 12360); 


16 


f) Published total power input, kW; 
g) Maximum starting current, Amperes, and 


h) Refrigerant charge, kg. 


13.2 The markings required by the standard shall 
be clearly legible and durable. Compliance is checked 
by inspection and by rubbing the marking by hand 
for 15 s with a piece of cloth soaked with water and 
again for 15 s with a piece of cloth soaked with 
petroleum spirit. The petroleum spirit to be used for 
the test is aliphatic solvent hexane. After the test, 
the markings shall be clearly legible. It shall not be 
possible to remove marking plates nor shall they 
show curling. 


NOTE — In considering the durability of the marking, 
the effect of normal use is taken into account. For 
example, marking by means of paint or enamel, other 
than vitreous enamel, on containers that are likely to 
be cleaned frequently, is not considered to be durable. 


13.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The water cooled chilling package may also be marked 
with the Standard Mark. 


13.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed 
by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. The details of conditions under which a 
license for the use of Standard Mark may be granted 
to the manufacturers or the producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


13.4 Published Performance Data 


a) Application rating performance curves shall 
be provided as specified in 6.2.3. 
b) Part load performance rating shall be 


provided as specified in 6.2.4. 


IS 16590 : 2017 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 6.2.1 and 12.2) 
METHOD FOR SIMULATING FOULING FACTOR ALLOWANCE 


A-1 PURPOSE 


A-1.1 This Annex describes the method for adjusting 
the operating conditions of'a test unit to simulate the 
required rating water side fouling allowance. 


It is assumed that all heat transfer surfaces have a 
fouling allowance of 0.0000 m?°C/kW during the test. 
The procedure below defines a way to adjust the water 
cooled condenser water temperatures and the 
evaporator water temperatures to simulate a desired 
field fouling allowance. 


The procedure below is only applicable to the waterside 
of evaporators and condensers and excludes air cooled 
condensers. 


A-2 FOULING ALLOWANCE PROCEDURE 


A-2.1 Obtain the log mean temperature difference 
(LMTD) for the evaporator and/or condenser using the 
following equation at the specified field fouling 
allowance (ff). 


LMTD = —— 
In} 1+ — weve (1) 
(s) 
R = water temperature range = absolute value 
(ta T te)» °C 
S = small temperature difference, 


= absolute value (1 — ¢,,), °C, for 
condenser, and 


= absolute value (ft, - ¢,,), °C, for 
evaporator. 


A-2.2 Derivation of LMTD 


The incremental LMTD (ILMTD) is determined using 
the following equation: 


ILMTD = FO ane) 


Note that the 4 (area) is the surface area on the water 
side. 


A-2.3 The water temperature difference TD, needed to 
simulate the additional fouling, TD, can now be 
calculated 


TD = S- S, 20) 
USR (A) 
ef -l 
where 
R 
= ms (0) 
LMTD — ILMTD 


R mure (6) 
“ €-1 
S, = small temperature difference as tested in clean 
condition 


The water temperature difference, TD, is then added to 
the condenser entering water temperature or subtracted 
from the evaporator leaving water temperature to 
simulate the additional fouling factor. 


A-3 EXAMPLE-CONDENSER FOULING 
Fouling factor allowance ff= 0.088 m?"C/k W 
Condenser load, g = 850 kW 
Condenser leaving water temp, T',, = 35°C 
Condenser entering water temp, 7 =28 °C 
Water surface area, A = 50 m? 


Saturated condensing temperature. f,,,=40 °C 


LE =40-35=5°C 
R=t -t =35-28=7°C 


- R = 1 = 0.97 
LMTD-ILMTD 7.966-0.748 ` 
R 7.0 
Tika S- =50- 1 =0.7° 
e? -1 e?” —1 0.7 C 


The entering condenser water temperature for testing 
is then raised 0.7 ?C to simulate the fouling factor 
allowance of 0.088 m? °C/kW. The entering condenser 
water temperature will be 28 + 0.7°C or 28.7°C. 


A-4 The meaning of symbols and subscripts. The 
symbols and subscripts used in equations (1) 
through (6) are as follows: 


a) Symbols: 

A = water heat transfer surface, m”, for 
evaporator or condenser 

e = base of natural logarithm 

q = capacity,kW 

R = water temperature range 

S = small temperature difference 

t = temperature, °C 

f = fouling factor allowance, m’°C / kW 

t a = saturated vapor temperature entering 


the condenser for single component 
or azeotrope refrigerants and equal 
dew point for zeotropic refrigerants 
[at compressor discharge pressure]. 


IS 16590 : 2017 


saturated vapor temperature leaving 
the evaporator for single component 
or azeotrope refrigerants and average 
dew point for zeotropic refrigerants 
[at compressor average suction 
pressure]. 


b) Subscripts: 


ev = evaporator 

c = cleaned 

cd = condenser 

f = fouled or fouling 

l = leaving (for example : ¢,, — water 
leaving temperature) 

w = water 

s = saturation 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 6.2.4.1 and 6.2.4.4) 


INDIA SEASONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATIO (ISEER) 


a = additional fouling 
e = entering (for example: t „ — water 
entering temperature) 
B-1 PURPOSE 


The purpose of this annex is to define a uniform 
procedure for the calculation ofa single value number 
that is a representation of the part load efficiency of 
a chiller. The single value number will be called an 
India Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio or ISEER. It 
is somewhat like highway and city fuel efficiency for 
cars, which both are intended to be typical efficiency 
number, but will likely not exactly match actual 
efficiencies obtained under actual operating 
conditions. 


B-2 SCOPE 


This annex procedure is only for equipment covered 
by this standard. The ISEER equation and procedure 
are intended to be an average representation of a 
single chiller in a typical commercial application with 
conventional operating parameters. The procedure 
is intended to provide a consistent uniform method 
for calculating the single number for part load 
operation. A fixed set of operating load points and 
conditions are defined to allow for equal comparison 
of products. But allowances have been made for 
regional values to be defined to allow for correlation 
to regional ambient and building operational and 
construction standards. The intent is that this single 
value metric be used by efficiency standards and 
certification programs around the world that require 
more than a full load efficiency level. 


The equation has been derived to provide a 
representation of the average part load efficiency 
for a single chiller only. However, for operating cost 
and energy analysis it is best to use a comprehensive 
analysis tool that reflects the actual weather data, 


18 


building load characteristics, operational hours, 
economizer capabilities and energy drawn by 
auxiliaries such as pumps and cooling towers when 
calculating the applied chiller system efficiency. This 
becomes increasingly important with multiple chiller 
systems because individual chillers operating within 
a multiple chiller systems can have significantly 
different load profiles than a single chiller. 


B-3 EQUATION AND DEFINITION OF TERMS 


B-3.1 The single value part load rating shall be 
determined by using the following equation; 


ISEER = AXCOP yyy, + BX COP you, + CX COP 5, 


100% 


+D xCOP sy 
where 

COP w = COP at full load rating point and 
operating conditions 

COP,,,, = COP at 75 percent load rating point 
and operating conditions 

COP., = COPat SOpercent load rating point 
and operating conditions 

COP, 5, = COPat25 percent load rating point 
and operating conditions 

A = weighting factor for 100 percent load 

B = weighting factor for 75percent load 

C =weighting factor for 50percent load 

D = weighting factor for 25 percent load 


The values of 4, B, C and D are based on the weighted 
average of the most common building types across 
climatic zones of India. Values that have been 
developed are shown in Table 7. 


Table 7 WeightingCoefficients A to D for 
Calculation of ISEER 


(Clause B-3.1) 


Load Rate 100 75 50 25 
(percent) 
Weighting A=6 | B=48| C=36 
Coefficients 


D=10 


The ISEER rating requires that the unit efficiency be 
determined at 100 percent, 75 percent, 50 percent and 
25 percent at the conditions specified in Table 8. 


For units with proportional unloading performance 
should be obtained at the 25 percent, 50 percent, 75 
percent and 100 percent points to calculate the 
ISEER. 


For units with proportional unloading performance 
should be obtained at the 25 percent, 50 percent, 75 
percent and 100 percent points to calculate the 
ISEER. 


If the unit has discrete steps of unloading, but due 
to its capacity control logic cannot be operated at 
75 percent, 50 percent or 25 percent capacity, then 
the unit should be operated at other load points and 
the 75 percent, 50 percent, or 25 percent capacity 
efficiencies should be determined by interpolating 
between the two operating points that frame the 
rating point. The required condenser entering 
temperature at the requested load point should be 
used and a capacity test run at each unloading stage 
on either side of the desired part load rating point 
then should be interpolated to obtain the desired 
part load point rating. For example if the unit has 
capacity stages at 33 percent and 66 percent nominal 
displacement, then the 50 percent point can be 
determined by obtaining the capacity and efficiency 
at the 66 percent unloading stage at 50 percent 


IS 16590 : 2017 


entering temperature and another test, at the 
33percent unloading stage at the 50 percent entering 
temperature. Extrapolation of data shall not be used 
and the desired rating point must be framed by two 
actual operating points. An actual chiller capacity 
point, equal to or less than the required rating point 
must be used to plot the data. For example, if the 
minimum actual capacity is 33 percent, then the curve 
can be used to determine the 50 percent capacity 
point, but not the 25 percent capacity point. 


If a unit cannot be unloaded to the 25 percent, 
50 percent, or 75 percent capacity point, then the unit 
should be run at the minimum step of unloading at 
the condenser entering temperature based on Table 9 
for 25 percent, SOpercent or 75 percent capacity points 
as required. The efficiency shall then be determined 
by using the following equation: 


_ Capacity min 


COP 
Cy X POWET nin 


where 

Capacity . and Power, are the values from 
the lowest stage of unloading running at the 
desired part load rating point. 

C, is a degradation factor to account for cycling 
of the compressor for capacities less than the 
minimum step of capacity. C, should be 
calculated using the following equation: 


C,=( 0.13 x LF) +1.13 


The factor LF should be calculated using the 
following equation: 


| % Load 
LF= 


00 x (Full Load Unit Capacity) 


Part Load Unit Capacity 


Table 8 India Seasonal Energy Efficiency Rating Conditions 
(ClauseB-2) 


SI No. Measurement Parameters Water Cooled Air Cooled 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Evaporator water temperature 
Leaving 7 °C 
Flow Flow rate equal to a 5 °C Delta temperature at 
100 percent rating point 
ii) Evaporator fouling factor allowance 
Water Side 0.044 m? °C /kW 
ili) Condenser fouling factor allowance 
Water Side 0.088m? m°°C /kW 0.000 m? °C /kW 
Condenser Flow Flow rate equal to a 5 °C AT at Airflow equal to the full 
100 percent rating point load rating 
iv) Condenser Entering Temperature 
100 percent Load 30.0 °C 39.0 °C 
75 percent Load 26.0 °C 32.0 °C 
50 percent Load 23.0: °C 26.0 °C 
25 percent Load 20.0 °C 20.0 °C 


19 


IS 16590 : 2017 


where 


PercentLoad = standard rating point that is 75 
percent, 50 percent and 25 percent. 


Full loadcapacityis the capacity at the full load 100 
percent rating point as defined in Table 9. 


The part load capacity of the unit is the 
capacityobtainedwhen the machine is run at it’s 
lowest stage of capacityat the desiredload point 
rating conditions. 


For water cooled units where a unit has been selected 
for operating conditions that will not allow operation 
at the full load condenser entering fluid conditions, 
then an ISEER cannot be calculated. For these 
applications - ISEER can be determined, using the 
same procedures as defined above except that for 
the full load rating point the machine will be run at 
the maximum design entering condenser temperature. 
The 75 percent, 50 percent and 25 percent points will 
then be run at the temperatures defined in Table 9 
unless the unit will not operate at these conditions 
and then the maximum option temperature shall be 
used. For example if a chiller was selected for 30°C 
full load condenser enter fluid temperature then the 
100 percent point would be determined at a 30°C 
entering conditions. For ISEER rating the 75 percent 
would then be determined at a 26 °C entering 
temperature, the 50 percent at 23°C and the 25 percent 
point at 20°C. 


B-4 SAMPLE CALCULATION 


The following is an example of an ISEER calculation 
for an air cooled machine with 3 discrete stages of 
capacity with an ISEER determined for the average 
profile. 


Using the above data the part load COP value can be 
calculated. 


The 75 percent load point is determined by 
interpolating between the 100 percent and 72.3 
percent load point. 


(75-70) 


COP = 
3% (112—70) 


x (3.85—4.35) +4.35 = 4.29 


The 50 percent load point is determined by 
interpolating between the 73 percent and 42 percent 
load points. 


_ (50-40) 


COP», = (13-40) x(4.45-4.59) +4.59 = 4.54 


Because the unit cannot unload to 25 percent 
capacity or less, the following additional calculations 
are required to determine the COP, Using the 
minimum capacity data point listed above, that was 
determined at the minimum step of capacity at the 
20 °C ambient conditions the following calculations 
can be made. 


_ 0.25 x 350 
146.9 


LF = 0.60 


C= (40.13 x 0.60) +1.13 = 1.05 
cop= "7 430 
1.05x33.3 


Using the A, B, C and D efficiencies the EBV can 
then be calculated as follows: 


ISEER(COP) = (0.06 x 3.79) + (0.48 x 4.29) + 
(0.36 x 4.54) + (0.10 x 4.20) = 4.34 


B-5 APPROACH ADOPTED FOR ISEER 
COEFFICIENT CALCULATIONS 


a) Weather data is taken from bin weather file 
used for energy simulation of buildings 


b) Following building types have been 
analysed through simulation for studying 
the chiller load variation: 

1) Office Building — large, 24 h use 
2) Office building — large, daytime use 
3) Office building — small, 24 h use 


Table 9 Chiller Part Load Values Data 
(Clauses B-3 and B-4) 


SINo. Rating Step Capacity % Load Temp of Input COP 
(kW) Entering (kW) 
Air (°C) 

i) 100% 1 (100%) 350.0 100% 39.0 92.3 3.79 
ii) 100% 1 (100%) 392.0 112% 32.0 101.8 3.85 
iii) 75% 2 (66%) 245.0 70% 32.0 563 435 

iv) 50% 2(66%) 256.0 73% 26.0 57.5 445 
v) 50% 3(33%) 141.0 40% 26.0 30.7 4.59 
vi) 25% 3(33%) 146.9 42% 20.0 33.3 441 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Table 10 Calculation of ISEER for Large Office Building 


(ClauseB-5) 


Percentage Average Number kW - hr Min Low Peak Design 
Load Percent Load | ofhours bin bin bin bin 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
100 to 87.5 93.75 237 781.4 0 0 0 2207) 
87.5 to 81.25 84.37 353 1047.3 0 297.8 0.0 
81.25 to 75 78.125 511 1403.9 0 5992 0 
75 to 68.25 71.87 642 1622.7 0 0 4614 0 
68.25 to 62.5 65.625 718 1657.1 0 0.00 4712 0 
62.5 to 56.25 59.375 1360 2839.9 0 807.5 0 0 
56.25 to 50 53.125 1404 2623.2 0 745.9 0 0 
50 to 43.75 46.875 1411 2326.0 0 661.4 0 0 
43.75 to 37.5 40.625 846 1208.7 0 343.7 0 0 
37.5 to31.25 34.375 522 630.9 |179.4 0 0 0 
31.25 to 25 25.125 364 321.8 DIS 0 0 0 
25 to 18.75 21.875 235 180.8 51.4 0 0 0 
18.75 to 12.5 15.625 116 63.7 18.1 0 0 0 
12.5 to 6.25 9.375 37 12.3 5 0 0 0 
6.25 to 0 3.125 4 0.4 0.1 0 0 0 

8 760 16720.2 | 344.0 2558.5 116296 2222 

T2 53.8 34.3 4.7 
weightage| percent percent percent percent 
D C B A 
4) Office building — small, daytime use f) Bin group is selected in such a way that 


c) 


d) 


e) 


5) Retail shopping building, daytime use 
6) Hotel building, 24 h use 
7) Hospital — 24 h use 


Building envelopes, occupancy, LPD, EPD, 
etc, are the taken from recently built modern 
buildings. 

Models of all seven types have been 
simulated for representative cities of various 
climatic zones: hot and dry, composite, warm 
and humid, and moderate. 

Grouping of data as per bin method for 
computation of ISEER coefficients is done 
on the basis of load on chiller. 


g) 


average of peak bin group should be 75 
percent load and similarly average of low 
bin group and min bin group should be 50 
percent and 25 percent load respectively. 


ISEER coefficients for 25 percent, 50 percent, 
75 percent and 100 percent load are first 
computed separately for each building type 
in each representative city. Average of all 
the cases has led to the final set of ISEER 
coefficients. 


Typical example for the calculation of ISEER for large 
office building is shown in Table 10. 


21 


IS 16590 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 6.2.4.4 and 7.3) 


SAMPLE CALCULATIONS 


C-1 PURPOSE 


The purpose of this Annex is to provide guidance for 
calculation ofrating tolerance as described in clause 7. 


To calculate permissible tolerances on capacity (kW) 
and COP 
ins Don Et 5 
AT, X%FL 


C-1.1 FULL-LOAD EXAMPLEIN COP 
Rated capacity =35kW 
Rated power input = 9.230 kW 


Cooling A 7,, =SK 


COP= cue 3.79 
9.230 


Tolerance (percentage) = 


10.50 — (0.07 x 100) 4 = 
x 


=10.5-7+1.66= 5.16 
100 


100 — 5.16 x 35=33.194 kW 
100 


Minimum allowable capacity = 


3.79 x 100 = 3.6 
100+5.16 
C-1.2 PART-LOAD EXAMPLE IN COP 


Minimum allowable COP = 


Assume a part load of 69.5 of the rated capacity. 


Part load capacity = 24.325 kW 
Part load power input = 5.960 kW 


AT, =5.0°C 
24,325 

m -4.0 
AN 


Tolerance (percentage) = 


10.50 - (0.07 x 69.5) + 833.3 
5 x 69.5 


=10.5 - 4.865 + 2.39 = 8.025 


4.08 x 100 _ 
100+8.025 


Minimum allowable COP = 3.77 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 8.11.1) 
AIR DISTRIBUTION CHECK PROCEDURE AND CHECK LIST 


D-1 Following procedure shall be adopted for 
verification of the air and temperature distribution 
within the lab. This may be conducted at every 
test set up to verify the air and temperature 
distribution within the specified limits. 


a) Set up the air sampler device and the 
aspirating around the chiller condensing 
unit based on the unit configuration as 
shown in Fig. 4. Keep the aspirating 
psychrometer’s air mixing fan on. 


b) Ensure all the thermocouples mounted on 
the air sampler device measures same 
value and measures ambient. The 
measured values shall be within the 
allowable tolerance as per Table 4. 


c) Start the chiller and conditioning 
equipment of the lab. Once the 
appropriate stable conditions have been 
achieved, record the temperature values 


as simultaneously as possible prior to start 
of data collection. Note the data in the 
table below. 


d) Calculate the mean air dry-bulb 
temperature (MADBT). 


e) Confirm that each of the aspirating 
psychrometer values are within +1°C (for 
units < 703.4kW or+1.7°C (for units 
2703.4 kW ) of MADBT. 


f) Confirmthat each thermocouple values 
are within +1°C of eachaspirating 
psychrometer. 

g) Confirm each recirculating thermocouple 
values shall be within +2.7°C of the 
MADBT. 


h) Note the values in a sketch (see Fig. 7) 
as shown below. The data shall be noted 
as shown in Fig. 8. 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Il Chiller 


A/P#4— 


T/P#10_ 


L R/CHO_ 


Mixing Fan 


Fic. 7 SAMPLE SKETCH 


Fic. 8 


IS 16590 : 2017 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses3.13and 11.1) 


BAROMETRIC PRESSURE ADJUSTMENT 


E-1 PURPOSE 


The purpose of this Annex is to prescribe a method 
ofadjusting measured test data according to the local 
barometric pressure. 


E-2 BACKGROUND 


In order to ensure that performance can be uniformly 
compared from one unit to another and from one 
manufacturer to another, performance testing for air- 
cooled chillers shall be corrected for air density 
variations. To accomplish this, use the following two 
(2) correction factors (CF. CF) to correct test data 
at 100 percent load points back to standard 
barometric pressure at sea level. These correction 
factors use an empirical method of correction based 
on industry average values across a wide variety of 
chillers. The correction factors are based on pressure 
rather than altitude, in order to include the effects of 
weather variations. Test data shall be corrected to 
Standard Air conditions for comparison to Published 
Ratings. The correction multiplier for efficiency and 
capacity at the 0 percent load point will be 1.0. 
Intermediate correction multipliers at part-load points 
will be a linear interpolation of values between the 0 
and 100 percent load points where the percent load 
value is based on the measured capacity divided by 
the design capacity. 


NOTE — These factors are not intended to serve as 
selection code correction factors. For selection codes it is 
best to use component models that properly adjust for 
variation in barometric pressure as related to fan, heat 
exchanger and compressor power and capacity. 


The correction factors (CF, CF,) will be limited to a 
value corresponding to a barometric pressureof 
84.32kPa (approximately1524metres elevation). 
Correction factors for measured barometric readings 
below the minimum will be equal to the value 
determined at 84.32 kPa. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


Air-cooled chillers are tested at the local conditions. 
The data is then corrected to sea level and standard 
pressure by multiplying the measured data by the 


appropriate correction factor (CF). Both factors are 
in the form of a second order polynomial equations, 
Table 11. 


A za M L 
Di Ai FE Pres 
DHA PEB PEN, 
CF, =1+ D, — 1): el 35: (Dn: te-a aa 
CF,=1+(D,-1): el:035:(Dn'n -9.6)] 


test, FL 


O ei = Q est ` Chy 


Neorrected z Nest ` n 
where 


Variables are as given below: 


P pressure, absolute, kPa 

Q = capacity, kW 

n = efficiency 

CF, capacity correction factor 

CF, efficiency correction factor 

A,B,C = polynomial constants 

Test = actual measured value during test 
at local conditions 

Corrected = adjusted value equivalent to 


operation at sea level with standard 
pressure 


100 percent Load Point Example 


A chiller has published ratings of 700 kW and 3.10 COP 
at sea level. The chiller is tested at an elevation of 
approximately 1 080 metres with overcast skies. 


The measured test results: 


Capacity Q — 693.2 kW 
Efficiency nosa 3.021 COP 
Air pressure P = 89.80 kPa 


Correction function D, = (0.000023713) x (89.80) — 
(0.0059860) x (89.80) + 1.36304= 1.0167 


Correction function D, = (0.00005 1135) x (89.80P— 
(0.013064) x (89.80) + 1.79872 = 1.0379 


Table 11 Terms Correction Factor (CF) coefficients 
(Clause E-3) 


Description Unit of Measure 
Capacity D, Capacity D, 
Ao By Ci A, B, Č, 
2.3713E-05 -5.9860E-03 1.36304E+00 5.1135E-05 -1.3064E-02 1.79872E+00 
Note — E indicates scientific equation, example 1E-02 = 0.01 


24 


Correction function CF = 1+(1.016 7-1) x exp [- 0.35 
(3.412 x1.0379 x 3.021 —9.6)]= 1.0114 


Correction function CF, = 1+(1.037 9-1) x exp [- 0.35 
(3.412 x1.0379 x 3.021-9.6)] = 1.025 8 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Part load efficiency and capacity correction factors for 
the above example are determined using a linear 
interpolation method based on the 0 and 100 percent 
correction values: 


With a part load measured capacity of 505.3 kW and a 
700 kW full load rating, 


CFç= 1 + (505.3/700) x (1.025 8- 1)=1.018 6 
CF = 1 +(505.3/700) x (1.011 4- 1)= 1.008 2 


ANNEXF 
(Clause7.3) 


WATER-SIDE PRESSURE DROP CORRECTION MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE 


Corrected capacity Q ..-693.2x1.0114=701.1 kW 
Corrected efficiency 6, y 3-021 x 1.025 8 = 3.099 
COP 

F-1 PURPOSE 


The purpose of this Annex is to prescribe a 
measurement method for water pressure drop and, 
when required, a correction method to compensate 
for friction losses associated with external piping 
measurement sections. The measurement method 
only applies to pipe of circular cross section. 


F-2 BACKGROUND 


As a certified test point for the water to refrigerant 
heat exchangers, the water-side pressure drop needs 
to be determined by test with acceptable 
measurement uncertainty. In some cases, the 
measured pressure drop per this standard will be 
determined by using static pressure taps external to 
the unit in upstream and downstream piping. When 
using external piping, adjustment factors are allowed 
to compensate the reported pressure drop 
measurement. Numerous studies conclude that the 
determination of a calculated correction term for 
these external components may contain significant 
sources of error and therefore the use of external 
correction factors will be restricted to limit the 
magnitude of these potential errors. For units with 
small connection sizes it is feasible that straight pipe 
sections be directly connected to the units with 
adequate length to obtain static pressure 
measurements with acceptable systematic errors due 
to instrument installation location. This is the 
preferred connection methodology. Units with larger 
size connections may have spatial limits in the 
upstream and downstream connection arrangement 
such that elbows or pipe diameter changes may be 
necessary to accommodate the available space at the 


test facility, or to provide mechanical support for 
piping weight loads. 


F-3 MEASUREMENT LOCATIONS 


Static pressure taps shall simultaneously meet all of 
the following requirements: 


a) Static pressure taps may be in either the unit 
connections (that is nozzles) or in additional 
external piping provided for the purpose of 
test measurements. 


b) If using additional external piping, the 
piping arrangement shall use rigid pipe and 
may include fittings such as elbows, 
reducers, or enlargers between the pressure 
tap locations and the unit connections. 
Flexible hose is prohibited between the unit 
connections and the pressure taps. 


c) Static pressure taps shall maintain the 
following lengths of cylindrical straight pipe 
in the flow path adjacent to each pressure 
tap location in Table 12. 


F-4 STATIC PRESSURE TAPS 


Static pressure taps will be in a piezometer ring or 
piezometer manifold arrangement with a minimum of 
3 taps located circumferentially around the pipe, all 
taps at equal angle spacing (see Fig. 9). To avoid 
introducing measurement errors from recirculating 
flow within the piezometer ring, each of the pipe tap 
holes shall have a flow resistance that is greater than 
or equal to 5 times the flow resistance of the 
piezometer ring piping connections between any pair 
of pressure taps. A ‘Triple-Tee’ manifold arrangement 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Table 12 Lengths of Cylindrical Straight Pipe 
(Clause F-3) 


SINo. 


Unit Connection, 


Straight Length in Flow Path 


Nominal Pipe Size Upstream of Downstream of 
Pressure Tap Pressure Tap 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) <75 mm Minimum 10 : D Minimum 3 : D 
ii) 100, 125, or 150 mm Minimum 6 : D Minimum 2 - D 
ili) 2200 mm Minimum 3 - D Minimum I - D 


D = The greatest pipe inside diameter dimension, using the nominal pipe size and pipe schedule nominal wall thickness, 


of the following locations: 


if any. 


a) The pipe diameter at the pressure tap location. 
b) The largest diameter of any reducer or enlarger fittings between the pressure tap location and unit connections. 


c) The largest diameter of the first reducer or enlarger fitting between the pressure tap location and the test facility, 


using 4 pipe tap holes is the preferred arrangement, 
but not required if meeting the flow resistance 
requirement (see Fig. 10). 


F-4.1 For design or evaluation purposes, flow 
resistance may be estimated by resistance coefficient 
K factor calculation methods as found in Crane 
Technical Paper No. 410. Generally, manifold tubing 
or piping can be evaluated using the K factor and 
pressure tap holes can be evaluated using orifice 
flow equations (see F-5.2). 


F-4.2 Provisions shall be made to bleed air out of the 
lines connected to pressure measurement devices. 
These provisions shall take into consideration the 
orientation of pressure taps and manifold 
connections. 


Pring 


Manifold Tubing 


tap office 


120° (typical) 


Wall static pressure 


F-5 CORRECTION METHOD 


Measured water pressure drop values shall be 
adjusted to subtract additional static pressure drop 
due to external piping. The additional static pressure 
drop shall be the sum of all losses between the unit 
connections and the location of static pressure taps. 
Record the original measured value, the calculated 
adjustment value, and the final calculated result for 
water pressure drop. 


F-5.1 The adjustment shall not exceed 10percent of 
the measured water pressure drop. 


F-5.2 The general form of the adjustment equations 
utilize the methods in the Crane Technical Paper No. 


Pring 


Manifold Tubing/Piping 


Wall static pressure 
tap office 


Fic. 9 EXAMPLES OF PIEZOMETER RING/MANIFOLD 


90" (typical) 


Manifold Tubing/Piping 


IS 16590 : 2017 


Pring 


Wall static pressure 
tap office 


Fic. 10 EXAMPLES OF TRIPLE-TEE PIEZOMETER RING/MANIFOLD 


410. A Darcy friction factor is determined using the 
Swamee-Jain Equation as given below 


0.25 


€ = absolute roughness, 0.045 mm (for 
purposes of this standard); 


D = internal pipe diameter, mm; and 


Re = Reynolds number for the flow in the pipe. 


The pressure drop (A,) associated with a flow 

component or fitting may be calculated using the 

friction factor as detailed above or the equation may 

use a K factor. These are shown in Equations 8 and 9. 
LV? 


h, =f-—-— when the Darcy friction factor is 


d 2g 
used for straight pipe sections 
=K: when a K factor is specified for elbows 
and expansion/contractions 


where 
L = pipe length, m; 
D = internal diameter, m; 


V — average velocity calculated at the 
entrance to the component; 

G = standard gravitational term 9.81 m/s*; and 

K = resistance coefficient specified in crane 
Technical Publication 410. The K 
correction factor is computed for the 


following elbow arrangements as detailed 
in Table 13. 


The determination of the K factor for the expansion 
and contraction sections is a function of the inlet to 


outlet diameter ratio as well as the angle of expansion 
and contraction. The user is directed to the crane 
technical paper for a more complete description of 
the equations. The angle of expansion or contraction 
is detailed on the accompanying chart (Fig.11) with 
limits placed at 45° and 10°. 


Table13 K Factors for Elbow Arrangements 
(Clause F-5.2) 


SI.No. Description K Factor 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Smooth elbow with r/D = 1 20xf 
ii) Smooth elbow with r/D= 1.5 14-f 
ili) Smooth elbow with r/D= 2.0 12:f 
iv) Smooth elbow with r/D= 3.0 12:f 
v) Smooth elbow with r/D= 4.0 14-f 
vi) Segmented with 2:45? miters 30f 
vil) Segmented with 3-30? miters 24-f 
viii) Segmented with 6-15? miters 24-f 

wherer = 
radius of the centerline of the elbow, ft 


NNW W 
oaoao nu 


~ 
o 
2 
fe) 
= 
< 
TD 
o 
Le 
3 
Oo 
E 


=ù må 
ou 


Ono 


100 200 300 400 500 600 
Minimum pipe Diameter (mm) 


Fic. 11 CORRECTION TERM FOR INCLUDED ANGLE FOR 
EXPANSION/CONTRACTION FITTING 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (1320). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131,2323 3375,2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg o 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 23379120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 i 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 [n 1216, 2254 1442 
22542519,22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891,2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


