IS 14700 ( Part l/Set 1) : 2000 IEC 1000-l-l ( 1992 )
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard ELECTROMAGN.ETIC COMPATIBWTY (EMC)
PART 1 GENERAL

Section 1 Application and Interpretation of Fundamental Definitions andTerms

ICS 33.100

0 BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

BHAVAN,

August 2000

Price Group 10

Electromagnetic

Compatibility

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 22

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part l/Set 1 ) which is identical with IEC 1000-l-l (1992) `Electromagnetic and interpretation of fundamental compatibility (EMC) - Part 1 : General - Section 1 : Application definitions and terms' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Electromagnetic Compatibiiity Seciionai Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. In the adopted standard, certain conventions is particularly~drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International as `Indian Standard'. are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention

Standard'appear

referring to this standard,

they should be read

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

the current practice is

CROSS REFERENCES In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist.The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below -lr\nn us&h their r(anrsn n4 nr.ankralrrnne 4-r +hrr aAA;rrmr inr(;mm+nr(' awlly ""IIII IIIGII "yjlt7G "I xq","alcslIb~ I"1 \llr; G"I,I"IIJ III"lbcI1~". lnterna tional Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Technically Equivalent

IEC 50 (161) : 1990 International Electrotechnical Vocabulary (IEV) - Chapter 161 : Electromagnetic compatibility fEC 555-2 (1982) Disturbances in supply systems caused by household appliances and similar electrical equipment Part 2 : Harmonics [ Replaced by IEC 61000-3-2 (1995)

IS 1885 ( Part 64/Set 1 and 2 ) : 1987 Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 64 Electromagnetic compatibility, Section 1 General terms,Section 2 Specific terms IS 14700 ( Part 3/Set 2 ) : 1999 Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) : Part 3 Limits, Section 2 Limits for harmonic current emissions ( equipment input current 5 16A per phase )

Identical

1
IS 6873 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 Limits and methods of measurement of electromagnetic disturbance characteristics : Part 2 Electric motor-operated and thermal appliances for household and similar purposes, electrical tools and
elartric _.__.. ._ qpr~?~~ ( f/x! mvi.cinn -1..I_..,. \ ,

CISPR 14 ( 1985 ) Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics of household electrical appliances, portable tools and similar electrical apparatus fReolared hv L .-r._z-_ I CISPR -.-. .. 14 (`f 993)j CISPR 16 (1987) Specification for radio interference measuring apparatus and measurement methods [ Replaced by CISPR 16-1 (1993) and CISPR 16-2 ,.___. _
(1896) ]

do

IS 10052 (Parts 1' and 2) : 1999 Specification for radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus and methods ( first revision )

do

( Continued

on third cover )

IS 14700(Part1/Sec1):2000 IEC,_lOOO-l-1 (1992)

CONTENTS

Page

.

^

1
2

43 Scope ..............._................................................................................................................................

Definition of terms ........................................................................................................................... 2.1 2.2 2.3

3

Basic terms ............................................................................................................................ 3 Combined terms ................................................................................................................... 4 Interrelated terms ................................................................................................................. 5

3

Application of EMC terms and definitions ................................................................................... 5 3.1 3.2 General .................................................................................................................................. . 5

Relation between various levels ......................................................................................... 5 3.2.1 Emission and immunity level/limit ......................................................................... 5 3.2.2 Compatibility level .................................................................................................... 7

3.3

Probability aspects and margins ........................................................................................ 11 3.3.1 Standardized test ..................................................................................................... 12 ,Q 3.3.2 !n situ test, superposition ........................................................................................ IO 3.3.3 Lack of data ..............................................................................................................15

Annexes A Interpretation of EMC terms and definitions ........................................................................ 16 26 28

B Standardized and in situ tests. .............................................................................................. References.. .............. .................................................................................................................

1

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set 1 ).: 2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992)

Indian Standard
ELECTROmMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY (EMC)
PART 1 GENERAL Section 1 Application and Interpretation of Fundamental Definitions and Terms 1 Scope

The object of this report is to describe and interpret various terms considered to be of basic importance to concepts and practical application in the design and evaluation of electromagnetically compatible systems. In addition, attention is drawn to the distinction between electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) tests carried out in a standardized set-up and those carried out at the locatjon where a device (equipment or system) is installed (in situ tests). The terms and their definitions are given in clause 2, with reference to chapter 161 of the IEV [l]. The application of the terms is described in clause 3 and an interpretation of their definitions is presented in the annexes.

2

Definition

of terms

The terms of importance in the context of this report are defined below. Each definition is followed by its IEV number when it is identical with the definition (and any note accompanying it) -given in [l]`. Where it differs, the IEV number is followed by "/A". or it is indicated that the term has not been defined in IEC SO(161).

The terms and their definitions

can be divided into three groups: electromagnetic compatibility, emission, immunity and

1) Basic terms, for example level;

2) Combined terms, which combine basic terms, for example emission level, compatibility level and immunity limit. 3) Interrelated terms, which interrelate and compatibility margin. 2.1 Basic terms (161-01-01): The totality of electromagnetic phenomena combined terms. for example emission margin

electromagnetic environment existing at a given location.

Note/A: In general, this totality is time dependent and its description-may need a statistical approach.

electromagnetic disturbance (161-01-05): Any electromagnetic phenomenon which may degrade the performance of a device, equipment or system, or adversely affect living or inert matter.
NOTE - An electromagnetic disturbance may be an electromagnetic noise: an unwanted signal or a change in the propagation medium itself.

l

The figure9 in square brackets indicate the references listed in page 64.

3

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set 1 )-: 2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992)
e.lr.A*r#Nmo"mn*ir ~l~bLI"IIIqjIIC;,,b

in*nr4nr-mrh.

111,511s71~11&0G,

EM I

\a"",

I~kkrdxni~4inn\
KT"Ia,I"I

`,

(161_~!_06):

nm-iratiatinn YY~.UYU.."..

o!

?h!?

performance
Note/A: NOTES
1

of a device, equipment or system caused by an electromagnetic
and interference are cause and effect respectively.

disturbance.

Disturbance

The English words `interference" `perturbation

and "disturbance"

are often used indiscriminately. is also used with the meaning of "brouillage

2 In French, the term BlectromagnBtique'. 3 In Russian,

6lectromagn4tique"

the terms `vozmuscenie'

and `pomeha'

are~often used with the same meaning.

electromagnetic compatibility; EMC (abbreviation) (161-01-07): The ability of an equipment or system to function satisfactorily fin its electromagnetic environment without introducing intolerable electromagnetic disturbances to anything in that environment.

(electromagnetic) emission (161-01-08): energy emanates from a source.

The phenomenon

by which

electromagnetic

degradation (of performance) (161-01-l 9): An undesired departure in the operational performance~of any device, equipment or system from its intended performance.

NOTE

- The term `degradation'

can apply to temporary

or permanent

failure.

immunity (to a disturbance) (161-01-20): The ability of a device, equipment of system to perform without degradation in the presence of an electromagnetic disturbance.

(electromagnetic) skrsceptibiiity (161-01-21): The inability of a device, equipment or system to perform without degradation in the presence of an el~ectromagnetic disturbance.

.,ml-I-

IV"

I

c

-

~..--__.:L:l:.._

:_

3"scepr,"lllry

IS

a ,ar;n

_

,__I_

"I

_I

:__.._:...

IIII~II"II,Iy.

level (of a quantity) (not defined in IEC 50(161): The magnitude of a quantity a specified manner.
NOTE

evaluated

in

. The level of a quantity may be expressed
value.

in logarithmic

units, for example

decibels

with respect

to a reference

2.2

Combined terms

-emission level (of a disturbing source) (161-03-l 1): The level of a given electromagnetic disturbance emitted from a particular device, equipment or system, measured in a specified way. emission limit emission level. (from a disturbing source) (161-03-12/A): The maximum permissible

The maximum level of a given electromagnetic disimmunity level (161-03-14/A): turbance, incident in a specified way on a particular device, equipment or system, at which no degradation of operation occurs.

IS 14700 (Part l/Set IEC 1000-1-l (1902) immunity limit (161-03-15/A): The minimum required immunity level.

1) : 2000

disturbance level (not defined in IEC 50(161): The level of a given electromagnetic bance, measured in a specified way.

distur-

(electromagnetic) compatibility level (161-03-l O/A): The specified disturbance level at which an acceptable, high probability of electromagnetic compatibility should exist.

2.3

Interrelated margin limit.

terms (161-03-13/A): The ratio of the electromagnetic compatibility level to the

emission emission

immunity margin (161-03-16/A): compatibility level. (electromagnetic) the emission limit. compatibility

The ratio of the immunity

limit to the electromagnetic

margin

(1-61-03-17/A): The ratio of the immunity

limit to

Note/A: the compatibility General

margin is the product of the emission are expressed in dB(...),

margin and the immunity

margin. should be

note: If the levels

in the above margin definitions

"difference'

read instead of "ratio' and `sum'

instead of `product'.

3 3.1

Application General

of EMC terms and definitions

The definitions given in clause 2 are basic, conceptual definitions. When they are applied to assign specific vaiues to the ieveis in a particuiar case, severai consideraiions shouid be borne in mind. A number of these are given in this section, together with examples which will elucidate them. For an interpretation of the various terms used, see annexes A and B.

The basic devices of systems can be-divided 1) emiffers, i.e. devices, equipment voltages, currents or fields, and 2) susceptors, i.e. devices, by those emissions.

into two groups which emit potentially disturbing

or systems

equipment or systems whose operation

might be degraded

Some devices may belong simultaneously 3.2 3.2.1 Relation between various levels

to both groups.

Emission and immunity level/limit

Figure 1 shows a possible combination of an emission and an immunity level and their associated limits as a function of some independent variable, for example the~frequency, for a single type of emitter and a single type of susceptor.

5

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set IEC 1000-l-l (1992)

1 ) : 2000

In figure 1 the emission level is always lower than its maximum permissible level, i.e. the emission limit, and the immunity level is always higher than its minimum required level, i.e. the immunity limit. Hence, the emitter and the susceptor comply with their prescribed limit. In addition the immunity limit has been chosen above the emission limit, and it has been assumed that the levels and limits are continuous functions of the independent variable. These levels and limits may also be discrete functions.of some independent variable, see example 1 in 3.2.2.

The following considerations Consideration A

should be kept in mind.

By drawing the emission and immunity level (and the associated limits) in one figure it is assumed that only one particular disturbance is considered, unless it is clearly indicated that different disturbances are considered and the relationship between the different disturbances is also indicated.

Immunity level Immunity limit

Equipment design margin

Independent variable

Figure 1 - Limits and levels for a single emitter and susceptor as a function of some independent variable (e.g. the frequency) Consideration 6

Drawing the emission and immunity level in one figure is only relevant when there is a good interrelation between fhe specified way the emission level of the particular disturbance is measured and the specified way that type -of disturbance is incident on the equipment under test. If this is the case, -figure 1 indicates an electromagnetically compatible situation.

6

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set
IEC 1000-l-l (1992)

1 ) : 2000

In figure 1 there is some margin between a me-asured level and its limit. This margin might be called the "equipment design margin", and is an additional margin in the design to i. -. _ensure compliance with the iimit If EMC testing is carried out. Aithough it is an important consideration for manufacturers, this margin has not been defined in IEC 50(161) [l] nor in this report, as equipment design issues are the prerogative of the manufacturer.

3.2.2

Compatibility

level

Figure 2 shows the emission and the immunity limits of figure 1, and a compatibility level in between these limits. The dashed lines indicate a possible emission and immunity level for a single emitter and susceptor. Again consideration A, presented in 3.2.1, is valid.

2
8 r)

N/ ---/

0

c\

-H\ \
\I Immunity limit

/`*a

Immunity level

t

Compatibility level Emission margin Emission limit
I

I

Compatibility margin

Emission

level

w
Independent variable

Figure 2 -

Emission/immunity limits and compatibility level, with an example of emission/immunity levels for a sing/e emitter and susceptor, as a function of some independent variable (e.g. the frequency)

The following Consideration

additional C

considerations

should be kept in mind:

The compatibility level, being a specified disturbance level, is expressed in the unit corresponding to the emission limit. If the emission and immunity limits do not refer to the same disturbance (see example 2 below), the compatibility level can be expressed in the unit corresponding to either the emission level or the immunity level.

7

IS

14700

( Part l/See 1 ) : 2000
-1 (1992)

IEC 1000-l

Consideration

D

If the electromagnetic environment is controllable, a compatibility level may be chosen first. Following this, emission and immunity limits are derived from this level in order to ensure an acceptable, high probability of EMC in that environment. This consideration indicates that in a controllable environment, EMC can be achieved in the most cost-effective way by initially choosing the compatibility level on financial and technical grounds in order to realize appropriate emission and immunity limits for all equipment (to be) installed in that environment. Consideration E

If the electromagnetic environment is uncontrollable.-the level is chosen on the basis of existing or expected disturbance levels. However, emission and immunity limits have still to be assessed, to ensure that the existing or expected disturbance levels will not increase when new equipment is installed and that such equipment is sufficiently immune. If tests or calculations indicate that an existing situation has to be improved, because of the financial and technical consequences of the chosen limits, the compatibility level has to be adjusted and consequently, the emission and immunity limits. In the long run the adjusted compatibility level will then result in a more cost-effective solution for the total system.

Consideration

F

The determination of limits from the compatibility level is governed by probability considerations, discussed in 3.3. In general, these limits are not at equal distances from the compatibility level, see also 3.3. In clause 6 of annex A the compatibility level is determined for an idealized situation, where the probability density functions are assumed to be known. Two examples are given to illustrate Example 7: Assume an immunity limit has to be determined with regard to disturbances monics of the mains frequency, for equipment connected to the public network. In addition, assume that for the equipment under consideration network only serves as an energy supply (no ~mains signalling etc.). As this only an illustration of several aspects, the discussions will be limited to the odd at the harlow-voltage the mains example is harmonics. several considerations in 3.2.1 and 3.2.2.

The level of the harmonic disturbances in a public network is not readily controllable. Therefore the discussions start by taking the compatibility level UC from [2]. In [2] that level is given as a percentage of the rated voltage, and this approach is followed here (see figure 3). To ensure an acceptable, high probability of EMC, two requirements-have to be met:

a) At each frequency, the disturbance voltage level Ud in the network, i.e. the disturbance voltage r_esulting from all disturbance sources connected to that network, should have a high probability of fulfilling the relation Ud c UC at the locations where UC is specified and for most of the time. b) At each frequency, there should be a high probability that the immunity each appliance connected to the network fulfills the relation Ui > Ud. The first requirement is largely met by taking the compatibility 8 levels from [2]. level Ui of

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set 1 ) : 2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992) Also given in figure 3 is an emission limit of a single disturbance source. If it is known how many sources contribute to Ud and it is also known how, the harmonic disturbances add, then an estimate can be made of U,, in that network. This is of interest in cases where the levels are controllable, because this estimate leads to a first choice of UC for that particular network. Of course, the final choice is also determined by the immunity requirements.

Emission I 0

iimit level

Compatibility immunity !imit

1 0 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 Harmonic number

Figure 3 - Compatibility levels U, for the odd harmonics in a public low-voltage network and examples of associated emission and immunity limits.

The emission limit is also given to illustrate a problem. In table 1 of [3] the emission limit is given as the maximum permissible harmonic current in amperes. However, the presentation in figure 3 requires an emission limit expressed in a percentage of the rated ,ioltage. The latter limit can be derived from the first limit when the network~impedance is known. In this example it is simply assumed that this impedance is equal to the reference impedance, given in (31. In line with the above reasoning, the maximum harmonic voltage ratios given in annex A of (31 are plotted in figure 3. Note that in [2] a distinction is made between the odd harmonics that are a multiple of 3 and those that are not multiples of 3. In [3] this distinction his not made for the emission limit.

9

IS 14700 ( Pad l/See 1) : 2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992) The actual disturbance level strongly depends on the number of disturbance sources, i.e. on the number of operating appliances connected to the network. In a public low-voltage network the number of sources that may contribute significantly is generally much larger at the low-frequency end than at the high-frequency end. Hence, the uncertainty about the actual disturbance level at lower frequencies is much greater than that at higher frequencies. This is reflected in figure 3, where at the low-frequency end the distance between the emission limit (for a single device) and the compatibility level (which takes the superposition of disturbances into account) is much larger than ,the distance at the high-frequency end. This distance, i.e. the emission margin, will be discussed fin 3.3.

To meet the second requirement a sufficiently strict immunity limit is needed, of which an example is given in figure 3. A distance between this limit and UC, i.e. an immunity margin (see 3.3), is needed because: 1) there is still a small probability that at a certain location and during a certain time interval the disturbance level will be above the compatibility level; 2) the internal impedance Z, of the disturbance source used in the immunity test will not, in general, be equal to the internal impedance of the actual network. (A discussion about the value of Zi to be used in the immunity test is beyond the scope of this report.)

It is possible to specify a continuous immunity limit as illustrated in figure 3. This has the advantage that the even harmonics, the inter-harmonics and all other disturbances in the given frequency range can be considered. A continuous function could be chosen as it was assumed at the beginning that the network served only as an energy supply, i.e. no mains signalling is present. For test purposes there may be a need to convert the percentI_^^ III :_. wIIIc;Il ...L._L .L^ :--..-:... I:-:* :- -:..a:- `:a..-0 *a ^L^^I..... ..^1..^^ dyes IlIt: llllllluIllly 1111111IS ylvell III Ilyure 3 tu ausuIule Value>.

Example 2: There are cases where emission, expressed in different units. compatibility and immunity levels and limits may be

Consider the immunity to RF fields of equipment having dimensions small compared to the wavelength of that RF field. It is well known that the equipment iinmunity is determined largely by the immunity to common-mode currents induced in the leads connected to that equipment [4]. Hence, the interrelated radiated and conducted phenomena have to be taken into consideration when attempting to achieve EMC.

With regard to 3.2.1, as the relationship between the field strength and the e.m.f. has been established in other studies, it is possible to express the emission level in figure 1 as an electric field strength (for example in dB @V/m)) and the immunity level as the e.m.f. (for example in dB (uV)) of a disturbing source, e.g. a test generator.

10

IS 14700(Part1/Sec1):2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992) With regard to figure
ho Y" aunrnccnri "~y,".J.B"" in dR III "Y

2 and the foregoing
I~~\llm\ \p .`"`, nr "8 in r(R III "Y III\/\ \p.,.

considerations,
It I.J ic "IbC4l rln~r I.

the'compatibility
Aononrlc YYp.V"Y"

level may now
nn ".. the . ..V rhnctm "..--Y*.

thnt IPVPI ,,,CI, thic ,.II.J I".".

unit. In addition, the choice of the compatibility level may also be determined by the susceptibility properties of the susceptor concerned. If the EMI problem to be prevented concerns RF-field demodulation, the degradation is (in first order approximation) proportional to the square of the RF disturbance level. Hence, the immunity margin ~may be chosen to be larger than the emission margin (see 3.3).

3.3

Probabiiiiy

aspects and margins

If the emission and immunity tests have been designed in such a way that there is a good corretation with the electromagnetic phenomena existing, the situation in figure 4 may represent an electromagnetically compatible situation for the single emitter and susceptor under consideration.

t
Emission margin

Compatibility
IWd

Emission LIII~I~~~~~I~~-

limit

I

Compatibility margin

I
Independent variable

+

Figure 4 -

Limits, compatibility level and margins, as a function independent variable (for example the frequency)

of any

Indeed, figure 4 indicates that the immunity level is higher than the immunity limit and this is higher than the emission limit which, in turn, is higher than the emission level. However, the sitoatron depicted in figure 4 does not guarantee that EMC will exist in the actual situation, as there are uncertainties, already briefly mentioned in the first example in 3.2.2.

means that after the compatibility level has been and immunitv _.._ . . -..._, limits to be prescribed. In figure 4, the margins, defined in 2.3, are shown as solid lines. The dashed lines refer to the equipment design margin, to be chosen by the manufacturer and already' d%cussed in 3.2.1. Four important uncertainties will be discussed in the next subclauses.
chosen emission ._`l_ ..__ between -- _.._ -.. that _..__ level ._ _-I_ and _.._ the ___A _....__._.. -_..___.., marnins . ..- =... _ are _._ renuired

The existence

of these uncertainties

11

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set IEC 1000-l-l (1992) 3.3.1 Srandard/zed

1) : 2000

rest

In the case~of a standardized test, see annex B, there are two important uncertainties which influence the magnitude of the margins between compatibility level and the prescribed limits: 1) the relevance of the test method, and 2) the normal spread of component equipment. Uncertainty characteristics in the case of quantity-produced

I: The relevance of the test methods

Standardized test methods in particular endeavour, with a very limited number of test situations, to cover an almost infinitely large number of actual situations in which equipment has to function satisfactorily. Hence, the relevance of the test method is determined by the extent to which the method covers an actual situation, and this is known only to a limited extent. A standardized emission test is always carried out by using a well-defined ~measuring device (voltage probe, antenna, etc.) connected to well-defined measuring equipment, instead of using an actual susceptor. Similarly, in standardized immunity tests the emitter is a well-defined generator with a well-defined coupling device, and not an actual emitter. Nevertheless, these emission and immunity tests are carried out to achieve EMC at the locations where the actual emitters and susceptors interact.

In general, standardized tests consider only one phenomenon at a time, for example emission via conduction or emission via radiation. A similar remark applies to immunity testing. However, in the actual situation all phenomena act simultaneously, and this reduces the relevance of a standardized test. As a consequence of the limited relevance of a standardized test, margins between compatibility level and the emission and immunity limits. are needed

IEmission limit

Immunity limit

I\ Emission level

n
12

Immunity level

Disturbance level

Figure 5 -

Example of the probability densities for an emission level and an immunity level, at one single value of the independent variable

IS 14700(Part1/Sec1):2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992) Uncertainty2: Normal spread of component

characteristics

Not all devices, equipment or systems, especially those that are quantity-produced, will be tested before installation. If all equipment were tested, test-data distributions would be found, as a consequence of the spread of component characteristics. This is illustrated in figure 5. Hence, there is an uncertainty as to whether a randomly chosen equipment from that quantity-production will comply with the limit. This uncertainty is considered in detail in clause 9 of [5], the part on the so-called "80 %-80 % compliance rule". The distributions are also determined by the reproducibility of the test method. It should be noted that curves similar to those given in figure 5 will be found for each value of the independent variable in the prescribed EMC test. Hence, figure 5 can only apply to the test data for one single value of the independent variable.

From figure 5 it can be concluded that there is a very small probability that an equipment will not comply with the limit, and because of the chosen compatibility margin the probability that an EMI problem will result in this case is negligible. Figure 5 also shows that the manufacturer had chosen a certain equipment design margin. In some cases, see for example j5], IS], the 80%-80% compliance rule creates the need for a minimum equipment design margin, where-this margin depends on the EMC test sample size.

3.3.2

In situ test, superposition of disturbances

In addition to the two uncertainties mentioned in 3.3.1, the superposition produced by various sources in the installation gives rise to an uncertainty.

This uncertainty relates to the relevance of the test, and it should be noted that an in-situ test, i.e. a test at the location where the equipment under test is in use, is not as well defined as the standardized test; see annex B. In particular the load impedance of an emitter is often unknown and often time-dependent. For example, the differential-mode mains impedance depends, among other things, on equipment (switched on or switched off) connected to the network. A `similar remark applies when immunity is considered. As a result, the margins chosen in the insta-llation may differ from those in the standardized test. Uncertainty 3: Superposition effects, multidimensional criteria

At t~he location of the susceptor the electromagnetic environment is determined by all devices, equipment and systems emitting electromagnetic energy. Hence, many types of disturbances ("type" also includes the wave-form, e.g. sinusoidal, pulsed) may be present simultaneously. If a given disturbance is considered at a given location, the disturbance level is determined by: a) the superposition of disturbances of the same type, where each disturbance contribution depends on the loading conditions of its emitter, on the electromagnetic propagation properties between that emitter and the susceptor, and on time; b) contributions of other types of disturbances, reception band, where each of the contributions above under a). The uncertainty margins. of the actual value of the ultimate having components in the susceptor is subject to the aspects mentioned

disturbance

level, creates the need for.

13

IS 14700(Part1/Sec1-):2000 EC 1000-1-1 (1992)

50 Disturbance

60 level (dB..

70

.)

Figure 6 - Example of superposition of disturbances. The ultimate disturbance level probability density, p(D), originates from the probability densities p,(D) of various types of sources

Example: An example of the superposition of disturbances, mentioned--under a), is given in figure 6. In this example it is assumed that there are three types of emitters emitting the same type of disturbance. As with figure 5, it is only possible to consider the results for one value of the independent variable at a time. The three associated probability density functions are represented by psi(D) (i = 1, 2, 3). In this example the ultimate density function p(D) is largely determined by p,,(D). Note that, in general, the density function will be time dependent, as it depends on the number of sources which are operating.

Gaussian distribufions have been used in the examples in this text, other types of distributions are also possible. The ultimate disturbance level is of importance to all possible susceptors at a particular location (in a particular system), where each type of susceptor will have its specific immunity properties (see figure 7) even if these types have to comply with the same immunity limit. In addition, at the location where the device, equipment'or system is installed various types of disturbances might enter the susceptor simultaneously, and this is another type of superposition. The immunity level for one type of disturbance may be negatively influenced by the presence of another type of disturbance (see annex B). Consequently, there is an additional need for additional margins.

14

IS 14700(Part1/Sec1):2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992) 3.3.3

Lack of data 4: Lack of data

Uncertainty

Generally, there is no time, or it is impossible, to measure the disturbance levels at all possible locations where a susceptor may be installed, and therefore the disturbance probability density given in figure 7 is seldom known. Furthermore, the immunity level distribution is often unknown. The latter is the case when exceeding the immunity level results in a (high) risk of damage to the susceptor and the immunity is tested in a "go - no go" test, to an electromagnetic disturbance level equal to (or an agreed amount higher than) the minimum required immunity level, i.e. the immunity limit. This lack of supporting data again creates the need for margins between the compatibility level and the limits to be prescribed.

In some cases the lack of certain disturbance source data can be of importance if equipment, which operated initially in dedicated environments, then becomes widely used. For example, much is known about the mains at the f.undamental frequency and its harmonics and about the associated impedances, where differential-mode conducted disturbances are concerned. Much less is known about the magnetic fields produced by these disturbances in actual situations. These fields are now of great importance in view of the increased use of video display units and electron microscopes (in high-technology industries), as these fields may strongly influence the deflection of the electron beam in such equipment. (Moreover, it is not possible to shield few frequency magnetic fields in a cost-effective way.)

Equipment type 1

rotal disturbance

/

r

Immunity levels (standardized tests)

level

Disturbance

level

Figure 7 -

Example of probability densities for an ultimate disturbance level (the sum of disturbance levels produced by various emitters) and the immunity levels of two types of susceptor

IS 1470 ( Part l/Set 1) : 2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992) Annex A

Interpretation

of EMC terms and definitions

A.1

General

In this section terms and definitions given in clause 2 are discussed to give background information about the chosen definition and the consequences of using the terms in the description of EMC requirements. A.2 Electromagnetic interference, compatibility and environment

The ever increasing number of applications of electrical and electronic equipment also gives rise to an increasing number of operational difficulties. One of fhe factors contributing to these operational difficulties is that devices in use are found to interfere with each other as a result of the electromagnetic properties of the devices (equipment, or systems) involved. If all these devices could exist side by side in harmony the world would be electromagnetically compatible. Unfortunately, this situation has not become universal and electromagnetic interference problems have to be solved.

In an electromagnetically compatible that everything in it is in harmony. A.2.1 Electromagnetic interference

situation

the electromagnetic

environment

is such

(EMI) to consider EMC, so the definition of EMI is

The existence of EMI makes it necessary considered first. Electromagnetic interference;

EM/ (abbreviation) of a device, equipment or system caused by an electro-

Degradation of the performance magnetic disturbance. The electromagnetic Electromagnetic disturbance disturbance

mentioned in this definition

has been defined as

Any electromagnetic phenomenon which may degrade the performance equipment or system, or adversely affect living or inert matter.

of a device,

The following a)

observations

can be made:

Interference/disturbance

The English words "interference" and "disturbance" are often used indiscriminately. However, it should be note-d that "interference" refers to the unwanted degradation, and "disturbance" refers to the electromagnetic phenomenon causing that degradation. Consequently, if that phenomenon is described in terms of a measurable quantity, for example a voltage, it shall be called disturbance voltage, and not interference voltage ([l], section 161-4)).

16

IS 14700( Part l/Sec1):~2000 IEC 1000-1-1 (1992)

b)

Nementary

form of EM/ problem

The definition of EMI refers to "degradation of the performance . .. . . caused by . ...". This means that, in its elementary form, an EMI problem consists of three ingredients (see figure A.l), namely: 1) an emitter, i.e. a source emitting the electromagnetic 2) a susceptor, i.e. a susceptible of its performance,, disturbance,

device, equipment or system showing degradation

3) a medium in between, which is called the coupling path.

source
emitting EM energy

Coupling

path

Susceptible device

Figure A.1 - The basic form of an EMI problem Hence, EMI problems have two key aspects: emission and susceptibility, shown later that EMC also possesses these two key aspects. and it will be

c)

Degradation
of the term degradation is as follows: performance of any device,

The definition

degradation: An undesired departure in the operational equipment or system from its intended performance.

It is important to note that the adjective "undesired" is used and not, for example, the adjective "any". This aspect is very important when setting down EMC specifications. The kind of departure in the operational performance which is considered to be undesired must be made clear in these specifications. Example: Assume a computing system has to function without degradation in the presence of certain types of interruptions in the mains voltage of that system. Errors in the computation caused by these interruptions always form an undesired departure. If the degradation can be avoided by using a battery-backup, it will be found that the interruptions cause a slight increase in the computation time because the system has to switch from mains to battery and vice versa. In many cases this departure is fully acceptable.

A.2.2

Electromagnetic

compatibility

(EMC)

At the beginning of A.2 it is stated that. . "If all devices could exist side by side in harmony, the world would be electromagnetically compatible (EMC)". In an electromagnetically in it is compatible situation the electromagnetic environment is such that everything in harmony. The addition of a device to that environment without causing EMI then

17

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set

1 ) : 2000

IEC 1000-1-1 (1992) means that this device has the property of being definition of EMC reads:
eleCtrOmagneIiCaiiY

compatible.

Thus, the

Electromagnetic

comparibility;

EMC

The ability of an equipment or system to function satisfactorily in its electromagnetic environment without introducing intolerable electromagnetic disturbances to anything in that environment. The desired harmony aspects of EMC: comes to the fore in two important ways, which are the two key

1) "to function satisfactorily", means that the device (equipment or system) is "tolerant i.e. the device (equipment or system) is not susceptible to disturbances of others", present in its environment. means that the device "gives no 2) "without introducing intolerable disturbances", offence to others", i.e. the emission of the device (equipment or system) does not result in electromagnetic interference. The key aspects emission and susceptibility, already found for EMI, are also the key aspects of EMC. This is illustrated in figure A.2, which represents the beginning of a subdivision to be completed in figure A.3.

I
I
Electromagnetic

Electromagnetic

compatibility

I
emission

'
susceptibility

I I Electromagnetic

I

Figure A.2 - Subdivision A.2.3 The electromagnetic environment

of EMC in its key aspects

In real life situations there are normally many sources (man-made and natural) emitting electromagnetic disturbances, creating an electromagnetic environment in which possible susceptors reside. The diversity of situations is immense and a complete description of the electromagnetic environment is very complex.

Normally the environment has to be determined (estimated) by separately measuring (calculating) certain parameters of the electromagnetic phenomena, such as voltages, currents, fields, etc., at the locations involved. In most cases it is found that these quantities vary in time. Therefore, th-e electromagnetic environment, used in the definition of EMC, is defined as Electromagnetic environment phenomena-existing at a given location.
may need a statistical approach.

The totality of electromagnetic
NOTE _ In general,

this fatality is time dependent

and its description

18

IS 14700 ( Part l/Secl IEC 1000-l-l (1992)

) : 2000

The following observations can be made with regard to the use of the term magnetic environment in the definition of EMC. a) Ifs environment

electro-

The definition of EMC refers to its environment and not to "an" environment or "every" environment. This means that if a device has the property of being electromagnetically compatible in a particular environment it does not necessarily mean that it will be electromagnetically compatible in another environment. In most cases the properties of the electromagnetic environment are never 100 % predictable, because they are location- and time-dependent. This implies that EMC specifications can only be written in such a way that there is an agreed or acceptable probability that the device is electromagnetically compatible in certain environments.

b) Anything in that environment The definition of EMC refers to "anything in that environment". This means that, in addition to devices, equipment and systems, living creatures could also be involved. This aspect is of importance when emission limits are set to electromagnetic fields, to achieve EMC.

Example: Consider the electromagnetic field produced by large RF-heating equipment in situations where it is known that the distance between the RF equipment and possibly susceptible devices is large and some building attenuation is experienced. One may then decide on a limit which is acceptable to those devices, However, the operator working inside the >uilding at very short distances from the RF equipment might then be exposed to intoerable fields, as a consequence of the variation of the field strength with the distance rom the source.

A.3

Susceptibility/immunity of

As susceptibility is one of the two key aspects of both EMC and EMI the definition susceptibility is a broad definition and reads as follows:

Susceptibility The inability of a device, equipment or system to perform without presence of an electromagnetic disturbance. The opposite of the concept susceptibility immunity The ability of a device, equipment or system to perform without presence of an electromagnetic disturbance. degradation in the is immunity. The definition degradation in the

of immunity reads:

It can readily be seen that the definitions of immunity and susceptibility differ by one single word: where "ability" is used in the definition of immunity, "inability" is found in that of susceptibility. The question may arise as to whether, if the definitions differ -only by one word, it is sensible to delete one of the terms and, if so, which term. The answer must be "No", for the following reasons. 19

IS 14700(Pati1/Sec1):2000 IEC tOOO-l-l (1992) As pointed out in clause A.2, the need to consider the EMC of devices is the existence of EMI, hence the existence of susceptible devices. In general, it will always be possible to find an electromagnetic disturbance causing degradation of the device performance. So one has to consider EMC since susceptibility is a basic property of almost every device. This is also indicated in IEC 50(161), where the note accompanying the definition of susceptibility states that susceptibility is a "lack of immunity" [l]. Thus a name is required for this basic property. Of course this might be called "a lack of immunity", but it is more sensible to choose one single word: susceptibility.

But, the ultimate goal is to achieve an electromagnetically compatible world. Hence, immune devices, equipment and systems are very much needed. Therefore, the term immunity is the relevant term to be used in EMC specifications. in general, immunity is achieved by taking preventive or corrective measures. It should be noted that an immunity requirement is always specified for a given type of electromagnetic disturbance which is incident in a specified way; see also AS. Level and limit

A.4

When setting -EMC specifications, specific values have to be assigned to the levels of electromagnetic disturbances in the particular cases. The definition of level reads [71: Level (of a quantity) The magnitude of a quantity evaluated in a specified manner. The definition of electromagnetic disturbance of a device, disturbance reads:

Electromagnetic

Any electromagnetic phenomenon which may degrade the performance equipment or system, or adversely affect living or inert matter.

If a quantity has to be evaluated in a specified way, it has to be known which quantity is meant. Consequently, the definition of a disturbance level has to reflect this requirement, so it is defined: EIecrromagnetic disrurbance level disturbance, measured in a specified way.

The level of a given electromagnetic

The adjective "given" is also found in other level definitions, "susceptibility level", etc.

such as "emission

level",

Strictly speaking, it could be said that the addition of "measured in a specified way" is not necessary, for the definition of "level" refers to "evaluated in a specified manner". However, there is the risk that the "specified way" could be applied only to the measuring device and its indicating instrument. The phrase "measured in a specified way" implies a specification of the loading conditions of the disturbance source and a detailed description of the test configuration, which can be summarized as.follows: Evaluated/measured in a specified manner/way

The measuring device shall be well defined and chosen having regard to the type of disturbance to be measured, and to the properties of desired signals which might be affected by the emission measurement. 20

IS 14700 (apart l/Set 1 ) : 2000 IEC 1000-1-1 (1992) The measuring equipment shall be well defined and chosen having regard to the type of disturbance and associated properties to be determined. Examples of disturbance properties are: peak amplitude, energy, rate of rise, repetition rate, etc. The loading conditions of the disturbance source shall be described. A measuring set-up will present certain load impedances to the disturbance source(s) in the equipment under test (EUT). These impedances may be standardized, for example in type tests, or may depend on the conditions at the place of installation, for example in the case of in situ tests (see also annex 6). The test configuration has to be described in detail. This description should consider the choice of the reference (ground), the position of the EUT and measuring equipment with respect to that reference, connections to that reference, interconnections of the EUT with the measuring device and other equipment, termination of terminals which are not connected to the measuring device, and operating conditions of the EUT during'testing. In addition it may be necessary to describe the disposition of system components and configurations for maximizing the emission level, cable lengths, decoupling of system components.

Once a level has been determined, an evaluation of that level has to be made: is it permissible or not? is it what has been required or not? etc. When setting EMC specifications the parties involved can agree on an acceptable level, which then is called a limit. In the case of an electromagnetic disturbance the definition of disturbance limit is as follows:

Disturbance

limit electromagnetic disturbance level.

The maximum permissible

Note that the inclusion of electromagnetic disturbance level in this definition implies that the limit his specified for a given electromagnetic disturbance, measured in a specified way. This also applies to other limit definitions, such as "emission limit" and "immunity limit".

A.5

Emission

and immunity is rather broad

As emission and reads:

is one of the two key aspects of EMC and EMI, its definition

(Electromagnetic) The phenomenon

emission by which electromagnetic energy emanates from a source.

In this definition the source normally is a device, equipment or system, but it can, for example, also be a human being or a piece of furniture. The two last named "sources" are of importance when considering electrostatic discharge phenomena. An example of a natural sdurce is lightning. In general, the emission will be determined in order to prevent EMI. However, a difficult question is: "What is the relevant parameter of the electromagnetic energy to be determined, and how shall it be determined?" The problem is that there is seldom exact knowledge of the susceptibility properties of devices, equipment and systems. In other words: it is seldom known precisely how such an item exactly "measures and detects" the emission and, strictly speaking, it is not known what has to be measured.

'

21

IS 14700( Partl/Secl): IEC 1000-i-l (1992)

2000

Experience has shown that it is necessary to measure certain types of emission. But, in fact, all these measurements are no more than an attempt to replace possible susceptible devices by well-defined measuring devices in a defined measuring method. AS a result a determination of the emission level can be very accurate, but its outcome can only be an indication of the probability that EMC will be achieved.

The amount of emission of electromagnetic energy can be expressed in an emission level (see 2.2 for its definition) if the requirements for the determination of a level, as discussed in A.4, are fulfilled. In that case the type of disturbance has to be given as well, which means that it has to be indicated which parameter of the emitted electromagnetic energy is considered. Examples of parameters are: magnetic field strength, electric field strength, commonmode current, V-terminal voltage [l]. The parameters thus represent a certain electromagnetic phenomenon (that is a disturbance, see A.4) in which a part of the emitted electromagnetic energy manifests itself. "Part of" is written here on purpose as, in general, electromagnetic energy emanates from a source via conduction and radiation at the same time. The discussion of immunity measurements follows the same line as in the case of emission measurements. The only important difference is that the defined measuring equipment (device plus instrument) is replaced by a defined disturbance source (generator plus coupling network). The task of this source is to replace all kinds of possible remitters (with often unknown impedance properties) by a reproducible, defined emitter. Figure A.3 gives an overview of various aspects of emission and immunity measurements. The subdivision in standardized and in situ tests will be discussed in clause B.l. Note that the lowest arrows in each column in figure A.3 point from "(test) limit" towards "(test) level" to indicate that the maximum permissible and minimum required levels, i.e. the limits (see 2.2 ) are quantities which have been agreed upon. An immunity level is only known after a level causing degradation has been reached, that is after a "lack of immunity", hence susceptibility, has been observed. The immunity level is often unknown in cases where exceeding that level results in a (great) risk of damaging the device. If this risk is present, normally a "go - no go" test is carried out up to an electromagnetic disturbance level which is equal to (or an agreed amount higher than) the minimum required immunity level, i.e. the immunity limit (see also 2.2).

'

A.6

Compatibility

level and margin

From the preceding sections it will be clear that it is often difficult, if not in fact impossible, to guarantee complete EMC, particularly because the definition of EMC refers to "its which means the (time-dependent) totality of electroelectromagnetic environment", magnetic phenomena occurring at the location of that device. As explained in clause 3, the concept of probabilities (statistical distributions) has to be used to arrive at an acceptably, high probability that electromagnetic compatibility will exist (for certain types of electromagnetic disturbances).

The compatibility level and its margin, defined in 2.2 and 2.3,and alreadydiscussed in 3.2.2. might be determined along the following (idealized) lines. 22

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set IEC 1000-l-l (1992)

1 ) : 2000

Electromagnetic 4 Electromagnetic 4 Standardized test emission 4

compatibility 4 Electromagnetic 4 susceptibility

I
In situ test

--

t t
Given EM dtsturbance _-----_ Defined disturbance source _-----Defined measuring conditions

t
Given EM disturbance _---__ Defined disturbance source ______ Standardize, measuring conditions

measuring equipment .-_---_

Emission.test

7
Given EM disturbance

Given EM disturbance

. -Defin%d

-

----__ Defined measuring equipment -----Defined measuring condttlons

Standardized measuring condltlons 4

t
Immunity level 4 Immunity-test level

Emission-test

Deterministic

situation

-------_____-----Probability situation

Single emittor or susceptor .----_____________ Superposition

?I
Immunity-test limit of disturbance

disturbance ______

Given EM disturbance NoZefitYed disturbance sources _---__ Defined measuring conditions 4

k!ii
Interference limit

Interference level

Figure A.3 - Overview

of various

EMC terms and measuring

conditions

23

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set 1 ) : 2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992) If one considers a certain type of electromagnetic disturbance, at a certain value of the independent variable (see 3.3) and assumes that the associated probability densities p(D) of the disturbance level and p(l) of the immunity level are known. In addition, one may assume that the condition for EMC is given by (I-D)>O. To find the probability C that (I-D)>O, i.e. C=P((I-D)>O), the probability density ~(1-0) is calculated first. After that the probability C=P((I-D)>O) can be calculated, where C is the area under the curve ~(1-0) with (I-D)>O. Figure A.4 gives a numerical example assuming log-normal distributions for the disturbance and susceptibility levels. It is concluded that there is a high probability of achieving EMC, in spite of the overlap of the curves p(D) and p(l).

0

20

40

60

60

100

Disturbance

level (dB...)

Figure A.4 -

Example of probability densities p(D), p(l) and the resulting ~(1-0). The area C under the curve ~(1-0) for values (I-D)>0 gives the probability of having EMC at the value of the independent variable under consideration

To achieve EMC, one can proceed as follows. After a certain value of C has been chosen, restrictions are imposed on the relative positions of p(D) and p(l), taking into account the width of the density functions. From the relation between p(D) and the prescribed emission limit(s) and p(l) and the prescribed immunity limit(s) then a value follows for the ratio of the emission and immunity limits, hence for the electromagnetic compatibility margin. Additional considerations of a financial and technical nature then lead to a choice of the compatibility level, the emission and immunity limits and the position of these limits relative to the compatibility level; see 3.2.2 and 3.3. In the determination of the limits, the step has to be made from the "probabilistic situation" as determined by the possible actual situations to the "deterministic situation", associated with standardized tests.

24

IS 14700(Part1/Sec1):2000 IEC 1000-l-l(1992)

The definition

of compatibility

level reads: level an acceptable, high probability of electro-

(Electromagnetic)

compatibility

The specified disturbance level at which magneticcompatibility should exist. The following comments can be made.

a) The definition uses "disturbance level", hence it is associated with a given electromagnetic disturbance measured in a specified way. In addition one could mention a disturbance compatibility level, for example a mains-harmonics compatibility level, a magnetic field compatibility level, etc. b) The level gives an indication of the probability of EMC, but only at the locations (in the system) where that level is specified, as the definition of EMC states "in its environment". Thus the level need not be valid worldwide. The choice of a level will very much depend on installation conditions. c) In the case a compatibility level is determined, a quantitative interpretation of "acceptable, high probability" has to be formulated by the IEC committee dealing with that compatibility level.

25

IS 14700 ( Part l/Set 1) : 2000 IEC 1000-l-l (1992)

Annex B Standardized and in situ tests

For the verification of EMC specifications it is recommended that emission and immunity measurements be carried out in standardized situations, so that the specifications can be verified world wide. However, these measurements can also be of interest at the location where a device, equipment or system~is in use. For example, in the case of large systems, which can only be measured in situ, or to see how the results of a standardized test work out in the installation. . The standardized test properties to allow levels to be measured

Standardized tests have three fundamental reproducibly all over the world: 1. Only one type of electromagnetic

disturbance

is considered

at a time. the the

2. In the case of emission: The sensitive device and indicator used to determine type of disturbance are well defined. In the case of immunity: The source producing electromagnetic disturbance and the coupling network are well defined. 3. The measurement conditions are well defined and standardized. in A.4 and AS.

The details of these properties

have already been discussed

In the standardized test the electromagnetic environment the emission level and the immunity level are measurable. always be the case, as the electromagnetic environment controllable. The in situ test

is always controlled such that In the installation this need not in that situation is not always

The first two fundamental properties mentioned above can be realized at the location where the device, equipment or system is in use. The third property can be realized only to a limited extent. In particular not all the loading conditions mentioned in clause A.5 can be standardized. To distinguish test results obtained in the standardized test from those obtained in an installation it is preferable to speak about emission/immunity-test level/limit and emission/immunity level/limit, respectively; see figure A.3.

Example: If the disturbing voltage between reference-earth and line (or neutral), the so-called V terminal voltage [l]. has been measured by using a V-network [l] in the standardized emission test, and in the in situ test that voltage is measured between a safety earth and line (or neutral), the load impedance for the disturbance source is unknown a priori. If this impedance is measured, one will normally find a time-dependent quantity, because this impedance depends on the loading conditions of the mains network. Hence, the level need not be constant at a given location, when considered over a longer period of time. Consequently, the level cannot now be measured reproducibly all over the world.

26

IS 14700 ( Part l/See 1) : 2000 IEC 1000-l-l(1992)

In the case of emission measurements other disturbance sources may already emit such a high level of the type of disturbance to be measured that the contribution of the device (equipment or system) under test is drowned completely or, at least, the measuring results are affected by the ambient noise. In such a case it is no longer possible to state that the emission level has been measured, and only the disturbance level (see clause A.4) can be measured. In the case of immunity measurements other electromagnetic disturbances might be incident on the particular susceptor at the same time, and the immunity level for one type of disturbance need not be independent of the presence of another type.

Example: The immunity of a digital system to transients on the mains can be reduced appreciably when the system is subjected to a strong field from a broadcasting transmitter. This reduction is caused by the detection of the RF-signal by the nonlinear semiconductor devices used in that system. In such cases it is no longer possible to state that the immunity level/limit has been determined, but only a level at which interference resulted. The latter level might be called the interference level.

.

Note that the disturbance and interference levels are needed because of the superposition of various electromagnetic disturbances. In the case of emission the electromagnetic disturbances of a given type (emitted by various sources) add up and determine the ultimate disturbance level. In the case of the "immunity/interference column" various types of electromagnetic disturbances (emitted by various sources) add up and determine the ultimate interference level of a particular susceptor.

L

27

IS

14700

IEC 1000-l-l

( Part l/Set (1992)

1) : 2000

References

[ll
PI

IEC SO(l61): 1990, International Electromagnetic Compatibility.

Nectrotechnical

Vocabulary

(IEV),

chapter

161:

IEC 1000-2-2: 1990, Electromagnetic compatibility Section 2: Compatibility levels for low-frequency signalling in low-voltage power supply systems.

(EMC). Part 2: Environment. conducted disturbances and
-

I31

CEC 555-2: 1982, ~Disturbances in supply systems caused by household and similar electrical equipment. Part 2: Harmonics.

appliances

[41

IEC CISPR Publication 20: 1985. Measurement of the immunity of sound and tetevision broadcast receivers and associated equipment in the frequency range 1,5 MHz to 30 MHz by the current injection method. IEC CISPR Publication 16: 1987, ClSPR specification apparatus and measurement methods. for radio interference -measuring

151

161

IEC CISPR Publication 14: 1985, Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics of .household electrical appliances, portable tools and similar electrical apparatus, European standard EN 55014, CENELEC, Brussels, Belgium, 1986. G. Bell & Sons Ltd.: 1966, Webster's Language, p. l-300. Third International Dictionary of the English

171

28

( Ccntinued from second cower ) International Standard Corresponding Indian Sthdard Degree of Equivalence Identical

CISPR 20 (1985) Measurement of the immunity of sound and television broadcast receivers and associated equipment in the frequency range 1.5 MHz to 30 MHz by the current injection method [Replaced by CISPR 20 (l998)l

IS 12552 : 1999 Limits and methods of measurement of immunity characteristics of sound and television broadcast receivers and associated equipment ( first revision )

The concerned Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following International Publication and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. 1EC 1000-2-2 : 1990 ~Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) - Part 2 : Environment Compatibility levels for low-frequency conducted disturbances in low-voltage power supp'iy system - Section 2 : and signalling

Only the English Indian Standard.

language

text of the International

Standard

has been retained

while adopting

it in this

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofrndiun Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the-need arises onthe basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the.iatest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been develoDed from Dot : No. LTD 22 ( 1862 ). Aqrendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 1 323 3841 3378499,3378561 1 337 86 26, 337 86 62 60 38 43 I 60 20 25 235 02,16,`235 04 42 1 235 15 19,23523,15 8329295,8327858 1 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar~Marg, New Delhi llOOO2 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERAEWD.JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khujs,

India

