атт Ah IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


заат ат © ЫТ — 
ават 
аттат 2 a ant = RARA 
( ЧЕСТ чадат ) 


Finishing of Automobile Bodies — 
Code of Practice 


Part 2 Refinishing of Passenger Cars 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 87.040 


© BIS 2023 


ARA AM ST 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR A, 9 ETE IE чи ЧО, Ag (8 - 110002 
e МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2023 Price Group 6 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Paints, Varnishes, and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


The object of painting is to obtain desired product appearance consistent with maximum durability. The objective 
is achieved by proper application of organic fillers, putties, primers and enamels or nitrocellulose lacquers on to 
surfaces which have been cleaned and or chemically treated. 


A large number of material specifications on ready mixed paints, enamels, varnishes, lacquers and allied products 
have created a need for codes of practice for finishing of automobile bodies, machinery, equipment, etc. There are 
two parts to this standard; the other part is: 


Part 1 Finishing of passenger cars 


This standard covers code of practice for refinishing of passenger cars. Code of practice for finishing of other 
automobile bodies and refinishing would be taken up in due course. 


This standard was originally published in 1981. Now, this revision has taken to bring out the standard in the latest 
style and format of the Indian Standard. Also, the suitable modifications have been made in accordance with the 
current procedures followed throughout the industry. Additionally, references of Indian Standards have been 
updated wherever required. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
FINISHING OF AUTOMOBILE BODIES — CODE OF PRACTICE 
PART 2 REFINISHING OF PASSENGER CARS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes practices to be followed in 
refinishing (painting) of already painted passenger 
cars. It covers surface preparation and finishing of 
cars using synthetic enamels and nitrocellulose 
lacquers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1303 : 1983 Glossary of terms relating to 


paints (second revision) 


IS 5667 : 1970 Specification for thinner for 
cellulose nitrate based paints 


and lacquers 


IS 5691 : 1970 Specification for lacquer, 
cellulose nitrate, pigmented, 


finishing, glossy 


IS 6126: 1971 Specification for 


nitrocellulose surfacer 


IS 7982 : 1992 Automobile polish, liquid — 


Specification (first revision) 


IS 8098 (Part 1): Code of practice for finishing 
1976 of automobile bodies: Part 1 
Finishing of passenger cars 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 1303 and IS 8098 (Part 1) shall apply. 


4 SURFACE PREPARATION 


4.1 Assessment of Surface Conditions 


Before taking up any refinishing work, the surface 
shall be carefully examined. A small area shall be 
thoroughly cleaned and critically examined for 
defects, such as cracking, preferably a small area 
shall be touched up with nitrocellulose finish to 
observe any lifting or crazing. Only if the paint film 


is sound repainting shall be done over it; otherwise 
the paint film shall be completely removed and 
refinishing done on bare metal. 


4.2 Removal of Chromium Beadings 


If the area to be painted is crossed or edged, by 
chromium beadings or linings, they shall be 
removed first; otherwise, this may be a hindrance for 
refinishing work. Moreover, this may trap water, 
paint remover, etc, which may cause trouble at a 
later date. Welding, bronzing, etc, which may be 
required to be done while repainting cars involved 
in accidents, for instance, shall be done first. All 
tinkering work, like flattening of dents, etc, shall be 
completed prior to refinishing with paints. 


4.3 Surface in Good Condition (Refinish of Local 
Areas) 


4.3.1 Water Wash 


The area, if in good condition, shall be washed well 
with water to remove dirt and scum. Addition of a 
mild detergent to the water is recommended. The 
area shall be thoroughly rinsed with copious 
quantity of clean water. 


4.3.2 Water Sanding 


Area to be refinished shall be water-sanded using 
400 grit paper. Rubber or felt sanding blocks or 
power sander may be advantageously used. With 
smooth even strokes, using plenty of clean water, the 
hardened paint film surface shall be removed and the 
imperfections shall be smoothened out. Wipe with 
suitable solvent to remove grease, wax, etc, and 
thoroughly dry, blowing out the crevices, etc, with 
clean compressed air. Hand-sanding is unavoidable 
for some contours of the cars. Dry-sanding is seldom 
resorted to, as it raises dust and clogs the paper. Use 
of solvent in place of water is tough on the hands. 
Gasoline shall not be used as it is dangerous and 
leaves oily residue. Apply colour coats as in 5. 


4.3.2.1 Cut-throughs 


The sanding operation given in 4.3.3 may 
cut-through the paint film to the metal, either 
because the paint film was thin or a localized rust 
spot or imperfection was removed. In this case, the 
edges surrounding the base metal shall be *feather- 
edged’, that is, finely sanded with 400 or still finer 
sand paper so that any edge or ridge is not felt by 
the finger tips. 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


4.3.3 Removal of Paint Dust from Sanding 


The entire areas, including metal spots, shall be 
cleaned with water, dried and solvent wiped. All 
areas, including crevices are to be dried thoroughly 
using compressed air, free from oil or by force 
drying. 


4.3.4 For Replacement Parts 


If the area to be finished is a new bare metal 
replacement part, it shall also be thoroughly washed 
with cleaning solvent to remove oil, grease, etc. 


4.3.5 Newly Soldered Areas 


Newly soldered areas shall be washed with ammonia 
and thoroughly rinsed with water and cleaned with a 
suitable solvent/thinner afterwards. 


4.3.6 Masking 


Careful masking provides clean paint edges and 
avoids the ragged, sloppy appearance of the 
repainted areas. This very much contributes to a top 
class job. Use of various widths of good masking 
tape, papers and dispensing equipment will save 
much time and efforts. Use newspapers only over 
the windows or wheels. Use of newspapers over 
painted areas is usually poor practice because the ink 
from the paper may dissolve in paint solvents and 
cause stains. A narrow width tape shall be used on 
difficult curved areas because it is easier to 
manipulate. Wide tape may then be applied over the 
narrow tape. Water-soluble masking creams are also 
available which are brushed before spraying and 
washed off after the paint film is thoroughly dry. 


4.3.7 Tack Ragging the Surface 


After cleaning and drying the metal surface should 
be wiped with a clean tack rag prior to the 
application of the primer surfacer. Great care shall 
be taken to avoid touching the surface with hands, 
gloves, clothing, etc, which may contaminate the 
chemically cleaned surface with grease and dirt. 
Such contamination may seriously harm the final 
finish. 


4.3.8 Application of Primer/Primer Surfacer 


After the areas are dried thoroughly, primer/primer 
surfacer shall be applied to the bare metal surfaces 
and allowed to dry for the recommended period 
before the application of the subsequent coats. 


4.3.9 Application of Putty 


Spot putty can be applied to make up surface defects 
on the damaged area. Putty should be applied over 
the primer surfacer before it is sanded. 


After drying the putty should be wet/dry sanded and 
dried thoroughly along with the primer surfacer 
using 80/220/320 grade grit paper depending on type 
of putty. All putty areas should be sealed with 
primer surfacer before the application of the finish. 


4.3.10 Application of Finish 


The finish may either be applied locally or over the 
whole surface depending upon the extent of 
rectification required. 


4.3.10.1 Spot repairs 


Local rectification shall be done by spraying the 
whole panel. However, spot spray may be carried 
out over existing nitrocellulose finish by using a 
special technique. Existing stoving synthetic or air- 
drying synthetic finish should always be rectified 
panel wise. 


4.4 Surface in Bad Condition (Complete 
Refinish) 


4.4.1 Removal of Old Finish 


If the entire paint system is to be removed to the bare 
metal, because of the poor condition of the existing 
paint system, any one of the following procedures 
may be adopted. 


4.4.1.1 By sanding 


The damaged paint film may be removed by water 
sanding with 180 rough paper fist and then with 400 
or still finer paper to smooth out the scratches. 
Power sanding with 24 grinding discs followed by 
50 grit disc is also recommended. 


4.4.1.2 By strong alkali 


The existing paint system may be removed by using 
strong alkali solutions. But great care shall be taken 
while handling the solution as it is injurious to the 
skin and attacks zinc and aluminium parts fitted in 
the cars. 


4.4.1.3 Paint removers 


Solvent type paint removers may also be used. These 
usually contain wax which forms the top layer and 
seals in the solvents under its surface. The solvents 
attack and lift the paint film. Correct application 
and thorough removal of the material after use is 
essential as any trace of wax left unremoved shall 
hinder the final finish. 


4.4.1.4 By sand blasting 


Sand blasting is excellent for larger areas. It may 
be used on any metal. It results in a perfect 
cleaning job. 


4.4.2 Clean-up of Sanding Operations 


After any of the operations (see 4.4.1.1 to 4.4.1.4) 
using 50 grit disc or steel-wool, any remaining rust 
spot or surface defects shall be removed. 


4.4.3 Washing 


Wash the entire area with suitable solvent to remove 
all the wax, grease or dirt, residues from paint 
removal operation. If a chemical type remover is 
used, a thorough water wash shall precede the 
solvent wash. Solvent wash is very important if 
solvent wax type paint removers have been used. 


4.4.4 Anti-Rust Treatment 


The bare metal shall be treated with a phosphoric 
acid based rust preventive material after diluting as 
directed by the manufacturer. Wipe off after 
2 minutes to 3 minutes while still wet with a clean 
dry cloth. If the surface dries up, re-wet with more 
of the material and then wipe dry with a clean cloth 
again. 


4.4.5 Drying 


Blow out cracks and mouldings and wipe off any 
spatters. 


4.4.6 Application of Primer/Primer Surfacer 


Apply a coat of primer/primer surfacer within 
30 minutes to prevent the formation of rust on the 
chemically cleaned surface. Take great care to avoid 
touching the surface with hands or clothing. 


4.4.7 Putty Application 


4.4.7.1 Putty may be applied over the primer surfacer 
before the surfacer is sanded. The surfacer and putty 
are then sanded in the same operation. It may also be 
applied over the primer. Apply putty in thickness not 
greater than that necessary to smooth out the rough 
spots. Putty is not a substitute for metal work which 
calls for the hammer, the grinder and the file. The 
excess putty shall be sanded off. It is better to make 
2 or 3 thin applications of putty allowing adequate 
drying time between coats than to make one heavy 
application. The drying time for putty may vary with 
the type of putty and thickness applied. 


4.4.7.2 After the putty has thoroughly dried, water 
sand the undercoats with 360 grit paper or finer. For 
putty area 80/220/320 grit paper may be used based 
on type of putty. A final wet sanding with 400 grit 
paper or finer is recommended. Any cut-through to 
the metal shall be re-sprayed with surfacer and 
scuff-sanded after drying. 


4.4.7.3 All putty areas shall be sealed by the 
application of primer surfacer. This shall be dried 
and scuffed before the application of the finish coat. 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


4.4.7.4 Wipe surface with tack-rag before applying 
colour coats. 


4.5 Finish 


The finish shall be sprayed all over. Normally 2 to 3 
coats are required to get the desired film built. 


4.5.1 Details on the different finish systems are 
given in Table 1. 


4.6 General 


4.6.1 Safety Rules for the Paint Shop 


Provide good ventilation system to remove fumes. 
Do not permit smoking in and around the spray 
areas. Place fire extinguishers and equipment in 
handy spots. Never drive a car in or out of the spray 
booth; push it by hand. Never use temporary 
electrical connections. Be sure ground wires are 
intact to avoid static electricity. Regularly check all 
electrically driven equipment. Keep the areas 
including the floors clean. Dispose of dirty range 
daily without fail before quitting time. 


4.6.2 Hints for Good Workmanship 


4.6.2.1 Thoroughly stir or shake the can of paint. A 
power-driven shaker is very helpful. The stirring or 
agitation results in a uniform mixture of pigment, 
binder and thinners. 


4.6.2.2 It is very important to stir undercoats well 
because of their heavier pigment content. 


4.6.2.3 Reduce with the right type and correct 
amount of thinner as recommended by the 
manufacturer. Economizing on cheap thinner may 
spoil the finish. Always keep the paint and thinner at 
the room temperature. 


4.6.2.4 Always add thinner slowly to the paint and 
stir constantly. Adding thinner quickly may result in 
seedy looking paint jobs. 


4.6.2.5 Strain the reduced topcoats through a fine 
mesh metal or suitable strainer. A 100 mesh screen 
(100 parallel wires per 2 cm to 5 cm) is good. Use a 
coarse screen (50 mesh) for all undercoats. 


4.6.2.6 Do not inter-mix the same type of products, 
like the primer, primer surfacer, colour coats, etc, of 
different brands. They may not be compatible. 


4.6.2.7 Never apply a synthetic primer over a 
lacquer, when the topcoat also is going to be a 
lacquer. This sand-witching of the primer will result 
in “lifting”. They may only be lightly dry scuffed. 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 1 Process of Refinishing of Passenger Cars 


(Clause 4.5.1) 


SINo. Process Detail Material Specification 
Requirement 
а) (2) 3) (4) 
1) In case of welding: 

a) If the surface is to be welded the Any suitable welding Specification to be drafted. 
area shall be thoroughly cleaned sealer or welding At present proprietory 
with mineral turpentine and a primer may be used. materials are being used. 
suitable welding sealer or primer The primer shall prevent 
applied. corrosion starting from the 

welded joints after welding 
and also the parts shall be 
capable of being welded 
after the application of the 
primer. 

b) Derusting — apply a suitable Any suitable Specification to be drafted. 
derusting composition with steel derusting composition At present proprietory 
wool and remove the rust, if any, based on phosphoric materials are being used. 
from both inside and outside and acid may be used. After application wipe off, 
wipe with cotton rags and blow the area shall be 
compressed air all over the area completely free from rust 
inside and outside. and shall not show any 

stickiness. 
11) On brazed joints: 
Apply epoxy stopper putty on Two - component Specification to be drafted. 
brazed joints. epoxy stopper putty This material shall make 
may be used. the brazed joints 
completely waterproof and 
shall give complete 
protection against 
corrosion. 
111) Primer/Primer surfacer 


a) 


b) 


One coat of synthetic airdrying 
primer is sprayed at a viscosity 
of 20 seconds to 22 seconds in IS 
Cup No. 4 at 30 *C to get a dry 
film thickness of 25 
microns. Airdry for 16 h and 
apply 2 coats of nitrocellulose 
surfacer by spraying with 
15 minutes interval between 
coats. The surfacer is thinned to 
18 seconds to 20 seconds in 
IS Cup No. 4 at 30 °C with the 
recommended thinner. It is 
allowed to dry for 1 h for putty 
application. 


Two coats of synthetic airdrying 
primer surfacer is sprayed at a 
viscosity of 22 seconds 
to 24 seconds in IS Cup 
No. 4 at 30 °C to get a dıy 


Proprietory materials 
are being used. 


Proprietory materials 
are being used. 


Specification to be drafted. 
It dries to touch in 
30 minutes. It takes 
nitrocellulose putty in 
30 minutes and 
nitrocellulose primer 
surface in one hour. 


Specification to be drafted. 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 1 (Continued) 
SINo. Process Detail Material Specification 
Requirement 
а) (2) 3) (4) 
film build of 50 microns. This is 
airdried for 4 h to 6 h before 
putty application. 
c) For spot touch-up 
One coat of nitrocellulose Nitrocellulose primer Conforming to IS 6126. 
touch-up primer may Бе surfacer. 
sprayed at a viscosity of 
18 seconds to 20 seconds in 
IS up No. 4 at 30 °C to get a film 
thickness of 20 microns. Then 3 
coats of nitrocellulose primer 
surfacer are sprayed as 
indicated above and allowed to 
airdry for 4 h. 
1v) Putty 
Nitrocellulose putty is lightly Proprietory materials Specification to be drafted. 
applied over nitrocellulose primer are being used. 
surfacer synthetic primer surfacer 
wherever necessary and allowed to 
airdry for 4 h. 
v) Surfacer after putty flatting 
The primer surfacer/putty is wet- Proprietory materials Specification to be drafted. 
sanded by hand or machine and are being used. This shall be a non- 
then washed with water inside and sanding, fast drying type of 
outside and air is blown to remove primer, which when dried 
water and dried at elevated forms a non-absorbent 
temperature or with cloth. Exposed smooth surface with good 
putty areas and portions where bare adhesion on bare metal and 
metal is exposed during sanding are capable of protecting it 
touched up with nitrocellulose or from corrosion. This shall 
synthetic primer surfacer airdried hold good for lacquer and 
and dry-scuffed with emery paper stoving enamels. 
No. 400. The area is tack-ragged to 
remove loose particles of dust and 
dirt. 
vi) Application of finish 
Nitrocellulose based touch-up Proprietory materials This product shall be such 


finishes are used for touch-up on 
the areas using the appropriate 
thinner recommended by the 
supplier; 2 coats are to be sprayed 
with 5 minutes interval between the 
coats. After 5 minutes, a mist coat 
of the recommended thinner shall 
be sprayed on the dry spray area to 
ensure proper merging of the coats. 
A flash off time of 10 minutes to 
15 minutes is allowed and then the 
touched portions are airdried 
overnight or force dried for 


are being used at 
present. 


Lacquer 


Thinner 


that it gives a finish 
comparable to stoving 
enamels. 


Conforming to IS 5691. 


Conforming to IS 5667. 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


SINo. 


а) 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


Process Detail 


(2) 


Material Specification 
Requirement 


3) (4) 


viii) 


15 minutes to 20 minutes with 
infrared lamps. Touch up of 
synthetic stoving enamels shall be 
done edge-to- edge, that is, if the 
damage is on the door panel, the 
whole door panel shall be finished 
with the finish and dried as before. 
In case of complete refinish either 
nitrocellulose finish or synthetic 
airdrying finish can be used. Three 
coats of nitrocellulose finish 
followed by a mist coat are 
recommended. Synthetic air-drying 
finish should be thinned to 
20 seconds to 22 seconds in 
IS cup No. 4 with recommended 
thinner and two coats should be 
sprayed with 10 minutes flash 
between coats. 


Polishing 

The refinished touch-up areas are 
polished with suitable liquid polish 
with mechanical buffing with soft 
mop. This polishing operation is to 
be carried out to remove the dry 
spray and proper merging of the 
touched-up areas. Polishing is 
preceded by rubbing with abrasive 
rubbing compound. For complete 
refinishing it is desirable to carry 
out the burnishing and polishing 
operation after a few days. 


4.6.3 Colour Accuracy 


4.6.3.1 Colour change in the paint film may be 
caused by the weather. Continuous exposure to the 
ultra violet rays of strong sunlight have greatest 
effect on the colour. 


4.6.3.2 Matching an old finish that has drastically 
changed in colour, is usually difficult. It is easier to 
refinish the car completely. To test a finish for 
colour accuracy, spray the new colour over the same 
base colour that will finally be used. Allow it to dry, 
then compare it against a polished section. Spraying 
over the same base colour is particularly important 
for aluminium pigmented colours and for many new 
semi-opaque colours. The base coat has a marked 
effect on the final appearance. 


4.6.3.3 Before actually using the paint, make sure to 
stir the fresh can of paint thoroughly and reduce with 
the correct amount and type of thinner or reducer. 
Make sure to pay close attention to the spraying 
technique. Neglect of any of these factors may result 
in an off colour. 


Automobile polish, 
liquid. 


Conforming to IS 7982. 


4.6.3.4 Spraying in different ways, wet, dry, heavy 
and thin shall result in distinct colour variation. 
Most colours shall show some variation because of 
differences in spraying or reduction. This is 
specially so in case of low hiding and indescent 
colours. 


4.6.4 Rubbing and Polishing 


4.6.4.1 If rubbing is done too soon before all traces 
of solvents have evaporated from the film, hazing 
or dulling may result. The rubbing/polishing shall 
be done after 48 hours of application of 
nitrocellulose lacquer. Rubbing may be done either 
by hand or by wheel-buffer. If a hand rubbing 
compound is to be used, apply the compound 
sparingly to a rubbing ball made of a clean, cheese 
cloth. Rub with straight back and forth motions in 
one direction until the desired smoothness is 
obtained. After obtaining the desired surface, polish 
to a high lustre with another clean cloth-preferably 
cotton flannel. In case of the material being painted 
with synthetic enamel, polishing shall be done after 
7 days of drying. 


4.6.4.2 Wheel-polishing compounds should be 
applied with a brush to the colour film. As the wheel 
is applied, the compound shall spread evenly and 
rapidly produce a bright, glossy finish. 


5 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


Brush all the upholstery. If a leatherette upholstery 
has been used, brighten it up with recommended 
leatherette cleaner. Wash the rubber or composition 
floor mats with water and detergents with a soft 
cloth, dust and dash, steering wheel and mouldings. 
For old tyres, whether white side or black walls 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


rubber dressing will make them look new. 
Sometimes a good washing with water is 
sufficient. For chrome strips and bumper, a 
commercial type chrome cleaner or steel wool and 
soap will do, provided the chrome has not 
completely rusted away. 


6 ECONOMY IN REFINWIING JOB 
Avoiding high air pressure and overspray and 


maintaining a low paint inventory at all times, will 
result in considerable economy in refinishing jobs. 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


Organization 
Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 
Akzo Nobel India Limited, Gurugram 


Asian Paints Ltd, Mumbai 


Berger Paints India Ltd, Howrah 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi, 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Materials), 
Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Harcourt Butler Technical University, Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Paints Association, Kolkata 

Indian Small Scale Paint Association, Mumbai 
Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 

J K Cement Limited, Kanpur 

Kansai Nerolac Paints Ltd, Mumbai 

Meta Chem Paints and Adhesives Private Limited, 


Nashik 


Ministry of Defence, 
Standardization, New Delhi 


Department of 


Ministry of Industry, New Delhi 


National Test House (ER), Kolkata 


Naval Materials Research Laboratory (NMRL), 
Thane 


Representative(s) 
PROF P. A. MAHANWAR, (Chairperson) 
SHRI SANATAN HAJRA 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR GOEL 
SHRI RAJES BARDIA (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPAN KUMAR DHAR 
SHRI SWAGATA CHAKROBORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI V. RAJESHKHARAN (Alternate) 


DR SUKHDEO R. KARADE 
DR P. C. THAPLIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAR SINGH 
SHRI M. L. PRASAD (Alternate 1) 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate П) 


SHRI M. A. U. KHAN 


DR GURBACHAN SINGH 
SHRI A. K. PATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GHOSHAL 
SHRI A. SATYA SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


PROF P. K. KAMANI 
PROF ARUN MAITHANI (Alternate) 


PROF SMRUTIRANJAN PARIDA 


SHRI SUBROTO BANERJEE 
DR M. B. GUHA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH GOYAL 
SHRI H. SATHYANARAYAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI NIRAV RAVESHIA (Alternate II) 


PROF V. V. SHERTUKADE 


SHRI RANA PRATAP SINGH 
DR PRITI PILLAY (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN NIKAM 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR SOMANI (Alternate) 


SHRI BISWANATH PANJA 
SHRI HEMANT KULKARNI (Alternate) 


LT COL PRAVEEN DEO 
SHRI V. K. CHHABRA (Alternate) 


SHRI NAND LAL 


SHRIMATI P. NATARAJAN 
DR A. B. MONDAL (Alternate) 


DR T. K. MAHATO 
DR G. GUNASEKARAN (Alternate) 


Organization 


Office of the Micro Small & Medium Enterprises 
(MSME), New Delhi 


Paint and Coating Technologists Association, 
Kanpur 


Pidilite Indusries Ltd, Mumbai 


Research Designs & Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 


Shriram Institute for Indl. Research, Delhi 
SSPC India Chapter, Kolkata, Mumbai 


The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (Flat 1303, Blooming 
Heights, Pacific Enclave, Powai, Mumbai - 
400076) 


In Personal Capacity (2, Block Mann Street, 
Kolkata - 700013) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 8098 (Part 2) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRIMATI M. ANNABACKIAM 
SHRIMATIM. S. RAMMIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI USHENDRA SINGH 
SHRI VIVEK KUMAR SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRIRAMESH KASHYAP 
SHRI SUSHANT PANGAM (Alternate) 


SHRIP. K. BALA 
SHRIK. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIA. K. MAJUMDAR 


DR BUDDHADEB DUARI 
SHRI ANIL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K.TRIPATHI 
SHRI SUSHIL ORAON (Alternate) 


DR В.Р. MALLIK 


DR SUNIL KUMAR SAHA 


A. K. LAL SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI PUSHPENDRA KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
CHEMICAL, BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 20 (21467). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


