NRA Alte IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


aA ard URAN Eso Sc fer 
STRUTT AY ATT Ch URRU EATA GAT 
OATS ART Went A AU MSS 
am 2 Kohle a Haat Seat 
( FAT JARAT ) 


Guide for Types of Measurements for 
Structures in River Valley Projects 
and Criteria for Choice and Location 
of Measuring Instrument 


Part 2 Concrete and Masonry Dams 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2019 


weds Ae Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UI, 9 TEE TH HM, ay Reef 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 5 


Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee, WRD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources 
Division Council. 


In the second revision of this standard clause 4.8 and 6.9.1 have been modified. 


Dams and related works are built to last many decades, and form key structures to the development of river basin, 
potential for irrigation, water supply, flood control, navigation, recreation and power generation. 


Inherent in the reservoir water storage are tremendous forces which the dam is expected to withstand throughout 
its operational life. Consideration of the disastrous effect of the failure of a dam in terms of loss of life and 
property and the negation of planned benefits of the project, make it imperative that means should be available in 
the dam for providing information on continued assurance of its safety. 


The extent of internal distress in a dam cannot always be directly measured. However, diagnostic procedures are 
available which can help in identifying most ailments. Key to these procedures is effective instrumentation, which 
is a vital part of dam design. Instruments strategically implanted in the vital zone scan provide meaningful clues. 


The objectives of instrumentation are manifold. The instruments embedded in, or installed at the surface of dams 
and other hydraulic structures keep a constant watch over their performance in service and indicate the distress 
spots which call for remedial measures. Thus these instruments play an important role in checking the safety of 
the structure. 


Observations from the instruments form a cumulative record of the structural behaviour. The study of structural 
behaviour provides an important aid in modifying purely theoretical treatment so as to include the effect of 
actual field conditions. Most hydraulic structures are built on rather conservative assumptions to provide for the 
‘unknowns’ in the design. Observations from the instrumentation help reduce these ‘unknowns’ and place the 
future designs on sounder footings. The information obtained through measurements promotes the understanding 
of the influence of various parameters on the structural behaviour and leads 10 formulations of more realistic 
design criteria. 


Various new or modified construction techniques like rolled concrete construction are being evolved. However, 
these techniques are not accepted by the engineers till their long term performance is proved. The observations 
from instruments help to evaluate the suitability or otherwise of the new modified techniques. 


Many dams, particularly older ones, are modified to allow for increased capacity, increased safety or on account of 
some efficiency noted. Instrumentation readings, available before and after the modifications, will help to clarify 
and indicate whether the remedial actions were effective or otherwise. 


The condition of dam and its overall safety has to be checked regularly not merely to satisfy the engineer 
community but also to demonstrate to the public at large that the dam is safe performing in accordance with the 
design assumptions. 


Masonry is a heterogeneous material and there is very little experience of instrumentation in it. Further, properties, 
such as creep, compressive, flexural or tensile strengths, modulus of elasticity, and thermal properties cannot be 
easily ascertained in the case of masonry dam construction. The instrumentation has, therefore, limitations as far 
as masonry dams are concerned. However, as experience of instrumentation in masonry dams is gained, better 
idea can be had regarding the use and utility of instrumentation in masonry dams. 


This standard was first published in 1976. The revision of the standard has been taken up to incorporate certain 
changes found necessary. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards 
and practice prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)’. The number of significant place retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


GUIDE FPR TYPES OF MEASUREMENTS FOR 
STRUCTURES IN RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
AND CRITERIA FOR CHOICE AND LOCATION 
OF MEASUREING INSTRUMENT 


PART 2 CONCRETE AND MASONRY DAMS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) lays down the types of 
measurements need to be done in concrete dams 
and masonry dams in river valley projects. Criteria 
for choice and location of the required measuring 
instruments are also given. 
NOTE — Details of specifications, instrumentation, 
maintenance and observation of individual instruments will be 
covered by separate codes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 


4967 : 1968 Recommendations for seismic 
instrumentation for river valley 


projects 


9225.2. 1992 Meteorology — Raingauge, non- 


recording ( first revision) 


5235 : 1992 Meteorology —-  Raingauges, 


recording specification 


6524 : 1972 Code of practice for installation 
and observation of instruments 
for temperature measurement 
inside dams — Resistance type 


thermometers 


8282 Code of practice for installation, 
maintenance and observation of 


pore pressure 


(Part 1) : 1976 Measuring devices in concrete 
and masonry dams: Electrical 


resistance type cell 


IS No. Title 


(Part 2) : 1996 


13073 (Part 1) 
: 2002 


Vibrating wire type cell 


Code of practice for installation, 
maintenance and observation of 
displacement measuring devices 
for concrete and masonry dams: 
Part 1 Deflection measurement 
using plumb line 


13232 : 1992 Code of practice for installation, 
maintenance and observation of 
electrical strain measuring device 


in concrete dams 


3 OBLIGATORY 
MEASUREMENTS 


AND OPTIONAL 


No general rule can be given for the type of 
measurements to be made at dams as they are of many 
kinds, have different site conditions and have different 
problems. Even then some kinds of measurements 
are obligatory for all concrete dams while others are 
optional. 


3.1 Obligatory Measurements 


The following measurements are obligatory for all 
dams: 


a) Uplift pressure at the base of the dam at a sufficient 
number of transverse sections; 


b) Seepage into the dam and appearing downstream 
therefrom; 


c) Temperature of the interior of the dam; and 
d) Displacement measurements. Except for very 
small structures. 
Displacement measurements should include one or 
more of the following types of measurements: 
a) Those determined by suspended plumblines; 


b) Those determined by geodetic measurements 
where warranted by the importance of the 
structure; and 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


c) Those determined by embedded resistance joint 
meters at contraction joints where grouting is 
required to be done. 


3.2 Optional Measurements 


The following measurements are optional and may be 
undertaken where warranted by special circumstances 
of project. These would be beneficial for high dams, 
structures of unusual design, structures where unusual 
or doubtful foundations exist, the verification of design 
criteria and for effecting improvement in future designs: 


a) Stress, 
b) Strain, 


c) Pore pressure (as distinct from uplift pressure), 
and 


d) Seismicity of the area and dynamic characteristic 
of the structure. 


Due to ever increasing demand of power, emphasis has 
been laid to construct large size of hydroelectric project 
with very high dam. With the present trend, dam sites 
are neither geologically ideal nor seismically suitable 
as most of the best sites have already been considered 
for the purpose. Due to this reason those measurements 
that were considered optional at the time of framing 
this code may become obligatory now for high dams 
especially in the Himalayan region. 


4 TYPES OF MEASUREMENTS 


4.1 Measurement of Uplift Pressure 


It is important to determine the magnitude of any 
hydraulic pressure at the base of a dam. The effect 
of uplift on a dam is to reduce its effective weight on 
account of resulting buoyancy. 


4.2 Measurement of Seepage 


4.2.1 Seepage is undoubtedly the best indicator of the 
overall performance of a dam because this reflects the 
performance of entire dam and not just the condition 
at discrete instrumented points. Any sudden change in 
the quantity of seepage without apparent cause, such as 
corresponding change in the reservoir level or a heavy 
rain fall, could indicate a seepage problem. Similarly, 
when the seepage water becomes cloudy or discoloured 
contains increased quantities of sediment, or changes 
radically in chemical content, a likely serious seepage 
problem is indicated. 


4.2.2 It is customary to provide grout curtain near the 
upstream face of the dam. Besides, a drainage curtain 
in the foundation and porous drain in the body of the 
dam are provided to intercept any seepage that passes 
through the grout curtain and through the body of the 
dam respectively. Measurement of seepage water along 
with uplift measurement at the plane of contact of the 
dam and its foundation will give direct indication of the 
effectiveness of the grout curtain and drainage curtain 


and will indicate whether any remedial measures are 
necessary. The chemical analysis of the seepage water 
through the foundation drainage system will help in 
assessing whether any foundation material is being 
washed out. 


4.2.3 Likewise the quantum of water passing through 
ungrouted contraction joints or cracks would indicate 
about the workmanship in general as also any damage 
that might have been caused to the seals in the 
contraction joints. The chemical analysis of the water in 
case of masonry dam may be indicative of any possible 
leaching action on mortar used in the construction of 
the masonry dam. Corrective measures such as grouting 
of dam and foundation, besides improving existing 
drainage or providing additional drainage could thus be 
planned. 


4.2.4 Wet spots or seepage appearing at new or 
unplanned locations at the abutments or downstream 
of a dam could also indicate a seepage problem. 
Measurement of seepage downstream of the grout 
curtain provides a direct indication of the adequacy and 
effectiveness of the grout curtain, drainage curtain and 
functioning of the drains and holes to decide when and 
where remedial measures may be required. 


4.3 Measurement of Temperature 


4.3.1 Measurement 
Construction 


of Temperature During 


For concrete gravity dams it is very important to 
know the thermic variations in the dam during its 
construction which enables to determine whether the 
concrete setting process is normal or otherwise to 
achieve this purpose, temperature measuring devices 
are embedded within the dam body and also mounted 
on the surface according to a predetermined plan for 
useful observations. Any abnormal setting process 
indicated by temperature observations may lead to a 
change in the concrete lift height, and also changes in 
the treatment of aggregates before concreting and of 
the mass concrete during curing. 


4.3.2 Measurement of Temperature of the Dam Interior 


It is necessary to measure temperature in the body of 
concrete and masonry dams in order to ascertain the 
nature and extent of thermal stresses and the consequent 
structural behaviour of the dam and also to ascertain 
when to undertake grouting of contraction joints that 
may have been provided for the structure. 


4.3.3 Measurement of Temperature of Reservoir Water 
and Air 


Measurement of temperature of reservoir water and air 
is essential for distinguishing the effects of ambient 
and water temperatures on such measurements as 
deflection, stresses, strains and joint movement sand 
settlements. 


4.4 Measurement of Displacement 


Measurement of displacement of points either between 
two monoliths, or between foundation and body of 
the dam or the displacement of any joint of the dam 
with respect to the surrounding area will immediately 
reveal any distress conditions developing in the dam. 
Measurement of displacement is thus one of the most 
important factors to be studied while observing the 
structural behaviour of a dam. 


4.4.1 Internal Joint Movement 


Concrete and masonry dams are generally built in 
blocks separated by transverse joints. It is essential to 
know whether, there is any relative movement between 
two blocks. The movement is likely to be due to 
differential foundation behaviour. Further, the relative 
movement of blocks is important from the point of 
view of grouting of transverse contraction joints. 


4.4.2 Surface Joint Movement 


Measurement of joint movement at the surface of 
the locations accessible from galleries is made by 
detachable gauges with a view to assess the amount of 
joint opening of two blocks of the dam. These gauges 
may also be advantageously used for observation of 
opening or of closing of surface cracks at any location. 


4.4.3 Foundation Displacement 


Measurement of vertical or horizontal displacement of 
foundation provides information for taking preventive 
measures for inclination, distortion etc. of structures. 
The data can also be used for studying the elastic and in 
elastic properties of dam and foundation. Measurement 
of foundation displacement involves vertical and 
horizontal displacement of part of foundation with 
respect to dam. 


4.4.4 Displacement of One Part of the Dam Relative to 
other Parts of the Dam 


Measurement of relative displacement of two points in a 
dam is a direct indication of structural behaviour of the 
dam. The deflection characteristics of a dam observed 
for the first few years will reveal any dangerous tilt or 
movement of the dam. These observations are made 
by regular and inverted plumb lines. The plumb line 
data together with other supporting data may be used to 
study the elastic behaviour of the dam. 


4.4.5 Displacement of Dam 
Surrounding Area 


with Reference to 


This measurement gives the absolute displacement of 
the dam with respect to surrounding area, and is a direct 
indication of structural behaviour of the dam. 


Provisions would be made for periodic deflection 
measurements. Where topography permits, this can be 
done by theodolite from fixed bases, using either line- 
of-sight over the top of the dam or by turning angles 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


to targets on the downstream face and at the crest. At 
concrete dams, the deflections should be consistent 
with changes in reservoir water surface level and in 
temperature and should not change appreciably from 
year to year. 


4.4.6 Measurement of Tilt 


Tilt is measurement of rotation in vertical plane. It is 
normally measured with the help of tilt meter system 
consisting of tilt meter sensor, tilt plates and indicator. 
Tilt plates are bonded to the surface of mass of structure 
under observation. The sensor is oriented on three pegs 
of tilt plate and senses change in tilt of tiltplate. The 
portable indicator gives the degree of rotation. 


4.5 Measurement of Stress 


Direct measurement of stress developed inside the 
mass of concrete or masonry helps in watching the 
structural behaviour of dams and their foundations. 
Any adverse change in stress will indicate distress 
conditions and remedial measures can be taken. The 
observation of stress also helps in studying the assumed 
stresses and actual stresses in dams and this can be used 
in improving upon the design procedure. 


4.6 Measurement of Strain 


Factors like temperature, chemical action, moisture 
change and stress result in volume changes, which 
cause strain in the structure. The measurement of 
strain, therefore, becomes necessary. As the design of 
structures is based on stress it is essential to measure 
the stresses developed in the structures during its 
life time. Moreover, the instruments available for 
measurement of stresses can measure only compressive 
stress and not the tensile stress. Further, the stress 
measuring instruments are more expensive and delicate 
than strainmeters and hence, it is a common practice 
to measure the strain and to calculate from it the 
developed stress. 


4.7 Measurement of Pore Pressure 


4.7.1 Since large concrete and masonry dams are 
provided with internal formed drains located near the 
upstream face, a record of pore pressure development 
and its variations would indicate the effectiveness and 
adequacy of these drains. Any sudden unusual increase 
in the pore pressures will be indicative of choking up 
of these internal drains and any unusual reduction from 
the normal would indicate possibility of formation of 
cracks or establishment of flow channels in the body 
of the dam. 


4.7.2 Measurement of uplift in the foundation is 
mandatory for all gravity dams and is generally 
accomplished by uplift pressure pipes which providea 
direct indication of the prevailing magnitude of uplift 
resulting from the operating reservoir heads and 
consequently the effectiveness of the grout curtain 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


close to the upstream face of the damand effectiveness 
of the drainage curtain provided in the foundation apart 
from checking of design assumptions for its stability. 


4.8 Seismicity of the Area 
Characteristic of the Structure 


and Dynamic 


Surveillance of seismic environment of the project 
site needs special attention in case of large dams to 
know about the seismicity of the region before taking 
up construction. Creation of a reservoir generates 
additional load on the surrounding area and underlying 
geological strata. Thus, it becomes essential to know the 
change in the seismicity pattern, if any, due to creation 
of large reservoir. The behaviour of dam during an 
earthquake also needs to be assessed. A seismological 
laboratory may be established near the project site for 
evaluation of seismic parameters for large dams located 
in seismic zone III, zone IV and zone V. 


4.9 Measurement of Water Level on Upstream and 
Downstream Side 


This measurement is useful for calculating the water 
pressure on the upstream face and downstream face of 
the dam. 


4.10 Other Measurements 


The following other measurements which would aid in 
interpretation of the main instrumentation data are also 
necessary. 


4.10.1 Rainfall Measurement 

Rainfall measurement is routinely carried out aspart of 
hydrological observation. 

4.10.2 Wave Height and Ice Effect 


Measurement of height of wave and effect of ice are 
also useful for interpretation of results of structural 
behaviour of the dam. 


4.10.3 Measurement of Level of Silt Deposit at the 
Upstream Face of the Dam 

This would be useful for determining the pressure due 
to silt deposit on the upstream face of the dam. 

4.10.4 Other Meteorological Measurements 


Other meteorological measurements such as of wind 
velocity and wet and dry bulb temperatures may also 
be made. 


5 AUXILIARY DATA TO BE COLLECTED 
5.1 Data to be Kept of Construction/Operation 
Stages 


The following data of construction/operation stage 
should be kept: 


a) Concrete or masonry placing diagram, showing 
lift placement date, placing temperature and lift 
thickness, type of method and duration of curing; 


b) Cooling arrangements, if any, and their details; 


c) Final rock elevations and unusual geological 
features; and 


d) Record of joint grouting operations. 


5.2 Data to be Kept from Control Operations 


The following data of control operations should be 
kept: 


a) Cement content, water-cement ratios, aggregate 
grading, amount of entrained air, and admixtures 
used, if any; 


b) Physical and chemical properties of cement 
including heat of hydration; 


c) Chemical and physical properties of aggregates; 
and 


d) Maximum and minimum air temperatures. 


5.3 Laboratory Data 
The following laboratory data should be collected: 


a) Specific heat, conductivity, diffusivity, thermal 
coefficient of expansion dynamic and static 
modulus of elasticity, creep, compressive, flexural 
and tensile strengths of concrete; 


b) Similar properties for masonry to the extent; 


c) Specific surface of cement used for joint grouting 
and properties of pozzolana, if used; and 


d) Data of water samples. 


6 CHOICE OF INSTRUMENTS AND 
LOCATION OF MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 


Instrumentation should be provided in at least one 
deepest over flow block and two abutment blocks. It 
should also be indicated that the number of instrumented 
blocks may be increased with the increase in length of 
dam. 


6.1 General 


6.1.1 Instruments presently available are designed on 
four basic principles namely, mechanical, hydraulic, 
pneumatic and electrical. Electrical type instruments 
include unbounded resistance type and vibrating 
wire. Out of the four types of instruments mechanical, 
pneumatic and hydraulic type of instruments are simple, 
rugged, reliable, cheaper and easy to operate, but have 
lower response and lower accuracy. The mechanical 
type cannot be read remotely while pneumatic and 
hydraulic though can be read remotely, have problems 
with connecting tubes of blocking and breaking. 
Whereas electrical type of instruments facilitates easy 
remote reading, use of data logger and computers 
apart from their high sensitivity, high resolutions and 
accuracy. 


6.1.2 Bonded strain gauge type of instruments should 
not be used for embedded applications. In special 


applications where the other types of instruments have 
limitations namely, dynamic measurements, these may 
be used only on surface and accessible locations and 
for short term observations. The unbonded resistance 
wire type and vibrating wire type of instruments have 
long term stability and are in use extensively. The 
main disadvantages with the bonded strain gauge 
types are that they suffer from drift due to creep in 
bonding material and backing material, variation 
in cable conductor resistance due to temperature, 
leakage resistances between cable conductors due to 
moisture ingress. Thus they are unsuitable for long 
term application. The unbonded resistance wire type 
instruments also suffer from the influence of change 
in cable conductor resistance and leakage resistance 
between conductor due to temperature changes and 
moisture ingress respectively. However the effect can 
be minimized and temperature corrections applied. 


6.1.3 Vibrating wire type instruments are not sensitive 
to cable resistance and moisture movement. They are 
under influence of temperature changes but the effect 
is less significant. They are either supplied with the 
moistures or correction factor by the manufacturer to 
compensate the effect. 


6.1.4 There is no simple rule which can determine the 
number of instruments, their exact type or location. 
Their determination remaining primarily a matter of 
experienced judgement. 


6.1.5 The number of devices installed in a dam is 
less important than the selection of proper types of 
instruments, their location and intelligent interpretation 
of the data. 


6.1.6 The quality of instruments should be of paramount 
importance since these are expected to work for very 
long periods, say 25 - 30 years. More importantly so 
because embedded instruments cannot be retrieved and 
repaired if these become defective. 


6.1.7 In a selection of equipment, service requirements 
must be carefully weighed. An instrument of rugged 
construction that gives reasonably accurate results 
may be preferable to a more precise but delicate 
instrument. 


6.1.8 Ideally, the instruments selected for a given 
situation should have the following characteristics: 


a) It should be sufficiently accurate; 
b) It should have long term reliability and stability; 
c) It should have low maintenance requirements; 


d) It should be compatible with construction 
techniques; 


e) It should have low cost; and 
f) It should be simple but rugged. 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


6.2 Uplift Measuring Instruments 


Instruments which may be used for measurement of 
uplift are uplift pressure pipes. 


6.2.1 Measurement of Uplift 


The device for measuring uplift consists of a pipe 
installed at the point where uplift pressure is to be 
measured, such that it terminates in a gallery directly 
above the measuring point which is generally 1 m 
below the base of a dam. 


6.2.2 The pipes placed upstream of the grout curtain 
are usually inclined towards upstream face fitted with 
a tee section and a Bourdon type pressure gauge for 
observing water pressure and those placed downstream 
of the grout curtain are read by sounding or with 
pressure gauge. Last pipe is generally inclined towards 
downstream to cover maximum width of the dam. 


6.2.3 Uplift pressure pipes are the simplest and most 
rugged. Only difficulty encountered in case of these 
pipes is when they get choked. Restoration of choked 
pipes is possible by drilling a hole through the pipe but 
if there is a bend in the pipe, drilling is not possible and 
the pipe has to be abandoned. 


6.2.4 Uplift pressure measurements should be made 
at cross sections representing the principal types of 
foundation strata. Uplift measurements should be done 
at least at three cross sections in case of small dams 
and at least at five cross sections in the case of large 
dams. The cross sections chosen should include one of 
the deepest overflow and non-overflow sections, and 
some sections near the abutments. Uplift measuring 
points on a cross section line should be located taking 
into consideration the geological features appearing at 
the cross section so that the effect of such geological 
features on the uplift pressure could be evaluated. 
At any cross section, uplift measurements should be 
done at: 


a) upstream of the groutline; 
b) between the grout line and the drainage hole; 
c) immediately after the drainage hole; and 
d) at the end of the cross gallery. 
Spacing between (c) and (d) may be divided equally. 


In case of large base widths a spacing of 20m may be 
adopted. 


6.2.5 Uplift pressure cells based on vibrating wire or 
unbonded resistance wire principle should be used for 
remote indication applications. 


6.3 Seepage Measuring Instrument 


Small notches and weirs may be constructed at points 
where seepage is to be measured from the water level 
readings at these points quantity of seepage can be 
computed. Where any drainage hole shows abnormal 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


flow (quantity and pressure) a regular program of 
observations of pressure and quantity of seepage may 
be necessary. Float operated water level sensors using 
vibrating wire load cell is one type instrument that 
should be used for remote indication. 


6.4 Temperature Measuring Instruments 


6.4.1 Temperature measurement can be done by either: 
a) Resistance thermometers, or 


b) Vibrating wire type thermometers. 


6.4.2 The resistance thermometer works on the principle 
that, resistance of an electrical wire is a function of 
temperature. The vibrating wire type works on the 
principle that, a change in length of vibrating wire 
results in proportional change in natural frequency. 


Resistance type thermometers are accurate yet 
comparatively less costly and hence, are extensively 
used. 


6.4.3 As temperature is one of the major factors causing 
stresses it is necessary to measure it at many places in 
the dam. A typical scheme for location of thermometers 
would be to place them in 1.5 x 15 mg rid horizontally 
and vertically in a minimum of one block in the spillway 
portion of the dam and in other portions depending upon 
the data required for detailed study of the structural 
behaviour of the dam. A few thermometers should be 
placed near and on the downstream face to evaluate the 
rapidly fluctuations in the temperature. Thermometers 
placed on upstream face as a continuation of the 
main thermometer grid will serve to evaluate lake 
temperatures close to the dam. For measurement of 
foundation temperature, thermometers should be placed 
near the base of the dam and also in holes drilled in 
the foundations at desired locations (see also IS 6524). 
As unbounded resistance wire type stress, strain and 
joint meters measure temperature accurately, it is not 
necessary to install thermometers at their locations. For 
details see IS 6524. 


6.5 Displacement Measurement Instruments 


6.5.1 Internal Joint Movement 
Two types of joint meters are available, namely: 

a) Unbonded resistance wire type, and 

b) Vibrating wire type. 
In the case of large dams joint meters should be 
provided in at least three blocks, deepest central block 
and a block each in the abutment portion. In plan of a 
given elevation the joint meters in each of these blocks 
should be installed on the centre of the longitudinal 
joints and at the centre of the transverse dimensions 
of the monoliths in the block, spaced about 15 m 
vertically for the entire heights of the longitudinal and 
transverse joints. This spacing may be modified in the 
top portion of the joint if joint height does not permit of 
15 m spacing for the entire height. 


6.5.2 Surface Joint Movement 


Surface joint measurements are made either on the 
surface or at locations accessible from galleries. 


The measurements are made by calibrated tapes by 
fixing two reference points one each on either side of the 
joint and by accurately measuring the distance between 
the two points at certain intervals. This discloses the 
amount of joint opening. 


6.5.2.1 Portable gauges with dial indicators are most 
common mechanical gauges for measurement of 
surface movements. Scratch gauges are occasionally 
used. 


6.5.2.2 These measurements should be taken at locations 
corresponding to embedded joint maters so that results 
can be compared. The surface joint measurements are 
also taken where surface cracks are noticed. 


6.5.3 Foundation Displacement 


6.5.3.1 Foundation displacement can either be vertical 
or horizontal. 


6.5.3.2 Vertical foundation displacement is measured 
through a bore hole drilled in the foundation from 
the foundation gallery by anchoring one end of a thin 
galvanized wire rope at lower end of the bore hole and 
providing a plumb bob to the other end taken over a 
pulley. Foundation movement thus can be measured 
in terms of displacement of the bob. The plumb bob 
over a pulley arrangement can be replaced by electrical 
devices like unbonded strain gauge, vibrating wire 
strain gauge, LVDT ora potentiometer. For the electrical 
type devices except potentiometer the wire rope can 
be replaced by a series of interconnectable rods. The 
instrument is known as bore hole extensometer. 


6.5.3.3 The measurements should be taken at all 
points where foundation deformation is expected to be 
significant. It is preferable to have one measurement 
each in a grid of 30 x 30 m. 


6.5.3.4 The vertical displacement of foundation can 
also be ascertained by installing joint meters between 
the contact of the foundation and the dam. The end 
fixed in the foundation can be mounted on a pipe 
with its lower end anchored at the bottom of a drilled 
hole. 


6.5.3.5 Horizontal foundation displacement can be 
measured by inverted plumb line. Inverted plumb line 
consists of a wire; the lower end of which is anchored 
in the foundation while the upper end is attached to 
a float, buoyed up by water in a covered tank. The 
displacement of the wire is measured by a co-ordiscope 
or microscope and micrometer slide. The inverted 
plumb line should be installed in the same block in 
which normal plumb line is installed so that results can 
be used together. 


6.5.4 Displacement of Dam by Plumb Line 


6.5.4.1 A plumb line consists of a wire, suspended 
through a shaft in the dam, the upper end of the wire 
being anchored to the body of the dam and the lower 
end carrying a heavy weight. The oscillations of the 
plumb line are damped by immersing the plumb weight 
in oil. 


6.5.4.2 The deflection of the wire is measured with 
reference to a reference point. The displacement of 
wire is measured by a co-ordimeter and co-ordiscope 
or microscope and micrometer slide. 


6.5.4.3 One plumb line is installed at the deepest central 
section and also one each on either side at quarter points 
of the dam. If the height of the dam does not change 
much one plumb line can be installed each at one-third 
the length of the dam. 


6.5.5 Displacement of Dam 
Surrounding Area 


with Reference to 


6.5.5.1 This measurement is done by surveying 
methods, namely, either by geodetic method or 
collimation method. 


6.5.5.2 In the geodetic method two piers are constructed 
one on each bank and also on the downstream side of 
the dam. The piers are used for accurately locating 
the theodolite for angular measurements. Targets are 
fixed on the downstream face of the dam and accurate 
measurements of movements of these targets are 
made from the two piers with precision instruments. 
Theodolite stations should be connected to an 
orientation point outside the influence of the dam and 
shift of the theodolite stations accounted for in the 
computations. 


6.5.5.3 The geodetic method has the advantage of 
measuring absolute displacement very accurately but 
involves complicated calculations. 


6.5.5.4 Targets should preferably be fixed on grid pattern 
at locations which detail the horizontal and vertical 
elements of the structure as adopted for theoretical 
analysis. Targets should also be located in the blocks 
containing the plumb line so that the displacements by 
the two methods can be compared. The actual results 
of displacement can then be compared with analytical 
results. 


6.5.5.5 In the collimation method, a line of sight is 
established which remains fixed during the life of the 
structure. The movement of points on the dam crest 
are then measured with reference to the line of sight. 
Collimeter is used for establishing the line of sight. 
Targets for the observation should preferably be fixed 
on each block. 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


6.5.6 Measurement of Tilt 


Tilt is measurement of rotation in vertical plane. It is 
normally measured with the help of tiltmeter system 
consisting of tiltmeter sensor tilt plates and indicator. 


Tiltplates are bonded to the surface of mass of structure 
under observation. The sensor is oriented on the three 
pegs of the tiltplate and sense change in the tilt of 
tiltplate. The portable indicator gives the degree of 
rotation. 


6.5.6.1 The instrument consists of a base which is 
permanently fixed in the concrete and a clinometer 
which is placed on the base. The clinometer is properly 
placed on the base and air bubble is centered with 
the help of a micrometer screw. Thereading of the 
micrometer screw obtained at any particular line of 
observation when referred to the initial reading gives 
the value of tilt. 


6.5.6.2 Tilt measurements are also made by vibrating 
wire clinometers. Vibrating wire type clinometers 
are either surface mounted or embedded in the body 
of dam. A cylindrical core houses a special pendulum 
surrounded by damping oil. A vibrating wire is stretched 
between the pendulum and the core. The instrument 
works on the principle that any change in the position 
of pendulum will change the tension in the vibrating 
wire and its frequency of vibration will change. 


6.5.6.3 Tilt measurements should preferably be made 
where plumb line observations are made so that 
results can be compared and used together. For details 
IS 13073 (Part 1) may be referred to. 


6.6 Stress Measuring Instruments 


6.6.1 One of the stress meters commonly used consists 
of mercury filled diaphragm to which is attached a 
measuring unit consisting of unbounded resistance 
wire strain meter. The stress applied to the mercury 
filled diaphragm is converted into strain by elastic 
deformation of diaphragm and is measured by the strain 
meter. The meter is useful only for the measurement of 
compressive stress and cannot be used for tensile stress 
measurement. 


6.6.2 Stressmeter is located only in zones subjected to 
compression. As the maximum stresses are developed 
near the foundation both in reservoir full and empty 
conditions and at a location where height of the dam 
is maximum, the stress meters should be located in 
the monolith of maximum height. There should be at 
least 5 stress meters in a straight line from upstream 
face to downstream face and in the horizontal plane. 
Stresses may also be measured at special locations 
where high stresses are anticipated or where special 
information is desired. Stress meters could also be used 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


on the upstream face of the dam for the determination 
of pressure exerted by silt. 


6.7 Strain Measuring Instruments 


6.7.1 Strain meters can be generally divided into two 
classes, namely: 


a) Meters which can be used on surface and at 
accessible location; and 


b) Meters that can be embedded into the body of 
the structure. Surface strain measuring devices 
are useful for superficial and short term strain 
measurements. Embedded type instruments are 
useful for long term strain measurements for 
finding out the structural behaviour of dams. 


6.7.2 Meters which can be Used on Surface and 
Accessible Locations 


The meters of the first class consists of a sensitive 
dial gauge and by some arrangement the dial gauge 
measures the change in distance between two fixed 
points on the surface. The magnification of displacement 
between the two points is obtained by mechanical and 
optical means. Bonded wire, unbounded wire and 
semiconductor gauges are used for special applications 
only. 


6.7.3 Embedded Type Meters 


The only stable strain meters that have embedment 
applications are the unbonded resistance wire type 
and the vibrating wire type. The former works on 
the principle that the electrical resistance of the wire 
changes with the strain applied while in the latter the 
frequency of vibration of the wire changes with the 
strain applied. 


In the determination of the strains at a particular point 
in a massive structure several choices of placing the 
instrument may be made, such as: 


a) One strain meter — This will provide strain history 
in one direction at the point without checking; 


b) Duplicate strain meters on one axis — This still 
provides information on only one axis but gives 
the reassurance of checking; and 


c) Five strain meters — Four 45° apart in the plane 
of interest and one normal to the plane. Principal 
strains can thus be calculated from data furnished 
by a group of strain meters. 


6.7.3.1 In addition to the set of strain meters indicated 
in 6.7.3 (c), one ‘no stress’ strain meter is required 
to be installed by the side in conjunction with strain 
meter groups to determine the corrections to be applied 
on account of creep, autogenous growth and thermal 
expansion of mass concrete. This is accomplished by 
embedding an ordinary strain meter in a typical mass 
concrete which is isolated from deformation due to 
loading but is responsive to the temperature, moisture 
and growth changes prevailing in the mass concrete 


of the structure. If a check is desired, another set of 5 
strain meters as indicated in 6.7.3 (c) may be installed. 


6.7.3.2 In the case of masonry dams, along with normal 
strain gauge meters, it is recommended that long gauge 
strain meters using unbonded resistance wire strain 
meters or joint meters or vibrating wire type long basis 
extensometers may be provided in a group side by side. 
This is called no stress strain meter. ‘No stress’ strain 
meter embedded by the side of each group should be 
ordinary unbounded resistance wire or vibrating wire 
type strain meter. 


6.7.3.3 It is necessary to have at least five strainmeter 
locations in a straight line from upstream face to 
downstream face and in one horizontal plane. The 
strain meters should be near the foundation level as 
stresses are maximum there. 


6.7.3.4 Stress meters and strain meters are generally 
installed side by side so that results of both the 
observations can be used together. Stress and strain 
meters may be installed at any location where 
development and observation of stress is of interest. 


For details IS 13232 may be referred to. 
6.8 Pore Pressure Measuring Instruments 


6.8.1 The device for measuring pore pressure could be 
hydraulic, pneumatic or electrical type. 


6.8.2 The electrical pore pressure cell (Piezometer) is 
either of the unbonded resistance wire type or vibrating 
wire type. Detailed information on them would be 
available in IS 8282(Part 1) and IS 8282 (Part 2). 


6.8.3 Installation of pore pressure meter is a precise 
job and should be carried out with great care. In 
concrete and masonry dams, these meters may be 
installed normally at 10 to 15 m spacing along the 
width of the dam. The bottom row of pore pressure 
meters may be located either at the contact plane 
of foundation and concrete, or just above the 
foundation or in the foundation by drilling holes as 
may be required by the design. A second row may be 
installed at one-third or half the height of the dam. 
For details IS 8282 (Part 1) and IS 8282 (Part 2) may 
be referred to. 


6.9 Earthquake Measurements 


6.9.1 As per recommendations of IS 4967, a 
seismological observatory for the entire project is to be 
established at the project site for evaluation of seismic 
parameters for large dams located in seismic Zone 
II, Zone IV and Zone V. The location of observatory 
should be so selected that the firm rock or suitable 
ground is available for founding the instrument pillars. 
The observatory may preferably be located at site 
which is unaffected by vibrations caused by power 
house operations, etc. 


6.9.2 The strong motion accelerographs and structural 
response recorders should be installed in the dam at 
the base (in a recess provided in the foundation gallery 
and at the top of the dam. If the height of the dam 
exceeds 100 m, these may also be installed near the 
mid-height of the dam. The location may be suitably 
selected to avoid the background seismic noise created 
due to the vibration originating from the appurtenant 
works of the dam. The instruments located in the 
foundation gallery are meant for observing the input 
ground motion in the event of major earthquake. The 
instruments located at the top of the dam are expected 
to provide information about response of the structure 
to the earthquake. 


6.10 Water Level Measurements 


Automatic water level recorders are installed on the 
reservoir to record the water level fluctuations. The 
measurement of water level is essential for establishing 
relation between the water level variations and the 
structural parameter variations being monitored. The 
water level measurement is a routine measurement 
as a part of hydrological observations for the dam 
project. 


IS 7436 (Part 2) : 2019 


6.11 Other Measurements 


6.11.1 Rain Fall 


Rainfall measurement is also a routine measurement as 
part of hydrological observations. Raingauges ordinary 
or self-recording type are normally installed at each 
dam site, however, use of advanced type rain gauges 
such as tipping bucket are not ruled out from use but 
are recommended being more accurate (see IS 5225 
and IS 5235). 


6.11.2 Wave Height 


Wave height can be measured by installing wave height 
recorder. The wave height information is important to 
assess free board of the dam. 


6.12 A simple, portable, battery operated read out unit 
with 4-digit LCD display should be used. Calibration data 
for each transducer should be provided when a simple 
read out unit to read frequency is used, for converting 
the frequency readings of relevant engineering units. 


Read out units with facility to read the relevant 
engineering units directly on the display can be used in 
place of the frequency readout units. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 16 (10907). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


