**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9932 (1981) : Recommendations for Lighting of Dental 
Operatories [MHD 8: Dentistry] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 9932 - 1981 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LIGHTING OF 

DENTAL OPERATOR1ES 



UUC 628-977-4 : 72551 055 : 61*314 ^UKS* 




© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

UANAK KHAYAN, 9 BAHADUR SliAlC ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110O02 



Price Rs 



5J M January 19S2 



IS : 9932 ■ 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LIGHTING OF 

DENTAL OPERATORIES 

Dental Equipment Sectional Committee, CPDC 15 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Balraj Sur Ministry of Health & Family Planning ( DGHS ), 

New Delhi 

Members 

Dr ( Smt ) Yasmin Achrekar Nibha Dental Corporation, Bombay 

Dr Ishar Singh Ahluwaua Health & Family Planning Department, Govt of 

Punjab 
Dr V. M. Chandrahas Medident India ( P ) Ltd, Madras 

Shri T. N. Narayanan Kutty ( Alternate ) 
Prof T. N. Chawla In personal capacity ( Faculty of Dental Sciences, 

University of Lucknow ) 
Dr H. M. Dholakia Nair Hospital & Dental College, Bombay 

Shri K. K. Ghai Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi 

Shri J. N. Vishwakarma ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Govande Messrs Select, Bombay 

Shri B. M. Madappa ( Alternate ) 
Shri Alok Gupta International Dental Corporation, Lucknow 

Shri P. C. Bajpai {Alternate ) 
Shri A. Jehangir Associated Dental & Medical Supply Co, Bombay 

Shri D. P. Panthaky ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mago Central Scientific Instruments Organization, 

Chandigarh 

Shri S. C. Suri ( Alternate ) 
Dr Fali S. Mehta Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay 

President Dental Council of India, New Delhi 

Dr Ratan H. Doctor Indian Dental Traders, Bombay 

Shri A. D. Chotia ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. M. Rawal Indo-Ceylon Dental & Surgical Co Ltd, Madras 

Shri R. Scolz Siemens India Ltd, Bombay 



Shri D. Pick ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infrigement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9932 - 1981 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri R. Soundhirarajan 

Dr V. SUBRAMANIAN 

Maj-Gen M. M. Suri 
Shri R. N. Vig 

Shri D. N. Vig ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. S. Sethi, 

Director ( Consr Prods & Med 

Instrs ) 



Representing 

Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Urban Development & Public Health Department, 

Government of Maharashtra 
Ministry of Defence ( DGAFMS ) 
ULTRADENT Private Ltd, Bombay 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Kumari Baljeet Kaur 

Assistant Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ), ISI 



IS : 9932 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LIGHTING OF 
DENTAL OPERATORIES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 16 September 1981, after the draft finalized by the Dental Equipment 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and 
Medical Instruments Division Council. 

0.2 Dental operatories are illuminated by day light and any specific require- 
ment of illumination is fulfilled by artificial light source of suitable size and 
shape. Now a days this condition is not usually fulfilled in any of the dental 
rooms because of the better artificial illumination and airconditioning. 
This standard prescribes general lighting conditions and recommendations 
to be followed in illuminating dental surgery rooms or operatories. 

0.3 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from DIN 67 505 
Lighting of dental operatories, recommendations. Deutsches Institut fur 
Normung, Federal Republic of Germany. 

0,4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2 - 1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be 
the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard recommends general requirements of artificial lighting in 
dental clinics and dental operatories. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 1885 
(Part XVI/Sec 1) - 1968f shall apply. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised). 

fElectrotechnical vocabulary: Part XVI Lighting, Section 1 General aspects. 



IS : 9932 - 1981 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Light used in the dental clinic may be a mixture of day light and arti- 
ficial light. The lighting shall be so designed that together with other light 
sources there shall be no excessive difference of illumination density. Lighting 
shall also facilitate special task like selecting of fine instruments and teeth. 
Special attention shall be paid to the direction of incident light, the blending 
and also the question of light colours. 

3.2 To meet the requirements specified in 3.1, every dental operation room 
shall have illumination devices so that a pattern of illumination as shown 
in Fig. 1 is obtained: 

Region R x — General illumination of the room ( 300 lux ). 

Region R 2 — Illumination of operation region ( ambient illumination ) 
(1000 lux). 

Region R 3 — Illumination of the operation field ( actual working zone ) 
( more than 8 000 lux ). 




Fig. 1 Pattern of Illumination in Various Regions 
of Dental Operatory 



3.2.1 General illumination of the room shall be not less that 300 lux 
( Region i?i ). This light colour in Region i?! shall agree with that of 
operating Region R 2 . 

For illumination, fluorescent lamps giving off white day light type of 
light having colour near to colour temperature of 5 500 + ! °™ K is 
recommended. 



IS : 9932 - 1981 

In general, the operating table lighting fittings employ tungsten lamps 
and produce a very high level of illumination, with very good colour render- 
ing properties, but it is not advisable to use filament lighting for the general 
lighting of the theatre because of the additional heat output that would be 
produced by this form of lighting. It is more practical to use fluorescent 
light sources which inherently have low heat output, yet have the added 
advantage that they can produce good colour rendering for medical 
purposes. 

Of the walls and ceiling of the room, ceiling plays the important role. 
The ceiling shall have a very high degree of reflectivity of not less than 0*75. 
It should also be matt finished so that it does not dazzle when the face of 
the patient sitting or lying on the dental chair is directed towards the ceiling. 
The reflectivity of the walls shall be not less than 05 and that of the furniture 
used in the clinic shall be not less than 03. The surfaces in the Regions R 2 
and R 3 shall be matt finished so that they do not dazzle the eyes. To avoid 
difference of light density, it is also recommended that the overalls of doc- 
tor or his assistants and cloth covering the mouths hall be made of matt 
material with reflectivity of less than or equal to 0*3. Preferably, all instru- 
ments and the trays for them shall be matt finished. 

If windows are visible and are of dark appearance during night time, 
these shall be brightened up with suitable curtain or ground glass lighted 
up properly from above but it should not dazzle. The colours of the light 
chosen and that of objects in the room shall be soothing to the patient. 

3.2.2 Illumination of the Operation Zone ( Region R z ) — The illumination 
in this region shall be at least 1 000 lux. The lights shall be located abov eand 
in front of the patient. The overhead light, if used, shall be easily adjust- 
able. Large area lights should be preferred because the dazzling effect is 
decreased with their use. The lights used shall give the colour corresponding 
to the light temperature of 5 500 + l ^ K. The colour transmission index 
of the source shall be at least 90. 

3.2.3 Illumination of Operation Field ( Region R z ) — The light source shall 
be about 80 cm above the head of the patient and shall be capable of giving 
an illumination of 8 000 lux or above in the mouth opening. For varying 
illumination, controls of illumination shall be possible depending on the 
task at hand. The light zone by this light shall be of height 10 + ° cm and 
width 20+ ° cm. 

To prevent the patient from the resulting dazzle, the light zone shall 
be limited rather sharply at the top and a uniform decrease of illumination 
downward and sideward. 



IS : 9932 - 1981 

For special tasks deep in mouth, an additional pencil beam light is 
recommended. The light colours of this light shall be close to each other 
to minimize disturbance by colour shadow. 

The temperature increase at 80 cm away from source caused by 
illumination of light shall be not more than 5 K. 

3.3 Stroboscopic Effect — A stroboscopic effect on moving parts which can 
affect vision shall be reduced by suitable means like using two or three phase 
circuits. 

3.4 Contrast Formation — In those operations, where the shape and surface 
finish of an object has to be determined, added illumination source should 
be provided for sufficient contrast. 



