RAT AAF IS 13942 (Part 2) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


taa Aled — TEL AUT 


WMT 2 UA ST Bea MA STRAT 
oh feu artnet aren 


( TET IRIETTT ) 


Automotive Vehicles — 
External Projections 


Part 2 Performance Requirements for 
Vehicles of Categories Other than M1 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 43.100 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 3 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories, Garage Equipment, Springs and Suspension Systems Sectional 
Committee, TED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories, Garage Equipment Springs and Suspension Systems Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


The purpose of this standard is to reduce the risk of seriousness of body injury to a person hit by the body work or 
crushing against it in the event of a collision. There is also likelihood of injury to the passenger if some parts are 
projected out more than specified particularly while taking a turn or cornering. 


This standard was first published in 1994 for all category of vehicles and was based on Safety Standard (SS 29) 
“External projection’ issued by Automotive Research Association of India ( ARAI ), Pune and uniform provisions 
concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to their external projections, EEC Regulation No. 26. 


The Sectional Committee had decided to split the standard in two parts. The other part of the standard is: 


Part 1 Performance requirements for M1 category of vehicles 


In preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the ECE Regulation No. 61 — 
Uniform Provisions for the Approval of Commercial Vehicles with regards to their External Projections Forward 
of the Cab’s Rear Panel. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 13942 (Part 2) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — EXTERNAL 
PROJECTIONS 


PART 2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
VEHICLES OF CATEGORIES OTHER THAN M1 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard applies to the external projection of 
vehicles of categories M2, M3, N1, N2 and N3 limited 
to the “external surface” as defined below. It does 
not apply to the exterior rear view mirrors, including 
their support, or to the accessories, such as aerials and 
luggage racks etc, if fitted. 


1.2 The purpose of this standard is to reduce the risk or 
the severity of injuries sustained by a person coming 
into contact with the external surface of the vehicle in 
the event of an impact. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. Title 
9435 : 2004 Terms and definitions relating to 
dimensions of road vehicles 
14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Vehicle — Vehicle shall be as defined in IS 9435and 
IS 14272. 


3.2 External Surface — It means the outside of the 
vehicle including the bonnet, the lid of the luggage 
compartment, the doors, the wings, the roof, the 
lighting and light signalling devices and the visible 
strengthening components. 


3.3 Floor Line — The floor line determined as follows: 

a) A cone is selected (the height of which shall be 

convenient to handle) which has its side at an 
angle of 15° to the vehicles, vertical. 


b) The vehicle of which floor line is to be established 
shall be laden to its rated GVW. 


c) The cone, in its vertical position, shall be brought 
near the lowest possible position of the laden 
vehicle’s external surface. 


d) The cone shall be moved round the vehicle so that 
it comes in contact with its lowest point. 

e) These points of contact are then geometrically 
traced to find the floor line. 

f) In determining the floor line, no account shall be 
taken of the following: 

1) Exhaust pipes, 

2) Wheels, 

3) Functional mechanical features attached to the 
under body, such as jacking points, suspension 
mountings, etc., and 

4) Attachments for use in towing or in case of 
breakdown. 

The gaps of the wheel arches are assumed to be 

filled in by an imaginary surface forming a smooth 

continuation of the surrounding external surface. 


== 


The front bumpers” shall be taken into account in 
determining the floor line. Depending on the type 
of vehicles, the trace of the floor line shall be at 
either the outer edge of the bumper or at the body 
panel below the bumper. 


8 


h 


= 


Where two or more points of contact are observed 
at the same time, the lowest point of contact shall 
be used to determine the floor line. 


3.4 Radius of Curvature — The radius of the arc ofa 
circle which comes closest to the rounded form of the 
component under consideration. 


3.5 Bumper — The front, lower, outer structure of a 
vehicle. It includes all structures, that are intended to 
give protection to a vehicle when involved in a low speed 
frontal collision and also any attachments to this structure. 


3.6 Bumper Cover — The non-rigid outer surface of 
a bumper, generally extending across the full width of 
the front of a vehicle. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 The provisions of this standard shall not apply to 
those parts of the external surface of the vehicle which, 


IS 13942 (Part 2) : 2020 


with the vehicle in the unladen condition, with doors, 
windows and access lids, etc, in the closed position, are 
either: 


1) at height of more than 2 m; 
2) below the floor line; or 


3) so located that, in static conditions, they cannot 
be contacted by a sphere 100 mm in diameter. 


4.2 The external surface of vehicles shall not exhibit, 
direct outwards, any pointed or sharp parts or any 
projections of such shape, dimensions, direction or 
hardness as to be likely to increase the risk or seriousness 
of bodily injury to a person hit by the external surface 
or brushing against it in the event of a collision. 


4.3 The external surface of vehicles shall not exhibit, 
direct outwards, any parts likely to catch on pedestrians, 
cyclists or motorcyclists. 


4.4 Projecting parts of the external surface, having 
hardness not more than 60 Shore A, may have a radius 
of curvature lower than the values prescribed fewer 
than 5 to 16. 


5 ORNAMENTS, COMMERCIAL SYMBOLS, 
LETTERS AND NUMBERS OFCOMMERCIAL 
MARKINGS 


5.1 Ornaments, commercial symbols, letters and 
numbers, of commercial markings which project more 
than 10 mm from the surrounding surface shall retract, 
become detached or bend over under a force or 10 daN 
exerted at their most salient point in any direction in a 
plane approximately parallel to the surface on which 
they are mounted. 


To apply 10 daN force a flat-ended ram of not more 
than 50 mm diameter shall be used. Where this is not 
possible, an equivalent method shall be used. After 
the ornaments are retracted, detached or bent over, the 
remaining portion shall not project more than 10 mm 
and shall not have any pointed, sharp or cutting edges. 


5.2 Ornaments, commercial symbols, letters and 
numbers of commercial markings shall not have 
any radius of curvature of less than 2.5 mm. This 
requirement does not apply to these parts if they do not 
protrude more than 5 mm from the surrounding surface; 
however, in the case their edges directed outwards 
shall, be blunted. 


5.3 If the added ornaments are less than 5 mm thick, 
minimum radius of curvature shall not apply, but the 
outward facing angles of such ornaments shall be 
blunted. 


6 HEADLAMP VISORS AND RIMS 


6.1 Projecting visors and rims shall be permitted on 
Headlamps, provided that their projection, as measured 


in relation to the external transparent surface of the 
headlight, does not exceed 30 mm and their radius of 
curvature is at least 2.5 mm throughout. 


6.2 Retracting headlamps shall meet the requirement 
in 6.1 in both the operative and retracted positions. 


6.3 The provisions of 6.1 shall not apply to headlamps 
recessed in the body, or where the headlamp is overhung 
by the body, provided the bodywork conforms to the 
requirements of 4.3. 


7 GRILLES AND GAPS 


Parts of grilles shall exhibit a radius of curvature of not 
less than: 


a) 2.5 mm, if the distance between adjacent parts is 
more than 40 mm; 


b) 1 mm, if the distance is between 25 mm and 
40 mm; and 


c) 0.5 mm, if the distance is less than 25 mm. 


8 WINDSCREEN WIPERS AND HEADLAMP 
CLEANING DEVICES 


8.1 The above mentioned devices shall be such that the 
wiper shafts have a protective covering with a radius 
of curvature of not less than 2.5 mm and a surface area 
of not less than 150 mm? measured in the projection 
of a section not further than 6.5 mm from the most 
protruding point. 


8.2 These units shall be so made as to have no sharp 
angles or pointed or cutting parts of a non-functional 
nature. 


9 PROTECTIVE DEVICES (BUMPERS) 


9.1 The ends of the bumpers shall be turned in towards 
the external surface in order to reduce the risk of 
fouling. 


9.2 The components of the protective device shall be so 
designed that all rigid surfaces facing outwards, have 
a radius of curvature of not less than 5 mm. However, 
if a bumper cover is fitted, it shall have a radius of 
curvature of not less than 2.5 mm. 


9.3 Equipment, such as towing hitches and winches 
shall not protrude beyond the foremost surface of 
the bumper. However, winches may protrude beyond 
the foremost surface of the bumper provided they 
are covered when not in use by a suitable protective 
covering having a radius of curvature of not less than 
2.5 mm. 


9.4 The requirements of 9.2 shall not apply to parts 
of the bumper or parts mounted on or inset in the 
bumper which project less than 5 mm. The edges of 
devices projecting less than 5 mm shall be blunted. 


With respect to devices mounted on the bumpers 
and referred to in other clauses of this standard, the 
particular requirements contained in this standard shall 
be applicable. 


10 HANDLES, HINGES AND PUSHBUTTONS 
OF DOORS, LUGGAGE COMPARTMENTS, 
BONNETS, VENTS, ACCESS FLAPAND GRAB 
HANDLE 


10.1 The above parts shall not protrude more than 30 
mm in the case of pushbuttons, 70 mm in the case of 
grab handles and bonnet-fasteners, and 50 mm in all 
other cases. They shall have radii of curvature of not 
less than 2.5 mm. 


10.2 If lateral door handles turn to operate, they shall 
meet the requirements given in 10.2.1 and 10.2.2. 


10.2.1 In case of handles which rotate parallel to the 
plane of door, the open end of handles must be directed 
towards the rear. The end of such handles shall be 
turned back towards plane of the door and fitted into a 
protective surround or be recessed. 


10.2.2 Handles which pivot outwards in any direction 
which are not parallel to the plane of the door shall, 
when in the closed position, be enclosed in a protective 
surround or be recessed. The open end shall face either 
rearwards or downwards. Nevertheless, handles which 
do not comply with this last condition may be accepted 
if: 
a) they have an independent return mechanism; 


b) should the return mechanisms fail, they cannot 
project more than 15 mm with reference to design 
intended closed position; 


c 


wa 


they, in such opened position, have a radius of 
curvature not less than 2.5 mm (this requirement 
does not apply if in maximum opened position 
the projection is less than 5 mm, in which case 
the angles of the parts facing outwards shall be 
blunted); and 

their end surface area, when measured not more 
than 6.5 mm from the point projecting furthest, is 
not less than 150 mm’. 


d 


— 


11 WHEEL NUTS, HUB CAPS AND 


PROTECTIVE DEVICES 


11.1 The wheel fasteners and hub caps shall not exhibit 
any fin shaped projections. 


11.2 When the vehicle is travelling in a straight line, 
no part of the wheels other than the tyres, situated 


IS 13942 (Part 2) : 2020 


above the horizontal plane, passing through their axis 
of rotation, shall project beyond the vertical projection 
in a horizontal plane, ofthe body panel edge above the 
wheel. However if functional requirements so warrant, 
the protective devices which cover wheel nuts and hubs 
may project beyond the vertical projection of the body 
panel edge above the wheel, on condition that radius 
of curvature of the surface of the projection part is 
not less than 5 mm and projection beyond the vertical 
projection of the body panel edge above the wheel in no 
case shall exceeds 30 mm. 


12 SHEET METAL EDGES 


Sheet metal edges, permitted provided that the edge is 
folded back or towards the body so that it cannot be 
touched by a sphere of 100 mm diameter or is provided 
with a protective covering having a radius of curvature 
of not less than 2.5 mm. 


13 BODY PANEL 


Folds in body panels may have a radius of curvature 
of less than 2.5 mm, provided that 1t is not less than 
one-tenth of the height ‘H’ of projection, measured in 
accordance with the method described in Annex A. 


14 LATERAL, AIR OR RAIN DEFLECTORS 
AND WINDOW ANTI-SMEAR AIR 
DEFLECTORS 


Edges capable of being directed outwards shall have a 
radius of curvature of not less than 1 mm. 


15 JACKING BRACKETS AND EXHAUST 
PIPE(S) 


15.1 The jacking bracket shall not project beyond a 
distance of 10 mm more than the vertical projection of 
the floor line lying directly above it. 


15.2 Notwithstanding the above requirement, an 
exhaust pipe may project more than 10 mm provided 
that its edges are rounded at the end to a radius of 
curvature of not less than 2.5 mm. 


16 RUNNING BOARDS AND STEPS 


The edges of running boards and steps shall be rounded. 


17 MEASUREMENTS OF PROJECTIONS AND 
DISTANCES 


Method of determining the dimensions of the external 
projections is given in Annex B. 


IS 13942 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 13 ) 


A-1 The height ‘H’ of a projection is determined 
graphically by reference to the circumference of a 165 
mm diameter circle, internally tangential to the outer 
line of the external surface at the section to be checked. 


A-2 H is the maximum value of the distance, measured 
along a straight line passing through centre of the 
165 mm diameter circle, between the circumference 
of the aforesaid circle and the external contour of the 
projection (see Fig. 1). 

A-3 In case where it is not possible for a 165 mm 
diameter circle to contact externally part of the 


Fic. 1 METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF HEIGHT ‘H?’ 
BY DRAWING A CIRCLE OF 165 MM 


outer line of the external surface at the section under 
consideration, the surface outline in this area shall be 
assumed to be that formed by the circumference of the 
100 mm diameter circle between its tangent points with 
the outer line, (see Fig. 2). ‘H’ shall be determined as 
in A-2. 

A-4 Drawings of the necessary sections through the 
external surface shall be provided by the manufacturer 
to allow the height of the projections referred to above 
to be measured. 


Fic. 2 METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF HEIGHT ‘H' By 
DRAWING A CIRCLE OF 165 MM AND 100 MM 


IS 13942 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 17 ) 


MEASUREMENTS OF PROJECTIONS AND DISTANCES 


B-1 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE 
DIMENSIONS OF THE PROJECTION OF A 
PART FITTED ON THE EXTERNAL SURFACE 


B-1.1 The dimensions of the projection of a part 
mounted on a convex panel may be determined either 
directly or by reference to a drawing of an appropriate 
section of the part in the fitted position. 


B-1.2 If the projection of a part mounted on a panel 
other than convex cannot be determined by simple 
measurement, it shall be determined by the maximum 
variation in the distance between the reference line of 
the panel and the centre of a sphere of 100 mm diameter 
when the sphere is moved in constant contact with the 
part. An example of the use of this method is given in 
Fig. 3. 


Fıc. 3 


B-1.3 For grab handles, the projection shall be measured 
in relation to a plane passing through the points of 
attachment. An example is given in Fig. 4. 


FiG. 4 


B-2 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE 
PROJECTION OF HEADLAMP VISORS AND 
RIMS 


The projection from the outer surface of the headlamp 
shall be measured horizontally from the point of 


contact of a sphere of 100 mm diameter, as shown in 
Fig. 5. 


| Projection measures 
\horisontally 


Fıc. 5 


B-3 METHOD OF DETERMINING THE 
DISTANCE BETWEEN PARTS OFA GRILLE 


The distance between parts of a grille shall be the 
distance between two planes passing through the points 
of contact of the points of contact of the sphere and 
perpendicular to the line joining the points of contact. 
Examples of the use of this method are given in Fig. 6 
and Fig. 7. 


Distance masured 


100 m= Y \ 
vce 
> \ 
{ 7 
U a 
~ \ 
N Parte ol a 
grille 
FiG. 6 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 06 (13302). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


