NAT HIAF IS 15916 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ча айа Фе так чач shi gA 
зї verra — fifa ат 


( TEAM TREAT ) 


Building Design and Erection Using 
Prefabricated Concrete — 
Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.040.01 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM η] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH ИТТ, +ç чей - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 14 


Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee, CED 51 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 


Prefabrication, though desirable for large scale building activities, is now gaining importance for use in the 
country. Two aspects of prefabrication, specifically to be borne in mind, are the system to be adopted for the 
different categories of buildings and the sizes of their components. Here the principle of modular coordination is 
of value and its use is recommended. 


Advantages of recent trends in prefabrication have been taken note of and also the hazards attended to such 
construction. Recommendations on the need to avoid progressive collapse of the structure are covered to make a 
structure reasonably safe against such a collapse. 


Since the aim of prefabrication is to effect economy and improve quality and speed of construction, the selection 
of proper materials for prefabrication is also an important factor in the popularization of this technique. The 
use of locally available materials with required characteristics and those materials which, due to their innate 
characteristics, such as lightweight, easy workability, thermal insulation, non-combustibility, etc, effect economy 
and improve quality may also be tried. However, this standard pertains to prefabricated elements with cementitious 
materials. 


It is possible to achieve or evolve aesthetically satisfying designs using prefabricated construction. A careful and 
judicious handling of materials and use of finishes on a prefabricated building can help the designer a great deal 
in ensuring that the appearance of the building is aesthetically appealing. The purpose of finishes and architectural 
treatment is not only to give prefabricated buildings an individual character but also to effect better performance 
and greater user satisfaction. 


This standard was first published in 2010 to provide necessary guidance for design and erection of prefabricated 
concrete buildings. 


This revision of the standard has been taken up to incorporate various changes found necessary as a result of 
experience gained and technological advances made in the field of prefabricated construction. 


In this revision the following major modifications have been incorporated: 
a) Definitions of some new terms have been added and existing terminologies modified, wherever required. 
b) False joints have been explained. 
с) Provisions relating to prefabricated systems have been updated. 


d) Provisions for precast components have been updated. Casting tolerance for length of column and stair 
unit have been modified. 


e) Provisions on precast filigree slab panel have been included. 
f) Provisions on box-type construction have been updated. 
g) Detailed provisions on diaphragm action of floor systems have been included. 


h) Emulative system has been categorized and detailed with respect to its definition, analysis, design, 
detailing, etc. 


j) Design considerations have been updated where accidental impact due to vehicles has been included. 
k) Provisions to ensure stability of precast wall panel during erection have been updated. 
m) Typical figures for connection of peripheral ties have been added. 
n) Provisions on vertical joints have been updated. 
p) Provisions and testing procedures for water tightness of joints have been included. 
q) Provisions on mould for manufacture of precast elements have been updated. 
r) Provisions relating to fire resistance testing of prototypes under sustained load has been provided for. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 15916 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


BUILDING DESIGN AND ERECTION USING 
PREFABRICATED CONCRETE — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers provisions regarding modular 
planning, component sizes, prefabrication systems, 
design considerations, joints and manufacture, 
storage, transportation and erection of prefabricated 
concrete elements for use in buildings and such related 
requirements for prefabricated concrete. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards and special publication listed in Annex A 
contain provisions which, through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the 
time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Authority Having Jurisdiction — The authority 
which has been created by a statute and which, for the 
purpose of administering the standard, may authorize 
a committee or an official or an agency to act on its 
behalf; hereinafter called the ‘Authority’. 


3.2 Basic Module —The fundamental module used in 

modular coordination, the size of which is selected for 

general application to building and its components. 
NOTE — The value of the basic module has been chosen as 


100 mm for the maximum flexibility and convenience. The 
symbol for the basic module is M. 


3.3 Cellular Concrete — The material consisting of 
an inorganic binder (such as, lime or cement or both) in 
combination with a finely ground material containing 
siliceous material (such as sand), gas generating 
material (for example, aluminium powder), water and 
harmless additives (optional); and/or steam cured under 
high pressure in autoclaves. 


3.4 Components — A building product formed as a 
distinct unit having specified sizes in three dimensions. 


3.5 Composite Members — Structural members 
comprising prefabricated structural units of steel, pre- 
stressed concrete or reinforced concrete and cast in-situ 
concrete connected together in such a manner that they 
act monolithically. 


3.6 Diaphragm — It is a horizontal or nearly horizontal 
structural system (for example, reinforced concrete 
floors and horizontal bracing systems), which transmits 
lateral forces to vertical elements that resist earthquake- 
induced inertia effects. 


3.7 Emulative Detailing System — A connection 
detailing system for precast concrete structures that 
has structural performance equivalent to that of a 
conventionally designed, cast in-situ, monolithic 
concrete structure. 


3.8 False Joints — Architecutural reveals that are used 
to build aesthetic patterns on the elevations or around 
the physical precast joint patterns as per structural 
framing (see Fig. 1). 


3.9 Increments — Difference between two homologous 
dimensions of components of successive sizes. 


3.10 Jointed Detailing System — A connection 
detailing system for precast concrete/cast in-situ 
and precast concrete component structures that have 
individual precast components separated from each 
other but connected using special connections such as 
welded or bolted plates. 


3.11 Light Weight Concrete — Concrete of 
substantially lower unit weight than that made from 
gravel or crushed stone. 


3.12 Module — A unit of size used in dimensional 
coordination. 


3.13 Modular Coordination — Dimensional 
coordination employing the basic module or a 
multimodule. 

NOTE — The purposes of modular coordination are to, 

a) reduce the variety of component sizes produced; and 


b) allow the building designer greater flexibility in the 
arrangement of components. 


IS 15916 : 2020 


АЗ SX AN 


Ny 


ELEVATION 


WALL 
THICKNESS 


WALL 
ELEMENT 


FALSE 
JOINT 


TRUE 


et STRUCTURAL 


GROUTED 
CONNECTION 


FALSE 
JOINT 


WALL 
ELEMENT 


SECTION 1-1 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 TvPiCAL TRUE JOINT AND FALSE JOINT PRECAST WALL ELEMENT 


3.14 Modular Grid — A rectangular coordinate 
reference system in which the distance between 
consecutive lines is the basic module or a multimodule. 
This multimodule may differ for each of the two 
orthogonal directions of the grid. 


3.15 Multimodule — A module whose size is a 
selected multiple of the basic module. 


3.16 Prefabricate — To fabricate components or 
assembled units (on site or off site) prior to erection or 
installation in a building. 


3.17 Prefabricated Building — Тһе partly/fully 
assembled and erected building, of which the structural 
parts consist of prefabricated individual units or 
assemblies using ordinary or controlled materials, 
including service facilities; and in which the service 
equipment may be either prefabricated or constructed 
in-situ. 


3.18 Sandwich Reinforced Concrete Panels — 
Panels made by sandwiching an insulation material 
between two layers of reinforced/prestressed concrete 
to act as insulation for concrete panels. 


3.19 Self Compacting Concrete — Concrete that 
is able to flow under its own weight and completely 
fill the voids within the formwork, even in the 
presence of dense reinforcement without any 
vibration, whilst maintaining homogeneity without 
segregation. 


3.20 Shear Connectors — Structural elements, such 
as anchors, studs, channels, loops and spirals intended 
to transmit the shear between the prefabricated member 
and the cast in-situ concrete, and also to prevent 
separation at the interface. 


3.21 System — It is a particular method of construction 
of buildings with certain order and discipline using 
the prefabricated components which are inter-related 
in functions and are produced based on a set of 
instructions. 


3.22 Unit — Building material formed as a simple 
article with all three dimensions specified, complete 
in itself but intended to be part of a compound unit or 
complete building. Examples are brick, block, floor 
panel, wall panel, beams, columns, etc. 


4 MATERIALS, PLANS AND 
SPECIFICATIONS 


4.1 Materials 


Use of materials for plain, reinforced concrete and 
pre-stressed concrete shall satisfy the requirements of 
IS 456 and IS 1343. Connections and jointing materials 
shall be in accordance with 9.3. 


4.1.1 While selecting the materials for prefabrication, 
the following characteristics shall be considered: 

a) Easy availability; 

b) Light weight for easy handling and transport; 


c) Strength; 

d) Thermal insulation property; 

e) Easy workability; 

f) Minimal water absorption; 

g) Serviceability along with durability; 

h) Non-combustibility/fire resistance rating; 
j) Sound insulation; 


k) Easy assembly and compatibility to form a 
complete unit; 


m) Economy; and 


n) Any other special requirement in а particular 
application. 


4.2 Plans and Specifications 


The detailed plans and specifications shall cover the 
following: 


a) Such drawings shall describe the elements and 
structure, and assembly including all required data 
of physical properties of component materials, 
material specification, strength of concrete for 
demoulding, casting/erection tolerance and type 
of curing to be followed. 


b 


x 


Details of connecting joints of prefabricates or 
precast concrete and cast in-situ components shall 
be given to an enlarged scale. 


с) Site or shop location ofservices, suchas installation 
of piping, wiring or other accessories integral with 
the total scheme shall be shown separately. 


d 


— 


Data sheet indicating the location of the inserts 
and acceptable tolerances for supporting the 
prefabricate during erection, location and position 
of doors/windows/ventilators, etc, if any. 


The drawings shall also clearly indicate location 
of handling arrangements for lifting and handling 
the prefabricated elements, sequence of erection 
with critical check points and measures to avoid 
stability failure during construction stage of the 
building. 


е 


wn 


5 MODULAR 
ARCHITECTURAL 
FINISHES 


COORDINATION, 
TREATMENT AND 


5.1 Modular Coordination 


The basic module shall be adopted. After adopting this, 
further work is necessary to outline suitable range of 
multi modules with greater increments, often referred 
to as preferred increments. A set of rules as detailed 
below would be adequate for meeting the requirements 
of conventional and prefabricated construction. 


These rules relate to the following basic elements: 


a) The planning grid in both directions of the 
horizontal plan shall be: 


IS 15916 : 2020 


1) 15 M for industrial buildings, and 
2) 3 M for other buildings. 


The centre lines of load bearing walls should 
preferably coincide with the gridlines. 


b) The planning module in the vertical direction shall 
be 2 M for industrial buildings and 1 M for other 
buildings. 

c) Preferred increments for sill heights, doors, 
windows and other fenestration shall be 1 M. 


d) In the case of internal columns, the grid lines shall 
coincide with the centre lines of columns. In case 
of external columns and columns near the lift and 
stair wells, the grid lines shall coincide with centre 
lines of the column in the topmost storey. 


5.2 Architectural Treatment and Finishes 


5.2.1 In general, prefabricated systems provide better 
opportunity to achieve superior finishes leading 
to an array of aesthetically pleasing options. The 
architectural elevational treatments form and features 
can also be effectively incorporated in the structures 
with careful advanced planning. In addition, detailed 
coordination between the architectural and structural 
design team during the planning stage for panel joints 
and false joints is necessary. The purpose of finishes and 
architectural treatment 1s not only to give prefabricated 
buildings an individual character but also to effect 
better performance and greater user satisfaction. 


5.2.2 Treatment and finishes have to be specified 
keeping in view the requirements of protection, 
function and aesthetics of internal and external spaces 
and surfaces. 


5.2.3 While deciding the type of architectural treatment 
and finishes for prefabricated buildings, the following 
points should be kept in view: 


a) Suitability for mass production techniques; 


b) Recognition of the constraints imposed by the 
level of workmanship available; 


c) Possibility of using different types of finishes; 


d) Use of finishes and architectural treatment for the 
creation of a particular architectural character in 
individual buildings and in groups of buildings by 
the use of colour, texture, projections and recesses 
on surfaces including form liners, etc; 


€) Incorporation of structural elements like joists, 
columns, beams, etc, as architectural features 
and the treatment of these for better overall 
performance and appearance; 


f) Satisfactory finishing of surfaces keeping in view 
the life cycle performance; and 

g) Use of lightweight materials to effect economy in 
the structural system. 


IS 15916 : 2020 


5.2.4 Some of the acceptable methods of finishes 
integral with the pre-casting are: 


1) Concrete surface moulded to design/shape; 
2) Laid-on finishing tiles fixed during casting; 


3) Finishes obtained by washing, tooling, 
grinding, grooving of hardened concrete; 


4 
5 


— 


Exposed aggregates; and 


— 


Other integral finishes. 


6 COMPONENTS 


6.1 The dimensions of precast elements shall meet the 
design requirements. However, the actual dimensions 
shall be the preferred dimensions as follows: 
a) Flooring and roofing scheme — Precast slabs or 
other precast structural flooring units: 


1) Length — Nominal length shall be in multiples 


of 1 М; 
2) Width — Nominal width shall be in multiples 
of 0.5 М; and 


3) Overall thickness — Overall thickness shall be 
in multiples of 0.1 M. 


b) Beams: 
1) Length — Nominal length shall be in multiples 
of 1 M; 
2) Width — Nominal width shall be in multiples 
of 0.1 M; and 


3) Overall depth — Overall depth of the floor 
zone shall be in multiples of 0.1 M. 


SI No. 


(1) Q) 


Product Tolerances 


c) Columns: 


1) Height — Height of columns for industrial 
building and other buildings shall be in 
multiples of 1 M, and 

2) Lateral dimensions — Overall lateral 
dimension or diameter of columns shall be in 
multiples of 0.1 M. 

d) Walls: 


Thickness — The nominal thickness of walls shall 
be in multiples of 0.1 M. 


e) Staircase: 


Width — Nominal width shall be in multiples 
of 1 M. 


f) Lintels: 
1) Length — Nominal length shall be in multiples 
of 1 М; 
2) Width — Nominal width shall be in multiples 
of 0.1 M; and 
3) Depth — Nominal depth shall be in multiples 
of 0.1 M. 


g) Sunshades/Chajja Projections : 


1) Length — Nominal length shall be in multiples 
of 1 M. 


2) Projection — Nominal length shall be in 
multiples of 0.5 M. 


NOTE — M is the basic module. 
6.2 Casting Tolerances of Precast Components 


The casting tolerances of various precast components 
shall be as given below: 


Product 
(see Key No.) 


(3) 


Key No. for product reference: 


кеі 


Channel unit 
Ribbed slab unit/hollow slab 
Waffle unit 


Cellular concrete floor/roof slabs 
Prefabricated brick panel 
Precast planks 

Ribbed/plain wall panel 

Column 


N 00-10 tn FW м 


- 
© 


Stair unit: 
i) Length: 


а) +5 тт 


b) +5 mm or + 0.1 percent, whichever is greater 


с) +0.1 percent subject to maximum of 


Large panel prefabrication and box unit prefabrication 


+5 4 
tio тт 


IS 15916 : 2020 


SI No. Product Tolerances Product 
(see Key No.) 
(1) (2) (3) 
d) 1) +2 mm for length below and up to 500 mm | 5 
2) + 5 mm for length over 500 mm | 
e) = 10 mm 6 
f) +8 mm 9,10 
ii) Thickness/Cross-sectional dimensions: 
a) +3 mm 1 
b) +3 mm or 0.1 percent, whichever is greater 2,8 
с) 1) + 2 mm upto 300 mm wide 4,5 
2) + 3 mm greater than 300 mm wide | 
d) +2 mm 3,7 
e) +4mm 6, 9, 10 
iii) Straightness/Bow: 
a) +5 mm or 1/750 of length, whichever is greater 2,4, 8 
b) +3 mm 1,5 
с) +2 mm 7 
iv) Squareness — When considering the squareness of the corner, the longer of 
two adjacent sides being checked shall be taken as the base line, and the 
following tolerances shall apply: 
a) The longer side shall not vary in length from the perpendicular by more 2,5,8 
than 5 mm 
b) The shorter side shall not vary in length from the perpendicular by more 1.7 
than 3 mm 
c) The shorter side shall not be out of square line for more than κ. mm 4 
у) Twist — Any corner shall not be more than the tolerance given below from 
the plane containing the other three corners: 
a) 1) Up to 600 mm, in width and up to 6 m, in length 5mm | 2.8 
2) Over 600 mm, in width and for any length 10 mm 
b) + 1/1 500 of dimension or + 5 mm, whichever is less 4 
c) -3mm 1 
d) +1 mm 7 
уі) Flatness — The maximum deviation from 1.5 m straight edge placed in any 
position on a nominal plane surface shall not exceed: 
a) = 5 шт 2, 8 
b) +3 mm 4 
c) +2 mm 1,7 
d) +4 mm or maximum of 0.1 percent length 5 


IS 15916 : 2020 


The structural supporting elements shall be designed/ 
checked for stability and design adequacy for the 
above mentioned tolerance limits. All formwork shall 
be designed to give exact dimension, well within the 
tolerances given above. 


7 PREFABRICATION 
STRUCTURAL SCHEMES 


SYSTEMS AND 


7.1 The word ‘system’ refers to a particular method 
of construction of buildings using the prefabricated 
components which are inter-related in functions and 
are produced to a set of instructions. With certain 
constraints, several plans are possible using the same 
set of components. The degree of flexibility varies from 
system to system. However, in all the systems there is a 
certain order and discipline. 


7.2 The following aspects, among others, are to be 
considered in devising a system: 


a) Effective utilization of spaces; 

b) Straight and simple walling scheme; 

c) Limited sizes and numbers of components; 

d) Limited opening in bearing walls; 

e) Regulated locations of partitions; 

f) Standardized service and stair units; 

g) Limited sizes of doors and windows with regulated 
positions; 

h 


j 


— 


Structural clarity and efficiency; 


wa 


Suitability for adoption in low rise and high rise 
building; 
k) Ease of manufacturing, storing and transporting; 


m 


ме 


Speed and ease of erection; 


Effective utilization of available equipment, plant 
and machinery; and 


n 


x 


p) Simple jointing system. 
7.3 Prefabrication Systems 


The system of prefabricated construction depends on 
the extent of the use of prefabricated components, their 
materials, sizes and the technique adopted for their 
manufacture and use in building. 


7.3.1 Types of Prefabrication Components 


The prefabricated concrete components, such as 
those given below may be used which shall be in 
accordance with relevant Indian Standards, such as 
IS 2185 (Parts 1 to 4), IS 3201, IS 6072, IS 6073, 
IS 9893, IS 10297, IS 10505, IS 11447, IS 12440, 
IS 13990, IS 14143, IS 14201 and IS 14241, where 
available: 


1) Reinforced/pre-stressed concrete channel unit, 
2) Reinforced/pre-stressed concrete slab unit, 


3) Reinforced/pre-stressed concrete beams, 
4 
5 


— 


Reinforced/pre-stressed concrete columns, 


— 


Reinforced/pre-stressed concrete hollow core 
slab, 


6) Reinforced concrete waffle slab/shells, 
7) Reinforced/pre-stressed concrete wall 
elements, 
8) Hollow/solid concrete blocks and battens, 
10) Precast planks and joists for flooring and 
roofing, 
11) Precast joists and trussed girders, 
13) Light weight/cellular concrete  slabs/wall 
panels, 
14) Precast lintel and Chajjas, 


16) Large panel prefabricates and box units, 
17 
18 
19) Precast concrete L-panel unit, 
20 
21) 
23) 
25) 
26) 
27) 


— 


Reinforced/prestressed concrete trusses, 


— 


Reinforced/prestressed roof purlins, 


— 


Prefabricated concrete double-T unit, 
Prefabricated brick panel unit, 
Prefabricated sandwich concrete panels, 
Precast concrete foundation, 

Precast concrete staircase, and 


Filigree slab or precast composite slab (lattic 
girder slab). 


There may be other types of components which may be 
used with the approval of the Authority. 


NOTE — The elements may be cast at the site or off the site. 


7.3.2 Open Prefabrication System 


There are two categories of open prefab system 
depending on the extent of prefabrication used in the 
construction as given in 7.3.2.1 and 7.3.2.2. 


7.3.2.1 Partial prefabrication system 


In this system part of the structural components are 
precast and remaining are cast in-situ based on design 
approach of required structural integrity and ease of 
manufacturing process. This system basically uses 
precast roofing and flooring components and other 
minor elements like lintels, Chajjas, kitchen sills in 
conventional building construction. The structural 
system could be in the form of in-situ framework or 
load bearing walls. 


7.3.2.2 Full prefabrication system 


In this system almost all the structural components are 
prefabricated. The filler walls may be of brick/block 
masonry, precast RCC concrete panel units or any other 
locally available material. 


7.3.3 Large Panel Prefabrication System 


This system is based on the use of large prefab 
components. The components used аге precast 
concrete large panels for walls, floors, roofs, balconies, 
staircases, etc. The casting of the components could be 
at the site or off the site. 


Depending upon the extent of prefabrication, this 
system can also lend itself to partial prefab system and 
full prefab system. 


Structural scheme with precast large panel walls can be 
classified as given in 7.3.3.1 to 7.3.3.3. 


7.3.3.1 Precast walls 


a) Based on the structural functions of the walls, the 
precast walls may be classified as: 


1) Load bearing walls, 
2) Non-load bearing walls, and 
3) Shear walls. 


b) Based on construction, the precast walls may be 
classified as: 


1) Homogeneous walls — Which could be solid, 
hollow or ribbed; and 


2) Non-homogeneous walls, — These could be 
composite or sandwich panels. 


c) Based on their locations and functional 
requirements, the precast walls may also be 
classified as: 


1) External walls, which may be load bearing or 
non-load bearing depending upon the layout. 
These are usually homogenous but sometimes 
non-homogeneous sandwiched type to impart 
better thermal comfort. They can also act as 
shear walls to resist horizontal loads with 
appropriate design; and 

2 


w 


Internal walls providing resistance against 
vertical loads, horizontal loads, fire, etc. These 
are normally homogeneous walls. 


7.3.3.2 Precast floors 


a) Depending upon the composition of units, precast 
flooring units may be classified as: 


1) Homogeneous floors — These may be of 
solid slabs, cored slabs, ribbed or waffle 
slabs and precast slabs with structural topping 
designed as a composite system. A minimum 
structural topping of 75 mm concrete with 


IS 15916 : 2020 


reinforcing mesh shall be used in seismic 
zones ІП, ТУ and V, which сап be reduced to 
50 mm in seismic zone II. 


2) Non-homogeneous floors — These may be of 
multi-layered units with combinations of light 
weight concrete or reinforced/pre-stressed 
concrete with filler blocks and structural 
topping. 

b) Depending upon the way the loads are transferred, 
the precast floors may be classified as one-way, 
two-way or cantilever systems: 


1) One-way system transfers loads to supporting 
members in one direction only. The precast 
elements which come under this category are 
channel slabs, hollow core slabs, channels 
and ties system, light weight/cellular concrete 
slabs, etc. 


2) Two-way system transfers loads in both the 
directions imparting loads on the four edges. 
The precast elements under this category are 
room sized panels, two-way ribbed or waffle 
slab systems, etc. 


3 


κ 


Cantilever components are supported on one 
edge or two adjacent edges and other ends 
without supports. 


7.3.3.2.1 Filigree slab 


Filigree slab, also termed as half slab or lattice girder 
slab is a precast composite slab; cast in two stages. The 
first stage is to manufacture thin precast concrete panels, 
typically of about 60 mm to 85 mm thick, with the slab’s 
bottom reinforcement and reinforcement lattice girders 
included. About half the depth of lattice girders project 
above thin precast concrete panels; which facilitates 
for multiple point lifting/handling as well as acts as 
shear connectors for in-situ deck concreting laid over 
precast panels after erection. The slab concrete panels 
can be designed for overall thickness (precast and 
in-situ deck) as one-way or two-way in accordance 
with provisions of IS 456, IS 1893 (Part 1), IS 13920 
and this standard. On maturity of concrete panels, they 
are taken to jobsite and erected on beams/walls. Few 
temporary supports may be necessary depending on 
span. Subsequently, the deck’s top reinforcement is 
placed on top of precast filigree slabs and concrete is 
poured over the entire assembly to achieve the final 
thickness of the deck (see Fig. 2). The soffits of the 
panels have a smooth uniform finish as a result of 
casting them in polished steel pallets. 


8У15 ЗЯУӘПІУ LSVOAYd AVM-OML ANY AVM-ANO dO NOILO3S IWNIGNLISNOT IWOIdAL Vc 


H.LGIM 3HLLN3 303 
AIWHYOSINN азіпагч151а 38 TIVHS LN3IA3OHOJNI3H SIHL - с 3LON 


NOILOSYIG 3H.LO NI 9NINNVdS ӘМІЗН IWNOILdO SI 9NIHV38 - | ILON 


8У16 AVM-OML МОНОЗЧІП ἩΠΗΙΟ NI ONINNVdS 8V'IS AVM-ANO 


АЛД 


М 


IS 15916 : 2020 


(NOIS3Q ыза © ALON 995 


SV наза ANY S9NIOVdS) 
\/ SOLLLV  LN3I/A3OHOJNI3H 


L ILON ees 


IS 15916 : 2020 


L. SPAN E 


В SPAN Ν £ | 54 
CO, SPOT 


WELD 


REINFORCEMENT LATTICE 
(SPACING AND DEPTH AS 


PER DESIGN) 


2B ONE-WAY PRECAST FILIGREE SLAB PANEL 


IS 15916 : 2020 


m SPAN - 


CO, SPOT 
WELD 


REINFORCEMENT LATTICE 
(SPACING AND DEPTH AS 
PER DESIGN) 


- WIDTH - 
2 C TWO-WAY PRECAST FILIGREE SLAB PANEL 


Fic. 2 PRECAST FILIGREE SLAB PANEL 


10 


NOTE — This process can effectively accelerate the 
construction of structures by eliminating the need for costly 
and time-consuming field forming, and the placing of bottom 
reinforcement. 


7.3.3.3 Staircase systems 


Staircase system may consist of flights with in-built 
risers and treads in the element. The flights are normally 
unidirectional transferring the loads to supporting 
landing beams/slabs or load bearing walls. 


7.3.4 Box Type Construction 


In this system, room size units are prefabricated, either 
in 3D volumetric mould or 2D elements cast at the 
factory and connected together to construct a 3D box 
element at the factory and erected at site. Toilet and 
kitchen blocks may also be similarly prefabricated and 
erected at site. 
NOTE — This system derives its stability and stiffness from 
the box units which are formed by four adjacent walls. Walls 
are jointed to make rigid connections among themselves. The 
box unit rests on foundation, conventional or precast. 


8 DESIGN 
REQUIREMENTS 


CONSIDERATIONS AND 


8.1 Design Considerations 


8.1.1 Precast structures could be analyzed either as an 
emulative systems or as a jointed system. However, 
emulative analysis is typically preferred where the 
structure is detailed such that the overall behaviour 
of the building in its service life will be similar to a 
reinforced cement concrete building constructed in-situ. 
In emulative approach, the precast structure is analyzed 
as a monolithic one and the joints in these designed 
to take the forces of an equivalent discrete system. 
Resistance to horizontal loading shall be provided by 
having appropriate moment and shear resisting joints 
or placing shear walls (in diaphragm braced frame 
type of construction) in two directions at right angles 
or otherwise. No account is to be taken of rotational 
stiffness, if any, of the floor-wall joint in case of precast 
bearing wall buildings. The individual components 
shall be designed, taking into consideration the 
appropriate end conditions and loads at various stages 
of construction. The components of the structure shall 
be designed for loads and reactions in accordance with 
IS 875 (Parts 1 to 5) and IS 1893 (Part 1). In addition, 
members shall be designed for handling, erection and 
impact loads that might be expected during handling 
and erection. 

NOTE — Rotational stiffness can be accounted for long/ 

short term deflection calculations, provided that the approach 


is mutually agreed by the design team and approved by the 
Authority. 


8.1.2 In some conventional forms of construction, 
experience has shown that structures are capable of 
safely sustaining abnormal conditions of loading and 
remaining stable after the removal of primary structural 


1 


IS 15916 : 2020 


members. It has been shown that some forms of 
building structure and particularly some industrialized 
large panel systems have little reserve strength to resist 
forces not specifically catered for in the design. In 
light of this, therefore, recommendations made in 8.1.3 
to 8.1.10 should be kept in mind for ensuring stability 
of such prefabricated structures, whether large panel or 
not. 


8.1.3 Adequate strengthening of external joints of 
external wall panels is important since these elements 
are not fully restrained on both sides by floor panels. 
Adequate design precautions may be taken by the 
designer. External wall panel connections are likely to 
be the weakest points of a precast panel building, if not 
designed properly. 


8.1.4 It is equally important to provide restraint to all 
load bearing elements at the corners of the building. 
These elements and the external ends of cross-wall 
units should be stiffened either by introducing columns 
as connecting units or by jointing them to non-structural 
wall units which in emergency may support the load. 
Jointing of these units should be done bearing in mind 
the need for load support in an emergency. 


8.1.5 In prefabricated construction, the possibility of 
gas or other explosions which can remove primary 
structural elements leading to progressive collapse of 
the structure shall be taken into account. It is, therefore, 
necessary to consider the possibility of progressive 
collapse in which the failure or displacement of one 
element of a structure causes the failure or displacement 
of another element and results in the partial or total 
collapse of the building. 


8.1.6 Provision in the design to reduce the probability of 
progressive collapse is essential in buildings of height 
more than 15 m and is of relatively higher priority than 
for buildings of lower height. 


One way of preventing progressive collapse of external 
wall panels is to design the combined precast wall 
panels of entire width as a beam of depth equal to 
the floor height for the impact loading of upper floors 
and provide reinforcement accordingly at the top and 
bottom of all precast wall panels at each floor. To make 
reinforcement continuous across joints, top and bottom 
bars projected into joints between wall panels should 
be joined with lapping bars. 


8.1.7 It is necessary to ensure that any local damage to a 
structure does not spread to other parts of the structure 
remote from the point of mishap and that the overall 
stability is not impaired, but it may not be necessary to 
stiffen all parts of the structure against local damage or 
collapse in the immediate vicinity of a mishap, unless 
the design briefs specially require this to be done. The 
requirements as specified at 8.2 shall be followed to 
prevent progressive collapse of the structure. 


IS 15916 : 2020 


8.1.8 Additional protection may be required in respect 
of damage from vehicles. Further, it is necessary to 
consider the effect of damage to or displacement of 
a load-bearing member by an uncontrolled vehicle. 
It is strongly recommended that important structural 
members are adequately protected by concrete kerbs or 
similar method. 


In areas with possibility of passenger vehicular impact, 
the precast components should be designed for an 
unfactored load of 27 kN, in any direction, acting at 
heights between 450 mm and 700 mm on an area not 
larger than 300 mm х 300 mm to produce maximum 
load effect. This load is not required to act concurrently 
with any handrail or guard rail system loads. 


8.1.9 In all aspects of erection that affect structural 
design, it is essential that the designer should maintain 
a close liaison with the builder/contractor regarding the 
erection procedures to be followed. 


8.1.10 Failures that have occurred during construction 
appear to be of two types. The first of these is the 
pack-of-cards type of collapse in which the absence 
of restraining elements, such as partitions, cladding or 
shear walls means that the structure is not stable during 
the construction period. The second is the situation 
in which one element falls during erection and lands 
on an element below. The connections of the lower 
element then give way under the loading, both static 
and dynamic, and a chain reaction of further collapse 
is set up. 


8.1.10.1 A precaution against the first form of failure 
is that the overall stability of a building shall be 
considered in all its erection stages as well as in its 
completed state. All joints that may be required to resist 
moments and shears during the erection stage only, 
shall be designed with these in mind. Temporary works 
required to provide stability during construction shall 
be designed carefully. 


8.1.10.2 To guard against the second form of failure, 
that is, the dropping of a unit during erection, particular 
attention shall be given to the details of all pre-formed 
units and to ensure that they are sufficiently robust to 
withstand the maximum stresses that can arise from 
site conditions. Precast concrete construction generally 
shall be capable of withstanding the impact forces that 
can arise from bad workmanship on site. 


To ensure the stability of precast wall panel during 
erection, each panel should be supported by two 
inclined adjustable steel props with top end of the 
prop connected to the wall panel just above the mid 
height and lower end of the prop connected to floor slab 
through base plate. The inclination of the prop should 
be within 45° to 60° from horizontal. 


8.1.11 The design shall take care of requirements owing 
to erection given at 11.11. 


12 


8.1.12 In case of buildings whose floors are capable of 
providing rigid horizontal diaphragm action, the total 
shear in any horizontal plane shall be distributed to 
the various vertical elements of lateral forces resisting 
system, assuming the floors to be infinitely rigid in the 
horizontal plane. 


In case of building whose floor diaphragms cannot be 
treated as infinitely rigid in their own plane, the lateral 
shear at each floor shall be distributed to the vertical 
elements resisting the lateral forces, considering the in- 
plane flexibility of the diaphragms. 


NOTES 


1 A floor diaphragm shall be considered to be flexible, if it 
deforms such that the maximum lateral displacement measured 
from the chord of the deformed shape at any point of the 
diaphragm is more than 1.5 times the average displacement of 
the entire diaphragm. 

2 Reinforced concrete monolithic slab-beam floors or those 
consisting of prefabricated/precast elements with reinforced 
topping of thickness not less than 50 mm can be taken as a 
rigid diaphragm. 


8.1.12.1 Floor systems play a key role in the lateral 
resistance of building structures by providing 
diaphragm action. Diaphragm action serves to: 


a) transfer lateral loads at each level to the lateral 
load-resisting elements (walls, frames); and 


b) unite individual lateral load-resisting elements 
into a single lateral load-resisting system. 


These actions are crucial in allowing the lateral (load- 
resisting) system to perform as intended. Diaphragm 
action occurs by virtue of the in-plane stiffness 
inherent in the floor system. Accordingly, significant 
in-plane forces may develop in the diaphragm during 
lateral loading. In this regard, the panelled nature of 
floor systems in precast concrete construction can 
present challenges in the seismic design of diaphragms. 
These design challenges may pertain to providing 
adequate strength, stiffness and in cases, ductility in the 
diaphragm and diaphragm connections. 


8.1.12.2 Standard analysis methods for diaphragm 
design 


The magnitude of the inertia force at each floor level 
is estimated using a capacity design approach or a 
diaphragm design force distribution based on equivalent 
lateral loads. A key design step is to transform the 
diaphragm design forces into internal actions. For 
regular floor plans, a ‘horizontal plate girder’ analogy 
is typically used in design. In this approach, diaphragm 
design forces are typically applied at each level as 
a distributed in-plane load along the length of the 
diaphragm. The resulting girder internal forces are 
used to determine the amount of flexural reinforcement 
(chord steel), shear (web) reinforcement, and lateral 
system reaction load path reinforcement (collector 
steel). An irregular mass distribution in plan may 
require the design forces to take on a smeared load 


configuration as the mass distribution with respect 
to diaphragm depth has relevance in determining the 
proper web reinforcement. 


For more complex diaphragm configurations, a 
strut-and-tie method can be used. However, there is 


IS 15916 : 2020 


compelling evidence that the strut-and-tie method 
accurately predicts the behaviour of floor diaphragms, 
in general, and may become the preferred method of 
diaphragm analysis (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 4). 


LATERAL LOADING 


' | or tov 4 


PRECAST SLAB 


TIE BEAM REINFORCEMENT 


3A DIAGONAL TRUSS 


COMPRESSION 
CHORD 


_ | + | 


ІШ 


CRITICAL SHEAR 
INTERFACE 
BETWEEN SLABS 


LARGE IN-PLANE 
STIFFNESS OF 
PRECAST SLABS 


TENSION 
CHORD 


3B VIERENDEEL GIRDER 


3C DEEP HORIZONTAL BEAM 


Fic.3 STRUCTURAL MODELS USED To ANALYSE FLOOR DIAPHRAGMS 


IS 15916 : 2020 


LATERAL FORCES 


CHORD FORCES 


И 


n SHEARS а 4 
| ῄ 


CHORD FORCES 


SHEAR ON DIAPHRAGM 


MOMENT ON DIAPHRAGM 


NOTE - The floor deck is assumed to act as the web of the continuous beam and the beams 
at the floor periphery are assumed to act as the flanges of the continuous beam 


Fic. 4 DESIGN FoRCES ON A DIAPHRAGM 


8.2 Design Requirements for Structural Integrity 
and Safety against Progressive Collapse 


8.2.1 Prefabricated buildings shall be designed with 
proper structural integrity to avoid situations where 
damage to small areas of a structure or failure of single 
elements may lead to collapse of major parts of the 
structure. 


The following precaution may generally provide 
adequate structural integrity, 


a) All buildings should be capable of safely resisting 
the minimum horizontal load of 1.5 percent of 
characteristic dead load applied at each floor or 
roof level simultaneously (see Fig. 5). 


All buildings shall be provided with effective 
horizontal ties, 


b 


— 


1) around the periphery; 
2) internally (in both directions); and 
3) to columns and walls. 


14 


c) All buildings of height more than 15 m shall be 
provided with vertical ties, not less than two ties 
for each precast panel, and shall be continuous 
over the height of the building. 


In proportioning the ties, it may be assumed that 
no other forces are acting and the reinforcement is 
acting at its characteristic strength (that is, the material 
factor of safety is not applicable). Reinforcement 
provided for other purposes (for example, in 
compliance with 8.2.3.1) may be regarded as forming 
a part of, or the whole of, these ties. 


Normal procedure may be to design the structure for 
the usual loads and then carry out a check for the tie 
forces. 


8.2.2 Continuity and Anchorage of Ties 


Bars shall be lapped, welded or mechanically joined in 
accordance with IS 456. 


8.2.3 Design of Ties 
8.2.3.1 Peripheral ties 


At each floor and roof level an effectively continuous 
tie should be provided within 1.2 m of the edge of the 
building or within the perimeter wall (see Fig. 6). 


The tie should be capable to resist a tensile force of 
F equal to 60 KN or (20 + АУ) KN, whichever is less, 
where N is the number of storeys (including basement). 


8.2.3.2 Internal ties 


These are to be provided at each floor and roof level 
in two directions approximately at right angles. Ties 
should be effectively continuous throughout their 
length and be anchored to the peripheral tie at both 
ends, unless continuing as horizontal ties to columns or 


HORIZONTAL 
LOAD 


ΠΠ ΙΙ 


IS 15916 : 2020 


walls (see Fig.7). The tensile strength, in kN/m width 
shall be the greater of : 
(αι +4) LF, 


.——- and F, 
7.5 5 


Where, (g, + q) is the sum of average characteristic 
dead and imposed floor loads, in kN/nv, and | is the 
greater of the distance between the centre of columns, 
frames or walls supporting any two adjacent floor spans 
in the direction of the tie under consideration. 


The bars providing these ties may be distributed evenly 
in the slabs (see Fig.8) or may be grouped at or in 
the beams, walls or other appropriate positions but at 
spacings generally not greater than 1.5 7. 


0.015 g kı 


9. = Characteristic dead load 


Fic. 5 HORIZONTAL LOADS 


—— CLADDING 


NOTE- If there are cantilever slabs, supporting external cladding, projecting in front of the 
columns and these are more than 1.2 m (see Fig. 6A), then the peripheral tie shall go in the slab 


as shown in Figs. 6B to 6F. 


6A POSITION FOR PERIPHERAL TIE 


IS 15916 : 2020 


SLAB 


IN-SITU DECK 
CONCRETE 


PRECAST SLAB WALL 


6B PRECAST WALL TO WALL CONNECTION WITH SHEATHING PIPE 


IN-SITU DECK | 
СОМСКЕТЕ 


PRECAST 
SLAB 


COLUMN 


6C PRECAST COLUMN, BEAM AND SLAB CONNECTION 


16 


IS 15916 : 2020 


IN-SITU DECK 
CONCRETE 


— WALL WALL 
| | 
7 SLAB SLAB 
E σα 
WALL 


6D PRECAST DOUBLE WALL CONNECTION 


IS 15916 : 2020 


IN-SITU DECK 
CONCRETE 


SLAB | 


6E PRECAST BEAM SLAB CONNECTION 


Fic. 6 POSITION FOR PERIPHERAL TIE 


ADDITIONAL BAR FOR 
ANCHORING IN PERIPHERAL 
TIE BARS 


EXTENDED 
TIE BARS 


NOTE - If the peripheral tie consists of bars in an edge beam, then the bottom bars in the slabs will not be 
at the same level as the peripheral tie bars. It is suggested that either an additional bar be used for anchoring in the 
peripheral tie or the internal tie bars be extended and anchored around the top bar in the beam. 


Fic. 7 ANCHORING OF TIES IN SLABS 


NOTE - For continuity in continuous slabs, bars < 
by means of lapping some bottom steel at supports 
or by the addition of splice bars. 


Fic. 8 ConTINUITY ΝΕΟΙ 


18 


8.2.3.3 Horizontal ties to column and wall 


All external load-bearing members such as columns 
and walls should be anchored or tied horizontally into 
the structure at each floor and roof level. The design 
force for the tie is to be greater of: 


а) 2F kN or |! х F/2.5 kN, whichever is less for a 
column or for each metre length, if there is a wall 
(/, is the floor to ceiling height in metre). 


b) 3 percent of the total ultimate vertical load in the 
column or wall at that level. 


For corner columns, this tie force should be provided 
in each of two directions approximately at right angles. 


8.2.3.4 Vertical ties (for buildings of five or more 
storeys) 


Each column and each wall carrying vertical load 
should be tied continuously from the foundation to the 
roof level. The reinforcement provided is required only 
to resist a tensile force equal to the maximum design 
ultimate load (dead and imposed) received from any 
one storey. 


In situation where provision of vertical ties cannot be 
done, the element should be considered to be removed 
and the surrounding members designed to bridge the 


gap. 
8.2.4 Key Elements 


For buildings of five or more storeys, the layout should 
be checked to identify key elements. A key element is, 
such that its failure would cause the collapse of more 
than a limited area close to it. 


The limited area defined above may be taken equal to 
70 m? or 15 percent of the area of the storey, whichever 
is lesser. 


If key element exists, it is preferable to modify the 
layout so that the key element is avoided. 


8.3 Bearing for Precast Units 


8.3.1 Jointed Precast Detailing 


The precast units shall have a bearing of at least of 100 
mm on masonry supports and of 75 mm at least on 
steel or concrete. Steel angle shelf bearings shall have 
a 100 mm horizontal leg to allow for a 50 mm bearing 
exclusive of fixing clearance. When deciding to what 
extent, if any, the bearing width may be reduced in 
special circumstances , factors such as, loading, span, 
height of wall and provision of continuity shall be taken 
into consideration. 


8.3.2 Emulative Precast Detailing 


In emulative precast detailing, the structure under 
service conditions behaves similar to a cast in-situ 
structure and inherits the redundancy due to continuity. 


19 


IS 15916 : 2020 


Typically, the components are tied together with 
appropriate steel ties and connected using a cast in-situ 
‘stitch’ concrete pour for near monolithic continuity. 
The bearing for the building components thus becomes 
a critical concern only during the erection stages. The 
precast members, in emulative detailing system, shall 
have a bearing of at least 40 mm on concrete support 
components. In cases, where the supports are in steel 
or masonry system where emulative detailing is not 
followed in local limited areas, bearing of at least 
75 mm for steel support and 100 mm for masonry 
support should be provided. Otherwise, for both 
systems, bearing of at least 40 mm should be provided 
at the structural engineer's discretion. In special 
circumstances, where additional temporary supports/ 
shoring is provided during erection, bearing of at least 
25 mm should be acceptable at the structural engineer's 
discretion. Such temporary supports shall be kept in 
place until the ‘stitch’ concrete pour gains at least 70 
percent of the final design strength 


9 JOINTS 


9.1 The design of joints shall be made in the light 
of their assessment with respect to the following 
considerations: 


a) Feasibility — The feasibility of a joint shall be 
determined by its load carrying capacity in the 
particular situation in which the joint is to function. 


b) Practicability — Practicability of joint shall be 
determined by the amount and type of material 
required in construction; cost of material, 
fabrication and erection and the time for fabrication 
and erection. 


Serviceability Serviceability shall be 
determined by the joints/expected behaviour to 
repeated or possible overloading and exposure to 
climatic or chemical conditions. 


с) 


d) Fire rating — The fire rating for joints of precast 
components shall be higher or at least equal to 
connecting members. 

NOTE — Fire resistance testing under sustained loading 
may also be carried out on a prototype, as mutually agreed 
between the parties concerned. 

е) Appearance — The appearance of precast 
component’s joints shall merge with architectural 
aesthetic appearance and shall not be physically 
prominent compared to other parts of structural 
components. 


Water tightness of joints — In buildings, the 
external joints between precast elements should be 
water tight to ensure the durability requirements. 
If the joints are not water tight, it may lead to 
corrosion of reinforcing steel due to exposure 
to moisture thereby impacting the structural 


IS 15916 : 2020 


integrity. Also, water can enter inside the building 
and impact the functionality in service life of the 
building. In case of precast reinforced concrete 
wall buildings, joints of external walls, in addition 
to their structural efficiency, shall be watertight. 
For non-load bearing/facade walls, the connections 
shall allow free movement of the walls due to 
temperature changes. This can be achieved by 
suitably shaping the joint or by sealing compounds. 
In load bearing external/internal walls, the 
horizontal and vertical joints shall be filled with 
non-shrink, non-metallic, flowable high strength 
cementitious grout followed by backer rod (bond 
breaker such as polyethylene film also can be used 
in place of backer rod) with sealant at the external 
side. Where the joints are wider, the grout mix can 
be modified by adding 10 mm down aggregates 
as per the grout manufacturer’s guidelines as 
approved by the Engineer-in-Charge. The sealing 
compound shall be approved by the Engineer-in- 
Charge and shall have a long life to avoid frequent 
repair of the joints (see Note). It should be noted 
that the sealant is provided as an additional 
line of defense against water entry. In cases of 
moderate water exposure, the joints could be 
detailed with cement grout only with appropriate 
additional water proofing treatment instead of 
sealant (see 10.4). 


NOTE — The sealant should be considered as a 
replaceable element of the structure with a desired life 
of 10-15 years. 


g) The joint shall be filled with material considering 
its permanence/lasting quality. 


9.2 The following are the requirements of a structural 
joint: 

a) It shall be capable of being designed to transfer the 
imposed load and moments with a known margin 
of safety; 

b) It shall occur at logical locations in the structure 
and at points which may be most readily analyzed 
and easily reinforced; 

с) It shall accept the loads without marked 
displacement or rotation and avoid high local 
stresses; 

d) It shall accommodate tolerances in elements; 

e) It shall require little temporary support, permit 
adjustment and demand only a few distinct 
operations to make; 

f) Itshall permit effective inspection and rectification; 

g) It shall be reliable in service with other parts of the 
building; and 


20 


h) It shall enable the structure to absorb sufficient 
energy during earthquakes so as to avoid sudden 
failure of the structure (see Note). The joint 
should be ductile. 

NOTE — If required, tests may be carried out on 
prototypes to assess against the above requirement. 

j) Vertical joints may be designed as structural 
joints to emulate the conventional reinforced 
concrete joint with appropriate reinforcement 
across the joint or as non-structural joints with 
nominal reinforcement required for alignment, 
thermal and shrinkage loads. Тһе structural 
analysis model should reflect the joint restraints 
accordingly. 


9.2.1 Precast structures may have continuous or hinged 
connections subject to providing sufficient rigidity to 
withstand horizontal loading. When only compressive 
forces are to be taken, hinged joints may be adopted. 
In case of prefabricated concrete elements, load is 
transmitted via the concrete. When both compressive 
force and bending moment are to be taken, rigid or 
welded joints may be adopted; the shearing force is 
usually small in the column and can be taken up by the 
friction resistance of the joint. Here load transmission 
is accomplished by steel inserted parts together 
with concrete. In precast structures, it is critical to 
minimize relative movements of precast components 
under loads. Hence, connection details that rely solely 
on the frictional resistance under gravity loads are 
not permitted. The connections shall be designed 
using either the pure shear capacity of the connection 
element or based on the shear friction theory that takes 
the advantage of the frictional resistance of concrete 
components under gravity loads. 


9.2.2 When considering thermal shrinkage апа 
heat effects, provision of freedom of movement or 
introduction of restraint may be considered. 


9.3 Following connections and jointing techniques/ 
materials may be employed: 
a) Welding of cleats or projecting steel; 


b) Overlapping reinforcement, loops and linking 
steel grouted by concrete; 


c) Reinforced concrete ties all around a slab; 

d) Pre-stressing; 

e) Epoxy grouting; 

f) Cement/lime grout with non-shrink additive; 

g) Polymer slurry grouting at dowel cast bolts and 
nuts connection; 

h) Rebar fastener, chemical fastener and expansion 
fastener; 


j) Reinforcement coupler; 
k) Combination of the above; and 
m) Any other method proven by test. 


9.4 Precast Joint Connections 


Typical figures of some of the common precast joint 
connections are given in Annex C. 


10 TESTS FOR COMPONENTS/STRUCTURES 


10.1 Sampling Procedure 
10.1.1 Lot 


All the precast units of the same size, manufactured 
from the same material under similar conditions of 
production shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 


The number of units to be selected from each lot for 
dimensional requirements shall depend upon the size of 
the lot and shall be in accordance with col 3 and col 4 
of Table 1. 


Table 1 Sample Size and Rejection Number 
( Clauses 10.1.1 and 10.1.2 ) 


SI Lot Size First Second First Second 
No. Sample Sample Rejection Rejection 
Size Size Number Number 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Upto 100 5 5 2 2 

H) 101 to 300 8 8 2 2 

iil) 301 to 500 13 13 2 2 

iv) 500 and above 20 20 3 4 


The units shall be selected from the lot at random. In 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, reference 
may be made to IS 4905. 


10.1.2 Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity 


All the units selected at random in accordance with 
col 3 and col 4 of Table 1 shall be subjected to the 
dimensional requirements. A unit failing to satisfy any 
of the dimensional requirements shall be termed as 
defective. The lot shall be considered as conforming to 
the dimensional requirements if no defective is found 
in the sample, and shall be rejected if the number of 
defectives is greater than or equal to the first rejection 
number. If the number of defectives is less than the 
first rejection number, the second sample of the same 
size as taken in the first stage shall be selected from 
the lot at random and subjected to the dimensional 
requirements. The number of defectives in the first 
sample and the second sample shall be combined and 
if the combined number of defectives is less than the 


21 


IS 15916 : 2020 


second rejection number, the lot shall be considered 
as conforming to the dimensional requirements; 
otherwise not. 


The lot which has been found as satisfactory with 
respect to the dimensional requirements shall then be 
tested for load test. For this purpose, one unit shall 
be selected for every 300 units or part thereof. The 
lot shall be considered as conforming to the strength 
requirement, if all the units meet the requirement; 
otherwise not. 


10.2 Testing on Individual Components 


The component should be loaded for 24 h at its full 
span with a total load (including its own self weight) 
of 1.25 times F, where F, is the sum of the dead 
and imposed loads used in design. At the end of this 
time it should not show any sign of weakness, faulty 
construction or excessive deflection. Its recovery 24 h 
after the removal of the test load, should not be less 
than 75 percent of the maximum deflection recorded 
during the test. If prestressed, it should not show any 
visible cracks up to working load and should have a 
recovery of not less than 85 percent in 1 В. 


10.3 Load Testing of Structure or Part of 
Structure 


Loading test on a completed structure should be 
made, if required by the specification or if there is a 
reasonable doubt as to the adequacy of the strength of 
the structure. 


10.3.1 In such tests, the structure should be subjected 
to full dead load of the structure plus an imposed load 
equal to 1.25 times the specified imposed load used in 
design for a period of 24 h and then the imposed load 
shall be removed. During the tests, vertical struts equal 
in strength to take the whole load should be placed in 
position leaving a gap under the member. 

NOTE — Dead load includes self-weight of the structural 

members plus weight of finishes and walls or partitions, if any, 

as considered in the design. 


10.3.1.1 If within 24 h of the removal of the load, a 
reinforced concrete structure does not show a recovery 
of at least 75 percent of the maximum deflection shown 
during the 24 h under load, test loading should be 
repeated after a lapse of 72 h. If the recovery is less 
than 80 percent in second test, the structure shall be 
deemed to be unacceptable. 


10.3.1.2 If within 24 h of the removal of the load, a 
prestressed concrete structure does not show a recovery 
of at least 85 percent of the maximum deflection shown 
during the 24 h under load, the test loading should be 
repeated. The structure should be considered to have 
failed, if the recovery after the second test is not at least 


IS 15916 : 2020 


85 percent of the maximum deflection shown during 
the second test. 


10.3.1.3 If the maximum deflection in mm, shown 
during 24 h under load is less than 40 / ?/D, where / is 
the effective span in m; and D, the overall depth of the 
section in mm, it is not necessary for the recovery to be 
measured and the recovery provisions of 10.3.1.1 and 
10.3.1.2 shall not apply. 


10.4 Testing of External Precast Wall/Facade Panels 
for Water Tightness 


Any of the testing procedures given in 10.4.1 
and 10.4.2 may be followed for testing of external 
wall/facade panel joints for water tightness. 


10.4.1 Testing Procedure 1 
10.4.1.1 General 


If it is deemed necessary to demonstrate that the precast 
facade joints are adequate to resist water penetration, 
a water penetration test on a full scale panel including 
joint mock-ups could be undertaken. 


10.4.1.2 Test procedures 


Mock-up panels to be tested for water tightness 
should be subjected to both static and cyclic pressure 
in accordance with standard accepted procedures. 
Available international testing procedures are to be 
modified for local conditions as follows: 


a) Differential test pressure shall be 20 percent of the 
maximum inward design wind load but not less 
than 0.77 kPa; and 


b) The test shall be performed with water flow rate of 
3.4 litres/min/m? for 15 min. 


10.4.1.3 Sampling for water penetration test 


Full scale water tightness testing on precast facade 
panels and joints should be carried out at the rate of 
0.5 percent for each type of joint and combination of 
panels or one for each type of joint and precast unit, 
whichever is the greater. 


10.4.1.4 Failure criterion 


The facade units or joints are deemed to have failed, 
if signs of water seepage through the joints or through 
the facade unit, including signs of damp patches, are 
observed during the test or within the subsequent 2 h 
after the test. 


10.4.1.5 Remedial action on failure 


Upon failure of a water penetration test on a precast 
facade system the cause of failure should be identified 
and the system revised and re-tested until a satisfactory 
test result is achieved. Modifications shall be realistic 
in terms of job conditions and shall maintain standards 
of quality and durability. 


22 


10.4.2 Testing Procedure 2 


10.4.2.1 For external walls, a continuous jet of 
water shall be sprayed on the joint corresponding to 
600 litres/h from a water hose having nozzle velocity 
of 2 m/s and a cone scatter of approximately 60° held 
at a distance of 1.2 m from the wall surface under 
test. The duration of the test shall not be less than 2 h. 
The hose shall be placed centred on the horizontal or 
vertical joint width. 


For external walls, the following tests shall be 
conducted for each building block: 


Building Height Frequency of Tests 


5 tests each for vertical joints and 
horizontal joints 


Up to 10 storeys 


10 tests each for vertical joints 
and horizontal joints 


Up to 20 storeys 


15 tests each for vertical joints 
and horizontal joints 


Up to 30 storeys 


20 tests each for vertical joints 
and horizontal joints 


Up to 40 storeys 


25 tests each for vertical joints 
and horizontal joints 


Up to 50 storeys 


Twenty percent of these tests shall be carried out at the 
intersection of vertical and horizontal joint. 


These tests shall be carried out at any location as 
instructed by the Engineer-In-Charge. 


10.4.2.2 Acceptance criterion 


Water shall not seep into any part of the building during 
the test. 


10.4.2.3 Remedial action on failure 


For each test which fails, the tested joint should be 
repaired as per the approved repair procedure as 
directed by the Engineer-in-Charge and the joint 
shall be retested for performance as per 10.4.2.2. Two 
additional joints should be tested for each failed joint 
unless directed otherwise by the Engineer-in-Charge at 
the cost and expense of contractor, including the cost 
of repair work. 


11 MANUFACTURE, STORAGE, TRANSPORT 
AND ERECTION OF PRECAST ELEMENTS 


11.1 Manufacture of Precast Concrete Elements 


11.1.1 A judicious location of precasting yard with 
concreting, initial curing (required for demoulding), 
storage facilities, suitable transportation and erection 
equipment and availability of raw materials are the 
crucial factors which should be carefully planned and 
provided for effective and economic use of precast 
concrete components in construction. 


11.1.2 Manufacture 


The manufacture of the components can be done in 
a factory for the commercial production established 
at the focal point based on the market potential or 
in a site pre-casting yard set up at or near the site of 
work. 


11.1.2.1 Factory prefabrication 


Factory prefabrication is resorted to in a factory for 
the commercial production for the manufacture of 
standardized components on a long term basis. It is 
a capital intensive production where work is done 
throughout the year preferably under a closed shed 
to avoid effects of seasonal variations. High level of 
mechanization can always be introduced in this system 
where the work can be organized in a factory-like 
manner with the help of a constant team of workmen. 


11.1.2.2 Site prefabrication 


In this scheme, prefabricated components are produced 
at site or as near the site of work as possible. 


This system is normally adopted for a specific job 
order of large scale that will continue over a long 
period. This option provides definite economy with 
respect to cost of transportation thereby improving 
productivity. Even though temporary, the factory 
established should be comparable to high capacity 
permanent factory with equivalent state-of-the-art 
degree of mechanization and quality control. Under 
this category there are two types, that is, semi- 
mechanized and fully-mechanized. 


a) Semi-mechanized — The work is normally 
carried out in open space with locally available 
labour force or skilled labour force depending 
on project complexity. The equipment/machinery 
used may be minor in nature and moulds are of 
mobile or stationary in nature. 


b) 


Fully-mechanized — The work is carried out 
under a shed with skilled labour. The equipment 
used are similar to those of factory production. 
This type of precast yard will be set up for the 
production of precast components of high quality 
with a high rate of production. 


11.1.3 The various processes involved іп the 
manufacture of precast elements may be classified as 
follows. 


11.1.3.1 Main process 


a) Providing and assembling the moulds, placing 
reinforcement cage in position for reinforced 
concrete work, and stressing the wires in the case 
of prestressed elements; 


b) Putting concealed service conduits/pipes; 


23 


IS 15916 : 2020 


c) Fixing of inserts and tubes, where necessary (for 
handling); 


d) Pouring the concrete (designed properly under 
strict quality control) into the moulds; 


e) Vibrating the concrete and finishing; 
f) Curing (steam curing, if necessary); and 
g) Demoulding the forms and stacking the precast 
products. 
11.1.3.2 Auxiliary process 


Process, such as the following, necessary for the 
successful completion of the processes covered by the 
main process: 


a) Mixing and manufacture of fresh concrete (done 
in a mixing station orby a batching plant); 


b) Prefabrication of reinforcement cage (done in a 
steel yard or workshop); 


c) Manufacture of inserts and other finishing items to 
be incorporated inthe main precast products; 


d) Finishing the precast products; and 
e) Testing of products. 


11.1.3.3 Subsidiary process 


All other work, such as the following, involved in 
keeping the main production work to a cyclic working: 
a) Storage of materials; 
b) Transport of cement and aggregates; 
c) Transport of green concrete and reinforcement 
cages; 
d) Transport and stacking the precast elements; 
e) Repairs and maintenance of tools, shackles and 
machines; 
f) Repairs and maintenance of moulds; 
g) Maintenance of curing yards; and 
h) Generation of steam, etc. 


11.1.4 For the manufacture of precast elements all the 
above processes shall be planned in a systematic way to 
achieve the following: 


a) Acyclic technological method of working to bring 
in speed and economy in manufacture; 


b) Mechanization of the process to increase 


productivity and to improve quality; 

c) The optimum production satisfying the quality 
control requirements and to keep up the expected 
speed of construction aimed; 


d) Better working conditions for the people on the 
job; and 
on the 


e) Minimizing the effect of weather 


manufacturing schedule. 


IS 15916 : 2020 


11.1.5 The various stages of pre-casting can be 
classified as given in Table 2 on the basis of the 
equipment required for the various stages. This permits 
mechanization and rationalization of work in the 
various stages. In the pre-casting, stages 6 and 7 given 
in Table 2 form the main process in the manufacture 
of precast concrete elements. For these pre-casting 
stages, there are many technological processes to suit 
the concrete product under consideration which have 
been proved rational, economical and time saving. 
The technological line or process is the theoretical 
solution for the method of planning the work involved 
by using machine complexes. Figure 9 illustrates 
diagrammatically the various stages involved in a plant 


11.1.6 The various accepted methods of manufacture 
of precast units can be broadly classified into two 
methods: 


a) The ‘stand method’ where the moulds remain 
stationary at places, when the various processes 
involved are carried out in a cyclic order at the 
same place; and 

b) The ‘flow method’ where the precast unit under 

consideration is in movement according to the 

various processes involved in the work which are 
carried out in an assembly-line method. 


Table 2 Stages of Precasting of Concrete Products 


( Clause 11.1.5 ) 


Operations Involved 


(4) 


Unloading and transport of cement, coarse and fine aggregates and steel, and storing 
them in bins, silos or storage sheds 


Testing of all materials including steel 
Testing of raw materials, plotting of grading curves and trial of mixes in laboratory 


Unloading of reinforcement bars from wagons or lorries and stacking them in the steel 
yard, cutting, bending, tying or welding the reinforcements and making in the form of 
a cage, which can be directly introduced into the mould 


Moulds are cleaned, applied with form release agent, and assembled and placed at the 


The reinforcement cages are placed in the moulds with spacers, etc, as per data sheet 
prepared for the particular prefabricate 


Taking out aggregates and cement from bins, silos, etc, batching and mixing 


Transport of green concrete from the mixer to the moulds. In the case of precast 
method involving direct transfer of concrete from mixer to the mould or a concrete 
hopper attached to the mould this prefabrication stage is not necessary 


Concrete is poured and vibrated to a good finish 


Either a natural curing with water or an accelerated curing using steam and other 
techniques. In the case of steam curing using trenches or autoclaves, this stage involves 
transport of moulds with the green concrete into the trench or autoclave and taking 
them out after the curing and demoulding elements. Cutting of protruding wires also 
falls in this stage. In certain cases the moulds have to be partly removed and inserts 
have to be removed after initial set. Final demoulding is done after concrete has gained 
designed strength, enough to resist handling stress, and the components are then 
allowed to be cured further. All these fall in this operation 


Lifting of precast elements from the mould and transporting to the stacking yard for 
further transport by trailer or rail is part of this stage 


Tests are carried out on the components individually and in combination to ensure the 
adequacy of their strength 


process. 
51 Precasting Name of Process 
No. Stage No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 1 Procurement and storage of 
construction materials 
ii) 2 Testing of materials 
iii) 3 Design of concrete mix 
iv) 4 Making of reinforcement 
cages 
v) 5 Applying form release agent 
and laying of moulds in right place 
position 
vi) 6 Placing of reinforcement 
cages, inserts and fixtures 
vii) 7 Preparation of green concrete 
viii) 8 Transport of green concrete 
ix) 9 Pouring and consolidation of 
concrete 
x) 10 Curing of concrete and 
demoulding 
xi) П Stacking of precast elements 
xii) 12 Testing of finished 
components 
xiii) 13 Miscellaneous 


3) Generation of steam involving storing of coal or oil necessary for generation 
of steam and providing insulated steam pipe connection up to the various 
technological lines 


b) Repair of machines used in the production 


24 


IS 15916: 2020 


WATER FINE COARSE CEMENT MILD STEEL H.T. WIRE 
AGGREGATE 


Mm 


MEASURING CUTTING 


MOULD OILING 


STRESSING 
FILLING CONCRETE 


COMPACTING 


CURING & 
DETENSIONING 


MOULD FITING 


MOULD CLEANING 


DEMOULDING 


BY ROAD DESPATCH BY RAIL 


CURING IN YARD 


Fic. 9 PLANT PROCESS 


25 


IS 15916 : 2020 


The various accepted pre-casting methods are listed in 
Table 3 with details regarding the elements that can be 
manufactured by these methods. 


11.2 Preparation and Storage of Materials 


Storage of materials is of considerable importance 
in the pre-casting industry as a mistake in planning 
in this aspect can greatly influence the economics of 
production. From experience in construction, it is 
clear that there will be very high percentage of loss 
of materials as well as poor quality due to improper 
storage and transport. So, in a precast factory where 
everything is produced with special emphasis on quality, 
proper storage and preservation of building materials, 


especially cement, coarse and fine aggregates is of 
prime importance. Storage of materials shall be done 
in accordance with IS 4082. Also, precast elements be 
subjected to ‘first-in first-out’ to minimize and/or avoid 
issues relating to shrinkage, creep, etc. 


11.3 Moulds 


11.3.1 Moulds for the manufacture of precast elements 
may be of steel, timber, concrete and plastic or a 
combination thereof. For the design of moulds for the 
various elements, special importance should be given 
to easy demoulding and assembly of the various parts. 
At the same time rigidity, strength and water-tightness 
of the mould, taking into consideration forces due 


Table 3 Precasting Methods 
( Clauses 11.1.6 and 11.9.1 ) 


51 No. Precasting Method Where Used Recommended Dimensions Advantages and 
and Weights Remarks 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Individual mould | method — а) Ribbed slabs, beams, Мо limit in size and weight. a) Strengthening of 
Precasting method using mould girders, window panels, Depends on the equipment the cross-section 


which may be easily assembled out 


box type units and special 


used for demoulding, possible 


of bottom and sides, transportable, elements transporting and placing b) Openings are 
if Necessary: This may be either b) Prestressed railway possible in two 
in timber or in steel using needle sleepers, parts of pre- planes 
Or mould vibrators and capable of stressed girders, etc. 
taking pre-stressing forces 
ii) Battery form method — The Interior wall panels, shell a) Length: 18m Specially suitable for 
shuttering panels may be adjusted elements, reinforced concrete b) Breadth:3m mass production of wall 
into the form of a battery at the  battens, rafters, purlins, and c) Mass: 5t panels where shuttering 
required distances equal to the  roofand floor slabs cost is reduced to 
thickness of the concrete member a large extent and 
autoclave ог trench 
steam curing may be 
adopted by taking the 
steam pipes through the 
shuttering panels 
iii) Stack method Floor and roof slab panels a) Length : Any desired For casting identical 
length reinforced ог рге- 
b) Breadth: 1 to4m stressed panels one 
с) Mass: 5t over the other with 
separating media 
interposed in between 
iv) Tilting mould method — This Exterior wall panels where a) Length: 6m Suitable for manu- 
method is capable of being skipped special finishes are required on b) Breadth : 4m facturing the external 
vertically using hydraulic jacks one face or for sandwich panel wall panels 
c) Mass: 5t 
v) Long line prestressing bed method Double tees, ribbed slabs, a) Length: Any Desired Ideally suited for 
purlins, piles and beams length pretension members 
b) Breadth: 2 т 
с) Height: 2m 
d) Mass : Up to 10t 
vi) Extrusion method —Long concrete Roof slabs, foam concrete wall a) Length: Any Desired May be used with 


mould with constant cross-section 
where concreting and vibration are 
done automatically just as in hollow 
cored slab casting 


panels and beams cross-section 


26 


length 
b) Breadth : Less than 2 m 
c) Height : Less than 3 m 


advantage in the case of 
un-reinforced — blocks, 
foam concrete panels 


to pouring of green concrete and vibrating, are also 
important. The deflection of all the supporting member 


of the mould should not be more than or 3 mm, 


350 
whichever is less, where L is span of the member 


in mm. 


11.3.2 Tolerances 


The moulds have to be designed in such a way as to 
take into consideration the tolerances given in 6.2. 


11.3.3 Slopes of the Mould Walls 


For easy demoulding of the elements from the mould 
with fixed sides, where precast elements have to be 
lifted out of mould, the side slopes should preferably 
be 1 in 6 but never less than 1 in 12. Otherwise, there is 
a possibility of the elements getting stuck up with the 
mould at the time of demoulding. 


11.4 Accelerated Hardening 


In most of the precasting factories, it is economical to 
use faster curing methods or artificial curing methods 
which, in turn will allow the elements to be demoulded 
much earlier permitting early re-use of the forms. Any 
of the following methods may be adopted: 


a) By heating the aggregates and water before 
mixing the concrete — By heating of the 
aggregates as well as water to about 70 °C to 
80 °C before making the concrete mix and placing 
the same in the moulds, sufficiently high earlier 
strengths are developed to allow the elements to 
be stripped and transported. 

b) Steam curing — Steam curing may be done 
under high pressure and high temperature in 
an autoclave. This technique is more suited to 
smaller elements. Alternatively, this could be done 
using low pressure steam having temperature 
around 80 °C. This type of curing shall be done 
as specified in 11.5.2. For light weight concrete 
products when steam cured under high pressure, 
the drying shrinkage is reduced considerably. 
Due to this reason, high pressure steam curing 
in autoclave is specified for light weight low 
densities ranging from 300 to 1 000 kg/m’. For 
normal (heavy) concretes as well as light weight 
concretes of higher densities, low pressure steam 
curing may be desirable as it does not involve 
using high pressures and temperatures requiring 
high investment in an autoclave (see also 11.5.2). 
c) Steam injection during mixing of concrete — 
In this method, low pressure saturated steam 
is injected into the mixer while the aggregates 
are being mixed. This enables the heating up of 
concrete to approximately 60 °C. Such a concrete 
after being placed in the moulds attains high early 
strength. 


27 


IS 15916 : 2020 


d) Heated air method — In this method, the concrete 
elements are kept in contact with hot air with 
a relative humidity not less than 80 percent. 
This method is specially useful for light weight 
concrete products using porous coarse aggregates. 


е) Hot water method — Іп this method, the concrete 
elements are kept in a bath of hot water around 
50 °C to 80 °C. The general principles of this 
type of curing are not much different from steam 
curing. 

f) Electrical method — The passage of current 
through the concrete panels generates heat 
through its electro-resistivity and accelerates 
curing. In this method, the concrete is heated up 
by an alternating current ranging from 50 V for a 
plastic concrete and gradually increasing to 230 V 
for the set concrete. This method is normally used 
for massive concrete products. 


11.4.1 After the accelerated hardening of the above 
products by any of the above accepted methods, the 
elements shall be cured further by normal curing 
methods to attain full final strength. 


11.4.2 Accelerated hardening may also be achieved by 
the following techniques: 


a) Construction chemicals — Suitable construction 
chemicals may be used. 


b) 


Consolidation by spinning — Such a method is 
generally used in the centrifugal moulding of pipes 
and such units. The spinning motion removes 
excess water, effects consolidation and permits 
earlier demoulding. 


Pressed concrete — This method is suitable for 
fabrication of small or large products at high speed 
of production. A 100 to 200 t press compresses the 
wet concrete in rigid moulds and expels water. 
Early handling and a dense wear resistant concrete 
is obtained. 


с 


) 


Vacuum treatment — This method removes the 
surplus air and water from the newly placed 
concrete as in slabs and similar elements. A 
suction upto about 70 percent of an atmosphere 
is applied for 20 to 30 min/cm thickness of the 
units. 


d) 


е 


— 


Consolidation by shock — This method is suitable 
for small concrete units dropped repeatedly from 
a height in strong moulds. The number of shocks 
required to remove excess water and air may vary 
from 6 to 20 and the height of lift may be up to as 
much as half the depth of the mould. 


11.4.3 After the accelerated curing of the above 
products by any of the above accepted methods, the 
elements shall be cured further by normal curing 
methods to attain full final strength. 


IS 15916 : 2020 


11.5 Curing 


11.5.1 The curing of the prefabricated elements can be 
effected by the normal methods of curing by sprinkling 
water and keeping the elements moist. This can also 
be done in the case of smaller elements by immersing 
them in a specially made water tanks. 


11.5.2 Steam Curing 


11.5.2.1 The steam curing of concrete products shall 
take place under tarpaulin in tents, under hoods, under 
chambers, in tunnels or in special autoclaves. The steam 
shall have a uniform quality throughout the length of 
the member. The precast elements shall be so stacked 
with sufficient clearance between each other and the 
bounding enclosure, so as to allow proper circulation 
of steam. 


Before the concrete products are subjected to any 
accelerated method of curing, the cement to be used 
shall be tested in accordance with relevant Indian 
Standards, especially for soundness, setting time and 
suitability for steam curing. 


In the case of elements manufactured by accelerated 
curing methods, concrete admixtures to reduce the 
water content may be allowed to be used. The normal 
aeration agents used to increase the workability of 
concrete should not be allowed to be used. Use of 
calcium chloride based admixtures should not be used 
for reinforced concrete elements so as to meet the 
chloride limits prescribed in IS 456. 


11.5.2.2 The inside face of the steam curing 
chamber, tunnel or hood shall have a damp-proof 
layer to maintain the humidity of steam. Moreover, 
proper slope shall be given to the floor and the roof 
to allow the condensed water to be easily drained 
away. At first, when steam is let into the curing 
chambers, the air inside shall be allowed to go out 
through openings provided in the hoods or side walls 
which shall be closed soon after moist steam is seen 
jetting out. 


11.5.2.3 It is preferable to let in steam from the top 
of the chamber through perforated pipelines to allow 
uniform entry of steam throughout the chamber. 


11.5.2.4 The fresh concrete in the moulds should be 
allowed to get the initial set before allowing the concrete 
to come into contact with steam. The regular heating up 
of fresh concrete product from about 20 °C to 35 °C 
should start only after a waiting period ranging from 
2h to 5 h depending on the setting time of cement used. 
It may be further noted that steam can be let in earlier 
than this waiting period provided the temperature of the 
concrete product does not rise beyond 35 °C within this 
waiting period. 


28 


11.5.2.5 The second stage in steam curing process 
is to heat up the concrete elements, moulds and the 
surroundings in the chamber: 


a) In the low pressure steam curing, the airspace 
around the member is heated upto a temperature of 
75 °C to 80 °C at a gradual rate, usually not faster 
than 30 °C /h (this process takes around 1 h to 1 h 
30 min depending upon outside temperature); and 


b) In the case of curing under high pressure steam 
in autoclaves, the temperature and pressure are 
gradually built up during a period of about 4 h. 


11.5.2.6 The third stage of steam curing is to maintain 
the uniform temperature and pressure for a duration 
depending upon thickness of the section. This may vary 
from 3 h to 5% h in the case of low pressure steam 
curing and 4 h to 7 h in the case of high pressure steam 
curing. 


11.5.2.7 The fourth stage of steam curing is the gradual 
cooling down of concrete products and surroundings in 
the chamber and normalization of the pressure to bring 
it at par with outside air. The maximum cooling rate, 
which is dependent on the thickness of the member, 
should normally not exceed 30 ?C/h. 


11.5.3 In all these cases, the difference between the 
temperature of the concrete product and the outside 
temperature should not be more than 60 ?C for 
concretes up to M30 and 75 ?C for concretes greater 
than M45. In the case of light weight concrete, the 
difference in temperature should not be more than 
60 ?C for concretes less than M25. For concretes 
greater than M50, the temperature differences can go 
up to 75 °C. 


11.6 Stacking During Transport and Storage 


Every precaution shall be taken against overstress or 
damage, by the provision of suitable packings at agreed 
points of support. Particular attention is directed to 
the inherent dangers of breakage and damage caused 
by supporting other than at two positions, and also 
by the careless placing of packings (for example, 
not vertically one above the other). Ribs, corners 
and intricate projections from solid section should 
be adequately protected. Packing pieces shall not 
discolour, disfigure or otherwise permanently cause 
mark on units or members. Stacking shall be arranged 
or the precast units should be protected, so as to prevent 
the accumulation of trapped water or rubbish and, if 
necessary, to reduce the risk of efflorescence. 


11.6.1 The following points shall be kept in view during 
stacking: 


a) Care should be taken to ensure that the flat elements 
are stacked with right side up. For identification, 
top surfaces should be clearly marked. 


b) Stacking should be done on a hard and suitable 
ground to avoid any sinking of support when 
elements are stacked. 


с 


wa 


In case of horizontal stacking, packing materials 
shall be at specified locations and shall be exactly 
one over the other to avoid cantilever stress in 
panels. 

d) Components should be packed in a uniform way 
to avoid any undue projection of elements in the 
stack which normally is a source of accident. 


е 


— 


In general, vertical stacking should be limited 
to 6-10 components. Where the ground is only 
compacted, the maximum ground load at support 
should be restricted to 15 t/m? and the stacking 
should be restricted to 6 panels. Where PCC layer 
is poured, the maximum ground load at support 
should be restricted to 30 t/m? and the stacking 
should be restricted to 10 panels. In both cases, 
the ground should be fairly levelled and the 
supports should be continuous along the width of 
the panels. 


All wall panels shall be stacked, preferably 
symmetrically on both sides, against steel 
A-frames. The slope of the sides of A-frame shall 
be between 75? and 80? to the horizontal and 
the bottom of the frame shall be provided with 
concrete footings to resist component of self- 
weight and also horizontal wind pressure on the 
wall panel. Similar type of A-frames should be 
used for transporting wall panels. 


11.7 Handling Arrangements 


11.7.1 Lifting and handling positions shall be clearly 
defined particularly where these sections are critical. 
Where necessary special facilities, such as bolt holes 
or projecting loops, shall be provided in the units and 
full instructions supplied for handling. For the purpose 
of testing the bolts/hooks, bond strength shall be the 
criteria. for embedded bolts and bearing strength 
for through bolts. For bond strength, pull out test of 
concrete shall be carried out. See 11.11 for additional 
design considerations. 


11.7.2 For precast pre-stressed concrete members, the 
residual pre-stress at the age of particular operation of 
handling and erection shall be considered in conjunction 
with any stresses caused by the handling or erection 
of member. The compressive stress thus computed 
shall not exceed 50 percent of the cube strength of the 
concrete at the time of handling and erection. Tensile 
stresses upto a limit of 50 percent above those specified 
in IS 456 shall be permissible. 


11.8 Identification and Marking 


All precast units shall bear an indelible identification, 
location and orientation marks as and where necessary. 
The date of manufacture shall also be marked on the 
units. 


29 


IS 15916 : 2020 


11.8.1 The identification markings on the drawings 
shall be the same as that indicated in the manufacturer's 
literature and shall be shown in a tabular format on 
the setting schedule together with the length, type, 
size of the unit, and the sizes and arrangement of all 
reinforcement. 


11.9 Transport 


Transport of precast elements inside the factory and to 
the site of erection is of considerable importance not 
only from the point of view of economy but also from 
the point of view of design and efficient management. 
Transport of precast elements must be carried out with 
extreme care to avoid any jerk and distress in elements 
and handled as far as possible in the same orientation 
as it is to be placed in final position. See 11.11 for 
additional design considerations. 


11.9.1 Transport Inside the Factory 


Transport of precast elements moulded inside the 
factory depends on the method of production, selected 
for the manufacture as given in Table 3. 


11.9.2 Transport from Stacking Yard Inside the Factory 
to the Site of Erection 


Transport of precast concrete elements from the factory 
to the site of erection should be planned in such a way 
so as to be in conformity with the traffic rules and 
regulations as stipulated by the Authorities. The size 
of the elements is often restricted by the availability 
of suitable transport equipment, such as tractor-cum- 
trailers, to suit the load and dimensions of the member 
in addition to the opening dimensions under the bridge 
and load carrying capacity while transporting the 
elements over the bridge. 


11.9.2.1 While transporting elements in various 
systems, that is, wagons, trucks, bullock carts, etc, care 
should be taken to avoid excessive cantilever actions 
and desired supports are maintained. Transportation of 
prefabricated element should be carried out with care. 
Care should be taken to also protect the steel inserts 
and reinforced bars of the precast elements during 
transportation. Precast elements should be secured with 
safety ties so as to ensure that vibrations to the elements 
in transit are minimum. Special care should be taken at 
location of sharp bends and on uneven or slushy roads 
to avoid undesirable stresses in elements. 


11.9.2.2 Before loading the elements in the transporting 
media, care should be taken to ensure that the base 
packing for supporting the elements are located at 
specified positions only. Subsequent packings shall be 
kept strictly one over the other. 


11.10 Erection 


The tower crane or other mobile cranes have different 
lifting capacities at various radii; maximum weight at 
a radius near to the centre and minimum weight at a 


IS 15916 : 2020 


radius farther from centre. In order to minimize the 
number of precast elements, the crane selected should 
be capable of handling heaviest precast elements at its 
maximum radius. The floor plan should indicate weight 
of panels at different radii of crane matching with the 
lifting capacity of crane at each radius. 


In the erection of precast elements, all the following 
items of work are meant to be included: 


a) Slinging of the precast element; 


b) Tying up of erection ropes connecting to the 
erection hooks; 


c) Cleaning of the elements and the site of erection; 


d) Cleaning of the steel inserts before incorporation 
in the joints, lifting up of the elements, setting 
them down into the correct envisaged position; 


e) Adjustment to get the stipulated level, line and 
plumb by means of levelling bolts and adjustable 
props, 

f) Welding of cleats; 

g) Changing of the erection tackles; 


h) Putting up and removing of the necessary 
scaffolding or supports; 


j) Welding of the inserts, laying of reinforcements in 
joints and grouting the joints; and 

k) Finishing the joints to bring the whole work to a 
workmanlike finished product. 


See 11.11 for additional design considerations. 


11.10.1 In view of the fact that the erection work in 
various construction jobs using prefabricated concrete 
elements differs from place to place depending on 
the site conditions, safety precautions in the work 
are of utmost importance. Hence, only those skilled 
foremen, trained workers and fitters who have been 
properly instructed about the safety precautions to be 
taken should be employed on the job. For additional 
information, see relevant Indian Standards for safety 
during construction. 


11.10.2 Transport of people, workers or visitors, by 
using cranes and hoists should be strictly prohibited on 
an erection site. 


11.10.3 In the case of tower rail mounted cranes 
running on rails, the track shall not have a slope more 
than 0.2 percent in the longitudinal direction. In the 
transverse direction, the rails shall lie in a horizontal 
plane. 


11.10.4 The track of the crane should be checked daily 
to see that all fish plates and bolts connecting them to 
the sleepers are in place and in good condition. 


11.10.5 The operation of all equipment used for 
handling and erection shall follow the operations 


30 


manual provided by the manufacturer. All safety 
precautions shall be taken in the operations of handling 
and erection. 


11.10.6 Erection Tolerances 


For the erection tolerances, reference shall be made to 
IS 11447 for large panel prefabricates. 


11.11 Design Considerations 


Based on the design intent, production environment 
and aesthetic requirements of the prefabricated panels, 
the resultant stresses should be controlled to minimize 
cracking in precast and/or prestressed panels. Precast 
(non-prestressed) components are generally designed 
as ‘cracked’ unless cracking is an aesthetic concern. 
Where the panels are to be designed ‘without cracking’ 
the extreme fibre tensile stresses during various stages 
of handling, storage and erection should be kept under 
the tensile strength of the concrete (modulus of rupture) 
at that stage with a factor of safety of 1.5 or more. 


Resultant extreme fibre tensile stresses 
< 0.7 f. J1.5, where f, is the characteristic 
strength of concrete, in N/mm? 
Structural design requirements of minimum spacing, 
skin reinforcement and crack width criteria as specified 
in IS 456 are applicable. 


Lifting hooks should be located such that while lifting 
the panel, minimum bending moments are produced. 


In addition, extra static load multipliers should be used 
to account for impact, and demoulding forces as per the 
following: 


51 No. Prefabricated Panel Type Static Load 
Multiplier 
(1) Q) 3) 
i) Demoulding: 
a) Structural components 1.3 
b) Architectural components 1.4 
ii) Yard handling and erection: 
All components 1:2 
il) Transportation: 
All components 1.2 


The static load multipliers are to be used in addition 
to the factor of safety of 1.5 used in the tensile stress 
limit. Also, the load multipliers are only needed for the 
flexural design and are not applicable for the lifting 
devices. 


Lifting hooks shall be designed for, 


a) self weight of panel plus an adhesive force, 
varying between 1.5 to 3.0 kN/m’, depending 
upon the surface condition of the mould; or 


b) 1.3 times self-weight of panel, whichever is more. 


12 EQUIPMENT 


12.1 General 


The equipment used in the precast concrete industry/ 
construction may be classified into the following 
categories: 


a) Machinery required for quarrying of coarse and 
fine aggregates; 


b) Conveying equipment, such as belt conveyors, 
chain conveyors, screw conveyors, bucket 
elevators, hoists, etc; 


c) Concrete mixing machines; 
d) Concrete vibrating machines; 


e) Erection equipment, such as cranes, derricks, 
hoists, chain pulley blocks, etc; 


f) Transport machinery, such as tractor-cum-trailers, 
dumpers, lorries, locomotives, motor boats and 
rarely even helicopters; 


g) Workshop machinery for making and repairing 
steel and timber moulds; 


h) Bar straightening, bending and welding machines 
to make reinforcement cages; 


j) Minor tools and tackles, such as wheel barrows, 
concrete buckets, etc; and 


k) Steam generation plant for accelerated curing. 


In addition to the above, pumps and soil compacting 
machinery are required at the building site for the 
execution of civil engineering projects involving 
prefabricated components. 


Each of the above groups may further be classified into 
various categories of machines and further to various 
other types depending on the source of power and 
capacity. 


12.22 Mechanization of the Construction and 
Erection Processes 


The various processes can be mechanized as in any 
other industry for attaining the advantages of mass 
production of identical elements which, in turn, will 
increase productivity and reduce the cost of production 
in the long run, at the same time guaranteeing quality 
for the end product. On the basis of the degree of 


31 


IS 15916 : 2020 


mechanization used, the various precasting factories 
can be divided into three categories: 


a) With simple mechanization; 
b) With partial mechanization; and 


c) With complex 
automation. 


mechanization leading to 


12.2.1 In simple mechanization, simple mechanically 
operated implements are used to reduce the manual 
labour and increase the speed. 


12.2.2 In partial mechanization, the manual work is 
more or less eliminated in the part of a process. For 
example, the batching plant for mixing concrete, 
hoists to lift materials to a great height and bagger and 
bulldozer to do earthwork come under this category. 


12.2.3 In the case of complex mechanization leading to 
automation, a number of processes leading to the end 
product are all mechanized to a large extent (without 
or with a little manual or human element involved). 
This type of mechanization reduces manual work to the 
absolute minimum and guarantee the mass production 
at a very fast rate and minimum cost. 


12.2.4 For equipment, see relevant Indian Standards. 


13 PREFABRICATED STRUCTURAL UNITS 


For the design and construction of composite 
structures made up of prefabricated structural units 
and cast in-situ concrete, reference may be made 
to IS 3935. 


For design and construction of precast reinforced and 
prestressed concrete triangulated trusses, reference 
may be made to IS 3201. 


For design and construction of floors and roofs using 
various precast units, reference may be made to 
IS 6332, IS 10297, IS 10505, IS 13994, IS 14142, 
IS 14215 and IS 14242. 


For construction with large panel prefabricates, 
reference may be made to IS 11447. 


For construction of floors and roofs with joists 
and filler blocks, reference may be made to 
IS 6061 (Parts 1 to 4). 


IS 15916 : 2020 


IS No. 
456 : 2000 


875 


(Part 1): 1987 


(Part 2) : 1987 
(Part 3) : 2015 
(Part 4) : 1987 
(Part 5) : 1987 


1343 : 2012 


1893 
(Part 1) : 2016 


2185 

(Part 1) : 2005 
(Part 2) : 1983 
(Part 3) : 1984 
(Part 4) : 2008 


3201 : 1988 


3935 : 1966 


4082 : 1996 


4905 : 2015 


АММЕХА 
( Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 
Code of practice for design loads 
(Other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures 

Dead loads — Unit weights of 
building materials апа stored 
materials (second revision) 
Imposed loads (second revision) 
Wind loads (third revision) 

Snow loads (second revision) 


Special loads and combinations 
(second revision) 


Prestressed concrete — Code of 
practice (second revision) 


Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures: Part 1 
General provisions and buildings 
(sixth revision) 


Specification for concrete masonry 
units 

Hollow and solid concrete blocks 
(third revision) 


Hollow and solid lightweight 
concrete blocks (first revision) 


Autoclaved cellular (aerated) 
concrete blocks (first revision) 


Cellular concrete blocks 
preformed foam 


using 


Criteria for design and construction 
of precast trusses апа purlins 
(first revision) 


Code of practice for composite 
construction 


Stacking and storage of construction 
materials and components 
at site Recommendations 
(second revision) 


Random 
randomization 
(first revision) 


sampling and 
procedures 


32 


15 No. 


6061 


(Part 1): 1971 
(Part 2) : 1981 


(Part 3) : 1981 


(Part 4) : 1981 


6072 : 1971 


6073 : 2006 


6332 : 1984 


9893 : 1981 


10297 : 


10505 : 


11447 : 


12440 : 


13990 : 


13994 : 


14142 


1982 


1983 


1985 


1988 


1994 


1994 


: 1994 


Title 


Code of practice for construction of 
floor and roof with joists and filler 
blocks 


With hollow concrete filler blocks 
With hollow clay filler blocks 
(first revision) 

With precast hollow clay block 
joists and hollow clay filler blocks 
With precast hollow clay block slab 
panels 


Specification for autoclaved 
reinforced cellular concrete wall 
slabs 


Autoclaved reinforced 
concrete floor and roof 
Specification (first revision) 


cellular 
slabs- 


Code of practice for construction 
of floor and roofs using precast 
doubly-curved shell units 
(first revision) 

Specification for precast concrete 
blocks for lintels and sills 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of floors and roofs 
using precast reinforced/ prestressed 
concrete ribbed or cored slab unit 


Code of practice for construction 
of floors and roofs using precast 
concrete waffle units 


Code of practice for construction 
with large panel prefabricates 


Specification for precast concrete 
stone masonry blocks 


Specification for precast reinforced 
concrete planks and joists for 
flooring and roofing 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of floor and roof with 
precast reinforced concrete planks 
and RC joists 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of floors and roofs 
with prefabricated brick panel 


15 No. 
14143: 1994 


14201 : 1994 


14215: 1994 


Title 


Specification for prefabricated brick 
panel and partially precast concrete 
joist for flooring and roofing 


Specification for precast reinforced 
concrete channel unit for 
construction of floors and roofs 


Code of practice for construction 
of floor and roof with RC channel 
units 


IS No. 
14241 : 1995 


14242: 1995 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMON DEFECTS AND REMEDIES 


B-1 As defects in precast concrete elements result in 
direct and indirect cost in terms of rectification and 
construction time, it is worthwhile to ensure that they defects, their causes and preventive measures. 


33 


IS 15916 : 2020 


Title 


Specification for precast L-Panel 
units for roofing 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of roof with L-Panel 
units 


are produced and handled in a way to avoid/reduce such 
incidences. Table 4 illustrates some of these common 


2020 


IS 15916 


Áxodo чим po[[y pue punoq 


ΠΟΠ9919 Suunp 


AJo1oldusoo әле syoeso әш јар əmsuo o) pəsn рәрілола oq p[nous sSuruedo 101 siouəjjnus Алелодэт, (Ч sSuruodo 
90 poys роцэш uonoefur Kxodo “ово $1ou100 рро рив 3uruedo әш jo  uoneoo| pue  uoneimaguoo 
Ч подр 10 (πππς 0 uey} әлош) $42610 ooejuns риполе pooe[d oq p[nous sreq Supozu [euonrppy. (8 8ш88и1 οποιο 'Хцәшоә8 |әшкі 
104 (puun oq Jo 4382$ |влцопцв 59910 UTEM uo Surssəns-1IƏA0 109919 SU) σημα ποσά pue 
әш UO 109119 эзлэлре леч jou pue spun Əzrururtu 0} рәѕп әд p[nous sjurod 80у 1uəroujns (1 Ῥιπιπιοῃᾶ Jo эое] oj onp uoys 
Jo YU o3 uongjə: ш JOLI әш Jo PZU Зинир ponmooo savy Аеш syoer) (р 
: : Ρο]άορυ oq рүпоцѕ senbruqoo; Зиприеч лэфола (o 
pue uoneoo[ 01 j2e[qns Surqojed Aq рәмоп(о) Sui[pueu pue Surp[nourop 
‘soulj-yorio әш Suo[e шаәр umunuru 5985915 ayes шор Ásung pue (559] 10 шш 0/) 
poyroods Jo 940013-4 Zuno Аа pouredo1 oq Зипраеч pue 8шрүпошәр әјерошшооов о} postooui um ооу oq Кеш өшәшәә 
иво (шше) uey} әлош зои) SYI әшшен (о eq prnous өшәшә|ә 1580914 jo ssouxomg [euonoss (p 358094 әр Jo ssouxyonjp (ο 
ѕушәшәјә поо SULIOJ 
1580614 рэзоэце әш poog ayeur o) posn oq ezmurum oj эовухиз рүпош əy} ojuo porrdde Аүшлодип ріпош Sunseo ay} pue sjuouro[o әш 
иво зроцэш edar JUP ‘SYI әш Jo pue posn oq pynoys 511930 958691 шоу ojyeuido:ddy (о пәәлдәд чоцону 0} эпр Зицуц eyrur 
SSOUSNOLIOS pue $10190] әш uo Зитриэдэа (9 Surp[nourop 91ο]ος sjuouio[o Jo [1219115 ә)әлойоо Suunp pounooo әлеу Аеш sper) (q 
11914024 [221191433 әш urejrose Οἱ pojonpuoo oq progs $1591 эдпо (9 Sutp|notuəp o10]oq 
v juosold Кә д әшипәрр o) лээш8иэ рәшеушеш oq рүпоҷѕ WSuaNs ojo1ouoo juoroggns рәшеб 
рәуцепЬ в Aq рәшшехә oq p[nous sxoe1o ПУ (в einjge1eduro) pue owy Suuno ‘poyjow Suumno 194014 (в әлеу jou Аеш sjuourg[o 1589911 (в $1919 (п 
τπο]545 youl әшеџ 
pue s1ooeds j10ddns o[qeiins Sursn ѕушоа рәјвидіѕәр је 
poyxorys pue рәло)в Апәдола oq рүпоцѕ ѕјџәшәјә 1580911 (р 0551015 Sutmp poyioddns Арәдолі 
jou әле Ady] uəouA ΠΟΠΌΠΠΟΙΘΡ 
19Ρ99195 se uons $100} ojeuidoudde 
pue $595 onpun oj pojosfqns oq 
Sursn juourooe[d 91919109 jo Зи элэ| pue Surpeoudg (ο Кеш(ѕјәшей qe[s 10 ем 1opuo[s 
Зшрүпошәр ο1ο]ος sjuouro[o јо τῃ΄ποτ]5 эзэлоцоо Ayjersodso)  зиошою ј5воә14 (p 
әш τπομοο5 o) pojonpuoo oq progs $1591 эдпо (9 sap MOS 
pepeeu ποια ш nsa yom споцопрола 
pooejdo: 10 pouogiris “рәледә oq poys Aou L ‘osesn Suunp рәјәмоц pue  poj[oAo[ иоціриоо э8е101$ 1ododur 
posn pue our YIM әзетопәзәр (а suonrpuoo $0} pio] Αμοάοιά oq jou Аеш уиәшәрә 10 Sungi[ 15 ZUS әјәлоиоо 
oq jou p|nous aoueuuojiod [eunjooyuoue 10 sSunseo 005 οιάπ--ππας (c 3569944 jo ysiuy οοῦυµῃς doy (ο juəoroujnsur o) onp diem 
Kjusgojur [e1n3onjs әш uo 5]οοῇο jueogtusis pue *sSurseo 001 oin —umrg (Z рәрпошәр пәцл\ Кеш зиәшәјә qe[s 1500911 (q 
элец pue spw әооиеләо o[qejdoooe N 4809$ ojo1ouoo juoroggns рәшеб ΡΘΊΘΘΙΘ пәцл\ 
uym доп әле py ѕушәшәјә 1580914 (q “88шцв02 gg odn — ww ср (1 әлец jou Аеш sowa 1580911] (q sjuəum]ə 2594} ΠΘΘΛΛΘΩ 
uoneniis әш Арэшел оу pasn A[oreudoudde :91e-p[nout сыра үаәшәәрүа зиәши8це ушо[ әш зәре 
oq иво поцвоцаФе yoo wys pue 8шховц шор ssouom[ рәриәшшозәл oy} opind [e1ouo8 v sy әјәлопоо Suump sooueio[o3 payloads ΡΙΠΟΛΙ sjuoum[o 1509014 jo 
Suwun ‘Зириы8 sovjins se Чоп suone1odo Surjseo 910190 5010] шеушеш o) phía Криәоупѕ uorsuouup әр ш ΠΟΠΕΗΈΛ (в 
Somnseour oAnoolroo “ΠΟΠΌΙΛΘΡ JOWU 104 (в ртпош jo Апру8ы pue suorsuourrp oq uo yooyo гејдә (v oq jou Аеш вишој ртом (e :ио1илдәр [puoisuaunqq (т 
(<) (p) (©) (0 (D 
SIMSI [erpaurosq впоцерпәшшооән sasne;) 91415504 ϑ10919{1 пошшо> ὋΝ IS 


(I-g 257210) 
SIANSBIJA, рәриәшшоәәҹ pue 5]9919{1 пошшо> Jo 3517 р AQEL 


34 


2020 


IS 15916 


poued Suuno Suunp ooueqinsip 


Suno1ouoo 
Suunp 958389] 1no18 1ΠολοΙά oj рээв|@эл ло pouredoi 


Aue шоп тә pojoge әш PAd G әд р|по8 sonossoooe pue вппо)р ppnow oAnogjoq (J 
31018 10 хІШ qojed əy} urejuoo uonsoguoo 
0} Kressooou әләцм dn ynd oq 0] st домино (ә Jeqol oziurmuru о) pue jnoÁe[ 1ΠΘΙΠΘΟΙΟΠΠ9Ι әш 
o3o10uo0 Juoop[pe әш Ку9ит$ оу posn әд иво ѕәләәјѕ ло s1o]dnoo ]ΒΟΙΠΙΘΙΙΘΘΙ (ә 
jo sjueuroumbos 43819315 ou ЧИМ 391515409 e[qissod әләцм sjuouro[o OY} JO suorsuouip әлцоәрәр J! “еа p|nol (є 
әд p[nous 30018 ло Ποῄῃιςοάιποο хіш [9181 (р [euonoes əy} 8шѕвәлош Aq Io 5ΙΒΩΘΙ (19559] ‘sı 151) [eos 194585 Joqqni рэзешеа (с 
21018 10 Josie] SurAeQ Aq pojelaayye әд иво uonseSuoo леаэ (р suid 
9]9191109 хіш цојеа әш лор 310ddns эртлола uonoeduioo 19190 шеу 0} posn әд иво ΙΟΊΒΙΩΙΛ Әшхц “од 807511 ΙΟ 25007 (I 
о) рәрцош oq иво цвәш әлл pop[oA (ο woz uo-dure[o se qons ΙΟ1814ΙΛ 9]919uoo ο]εμάοιάάν (2 0] onp ѕшиој opis 
99ΒμΠ5 рэрээи пәцм pojsnfpe pue ΡΘΛΙΘΙΛΘΙ тәуәшиәй әш Suo[e 950389] mo (q 
әјәлоџоо PAAL о) 11955 8шриод Ajddy (9 әд р|поцв ΑἸΠΙΩΒΧΙΟΛΙ pue usisop xiu guo (q uorsoSuoo 
тәте PAL әш ur 1ΠΡ 10 jsnp 1ΠΟ porueo 618091 10 ΠΟΠΒΙΩΙΛ oAnoogour oj ѕәјоцша 
Кав ΠΟ useA pue 9jo1ouoo 9500] Це әлошәу (5 pue рэз4оре әд рүпоцѕ poujeur uonoeduroo лэдола (5 onp uomgoedumo әјәлоџоә 1004 (5 әліѕѕәәхә pue quiooKouoH (лт 
шәшәов(|4 әјәлоиоо о} 1ομά 
зәр paytoods oj pouajsey әд р|поЦ8 Kou], "uoneoo[ 
Jodoid 10} po1oedsur әд р|п0Ц5 syooy 10 syjosur SunjrT (Ч 
Sur[pueu шәтошә pue 9185 0) sjonpoud Areyoridoid 
Suni esp) aj] pəpuəlur əy} 10] Ajtoedeo әуепһәре Jo әд 
pinous 5}пәшәүә Jo {151915 әјәлоиоо pue злэзит SunjrT (S 
Surjseo 
Suunp ΡΘΠΠΡΘΙ 19409 әҙәтопоо ou шејшеш 0} poinoos 
porod Suuno Suunp ooueqinmsip Пэм pue рәвп әд рүпоцѕ 59215 199109 әу) jo siooedg (J 
Aue woy vor popoge әш 15901014 G ovens ртош әш o3uo рәцайе A[uriojiun pue әуепһәре 
31018 10 хІШ yoyed əy} urejuoo 93 рүпоцѕ 8шәде әѕвәјәл woz Jo 95ΒΙΘΛΟΟ ou (ә 
0} Aressooou әләцл\ dn ynd aq oispsoauuo, (ә ooejins 41005 в элэщов 0j poj[oAo] 'posueo[o 
9191911050 juoov[pe әш A[YSno10y} әд р|поцв шло} рүпош ло qejs Sunjseo our, (р 
jo sjueuroumbos 43819315 941 ЧИМ 391515409 019155 эзел oue 
әд роз 31018 10 uonrsodumo хш qoq (р pue s1ooeds 310ddns o[qujins Sursn sjutod payeusisap 18 
ΠΟΙΟ 10 рәхов)в pue poros A[redoud әд pjnous ѕјџәшәјә 1589911 (2 
9]9191109 хіш yed әш лор 310ddns эртлола Кір pue yey А|элнеа1 oq р|поцв воле 981015 ou], (q 
о) рәрпіош oq иво цѕәш ΟΠΛΑ рәррәдү (° di рошәш oSe1ojs 1odoidu (а 
9otpms шош seame 18109 91ῃ uorgsno оу pasn oq p[nous sped Зиприеч uəuA sjuouro[o әш uo 
әјәлоиоо pL oj juese Surpuoq Addy (q Sunuveog `иоцеләйо Surpeo[un әш Sunnp pue ois о) рәмәхә 9010] әліввәохә ло suroddns 
тәте PHIL oq ur 1ΠΡ 10 јѕпр элед “әјотцәл uo juouiooe[d jo әѕлпоо әш ut sjuouro[o 15 Suueoq prey эф Aq posneo 
Aue ΠΟ цѕвл pue әјәлоиоо 9500] [Je әлошәу (€ әш 8ш8ешер роле о) пәхе) oq p[nous зиопивоэла (в Kj[ensn эле зэ8ро poued 18 jo-drq (e sogeurep pue Jo-diuo (ш 
(s) (p) (5) © (D 
591π5691λ| [егрәшәҹ suonepuourui0293] 5951 91415504 s)əəJəq чошшогу 70 


(рэпицио)) p 91151, 


35 


2020 


IS 15916 


posn 
әд зои рүпоцѕ ooueuuojied penp yore 10 
AYLISIUL [οΙΠ]ΟΠΗς oq UO sj29jjo 208010816 


әлеу pue Παπ] оочелэрю} o[qejdoooe 
uym jou әле py sowo 1682914 (2 
UOTe[[E)sut 910199 sjuouro[o 
1580914 əy} Айзоэл oj рәѕп Á[ojeudoudde 
әд иво ποηεοῃάάυ peoo wys pue Suryoey 
/8шшшы)  'gurpuus әоврпв se Цопв 
ΘΘΙΠΘΒΘΠΙ әлцоәпоо 'suonerAop 1οπτα 104 (а поце} 910J9q рәунәл Sq prmous 
ponis ѕушәшәјә әјәлопоо jseooid jo suorsuounp [eonuj (o Juəutə[o 3520944 
oq ріпоцв Зшрипа әш Jo uonei^op pue Sunutof 3uoueurred 910191 əy} JO suorsuaump әш ш ΠΟΗΡΙΛΟ(Ι (q 
juourugi[e [PUY ou] uo 5199119 IY} 194940H peuuguoo eq рүпоц$ [949] pue зиэшивне peinbew (9 uonoo1o Suunp 
uone[[ejsur 8шипр эпор әд иво juouiugi[e juouiugi[e 19494 элэщов о) pasn әд 5ушәшәјә jseooid jo GSuruonisod 
Јәивадиәшәјә әш jo sjueunsnípe soupy (в pinous yuowdinbs Suposo; pue SurKoAuns ojeidouddy (e pue ΠΟ  Sunes әуелоовш (в juouruSi[y (пл 
uonoeduioo 1931949 
шере о} 20јетдтл әјәлоиоо ojenidoudde jo uOIsIAOIg (р 
popoou uoqA pojsnfpe pue рәмәтләт uonoodsur 
әд р|поцв ΑἸΠΙΩΒΧΙΟΛΙ pue usisop хіш әјәлоиод (9 sida 4а қазанын x ен, 
poydope Ji *oSeddi[s ο) эпр 5119π1919 Әпцвео 8иипр 1ΠΟ рәшео spurs pəssəns-ə21d Suisso1s-o1d jo soseddis 
әш jo Αποθάνο рәопрәт oy} ureyiaose о) pue рэз4оре eq рүпоцѕ poujeur поцовфаоо лэдола (а punoze ο]οΙοΠοο jo uoroeduroo 100g (q (quo 
шо pomeo oq рүпоцз uoneoguoA uSisoq (q spuens Jo Зшиотѕиә)-әр 910191 spuens Sjuouio[o Ρ9559η5-914 ој ə|qgor|dde 
οσυάἁῃς puens Sj[nso1 159] эдпо Aq рэцыэл pue poureye oq p[nous Suissons-oid әш pue ээлоиоэ шәп) sənjea и8іѕәр ә|демо(е 
шош ѕјшәшәјә әш А)291 0} 21415504 jou 8131 (в өшәшә|ә 1580914 әш jo {151915 ojo10uoo peumnbow (e пәәмдәд ἵῃσποης риод шәтәшпеш (в рәәохә yom oseddys puens (тл 
sjoued 1580914 әш ЈО 998] әу) по 8шүәвтцә 
Jo Зшѕецо Aq Ρ9ΡΙΛΟ14 oq иво jno-xoo[q pue 
SAOOIS “ШӘ ur-jseo se uons шәп 190 (9 Surjseo элоуэа popnyour 
воле PIAL әу 18 э}элоцоэ әш SuIMeIp әш ur pegroeds sway Пе yey} ounsue sadid рәуебпшоо/по 
91} Πο 8шховц Iye 5160 јиәшәолоушәт ο) «ἴση ue» uonoedsur Suump sisiPyooyo Jo osn 911], (q θου]ά ш -yoo|Qq/sreq 1ΘμΘ]9ΛΙΠ9ΘΙΠΘΟΙΟΠΠΘΙ 
үеиоцірре 8шррл\ Аа pooe[doi oq иво urea} поцопрола Aprodoid әд jou Аеш syooy Apend (а ‘syooy Sun “әјәр 940013 pue 
syooy Suni] pue  juouroojuroi/sieq әш 0} uou әреш oq pjnous sosueyo Auy "uoronpoud Зшл\рлр dous oy} ur Ши [einjoojoie “шәй ur-jseo 
1911515 Jussu se ons s[mjop πο) (в 10] sSurmesp dous әш ш рәјоәрәт oq р|поЦ8 ѕшәу [Ty (e рәрпүәш uooq элеч jou Аеш зе (e se qons ѕејәр SuUOIM ΙΟ SulsstJA (^ 
(s) (p) (Θ (0) (0 
$әлп$еә]д] [егрәшәҹ впоцерпәшшоәән 5951 91415504 $)29J9q пошшо> 
(papnjouo;)) у AAEL 


36 


IS 15916 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 9.4) 


COMMON PRECAST JOINT CONNECTIONS 


C-1 Typical figures of some common precast joint connections are given in Fig. 10 to Fig. 27. 


WALL PANEL 


GROUT FULL 


OPTIONAL 
GROUTING PORT 


LAPPED 
SPLICE 


MECHANICAL OR 
WELDED SPLICE 


SHIM AND GROUT 


PRECAST FLOOR SLAB BOUT OR CONCRETE 


CONDUIT CAST IN 


WALL PANEL BEARING STRIP 


SECTION AT JOINT 


NOTE - Overlapping bars in grout-filled conduit are extended full-height through the structural element 


Fic. 10 LAPPED SPLICES IN LARGE CONDUIT 


GROUT 


WALL PANEL 
MECHANICAL SPLICE 


CONDUIT CAST IN 


WALL PANEL OPTIONAL GROUTING PORT 


SHIM AND GROUT 


CAST IN-SITU OR 
PRECAST FLOOR SLAB 


MECHANICAL, LAPPED 
OR WELDED SPLICE 


BEARING STRIP 
CONDUIT CAST IN 


WALL PANEL 
GROUT 


NOTE - Vertical bars in conduit are spliced and the system is grouted 


Fic. 11 MECHANICAL CONNECTION IN CONDUIT 


37 


IS 15916 : 2020 


MECHANICAL 
SPLICE 


PANEL SET AFTER CAST IN-SITU 
CONCRETE TOPPING HAS BEEN 
COMPLETED AND PARTIALLY CURED 


SHIM AND GROUT 


BEDDING CAST IN-SITU TOPPING 


MECHANICAL 
SPLICE 


MECHANICAL 
SPLICE 


PANEL SET ON SHIMS 
PRIOR TO CAST IN-SITU TOPPING 


BEARING STRIP 
SHIM AND GROUT 


MECHANICAL OR J 


WELDED CONNECTION BEARING STRIP 


BEARING 


STRIP MECHANICAL SPLICE 


SHIM AND GROUT 
BEDDING 


CONCRETE TOPPING HAS BEEN 
COMPLETED AND PARTIALLY CURED 


EL PANEL SET AFTER CAST /N-S/TU 


HORIZONTAL 
CORE PLANK 


CAST IN-SITU CONCRETE 


BEARING STRIP IN VOIDS 


Fic. 12 DIFFERENT TYPES OF MECHANICAL SPLICES FOR CONNECTION OF VARIOUS CONIFIGURATIONS 
OF PRECAST WALLS AND FLOORS 


PRECAST MEMBER 


PRECAST MEMBER 


REBAR REBAR 


GROUT OUTLET 


RUBBER PLUG GROUT OUTLET THREADED CONNECTION 


STEEL SLEEVE HIGH STRENGTH STEEL SLEEVE 


GROUT HIGH STRENGTH 


GROUT INLET GROUT 
WASHER SEAL WASHER SEAL 
PRECAST MEMBER SHIM + GROUT INTERFACE GROUT INLET Е -— —— SHIM + GROUT 
INTERFACE 
REBAR PRECAST MEMBER =] REBAR 


Fic. 13 SOME MECHANICAL SPLICES USING HIGH-STRENGTH NON-SHRINK GROUT 


LAPPED, WELDED OR 
MECHANICAL SPLICES LAPPED, WELDED OR 
MECHANICAL SPLICES 

LAPPED, WELDED OR 
MECHANICAL SPLICES 


ELEVATION ELEVATION 


INTERIOR ELEVATION 


FORM "ad TIES 
tz oo FACE | ENG FACE 


—= ГЕН NA AUTE | 


ONE OR MORE ONE OR MORE ONE OR MORE 
ae ке; LAYERS OF ВАК LAYERS OF BAR LAYERS OF BAR 
FORM FORM 


PLAN PLAN PLAN 


Fic. 14 VARIATIONS OF SPLICES AND CASTIN-SITU CLOSURE PLACEMENTS TO CREATE 
VERTICAL JOINTS BETWEEN PRECAST CONCRETE ELEMENTS 


38 


IS 15916 : 2020 


MECHANICAL SPLICE 
SHIM AND 


GROUT BED 
NEGATIVE MOMENT 


CONTINUITY STEEL 


COMPOSITE CAST IN-SITU 
CONCRETE TOPPING 


PARTIAL THICKNESS 


BOTTOM BARS EXTENDED PRECAST SLAB 


DIAGONALLY ACROSS JOINT 
BEARING STRIP 


Fic. 15 FLOOR SLAB-TO-WALL DETAIL WHERE DIAGONAL DOWELS CROSS THE 
WALL JOINT INTO THE OPPOSITE FLOOR 


MECHANICAL SPLICE 
THREADED MECHANICAL 
SPLICE OR INSERT 
55 MECHANICAL, LAPPED 
^ OR WELDED SPLICE 
d 


(MILD STEEL OR PRESTRESED). 
2. SOLID SLAB WITH TOPPING 
(MILD STEEL OR PRESTRESSED). 
3. PRESTRESSED HOLLOW-CORE 
SLAB WITH TOPPING. 
4. MAY ALSO BE USED WITH TOPPED 
OR UNTOPPED TEE BEAMS. 
5. CAST IN-SITU SLAB. 


INTEGRAL LEDGER BEAM 
IN PRECAST WALL 


| MU LU AO CONCRETE FLOOR SLAB: 
STIRRUPS MILD STEEL DOWEL 1. SOLID SLAB 


Fic. 16 END DETAIL OF A MONOLITHIC CONNECTION BETWEEN PRECAST CONCRETE FLOOR 
ELEMENT AND A PRECAST CONCRETE WALL 


39 


IS 15916 : 2020 


PRECAST CONCRETE 


CAST IN-SITU CONCRETE OR GROUT 


ыы) 


+t H| + 4 
Γ 
^4 
| | 
1 
1 
BE 
- + 
18 
+ ΕἾ 
T " 
m 
4 
+ Е 
1 + 
+ ++ 
+ + 


17A PLAN VIEW OF TYPICAL GROUTED OR CAST /N-SITU VERTICAL 
JOINTS IN SHEAR-WALL PANELS REINFORCED FOR HIGH SEISMIC LOADING 
(REFER FIG. 17B FOR PLAN VIEW FOR DIFFERENT CONFIGURATIONS) 


17B VARIATIONS OF VERTICAL WALL-TO-WALL 
CONNECTIONS (PLAN VIEWS) 


Fic. 17 VERTICAL JOINTS IN SHEAR-WALL PANELS REINFORCED FOR HIGH SEISMIC LOADING 


40 


MECHANICAL OR LAPPED 
SPLICES 


222 


- 


ο 


18A USING MECHANICAL OR LAPPED SPLICES 


WELDED REBARS 


18B BUTT-WELDED REINFORCEMENT (SPECIAL PROCESS) 


WELDED REBARS 


BOLTED STEEL 
PLATES 


18C COMBINATION OF BOLTED PLATES AND WELDED REBARS 


Fic. 18 HORIZONTAL CONNECTIONS BETWEEN BEAM OR GIRDER ENDS AT LOCATIONS 
OTHER THAN COLUMN FACES 


41 


IS 15916 


:2020 


IS 15916 : 2020 


VERTICAL 
CRUCIFORM 


CROSS (TREE) ТЕЕ 


ВЕАМ 


HORIZONTAL 
CRUCIFORM 


LEGEND 
=, CAST IN-SITU CONCRETE 


PRECAST CONCRETE 


UNDEFINED 


FiG. 19 VARIOUS CONFIGURATIONS OF PRECAST FRAME ELEMENTS 


42 


IS 15916 


MECHANICAL 
SPLICE 


SHIM AND 
GROUT 


SS 
SS 
ον 


PRECAST 


REINFORCED BEAM END 


ERECTION CORBEL 


Fic. 20 CONNECTION AT BEAMS AND COLUMNS WITH CAST IN-SITU CLOSURE 


MECHANICAL SHIM AND GROUT 


SPLICE 


GROUT FULL 


PRECAST 
BEAM 


NOTE — Conduit diameter shoule be two to four times the bar diameter for 
tolerance in field erection 


Fic. 21 CoLUMN-TO-COLUMN CONNECTION THROUGH CONDUITS INSTALLED IN A BEAM 


43 


: 2020 


IS 15916 : 2020 


NEGATIVE OR BOUNDARY 
REINFORCEMENT (MILD STEEL) 


MILD OR PRESTRESSED 
REINFORCEMENT 


MILD OR PRESTRESSED 
REINFORCEMENT 


BEARING STRIP 


PRECAST CONCRETE SLAB INVERTED TEE BEAM 
1. SOLID SLAB, FORM SLAB, OR 
2. PRESTRESSED HOLLOW-CORE SLAB. 


MILD STEEL DOWEL 
EMBEDDED IN 
PRESTRESSED SLAB 


PRESTRESSED 
CAST IN-SITU TEE BEAM 


TOPPING PRESTRESSING 


I 


ОШ 
| 


BEARING STRIP 


PRESTRESSED 
SOLID SLAB 


BEARING STRIP 


МЭ 


ШЫН 


INVERTED TEE BEAM 
OR GIRDER 


SLAB REINFORCEMENT MILD STEEL DOWEL 
EXTENDED INTO CLOSURE COUPLERS EMBEDDED IN 
POUR AND MECHANICALLY PRESTRESSED 


SPLICED OR WELDED T-BEAM FLANGES 


BEARING STRIP 
SEAL 


INVERTED PRESTRESSED 
TEE BEAM TEE BEAM 


Fic. 22 TvPiCAL END CONNECTIONS OF PRECAST CONCRETE FLOOR SLAB ELEMENTS 


44 


IS 15916 : 2020 


PRECAST WALL 
PANEL 


CORRUGATED 
DUCT 


LAPPING BAR 


23A HORIZONTAL CROSS-SECTION 


LAPPING BARS 


CORRUGATED DUCT 


DRILLED VENT 


275 тт) 5 š PRECAST 
1 | WALL PANEL 


GROUT INLET 
TUBE 


FOUNDATION 
23B ELEVATION 23C VERTICAL CROSS-SECTION 


Fic. 23 WALL-FOUNDATION BEAM CONNECTION THROUGH GROUTED DUCTING 


45 


IS 15916 : 2020 


ALTERNATE BARS 


CAST IN-SITU 
CONCRETE 


εκ.” LLL 


DRY-PACK 
MORTAR 


PRECAST 
CONCRETE PLANK 


Ἡττττττττττττττττττττττττττ 


Fic. 24 INTERIOR WALL-FLOOR SLAB CONNECTION DETAIL CONTINUOUS WALL 


46 


IS 15916 : 2020 


DOUBLE MESH —— 
OUTLET PIPE 


NON-SHRINKAGE GROUT 


Lowa CORRUGATED STEEL DUCT 


INLET PIPE 


CAST IN-SITU 
md CONCRETE 


PRECAST CONCRETE 
FLOOR SYSTEM 


STEEL ANGLE 


AXANAAANAANAAANAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAYA 


Fic. 25 ExrERIOR WALL-FLOOR SLAB CONNECTION DETAIL: PARTITIONED WALL WITH HORIZONTAL JOINT 


47 


IS 15916 : 2020 


---- GROUT OUTLET VENT 


— PREFORMED METAL DUCT 
Ж STEEL SPLICE SLEEVE FILLED WITH EXPANSIVE GROUT 
К и 
= oW < CX x 
+ _7 GROUT OUTLET VENT + __ —— LAP BARS TO LAP WITH 
Ξ GROUT INLET TUBE я PAIRS OF VERTICA BARS 
8 SEALING STRIPS 5 GROUT INLET TUBE 
5 CAST IN-SITU TOPPING s /  SEALING STRIPS 
> OVER HOLLOW CORE FLOOR > мж /- CAST IN-SITU TOPPING 
EN | 1 ,/ | OVER HOLLOW CORE FLOOR 
FOAM PLASTIC RING = PLANKS 
SEALANT SEALANT 
HORIZONTAL JOINT < HORIZONTAL JOINT < 
GROUTED in GROUTED T 
8 LAP BAR 8 LAP BAR 
о о 
= PRECAST WALL PANELS 8 PRECAST WALL PANELS 
О, О, 
т к 


26А MONOLITHIC PRECAST CONCRETE WALL 


26B MONOLITHIC PRECAST CONCRETE WALL 
CONSTRUCTION HORIZONTAL JOINT - TYPE A 


CONSTRUCTION HORIZONTAL JOINT - TYPE B 


LAP BARS IN PREFORMED METAL 
DUCTS OR GROUTED STEEL SPLICE SLEEVE. 
AREA OF LAP BAR > 2 X AREA OF VERTICAL BARS 


LAP BARS LAP WITH 
PAIRS OF VERTICAL BARS 


HORIZONTAL SHEAR 
REINFORCEMENT 


SECTION X-X 


ALTERNATIVE 1 


REINFORCEMENT SAME AS 

ALTERNATIVE 1 EXCEPT HORIZONTAL 
SHEAR REINFORCEMENT IS TIED DIRECTLY 
TO THE PREFORMED METAL DUCTS OR 
SECTION X-X GROUTED SPLICE SLEEVES 


ALTERNATIVE 2 


FULL LENGTH BARS LAP WITHIN FULL HEIGHT 
PREFORMED METAL DUCTS OR FULL LENGTH BARS 
SPLICED WITH GROUTED STEEL SPLICE SLEEVES 


HORIZONTAL SHEAR 
REINFORCEMENT 


VERTICAL BASKETING 
REINFORCEMENT 


SECTION X-X 


ALTERNATIVE 3 


Fic. 26 MONOLITHIC PRECAST CONCRETE WALL CONSTRUCTION 


48 


fs FOR HORIZONTAL BARS 


ALL HORIZONTAL SHEAR 
REINFORCEMENT LAP 
SPLICED 


CAST IN-SITU CONCRETE 
"BANDAGE" JOINT 


PRECAST CONCRETE f 


WALL PANELS VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 


TYPICALLY LAP SPLICED 
SIDES OF WALL PANELS ABOVE FLOOR LEVEL 
KEYED AND ROUGHENED 


TYPEA 


ALL HORIZONTAL SHEAR 


CAST IN-SITU CONCRETE 


"ВАМОАСЕ" JOINT —, 


PRECAST CONCRETE 
WALL PANELS 


SIDES OF WALL PANELS 
KEYED AND ROUGHED 


VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 
TYPICALLY LAP SPLICED 
ABOVE FLOOR LEVEL 


TYPEB 
ALL HORIZONTAL SHEAR 
REINFORCEMENT SPLICED 
CAST IN-SITU CONCRETE WITH 90* STANDARD HOOK 
" " fan LAP BARS, that is, 
BANDAGE" JOINT ; тск 
p ШЕ 


VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 
TYPICALLY LAP SPLICED 
ABOVE FLOOR LEVEL 


PRECAST concrere\ 
WALL PANELS 


SIDES OF WALL PANELS 
KEYED AND ROUGHENED 


TYPE C 
CAST IN-SITU 


CONCRETE OR 
GROUT-FILLED JOINT 


SEALANT 


ALL HORIZONTAL SHEAR 
Жайы SPICED 


PRECAST CONCRETE p: 


WALL PANELS VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 


TYPICALLY LAP SPLICED 


SIDES OF JOINT ROUGHENED 
(SEE NOTE) 


ТУРЕ О 


REINFORCEMENT SPLICED WITH 
90° STANDARD HOOKS that is, 


"BANDAGE" JOINT 
[1 c= 


ABOVE OR BELOW FLOOR LEVEL 


IS 15916 : 2020 


SEALANT 
CAST IN-SITU 
CONCRETE OR 
GROUT-FILLED JOINT 


ALL HORIZONTAL SHEAR 
REINFORCEMENT HAIRPIN 
SPLICED 


PRECAST CONCRETE 
WALL PANELS 


SIDES OF JOINT ROUGHENED 


VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 
TYPICALLY LAP SPLICED 
ABOVE OR BELOW 

FLOOR LEVEL (SEE NOTE) 


TYPEE 


CAST IN-SITU CONCRETE ALL HORIZONTAL SHEAR 
REINFORCEMENT HAIRPIN 


SPLICED 


VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 
TYPICALLY LAP SPLICED ABOVE 
OR BELOW FLOOR LEVEL 

(SEE NOTE) 


PRECAST CONCRETE J 
WALL PANELS 


SIDES OF WALL PANELS 
ROUGHENED AND KEYED 


TYPE F 


ALL HORIZONTAL SHEAR 
REINFORCEMENT IS LAPPED 
WITH STIRRUPS OF SAME 
BAR DIAMETER, that is, 


CAST IN-SITU CONCRETE 
"BANDAGE" JOINT 


VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT 
TYPICALLY LAP SPLICED 
ABOVE FLOOR LEVEL 


PRECAST сокет 
WALL PANELS 


SIDES OF WALL PANELS 
KEYED AND ROUGHENED 
ТУРЕ С 


МОТЕ- Vertical joints shown as Types D, E апа F need to be detailed with extreme care. Once the 
lapping bars have been overlapped, the ability for lowering the wall panels over starter bars is very 
restricted. These details will typical work only when grouted steel splice sleeves are used to splice the 
vertical flexural reinforcement and when the laps of the vertical bars in the "bandage" joints are made 
below floor level. Type D is not prefered because joint reinforcement and concrete infill cannot be 


inspected 


Fic. 27 MONOLITHIC PRECAST CONCRETE WALL CONSTRUCTION VERTICAL JOINTS 


49 


IS 15916 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTIEE COMPOSITION 


Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee, CED 51 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (/savasyam TC 18/1023, 
B-6/2, Lakshmi Nagar, Kesavadasapuram, 
Pottam P.O, Thiruvananthapuram 695 004) 


Army Welfare Housing Organization, New Delhi 
B. G. Shirke Construction Technology Limited, Pune 


Bhardwaj Bhardwaj & Associates (P) Ltd, New Delhi 
Biltech Building Element Ltd, New Delhi 


Border Roads Organization, New Delhi 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Government Employees Welfare Housing 
Organization, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


City and Industrial Development Corporation of 
Maharashtra Limited, Navi Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi State Industrial & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation, Delhi 


Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, New Delhi 


Department of Science & Technology, Ministry of 
Science & Technology, New Delhi 


Development Alternatives, New Delhi 
Engineering Consultants (India) Ltd, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


G.B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & 
Development, Almora 


Himachal Pradesh Urban Development Authority, 
Shimla 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 


50 


Representative(s) 


Suri V. SURESH (Chairman) 


Bric PRANv Dev 
Сог Рамка) Mitta (Alternate) 


ӛнкі V. G. JANA 
ӛнкі YOGESH P. KAJALE (Alternate) 


Suri A. BHARDWAJ 


ΘΗΕΙ RAJDEEP CHOWDHURY 
Suri D. V. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suni A. P. PrTTULE 


Dn SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 


SHRI BHUPINDER SINGH 
Suri M. NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri MANU AMITABH 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


Suri S. К. CHOTALIA 
Dn К. M. Сорвоге (Alternate) 


Dr Азнок KUMAR 
Suri S. К. Nea! (Alternate) 


Dr J PRABHAKAR 
Dn P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


ENGINEER MEMBER 
COMMISSIONER (PLANNING) (Alternate) 


SHRI BHAVESH GUPTA 
SHRI MANISH SAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. К. MAHAJAN 
SHRI JEET КАМ (Alternate) 


Dr DEBAPRIYA DUTTA 


Ms ZEENAT NIAZI 
Dn Soumen Marty (Alternate) 


SHRI SUKHBIR SINGH MANN 
Suri ADITYA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR Das 
Suri ANISH KuNpu (Alternate) 


SHRI ΚΙΒΕΕΤ KUMAR 
Dr Varun Josut (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH KASHYAP 
ΦΗΕΙ DEWAN C. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH GOEL 
Suri S. К. Jan (Alternate) 


Organization 
Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
Limited, New Delhi 
Indian Green Building Council, Hyderabad 


Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineers- in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


Ministry of Rural Development, Govt of India, 
New Delhi 


Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority, 
Mumbai 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Housing Bank, New Delhi 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


North Eastern Council, Shillong 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 

Shirish Patel and Associates Consultants Pvt Limited, 
Mumbai 

Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 

Telangana State Housing Corporation Limited, 

Hyderabad 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 
Ultratech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15916 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


Suri AKHILESH KUMAR 


Suri M. ANAND 

SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR Soma (Alternate) 
Dr S. K. KULSHRESTHA 
SHRI К.Р. RAGHAVAN 


SHRI S. ΚΑΝΑΡΡΑΝ (Alternate I) 
Suri Amit BARDE (Alternate IT) 


SHRIMATI Етуоо MAHENDRU 
Suri S. К. Misura (Alternate) 


Suri D. S. NEGI 
SHRI ZILE SINGH DISHOpIA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Ms Uma ADUSUMILLI 
SHRI VISHRAN G. Parit (Alternate) 


Suri B. P. RANGA RAO 

Suri Amit ΤΚΙΝΕΡΙ (Alternate) 
SHRI К. CHAKRAVARTHY 

SHRI VISHAL Govar (Alternate) 
SHRI ALOK MAHAWAR 

SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI P. К.Н. SiNGH 

Suri Dosa Jini (Alternate) 
Dr P. S. М. Rao 

Dr ARUNA К Grover (Alternate) 
SHRI М. M. AJUGIA 

Suri P. S. BADRINARAYAN (Alternate) 
SHRI VINAY GUPTA 

SHRI PRAVEEN Kumar (Alternate) 
ӛнкі CH. MALLIKARJUNA RAO 

Sur! P. SRIRAMULU (Alternate) 
SuRI BALBIR VERMA 

Suri Divya Kusu (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI К. SRINIVAS 

SHRI SUDEEP Roy (Alternate) 


Dr VENKATACHALAIAH RAMACHANDRA 
SHRI SRINIVASA GOVINDAPPA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DiRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 


Scientist ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


51 


(Continued from second cover) 


s) Design considerations to minimize relative movements of precast components under loads have been 
provided. 


t) Provisions on site prefabrication have been updated. 
u) Provisions on stacking and transportation of precast elements have been updated. 
v) Provisions on load test of individual components have been modified. 
w) Provisions for erection have been updated, and associated design considerations have been included. 


y) Annex B has been included on common defects, their causes and remedies which cover dimensional 
deviations, cracks, honeycombing, damages, strand slippage, alignment, etc. 

z) Typical figures of some of the common precast joint connections have been provided. 
Prefabricated constructions being comparatively a new technique, some of the essential requirements for the 
manufacture of the prefabricated components and elements are also included in this standard. 
In this standard, an attempt has been made to prescribe general requirements applicable to all valid existing 
systems using prefabricated concrete as also to accommodate any new such system introduced in the country in 
future. 
The design of prefabricated buildings shall include provision for all installations of services and their required 
piping, wiring and accessories to be installed in the building. 
Annex B provides information relating to common defects and remedies relating to prefabricated concrete 
construction. 


A separate Indian Standard IS 15917 : 2020 ‘Building design and erection using mixed/composite construction — 
Code of practice (first revision)’ exists, for those systems approach which uses mixed/composite construction. 


The composition of the technical Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 51 (12230). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 С.Т.Т. Scheme VII М, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


