IS 10137 : 2015 
(Reaffirmed 2020) 


YAT Ar 


Indian Standard 


Kurdi vəf Hel alee eb eyra 
eh miai rgia 


(Teel FRAT ) 


Guidelines for Selection of Spillways 
and Energy Dissipators 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2015 


ads AM SKİ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 Fee WH "Tİ, as feeei-110002 


əə MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 7 


Dams and Spillways Sectional Committee WRD 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of India Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Dams and Spillways Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Spillways are provided as integral part of a dam or as an auxiliary structure constructed separate from the main 
dam to release surplus flood waters which are in excess of the storage space in the reservoir as provided in the 
operation plan and must be passed downstream. The primary function of spillways is to release surplus water in 
conjunction with other discharging devices from the reservoir, in order to prevent rise of water level above a 
specified level in the reservoir to avoid unwanted submergence upstream or consequent overtopping and possible 
failure of the dam. Thus, spillways work as safety valves for a dam and the adjoining country side. 


In case of spillways negotiating large drops, the water discharged over the spillway generally attains a velocity 
which may be much higher than the safe flow conditions downstream and may cause serious scour and erosion of 
river bed downstream. To dissipate this excessive energy and to establish safe flow conditions in the downstream 
of a dam spillway, energy dissipators are used as remedial devices. 


This standard was first issued in 1982. The present revision incorporates additional types of spillways such as 
Vortex drop spillway, Orifice spillway, Stepped spillway, Duckbill spillway and labyrinth spillway. This revision 
also covers two stage Energy dissipators whose design is non-conventional as it involves a combination of two 
energy dissipators. 


IS 10137 : 2015 


İndian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR SELECTION OF SPILLWAYS AND 
ENEROY DISSIPATORS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard lays down guidelines for selection 
Of types of spillvvays and energy dissipators. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
4410 (Part 9): Glossary of terms relating to river 
1982 valley projects: Part 9 Spillways and 
siphons (first revision) 

4997 : 1968 Criteria for design of hydraulic jump 
type stilling basins with horizontal 
and sloping apron 

5186 : 1994 Design of chute and side channel 
spillways — Criteria (first revision) 

6934 : 1998 Recommendations for hydraulic 
design of high ogee overflow 
spillways (first revision) 

7365 : 2010 Criteria for hydraulic design of 


bucket type energy dissipators 
(second revision) 


DESIGN HEAD 


IS No. Title 
11485 : 1985 Criteria for hydraulic design of 
sluices in concrete and masonry dams 
13048 : 1991 Recommendations for hydraulic 


design of duck bill spillways 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard the definitions 
given in IS 4410 (Part 9) shall apply. 


4 TYPE OF SPILLWAYS 


4.1 Ogee Spillway ( see Fig. 1) 


This type comprises a structure vvhose crest is S-shaped. 
The shape conforms closely vvith the profile of the 
aerated lovver nappe falling from a sharp crested vveir. 
The profile of the crest may be made either broader or 
sharper than the nappe. A broader profile helps in the 
stability of the crest and gives a stable, cavitation-free 
flovv, but reducing thereby the coefficient of discharge. 
A sharper crest increases the coefficient of discharge, 
but may produce sub-atmospheric pressures. This type 
of spillway may be gated or ungated. For detailed 
design consideration IS 6934 may be referred. 


4.2 Chute Spillway (see Fig. 2 ) 


In this arrangement, water is conveyed from the reservoir 
to the river or to another natural drainage below the dam 
through an excavated or built-up channel trough with 


RESERVOIR ELEVATION x. 


CREST ELEVATION y 


RIVER BEDİ. 


TAILWATER LEVEL 


BUCKET INVERT 
END-SILL 


RIVER BED 


RADIUS OF BUCKET 


Fic. 1 OGEE SPILLWAY 


IS 10137 : 2015 


NON- OVERFLOW 
“ə DAM 


m 
=-= 
25 
Oop 
OG 


PJER 


aa 


b === 
! 


t 
pas 


Pf 


JOINTS 


HOIST PLATFORM 


— e- 
CHUTE SLOPE 


NTRACTION VIA í Í| | 


DOWNSTREAM 
TRAINING WALL 


BAFFLE 


ANCHOR BAFFLE 
BARS BLOCKS 
SECTION XX 


FiG. 2 CHUTE SPILLWAY 


fairly steep slope. It may be located either along a dam 
abutment or through a saddle in the rim of the reservoir. 
Sometimes, steps are provided in the channel (cascade 
spillway) to help in dissipation of energy. For detailed 
design consideration IS 5186 may be referred. 


4.3 Side Channel Spillway ( see Fig. 3 ) 


Here the crest is placed parallel to the discharge 
channel. Flow into the side channel might enter on only 
one side of the trough in the case of steep hillside 
locations, or on both sides and over the end of the 
trough if it is located on a knoll or gently sloping 
abutment. Discharge characteristics are similar to an 
ordinary overflow weir, except that at a high discharge 
the crest may be partly submerged. For detailed design 
consideration IS 5186 may be referred. 


4.4 Shaft Spillway (see Fig. 4) 


In this type, water enters over a horizontal circular crest 
and drops through a vertical flaring tunnel or sloping 
shaft, and then flows downstream through a nearly 
horizontal conduit or tunnel. This is also known as drop 
outlet or morning glory spillway. The crest may be ogee 
type or flat. 


4.5 Siphon Spillway (see Fig. 5 ) 


It is a closed conduit system formed in the shape of 
an inverted U-tube, positioned so that the inside of 
the bend of the upper passageway is at the normal 
storage level of the reservoir. The initial discharges 
from the siphon spillway are just like the discharges 
over a weir. After the air in the bend over the crest is 
exhausted, the water is discharged through siphoned 
action. 


4.6 Overfall Spillway (see Fig. 6 ) 


It is a weir in which the flow falls freely from the crest. 
The crest is sometimes extended in the form of an 
overhanging lip to direct the small discharges away 
from the face of the overfall section. Care should be 
taken of the spray that results from aeration of the jet 
or from its impact. It can cause damage to the 
countryside and may adversely affect nearby electrical 
installations. The underside of the nappe is ventilated 
sufficiently to prevent a pulsating, fluctuating jet. 
Where no artificial protection is provided at the base 
of overfall, scour occurs and a deep plunge pool is 
formed. 


TRANSITION 
WARP SURFACE 


SECTIONAL ELEVATION 


BED WIDTH 


CREST 


GROUT 


əssə LLL 


DRAINAGE 
ILE 


TILE DRAIN 


IS 10137 : 2015 


& OF SPILLWAY 


END OF CONC. 


— 


DRAINAGE TILE 


AT EACH JOINT DRAINAGE 


TUNNEL 


SECTION XX 


Fic. 3 SIDE CHANNEL SPILLWAY 


4.7 Barrage Type Spillway ( see Fig. 7) 


It consists of a series of gates separated by piers with 
floors in between the piers to prevent scour and 
undermining. The crest is not high above the bed level 
and the flow may generally be submerged. 


4.8 Tunnel Conduit Spillway (see Fig. 8 ) 


Where a closed channel is used to convey the discharge, 
the spillway is known as a tunnel or conduit spillway. 
The tunnel may be horizontal or inclined, through the 
earth or rock. Control and overflow crest may be of 
ogee type. Tunnels are designed to run partly full. 


4.9 Saddle Spillway (see Fig. 9 ) 


In some basins formed by a dam, there may be one or 
more natural depressions for providing spillway. They 
are sometimes preferred for locating main spillway or 
emergency or auxiliary spillways. A site which has a 
saddle is very desirable and economical, if the saddle 
is suitable for locating the spillway. 


4.10 Fuse Plug 


It may be a simple earth bank, flash board or other 
device designed to fail when overtopped. Such plugs 
may be used where the sudden release of a considerable 
volume of water is both safe and not over destructive 
to the environment. 


4.11 Sluice Spillway (see Fig. 10 ) 


The use of large bottom openings as spillways is a 
relatively modern innovation following the greater 
reliance on the safety and operation of modern control 
gates under high pressure. A distinct advantage of this 
type of spillway is that provision can usually be made 
for its use for the passage of floods during construction. 
One disadvantage is that, once built, its capacity is 
definite whereas the forecasting of floods is still 
indefinite. A second disadvantage is that a single outlet 
may be blocked by flood debris, especially where in 
flow timber does not float. For detailed design 
consideration IS 11485 may be referred. 


IS 10137 : 2015 


BRIDGE TO 


OUTLET VVORKS BRIDGE ACROSS 


SPILLWAY 
BRIDGE TO 
DAM 


SECTION AA 


GATES AND STOPLOG 
(NOT SHOWN) 


a 


ZSLI TI ZİN İS Lİ Lİ SEL İS 


Zİ İZİN 
WATER SURFACE 


TOP OF VİBRATED 
GRAVEL 


FILL WITH 
VIBRATED 
GRAVEL 


TOP OF 
BALLAST 
CONCRETE 


FILL WITH 
BALL AST 
CONCRETE 


Fic. 4 SHAFT SPILLWAY 


AIN VENI 


Fic. 5 SIPHON SPILLWAY 


4 


IS 10137 : 2015 
AERATED TAILWATER 
DEPTH 
REN 
| dd 
DROP 
LENGTH 
Fic. 6 OVERFALL SPILLWAY 
TOP OF TOP OF UPSTREAM 
TING 
GUIDE BUND ae WALL CR EORM DOWNSTREAM 
fan C WATER SURFACE FOR WING WALL 
RETURN N 20 ROADWay À PROFILE FOR MAXIMUM LOAD EĞME 
WING ` SUB-SOIL HG LINE BUND 
FOR MAXIMUM FLOOD 
. | İ SUB-SOIL HG LINE FOR RETURN 
Me al MAXIMUM STATIC LOAD 
əmər aoe LAUNCHING 
CONCRETE BLOCKS L APRON 
NT CONCRETE TOE 
LAUNCHING OVER-GRADED FILTER FLOOR ər 1 ICR SHEET PILÈ WALL 


APRON 
Fic. 7 BARRAGE TYPE SPILLWAY 


GROUND 
LINE 


BACKFILL 


GROUND 
LINE 


GROUND 
LINE 


WHEEL GAT 


SECTION XX SECTION YY 


Fic. 8 TUNNEL CONDUIT SUBWAY 


5 


IS 10137 : 2015 


REFERENCE LINES 


Fic. 9 SADDLE SPILLWAY 


CONSERVATION 
LEVE 


WATER STOPS IN 


= 


DRAINAGE WELLS 


EXPANDED JOINTS 


FOUNDATION 
SLAB 


Fic. 10 SLUICE SPILLWAY 


4.12 Vortex Drop Spillvvay (Tangential Intake) (see 
Fig. 11 ) 


In this type water is conveyed as a swirling flow down 
a vertical or near- vertical drop shaft. There are several 
intake configurations used to produce swirling flows. 
The five broad categories are: (a) Circular, (b) Scroll, 
(c) Spiral, (d) Tangential, and (e) Symphonic. Among 
these, circular and scroll types of intakes have sub- 
critical approach flow conditions. Spiral and tangential 
have supercritical approach flow conditions. 
Symphonic intakes are uncommon due to their complex 
geometry. The circular and scroll types of intakes are 


generally used for smaller discharges up to 2 cumec in 
storm sewer system, whereas the tangential intakes are 
used in spillways. The approach flow enters a vortex 
drop spillway at the top of the drop shaft and then swirls 
down the drop shaft. There are various approach 
configurations and this imparts an angular motion to 
the flow which then enters the drop shaft as a swirling 
annular jet with an air core at the centre of the drop 
shaft. As the flow passes down the drop shaft, its 
vertical velocity component increases, the swirl 
attenuates and the flow direction gradually approaches 
the vertical. The flow continues to hug the drop shaft 
wall even for a relatively low flow with a small 


APPROACH CHANNEL 


SECTION 


IS 10137 : 2015 


SECTION 


DROPSHAFT 


THROAT 
SECTION 


Fic. 11 Vortex Drop SPILLWAY (TRANGENTIAL INTAKE) 


tangential velocity component. The swirling flow along 
a drop shaft wall results in considerable dissipation of 
the flow energy. 


4.13 Orifice Spillway (see Fig. 12) 


The breast wall provided on overflow spillway forms 
an orifice. In combination with the radial gates on 
spillway crest it provides advantage of reducing the 
height of the spillway structure and also minimizing 
the size of the radial gates resulting in the increased 
flushing efficiency. This kind of spillway has been 
evolved from the concept of sluice spillways. Some 
times the sluice spillways are difficult to be 
accommodated structurally in the available width 
because of their large size. The breast wall spillways 
are increasingly being adopted on the run-of-the river 
schemes on the rivers carrying large amount of 
sediments in the Himalayan regions because of their 
suitability to discharge both flood and sediments. 
Figure 12 shows a typical orifice spillway. 


4.14 Stepped Spillway (see Fig. 13) 


Stepped spillway is an open spillway with continuous 
steps of various sizes from crest to the toe of the 
spillway. The steps increase significantly the rate of 
energy dissipation along the chute and reduce the size 
of the energy dissipator downstream. The hydraulics 
of stepped spillway is complex than the conventional 
spillway due to two flow regimes, that is nappe flow 
and skimming flow. Generally, the application of 
stepped spillway is limited to dam heights upto 40 m 
with discharge intensity upto 30 cumec/m. 


4.15 Duck Bill Spillway (see Fig. 14) 


This is a spillway, with rectangular layout projections 
into the reservoir comprising three straight overflow 
lengths intersecting at right angles. The layout could 
be trapezoidal in which case the corner angles will be 
other than 90°. The flow from the three reaches of the 
spillway interacts in the trough portion and is further 
conveyed through a discharge channel on to a terminal 


IS 10137 : 2015 


FRL KBAL v7 


Hgs 


TRUNİON 


GATE SEAT 


=1 | ORIGIN 
A, Bi 2 
X= 4 HYc 


| DAM AXIS 


Fic. 12 ORIFICE SPILLWAY 


DAM AXIS REGULAR SIZE 


Fic. 13 STEPPED SPILLWAYS 


FLOVV 


IS 10137 : 2015 


AXIS OF DAM 
I TRAINNING WALL 


DUCKBILL SPILLWAY 


DUCKBILL SPILLWAY 


SECTION AT BB 


TRAINING WALL 


DISCHARGE CARRIER 
TERMINAL STRUCTURE 


SPILLWAY SECTION 


Fic. 14 DUCKBILL SPILLWAY 


structure provided for energy dissipation. For detailed 
design consideration IS 13048 may be referred. 


4.16 Labyrinth Spillway (see Fig. 15) 


Unusual spillway shapes (in plan) are often resorted 
to when it is desirable to increase the effective spillway 
length. Labyrinth spillway is one such spillway where 
there is an increase in the spillway crest length without 
an associated increase in the width of structure. The 
labyrinth weir consists of a series of relatively slender 
walls having a repetitive plan form, shaped generally 
triangular or trapezoidal with a vertical upstream face. 
The increased crest length allows the passage of greater 


discharges for a given width and operating head. These 
are particularly suited to sites where the spillway width 
and upstream water surface are limited and larger 
discharging capacities are required. 


5 FACTORS AFFECTING SELECTION OF 
SPILLWAYS 


5.1 General Considerations 
5.1.1 Safety Considerations Consistent with Economy 


Spillway structures add substantially to the cost of a 
dam. In selecting a type of spillway for adam, economy 
in cost should not be the only criterion. The cost of 


IS 10137 : 2015 


-  ..—— —— — — — — FP | 


PLAN 


SECTION X-X 


Fic. 15 LABYRINTH SPILLWAYS 


spillway must be weighed in the light of safety required 
below the dam. 


5.1.2 Hydrological and Site Conditions 
The type of spillway to be chosen shall depend on: 


a) inflow flood, 

b) availability of tail channel, its capacity and 
flow hydraulics, 

c) power house, tail race and other structures 
downstream, and 

d) topography. 


5.1.3 Type of Dam 


This is one of the main factors in deciding the type of 
spillway. For earthfill and rockfill dams, chute and ogee 
spillways are commonly provided, whereas for an arch 
dam a free fall or morning glory or chute or tunnel 
spillway is more appropriate. Gravity dams are mostly 


10 


provided with ogee spillways. 
5.1.4 Purpose of Dam and Operating Conditions 


The purpose of the dam mainly determines whether 
the dam is to be provided with a gated spillway or a 
non-gated one. A diversion dam can have a fixed level 
crest that is non-gated crest. 


5.1.5 Conditions Downstream of a Dam 


The rise in the downstream level in heavy floods and 
its consequences need careful consideration. Certain 
spillways alter greatly the shape of the hydrograph 
downstream of a dam. The discharges from a siphon 
spillway may have surges and break-ups as priming 
and depriming occurs. This gives rise to the wave 
travelling downstream in the river, which may be 
detrimental to navigation and fishing and may also 
cause damage to population and developed areas 
downstream. 


5.1.6 Nature and Amount of Solid Materials Brought 
by the River 


Trees, floating debris, sediment in suspension, etc, 
affect the type of spillvvay to be provided. A siphon 
spillway cannot be successful if the inflow brings too 
much of floating materials. Where big trees come as 
floating materials, the chute or ogee spillway remains 
the common choice. 


5.2 Specific Considerations 
5.2.1 Ogee Spillway 


a) Itis most commonly used with gravity dams. 
However, it is also used with earth and rockfill 
dams with a separate gravity structure 
(see IS 6934); 


b) The ogee crest can be used as control in almost 
all types of spillways; and 
c) Ithas got the advantage over other spillways 


for its high discharging efficiency. 
5.2.2 Chute Spillway ( see IS 5186) 


a) Itcan be provided on any type of foundation, 

b) Itis commonly used with the earth and rockfill 
dams, and 

c) Itbecomes economical if earth received from 


spillway excavation is used in dam 
construction. 


5.2.2.1 Following factors limit its adoption: 


a) It should normally be avoided on 
embankments, 

b) Availability of space is essential for keeping 
the spillway basins away from the dam 
paving, and 

c) If it is necessary to provide too many bends 
in the chute because of the topography, its 
hydraulic performance can be adversely 
affected. 

5.2.3 Side Channel Spillways ( see IS 5186) 

a) This type of spillway is preferred where a long 
overflow crest is desired in order to limit the 
intensity of discharge, 

b) Itis useful where the abutments are steep, and 

c) Itis useful where the control is desired by the 


narrow side channel. 
5.2.3.1 The factor limiting its adoption is that this type 
of spillway is hydraulically less efficient. 
5.2.4 Shaft Spillway ( Morning Glory Spillway ) 
a) This can be adopted very advantageously in 
dam sites in narrow canyons, and 
b) Minimum discharging capacity is attained at 


11 


IS 10137 : 2015 


relatively lovv heads. This characteristic makes 
the spillway ideal where the maximum 
spillvvay outflovv is to be limited. This 
characteristic becomes undesirable vvhere a 
flood more than the design capacity is to be 
passed. So, it can be used as a service spillway 
in conjunction with an emergency spillway. 


5.2.4.1 The factor limiting its adoption is the difficulty 
of air-entrainment in a shaft, which may escape in 
bursts causing an undesirable surging motion. 


5.2.5 Siphon Spillway 


a) Siphon spillways can be used to discharge full 
capacity discharges, at relatively low heads; 
and 

b) Great advantage of this type of spillway is its 


positive and automatic operation without 
mechanical devices and moving parts. 


5.2.5.1 The following factors limit the adoption of a 
siphon spillway: 


a) Itis difficult to handle flows materially greater 
than designed capacity, even if the reservoir 
head exceeds the design level; 

b) Siphon spillways cannot pass debris, ice, etc; 

c) There is possibility of clogging of the siphon 
passage way and breaking of siphon vents 
with logs and debris; 

d) Incold climates, there can be freezing inside 
the inlet and air vents of the siphon; 

e) When sudden surges occur and outflow stops; 

f) The structure is subject to heavy vibrations 
during its operation needing strong 
foundations; and 

g) Siphons cannot be normally used for vacuum 


heads higher than 8 m and there is danger of 
cavitation damage. 


5.2.6 Overfall or Free Fall Spillway 


a) This is suitable for arch dams or dams with 
downstream vertical faces; and 


b) This is suitable for small drops and for passing 
any occasional flood. 


5.2.6.1 The factor limiting its adoption is that, 
ordinarily, the maximum hydraulic drop from head 
pool to tail pool water should not exceed 20 m. 


5.2.7 Barrage Spillway 


It may be used where a temporary and small storage 
above the crest is required. 


5.2.8 Tunnel or Conduit Spillway 


This type is generally suitable for dams in narrow 
valleys, where overflow spillways cannot be located 


IS 10137 : 2015 


vvithout risk and good sites are not available for a saddle 
spillway. In such cases, diversion tunnels used for 
construction can be modified to work as tunnel 
spillways. In case of embankment dams, diversion 
tunnels used during construction may usefully be 
adopted. Where there is danger to open channels from 
snow or rock slides, tunnel spillways are useful. 


5.2.9 Saddle Spillway 


a) Itis generally economical, 

b) It facilitates construction because it is 
independent of the main dam construction, 
and 

c) It can also be used as an auxiliary or 
emergency spillway. 


5.2.10 Fuse Plug 


a) Itis provided away from the main structure, 
generally in a saddle, and 


b) It is generally provided to handle only 
extraordinary floods above the capacity of 
main spillway, and when it is not possible to 
provide total surplus capacity at the main 
spillway. It may also be used with advantage 
with shaft, siphon and sluice spillways which 
cannot effectively handle discharges beyond 
the design capacity. 


5.2.11 Bottom Opening 


a) It can be adopted with advantage in case of 
rivers with steady flows which require and can 
accommodate large releases downstream, and 


b) When separate outlets for release downstream 
may not be necessary. 


5.2.11.1 The following factors limit the adoption of 
the bottom opening spillway: 


a) It can be effectively used only with the 
provision of an emergency spillway, and 

b) There is a possibility of the outlet being 
blocked by floating debris under unfavourable 
circumstances. 


5.2.12 Vortex Drop 


It is a special type of shaft spillway. It can be provided 
where topography does not permit radial inflow 
conditions. 


5.2.13 Orifice Spillway 


Orifice spillways are usually provided in diversion 
dams of run-of-river projects built on the rivers carrying 
lot of sediment load. They serve the dual purpose of 
passing floods as well as flushing of the sediment 
deposited in the reservoir into the river downstream. 


5.2.14 Stepped Spillway 


Use of stepped spillway is limited to discharge intensity 
up to 30 m?/s/m. 


5.2.15 Duckbill/Labyrinth Spillway 


These spillways are particularly suited to sites where 
the spillway width and upstream water surface are 
limited and larger discharging capacities are required. 
This may also provide additional storage capacity in 
lieu of a more costly gated structure. 


6 TYPES OF ENERGY DISSIPATORS 


6.1 Different types of energy dissipators are listed in 
6.1.1, 6.1.2 and 6.1.3 which can be used alone or in 
combination of more than one, depending upon the 
energy to the dissipated and erosion control required 
downstream of a dam. 


6.1.1 Stilling Basins 

a) Hydraulic jump type stilling basins ( see 
IS 4997 ) 
1) Horizontal apron type, and 
2) Sloping apron type. 

b) Jet diffusion stilling basins: 
1) Jet diffusion stilling basin (see Fig. 16), 
2) Interacting jet dissipators (see Fig. 17), 
3) Free jet stilling basin (see Fig. 18), 
4) Hump stilling basin (see Fig. 19), and 
5) Impact stilling basin ( see Fig. 20 and 21). 


Fic. 16 JET DIFFUSION STILLING BASIN 


DISSIPATORS 


SPLITTER 


1 
XX 


SECTION 


/ 
"et 


SECTION YY 
R, = 0.03 B R, =0.13B R,= 0.37 B 
R, = 0.03 B R, = 0.66B R,= 0.66 B 
d, = 0.18 B A, =0.71B_ b, = 0.25 B 


where B is the bay width 
FiG. 17 INTERACTING JET DISSIPATOR 


6.1.2 Bucket Type Energy Dissipators (see IS 7365) 
These are of the following three types (see IS 7365): 


a) Solid roller bucket, 
b) Slotted roller bucket, and 
c) Ski-jump ( or flip or trajectory ) bucket. 


6.1.3 Two Stage Energy Dissipator (see Fig. 22) 


The design of two-stage energy dissipator is non- 
conventional as it involves a combination of two energy 
dissipators. The energy is dissipated in two stages in 
order to save depth of excavation. Major part of the 
energy is dissipated in the first stage and the second 
stage takes care of the residual energy. This is especially 
suitable in situations when the flow issuing from the 
energy dissipator is at an angle to the normal river flow 


13 


IS 10137 : 2015 


in a deep river gorge and the opposite bank in danger 
of being attacked and also when the return flow may 
be generated along both sides of the energy dissipator 
impairing its performance. 


7 SELECTION 
DISSIPATORS 


OF TYPE OF ENERGY 


7.1 No hard and fast criterion can be fixed in selecting 
a particular type of energy dissipator. The following 
points may be kept in view while selecting the type of 
energy dissipators: 


a) Frequency and intensity of flood flows; 

b) The degree of protection to be provided for 
very high floods; 

c) Type of dam and its spillway; 

d) Proximity of power house, tailrace and other 
structures; 

e) Nature of foundations; 

f) Velocity and nature of flow; 

g) Elevations of tailwater at various discharges; 

h) Type and amount of bed material rolling over 
the spillway; 

j) Safety of existing structures downstream; and 

k) Any special consideration, such as deep pool 


in close proximity of dam or its downstream. 


7.2 In view of the above, only broad guidelines can 
be given to select a suitable type of device to be 
subjected to model studies. The final choice can be 
made after satisfactory results from model studies are 
obtained. 


7.2.1 Type of Dam and Its Spillway 


If the dam is an arch dam with a free fall spillway, it 
should normally be provided with stilling pools of high 
depths, whereas an earth dam with chute spillway can 
be provided with a hydraulic jump basin, with or 
without baffles, or end-sills to suit tailwater rating 
curves. Similarly, if water flows from a reservoir 
through a tunnel outlet, the energy can best be 
dissipated by jet diffusion. For high dams with high 
tailwater depths, roller buckets may be employed. 


7.2.2 Nature of Foundations 


If the river bed is solid rock, a bucket type of energy 
dissipator may be most suitably adopted with much 
lesser length of stilling basin. In case the river bed is 
softer jointed and fractured rock or alluvial deposit, a 
long apron with a hydraulic jump type stilling basin 
with baffles and end-sill may be more suitable. 


7.2.3 Velocity of Flow 


If velocity of flow is high, baffles in the stilling basin 
cannot be provided. 


IS 10137 : 2015 


TOP OF RIPRAP EMBANKMENT 


END OF BASIN 
VVATER SURFACE 


INTERSECTION 
OF VALVE 
CENTRE LINES 


PLAN 
DISCHARGE 
| GUIDE VANE TOP OF RIPRAP 
\ EMBANKMENT 
¢ VALVE 
MAXIMUM TAILWATER 
FREEBOARD ELEVATION 


“RIVER BED 


TRAJECTORY BASED ON 
MAXIMUM JET VELOCITY 


Fic. 18 FREE JET STILLING BASIN 


MAXIMUM WATER 
SURFACE 


RIVER BED 


TRAJECTORY 
RECTANGULAR 
SIMPLE 

CURVE STILLING BASIN 


Fic. 19 Hump STILLING BASIN 


Fic. 20 Impact STILLING BASIN WITH INCLINED BAFFLES 


14 


IS 10137 : 2015 


HANGING 
BAFFLE 


Fic. 21 Impact STILLING BASIN WITH HANGING BAFFLE 


SECONDARY WER 


LOWER BASIN 


22A Two Stilling Basin Scheme 


UPPER BASIN 


r~ SECONDARY WEIR 


SKİ JUMP BUCKET 


SECONDARY WEIR 


ROLLER BUCKET 


22C Stilling Basin and Roller Bucket Scheme 


Fic. 22 Types oF Two STAGE ENERGY DISSIPATORS 


7.2.4 Elevation of Tailwater at Various Discharges 


Accuracy of data in this respect is a pre-requisite for 
the most efficient and economic type of structure. The 
jump height curve may be related to the depth- 
discharge curve in four different ways given at 7.2.4.1 
to 7.2.4.4. 


7.2.4.1 Jump height is always above the tailwater 
depth 


This means that the depth of flow in the river in the 
particular section is insufficient for all discharges for 
the formation of a jump at the toe of the structure. The 
jump will try to sweep across the apron at a high 
velocity and attack the bed downstream. The energy 


15 


dissipation for this case can be achieved in any of the 
following ways: 


a) Lowering the floor level downstream of the 
dam, so as to make the tailwater depth in the 
stilling basin equal to the jump height for all 
discharges. This may lead to three 
alternatives: 


1) A horizontal floor but depressed below 
the river bed level, 


2) A depressed floor but rising towards the 
downstream end; and 
3) Adepressed floor but sloping away from 


the toe of the dam. 


IS 10137 : 2015 


b) Stilling basin vvith baffles or stills at river bed 
level, 

c) Stilling basin with a low subsidiary dam 
dovvnstream, and 

d) Ski-jump bucket. 


7.2.4.2 Jump height is less than the tailwater depth 


With higher depth of tailwater the tendency of the high 
velocity flow is to dive under the tailwater and travel a 
long distance along the bottom, forming only a very 
imperfect jump. The energy dissipation can be done in 
the following ways: 


a) Sloping apron, and 
b) Roller bucket type of energy dissipators. 


7.2.4.3 Jump height more than tailwater depth at low 
discharges and less at higher discharges 


16 


For such a condition, the solution lies in creating 
artificially enough water depth to make the jump form 
on the apron at low discharges. The following 
alternatives can be applied to the problem: 


a) Stilling basin with a low secondary dam, and 


b) Stilling basin with baffle piers or some form 
of dentated sill. 


7.2.4.4 Jump height below the tailwater depth at low 
discharges and above at higher discharges 


The main condition to be met in this case is the provision 
of sufficient depth of tailwater for the formation of the 
jump to high flows. Construction of a secondary dam 
or sloping apron will serve the purpose. A bucket type 
of energy dissipator can be provided with success if 
rock below is sound which will act as roller for low 
discharges and ski-jump at higher discharges. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 09 (0585). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


