IS 14451 (Part

1):

1998

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

TELEMETERING FOR CONSUMPTION , AND DEMANDS
PART 1 IMPULSE TRANSMITTING AND RECEIVING DEVICES

ICS

33.200; 91.140.50

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STAND-ARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI I 10002

January

1998

Price Group

3

Equipment

for Electric Energy Measurement

and Load Control Sectional Committee,

ET 13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted-by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Equipment for Electric Energy Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This part specifies the requirements for telemetering devices of impulse transmitting and receiving type for the purpose of consumption and demand, which are intended to operate along with electromechanical and static type electrical integrate meters. This standard is based on the requirements outlined in Annex B hereof, and shall comprise another part as : Part 2 Digital Data Transfer. That other part shall be nothing but direct digital transfer of meter values. This Standard is to be read with IS 722 (Part 1) : 1986 `Specification for ac electricity meters : Part 1 General requirements and tests (third revision)`, IS 13010 : 1990 `ac watthour meters, class 0.5, 1 .O and 2.0,' IS 13779 : 1993 `ac static watthour meters, class 1 and 2' and CBI &P Report No. 88 (revision 1998) for ac static watthour meters, class 0.2s and 0.5s. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 338 (1970) `Telemetering consumption and demand' issued by International Electrotechnical Commission. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The rounded off value shall be the same as that of the specified value for

of this standard is complied with, the final shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : number of significant places retained in the in this standard.

IS 14451 (Part -1) : 1998

Indian Standard

TELEMETERINGFORCONSUMPTION ANDDEMAND
PART 1 IMPULSE 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard applies to telemetering apparatus, intended to operate in conjunction with electrical integrating meters (static and electrotechnical type) in particular for billing and statistical purpose. 1.2 This consisting standard of : covers telemetering apparatus TRANSMllTlNG AND RECEIVING DEVICES 1.5 This standard does not cover the channels for transmitting the impulses from the transmitting to the receiving end, for example, telephone lines, low or high frequency communication, since these channels should comply with other appropriate documents. 1.51 Converting the modulating units, made necessary by the properties of the transmitting channels, may be covered by this standard only if they form an integral part of the telemetering apparatus. 2 REFERENCES 2.0 The Indian Standards given necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 DEFINITIONS 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. 3.1 Supporting Meter is intended to example, single IS 13779 and July 1996). the following in Annex A are

a> an

b)

c>

impulse device that causes emission of impulse signals from a set of output terminals whose number is proportional to the integrated quantity of electrical parameter(s) as measured from the test output of the static revolutions of meter or from number of rotor of the electromechanical meter. devices for receiving such impulses, converting them into analogous or digital values, and displaying the values which represent the integrated quantity, for example, the energy, active or reactive, or the mean power measured during a fixed period of time or at least 10 min, and device totalizing or otherwise evaluating the impulse signals from several meters by arithmetical or algebraic operations. of the

An integrating meter to which it incorporate the impulse device, for phase or static meters (see IS 13010, CBI & P Report No. @-Revision 3.2 Impulse An element of change in the sudden return voltage, current,

1.3 This standard is applicable regardless distance between impulse meter and receiver.

a signal : characterized by a sudden value of a quantity, followed by a to the original state, for example, frequency, impedance.

NOTE - Besides the need to transmit metering quantities over long distance, there are many applications where the receiving devices are located quite near the meter.

3.3 Impulse Device which produces at a set of output A device terminals, a fixed number of electrical impulses, integral or fractional corresponding to unit integrated quantity of electrical parameter(s) as measured from test output of the static meter or to each revolution of rotor of the electromechanical meter. 3.4 Impulse Meter The combination of an integrating meter impulse device whether integral or separate. 3.5 Impulse Frequency and an

1.4 This standard does not apply to : a) system transmitting in an analog from the rotor speed or any other instantaneous quantity proportional to the power, for example by means of a current or a voltage corresponding to this power; occasionally or transmitting systems periodically the readings of the register of an integrating meter, for example, by scanning either the combinations of switches or marking by magnetic or optical means; and system employing direct digital, serial or parallel data transfer with communication part or static electricity meters. Refer Annex B.

b)

c)

The number of impulses per time unit, for example, number of impulses per minute. I

IS 14451(

Part 1) : 1998 4.1.1.1 This category included element generally employing: 4 all types of contacts operated directly or by permanent magnet; b) interchangeable gear trains which allow the number of impulses per revolution of the meter rotor to be changed; and cl facilities whereby the mechanical burden is spread by means of weight or springs. 4.1.1.2 This category is characterized by the fact that the mechanical burden these devices impose on the meter is not negligible. On the other hand, they do not usually necessitate electrical amplification. 4.1.2 Servo-Mechanical Impulse Device

3.6 Impulse Amplifier A device used to increase the level of voltage or current impulses produced by the impluse device. 3.7 Impulse Shaper A device designed to alter the shape, duration, level phase, or polarity of voltage or current impulse originating from the impulse device or impulse amplifier. 3.8 Impulse Frequency Changer

A device changing ratio. 3.9 Receiver

the impulse frequency in a definite

a device for receiving Apparatus comprising an information impulses, with or without processing device and an output device such as integrating register, demand register, a recording and/or storage device, a pointer, a recorder or a device for recording on punched or magnetic tape. 3.10 Mechanical Receiving Device

A device which is substantially the same as the one if 4.1.1 but with the addition of servo-assistance or servo-operation which permits a reduction of the mechanical burden. It embodies relays or motors and their control devices.
4.1.3

Non-mechanical

Impulse Device

A device which transforms the incoming impulses mechanically into an analogous quantity or digital value. 3.11 Electric Receiving Device

A device in which the burden imposed on the is reduced to that required to supporting meter operate the undermentioned elements and their associated gearing, if any. 4.1.3.1 This category employing: includes elements generally

A device which receives and stores the impulses in electronic or magnetic arrangements without the use of magnetic relays. 3.12 Demand Integration Period

4

The nominal duration of the consecutive equal intervals of time (for example, 10, l-5,30 and 60 min), which comprises the time during which the integral values of electrical energy parameter(s) are computed and stored in demand register(s) for electromechanical meters, it is the time during which the driving element of the maximum demand indicator is coupled to the receiving device, and the detent time (see IS 8530). 3.13 Detent Time (for Electromechanical Meter)

b)
cl

4

photo-cell or photo-diode controlled by variation of the intensity of illumination; oscillating circuit controlled by variation of an inductance or a capacitance; semiconductors controlled by variation of a magnetic field; and other forms of electronic driving circuit.

4.1.4 Receiver without Amplifier A receiver (see 3.9) in which the incoming impulses directly operate the output device, if necessary after storage. 4.1.5 Receiver with Mechanical Ampl$k

The interval of time at the end, but within each demand integration period, during which the disconnecting element releases the coupling between the maximum demand indicator and the receiving device to allow the driving element to be restored to its initial position. 4 CLASSIFICATION 4.1 Clas&cation 4.1.1 Mechanical of Apparatus Impulse Device

A receiver (see 3.9) in which the incoming impulse operate a relay which permits a motor-driven shaft to rotate through a certain angle for each impulse received. 4.1.6 Receiver with Electrical Amplifier A receiver (see 3.9) in which the incoming impulses are electrically amplified before operating the output device by means of, for example, a relay mechanical storage, or an electronic memory device.

A device in which the electrical impulse is set up by the uniting and parting of metal contacts.

2

IS 14451( Part 1) : 1998 4.1.7 Scanning Device A device to ascertain by periodic scanning, if there has been any change in the state of either the impulse device or subsequent states relating to a number of impulse meters. This scanning is effected for a period of specified duration, each change of state corresponding to a specified consumption. 4.2 Classification of Impulses (see 3.2)
Impulses

Table 1 Variation in Errors of the Impulse Meter (Clause 6.2.1.1)
Meter Class 0.5 and 1.0 2.0 and 3.0 Polyphase Single-phase 2 percent
4 percent

1percent
2 percent

4.2.1 Uni-Directional

6.2.1.2 The impulse meter shall start and continue to function in accordance with the requirements for the supporting meter, but the following increase of tolerance for the limit of starting current of the respective meter shall be permitted : a) b) 0.2 percent non-mechanical 0.5 percent devices. of basic devices; and current for

Impulses following each in such a manner that the change in the value of the quantity in relation to the initial value is always of the same sign or magnitude. 4.2.2 Bi-Directional
Impulses

of basic current

for mechanical

Impulses following each other in such a manner that the change in the value of the quantity in relation to the initial value changes its sign for each connective impulse. 4.2.3
Momentary Impulses

The Error Due to the Connection Between the Meter Rotor and the Impulse Device (fbr Electromechanical Meters only)

6.2.2

Impulses, the duration input power. 5 STANDARD

of which is independent

of the

Since no slip whatsoever is permitted, the average value of this error for any complete cycle of the impulse meter shall be zero. 6.2.3
The Error Inherent in Impulse Metering

VALUES

5.1 Rated Supply Voltage Standard values for rated supply voltages to impulse transmitting and receiving devices are : a) for ac : 57.7; 63.5; 100; 1 IO; 230; 240 V; and b) for dc : 6; 12; 24; 30; 48; 60; 110; 220 V. 5.2 Demand Integration Period period are:

This error is due to the fact that it is a discontinuous process in which the maximum value of cycle uncertainity is always one impulse. 6.2.3.1 The number N of impulses per integration period is related to the value of the uncertainity u. For a given value of the uncertainity u the number N is given by the formula : N=y impulses/period, and

Standard values of demand integration 10; 15; 30: 60 min. 5.3 Rated Supply Frequencies Standard supply frequency 6 ACCURACY

u expressed as a percentage. shall be 50 Hz. 6.2.3.2 If the duration of a integration period is T min, the impulse frequencyf for a given value of u is given by the formula : f= F = 3 impulses/min

6.1 The requirements relating to accuracy shall be fulfilled under reference conditions of voltage, frequency, and temperature, and with balanced load in the case of polyphase meters. 6.2 The accuracy of a telemetering determined as follows. system is

NOTE - If a large number of successive

measurements is considered in telemetering, 50 percent of these measurements have an uncertainity which is only 0.3 u or less.

6.2.1 The error of the impulse meter, This error shall not exceed the limits fixed for the class of the supporting meter in the corresponding Indian Standard. 6.2.1.1 The variation in the error of the impulse meter due to disconnection of the impulse device shall not exceed the value given in Table 1 at 5 percent of basic current and at unity power factor.

6.2.3.3 The duration of the integration periods for demand measurements being relatively short, it is this which governs the impulse frequency rather than the much longer period for measuring consumption. 6.2.3.4 The constant R representing the number impulses per kilowatthour is given by the formula: of

R=60_-loo
P u.T

impulses per kilowatthour,

where P = Power in kW

3

IS 14451( Part 1) : 1998 60 100 u = - .p R.T 6.2.3.5 In order to obtain a reasonable accuracy of the telemetering system for the measurements of the average power, the relation between the class of supporting meter and the maximum uncertainity u at 30 percent rated maximum current and unity power factor for single-phase and polyphase meter shall be as shown in Table 2. Table 2 Uncertainity
Meter Class 0.5 1.0 2.0 3.0 Uncertainity 0.3 0.6 1.2 1.8 u

Thus uncertainity

7 GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS

7.1 If the receiver includes a maximum demand indicator, there shall be a register for consumption, or other means enabling the registration of the receiver to be verified. 7.2 If the receiver includes a maximum demand recorder, provision shall be made for the storage of impulses during the detent time, where applicable. 7.3 If there voltage, the designed so value within is a risk of interruption in the supply storage and other devices shall be that the information of the integrated the integration period shall not be lost.

6.2.4 The Intrinsic Error of the Receiving Device Together with Operated Maximum Demandlndicator, If Any (For Electromechanical Meters Only) This error shall be within 40.5 percent of its rating. 6.3 For consumption measurements, it is easy in most cases to obtain a much smaller uncertainity. The permissible uncertainity may be fixed between the contracting parties. 6.4 The impulse device and the receiver shall be so that operate without fault designed they throughout the entire range up to maximum input power level up to its maximum value when the voltage circuit of the supporting meter is supplied at its maximum voltage. While functioning, they shall not be disturbed by the effect of the supply voltage of the impulse device when it varies within the following limits: a) For ac : 80 to 115 percent of rated~voltage; and b) For dc : 80 to 110 percent of rated voltage. 6.4.1 In the same apparatus shall not influence quantities the limits defined Standard pertaining way, the functioning of the be disturbed by variation in other provided these later remain within for each of them in the Indian to~the suppbrtingmmeter.

7.4 A reversal-preventing device shall be provided if there is a possibility that by reversal of the direction of power the impulse meter rotor might rotate for electromechanical meters in a reverse direction. This device shall be so designed that false impulse cannot occur as a result of partial reversal of the rotor. 7.5 The impulse meter and the receiver shall be so constructed as to operate correctly under ordinary conditions of service. 7.6 The entire telemetering apparatus and the transmission channel shall be co-ordinated so that the production of incorrect impulses is avoided and correct impulses are not suppressed. 7.7 The impulse output from the ~meter shall be in the form of potential free contacts. The contact voltage and current rating shall be as per the requirement of the receiver for example 240 V 1 Amp (non-inductive). 8 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 8.1 Impulse meters and receiving devices shall be so constructed as not to introduce any danger in normal use and under normal conditions. 8.1.1 That portion of the impulses .meter terminal is provided for the external block which connections shali be constructed with clearances and creepage distances not less than those specified in Table 3. Table 3 Clearance and Creepage Distances SI
No
mm (1) (2)

6.5 Where impulses are received from several impulse meters, then in devices involving stored impulses the frequency of scanning shall be at least 20 percent above the highest impulse frequency of any of the impulse meters. 6.6 If the transmission of impulses ceases because, for example, by cutting of the supply to the impulses device or to the receiver or because of damage to them, the errors of the impulse meter should not exceed the values mentioned in 5.2.

Voltage, V

Clearance

Creepage Distance
mm

(3)

(4)

0 ii) iii) iv) v)

Up to and including 25 26 to 60 61 to 250 2s

I
2 3 3 4

I
2 3 4 6

1to 450

45 1 to 600

4

IS 14451( Part 1) : 1998 8.2 When hand-operated resetting devices are used, for example, in maximum demand indicators, additional precautions against electric shock are required. Protective covers, if any, shall not be removable without the use of an appropriate tool. 8.3 Dielectric Tests 9 MARKING RECEIVERS OF IMPULSE METERS AND

8.3.1 impulse Voltage Test All circuits in the telemetering apparatus which are intended to be directly connected to the mains shall be subjected to the following impulse voltage test of ten applications of 1.2/50 micro second impulses of the same polarity [see the relevant sub-clauses of IS 207 1 (Part 2)] and in accordance with relevant standards of supporting meters: Test Voltage (Penk Value) 6 kV a) Test Voltage to be Applied Between All current and voltage connected together; and circuits

9.1 Each impulse meter shall bear the following information in addition to that required by relevant standards for supporting meters: a) The constant R for example, impulse/kWh (see 6.2.3), 5) Contact rating of impulse device (see 6.6), and c) No/NC and type of output contacts. 9.2 The receiver shall bear the following information: Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, and if required, the place of manufacture;

a>

b) Designation or type;

c> Serial
4 e)

number and year of manufacture;

b)

The frame of the apparatus or the tlat metal surface connected to the frame, if the apparatus has a moulded insulation base.

Rated supply voltage and frequency; The principle units in which the register records (for example, kWh) and constant R; and In the case of maximum demand indicator: the constant K the demand integration period, in and the detent time for minutes; electromechanical type meters. may also be

8.3.1.1 The tests shall be made only on completed apparatus and not on unassembled components and carried out once only. No flashover and no damage shall occur and after this test the apparatus shall withstand all ac voltage tests prescribed in 8.3.2. 8.3.2 ac Voltage Test All circuits in the telemetering apparatus which are intended to be directly connected to the mains shall withstand the respective ac voltage tests laid down in the relevant standards for meters. When there is a hand-operated resetting device, indicated in 7.2, the high voltage test is carried out when the hand-operated control is in contact with the internal mechanisms of the meter.

9.3 The telemetering apparatus marked with the Standard Mark.

9.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions ofthe Bureau of lrzdian Standards Act, I986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

ANNEX

A

( Chlse 2.0 )
LIST OF REFERRED
IS No.

INDIAN STANDARDS IS No. Title Maximum demands indicator (class 1) ac Watthours meters, class 0.5, I and 2 ac Static watthour meters, class I and 2

Title ac Electricity meters General requirements (third revision) Test procedures : Part I and tests

722 (Part I) : 1986

8530:

1977

13010: 1990 13779 : 1993

207 I (Part 2) : I974

(first revision)

5

IS 14451(

Part 1 ) : 1998

ANNEX

B

( Foreword )
TELEMETERING B-l The Part 1 of this standard based on the IEC 338- 1970, applicable to the conventional is telemetering system that utilises activated switching contacts of impulsing devices in conjunction with electromechanical/static meters for transfer of incremental meter values to local/ remote electromechanical/static receivers via a transmission channel with or without intermediate summation/ subtraction/integration of such incremental meter values. While such devices are still in use in large numbers certain limitations of such impulsing devices like electromechanical relays or semiconductors for the sake of transfer of incremental meter value, may be borne in mind. B-2 The limitations observed with electromechanical meters with impulsing devices are as given hereunder. B-2.1 These devices have an inherent uncertainity error as discussed in 6.2.3 of this standard. This resolution uncertainity is limited by the maximum response rate that can be achieved by conventional electromechanical contacts. B-2.2 The limited resolution of impulsing devices lead to measurement inaccuracies for example in applications involving concurrent kVA demand computation from multiple meters, under varying power factor conditions. B-2.3 These devices also suffer from contact bounce, improper contact and distortion problem, information (EG, active import, reactive leg, etc) per meter. B-2.4 Conventional transfer of incremental meter values can only support one parameter informtion (EG, active import, reactive, leg, etc) per meter. SYSTEM

B-3 The new generation of static meters, employing improved impulsing techniques with rapid switching contacts of semiconductor devices, have overcome to some extent, few of the problems mentioned in B-2 above. They are fast, less uncertain and more dependable. Besides, they can support multiple parameter information per meter. However, they do not reap the full benefit of the static metering technology. B-4 A number of manufacturers have now come out with more efficient telemetering apparatus employing direct digital transfer of original meter values by utilising communication interfaces to overcome the inherent limitations of the conventional transfer of incremental meter values by impulsing devices and to provide improved performance with advanced features. B-4.1 Multiple parameter information can not only be supported by a single supporting meter, but only a single transfer channel is sufficient. B-4.2 Effective reliability can be achieved with commensurate accuracy single transfer of meter value is direct and original. B-4.3 This technology can be gainfully used to detect data integrity and take corrective actions in case of temporary loss of data link. B-S Telemetering system that utilises static meters for direct digital transfer of original meter values employing communication interfaces, will be dealt Part 2 of this standard, now under within preparation.

6

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 `to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. ETD 13 ( 3088 ). . Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

,

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

`Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 38 41 337 84 99,337 337 86 26,337 85 61 91 20

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110 002

Eastern

: l/l4 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700 054 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022

Northern

1 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113

60 38 43 60 20 25

235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 8327891,8327892 {

Western

: Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400 093

Marol,

Andheri

(East)

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
$I-inted at Printograph, New Dclhi, Ph

: 5726847

