IS : 12111 - 1987

Indian Standard

(Reaffirmed 2002)

GLOSSARYOFTERMS REiATINGTONARROWFABRICS
UDC 001.4 : 677-074.33

@ Cojyright 1988

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 May 1988

Gr 2

IS t 12111 - 1987

Indian Standard

CLOSSARYOFTERMS RELATINGTONARROWFABRICS
0.
0.1 This Indian Standard

FOREWORD
consumer for various end uses. This standard has been prepared to define the various terms to avoid ambiguity and propagate uniform interpretation of the terms. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from following publication: Textile terms and definitions, The Textile Institute, Manchester. 19E6 Ed 8.

was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 30 October 1987, after the draft finalized by the Narrow Fabrics, Webbings and Braids Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 Different types of narrow fabrics made from natural and man-made materials; woven, knitted, and strips are being used by the industry, Defence organizations and ordinary

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard defines terms commonly used in industry and trade connected with narrow fabrios.

2. DEFINITIONS
A 2.1 Argyle Gimp - A woven figured narrow fabric having three series of wefts and a warp. Two series consist of three gimp cords laid flat, the ground or third series consists of two gimp cords and forms a plain weave. The two series of three gimp cords form a double-weave raised pattern by passing through the warp every sixth pick alternately and returning over the top of the warp. The overall width is about 15 mm ( 518 in ). The warp is usually of rayon. B

NOTE 2 - Fabrics made by this process may be constructed with or without core, gut, filler or stuffing threads which are not interlaced in the fabric. For some applications, the core may be of insulated or uninsulated wire, or rubber, or other material. The tubular braided fabrics may be used as sheaths or surrounds. In the cordage trade, the term NOTE 3 `braided' denotes a particular form of cordage manufacture. In Aid braided cordage, carriers usually travel in one direction but the movement provides for interlocking between the strands. In a sense, this cord is more of an interlocked twisted cord than a plaited cord.

C 2.5 Camouflage Garnishing Strips A variety of narrow hessian strips of varying widths used for military purposes, generally manufactured from standard width hessian with patent selvedges incorporated at intervals depending upon corresponding width of the strips required. 2.6 Cratch ( Narrow Fabrics ) - A type of frame or creel for carrying the warps and their tensioning devices. It is situated behind the loom in an upright position and occupies the full width of the loom frame. It is usually divided into vertical sections by wood or metal struts so as to give the same number sections as there are reed spaces in the loom. The warps are placed in the cratch and rotate on spindles. 2.7 Crepe Cord - A cord consisting of from one to four strands, each strand comprising a core covered by several fine threads in a long spiral, over-wrapped in a shorter spiral in the opposite direction by a strong thread, giving a soft crepe or spiral effect. When two or more strands are used, each strand is over-twisted, and these are laid together and reverse-twisted.
1

2.2 Brace Web - An elastic or rigid woven fabric primarily intended for the manufacture of braces. 2.3 Braid - The product of the braiding process. Certain types of narrow fabrics produced on a loom or on trimming machinery are sometimes described as braids. 2.4 Braiding ( Plaiting ) The process of interlacing threads in such a way that they cross one another and are laid together in diagonal formation. Flat, tubular, round or solid constructions may be formed in this way.
NOTE 1 There are diametrically opposed opinions between sections of the industry regarding the exact meanings of braiding and plaiting. It is suggested, therefore, that as generic terms, braiding and plaiting should be considered synonymous.

IS:12111-

1987 D 2.17 Listings See spindle N 2.18 Narrow not exceeding Fabric Any woven 45 cm ( 18 in ) in width. fabric tape.

2.8 Double Satin Ribbon - A double warp ribbon with a satin or similar weave on each face, the two faces being equally lustrous.

.

E

2.9 Elastic Narrow Fabric A narrow fabric incorporating natural or synthetic rubber threads with the object of permitting stretch warpway and/or weftway with virtually complete recovery on removal of the stretching force.
NOTE The definition excludes crepe.

NOTE 1 - The upper limit of width recognized by the Brussels nomenclature is 30 cm ( 12 in ). NOTE 2 This includes any braid or trimming,

2.19 Newar - A heavy jute or cotton strip manufactured in a tape loom in narrow width and used for cots, chairs, etc. P 2.20 Petersham Ribbon ( Millinery )- A ribbon usually with silk or rayon warp and having single picks of relatively coarse weft usually cotton, to form a rib with the return of the weft making a gimp-like edge and traditionally with 10 ribs/cm ( 25.4 ribs per inch ). 2.21 Petersham Ribbon ( Skirt ) A narrow fabric having a pronounced rib weftway composed of one or more picks per rib and having lateral stiffness produced either by closeness of the weave or by a finishing process. It is woven with or without pockets to insert supports. The selvedges are formed by the return of the weft so as to produce gimp-like edges or they are woven in a contrasting manner. 2.22 Plaiting See braiding. R 2.23 Ribbon - An attractive woven narrow fabric, characterized in the higher qualities by fine warp yarns and high warp density and usually of lustrous appearance. It is generally used for trimming or adornment. 2.24 Ric-Rat Braid, Vandyke Braid -A braid having zig-zag appearance with the almost serrated effect on both edges. This effect is produced by applying different tension to the individual threads in the process of manufacture. S 2.25 Sarsnet Ribbon - A ribbon constructed entirely in plain weave of very fine warp and weft and with high density, the weft density being higher than that of the warp.
NOTE A true sarsnet is made wholly of silk.

F 2.10 Failetine Ribbon - A ribbon with faille characteristic ( see 2.11 ) but of more open texture. 2.11 Faille Ribbon - A fabric of silk, or of rayon, or other man-made fibre continuous filament yarn; it is usually of plain weave with a definite rib effect to give brightness and with a selvedge woven in a manner to add a lustrous effect. G 2.12 Galloon Ribbon - A ribbon with transverse ribs, each composed of two or more picks, to give a uniform or pronounced effect. The ribbon has a special selvedge which is normally of tubular weave. 2.13 Garnishing Scrim - Net-like structure with square mesh of various sizes and in the form of strips usually dyed or pigmented and used for camouflage purposes.
1

L

2.14 Lace - A fine openwork fabric with a ground of mesh or net on which patterns may be worked at the same time as the ground is formed or applied later, and which is made of yarn by looping, twisting or knitting, either by hand with a needle or bobbin, or by machine; also a similar fabric made by crotchetting, embroidery weaving or darning, tatting, knitting. 2.15 Ladder Web - A four ply woven narrow fabric consisting of two outer or body webs between which are woven two narrower webs in staggered relationship with each other, each being woven alternately into one end and then the other outer or body web, so as to form, when opened up, supports for the slats of venetian blind. 2.16 Lingerie Ribbon - Any type of washable ribbon suitable for use on ladies' and childrens' underwear.
It should have a soft, smooth finish NOTE and be firmly constructed with strong selvedges.

2.26 Seam Binding - A woven narrow fabric of fine texture, usually of cotton or rayon, in plain weave, usually with gross grain selvedges and intended for use in covering or strengthening seams or edges in clothing. The widths range from 10 to 20 mm ( 3/8 to 3/4 in ).

2

IS:12111-1987

2.27 Single Satin Ribbon rayon or cotton weft with to give a lustrous effect on plain tubular or grossgrain

- A ribbon of silk, a warp satin weave one face, and with selvedges.

the reinforcing of fabrics to resist wear and deformation. Cotton tapes are produced in widths up to and including 100 mm. W 2.31 Webbing -

2.28 Spindle Tape - A woven narrow fabric of width normally not greater than 50 mm, usually of high warp density, and designed for transmission of power to spindle wharve of smaller diameter, for example, as on textile spinning and twisting machinery.
NOTE - In some section of textile industry, similar or somewhat similar `tapes up to 100 mm in width are known as `listings'.

4

T 2.29 Taffeta Ribbon - A ribbon of silk or rayon or other man-made fibre in plain weave, with usually high warp density and very fine, almost imperceptible rib, generally with a woven tubular selvedge of contrasting weave. 2.39 Tape - A woven narrow fabric, generally used in non-load bearing applications and

b)

A woven narrow fabric, the primary function of which is load bearing. It is generally of a coarse weave and has multiple plies. It is produced in widths up to and including 100 mm and includes all elastic narrow fabrics. A term of classification referring to webbings in general.

2.32 Wick - A loosely twisted, braided or woven cord, tape or tube, or a bundle of fibres, generally made of soft spun cotton yarns which draws up a constant supply of any liquid substance by capillary action, used for illumination, for example, oil in lamps, melted tallow or wax in candles.

3
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja. India

