**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  4031-11  (1988) :  Methods  of  physical  tests  for  hydraulic 
cement^  Part  11:  Determination  of  density  [CED  2:  Cement 
and  Concrete] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :4031  (Part  11  )  •  1988 

(  Reaffirmed  2005 ) 

Indian  Standard 

METHODS  OF  PHYSICAL  TESTS  FOR 
HYDRAULIC  CEMENT 

PART   II     DETERMINATION  OF  DENSITY 

(  First  Revision  ) 

First  Reprint  MARCH,  1992 
UDC    666-942  :  531754 


®  Copyright  19S8 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR     SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
,    NEW  DELHI    110002 

.1. 

Gr  1  August  1988 


IS  :  4031  (  Part  11  )  -  1988 


Indian  Standard 


METHODS  OF  PHYSICAL  TESTS  FOR 
HYDRAULIC  CEMENT 

PART   II     DETERMINATION  OF  DENSITY 

(  First  Revision  } 

0.     FOREWORD 


0.1  This  Indian  Standard  (Part  11)  (First 
Revision  )  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  on  22  April  1988,  after  the  draft 
finalized  by  the  Cement  and  Concrete  Sectional 
Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil 
Engineering  Division  Council. 

0.2  Standard  methods  of  testing  cement  are 
essential  iadjunct  to  the  cement  specifications. 
This  standard  in  different  parts  lays  down 
the  procedure  for  the  tests  to  evaluate 
the  physical  properties  of  different  types  of 
hydraulic  cements.  The  procedure  for  conduct- 
ing chemical  tests  of  hydraulic  cement  is  covered 
in  IS:  4032-1985*. 

0.3  Originally  all  the  tests  to  evaluate  the 
physical  properties  of  hydraulic  cements  were 
covered  in  one  standard  ;  but  for  facilitating  the 
use  of  this  standard  and  future  revisions,  it  has 
been  decided  to  print  the  different  tests  as 
different  parts  of  the  standard  and  accordingly, 
this  revised  standard  has  been  brought  out  in 
thirteen  parts.     This  will  also  facilitate  updating 


of  individual  tests.  Further,  since  publication 
of  the  original  standard  in  1968,  a  number  of 
standards  covering  the  requirements  of  different 
equipment  used  for  testing  of  cement,  a  brief 
description  of  which  was  also  covered  in  the 
standard,  had  been  published.  In  this  revision, 
therefore,  reference  is  given  to  different  instru- 
ment specifications  deleting  the  description  of 
the  instruments,  as  It  has  been  recognized  that 
reproducible  and  repeatable  test  results  can  be 
obtained  only  with  standard  testing  equipment 
capable  of  giving  desired  level  of  accuracy.  This 
part  (  Part  1 1  )  covers  determination  of  density 
of  hydraulic  cement. 

0.4  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a 
particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is 
complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or 
calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or 
analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  2-1960*.  The  number  of  significant  places 
retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the 
same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this 
standard- 


♦Method  of  chemical  analysis 
(  first  revision  ). 


of    hydraulic    cement  *Rule8for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised). 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  ( Part  1 1  )  covers  the  proce- 
dure for  determining  the  density  of  hydraulic 
cement. 

2.  SAMPLING  AND  SELECTION  OF  TEST 
SPECIMENS 

2.1  The  samples  of  the  cement  shall  be  taken  in 
accordance  with  the  requirements  of  IS  :  3535- 
1986*  and  the  relevant  standard  specification  for 
the  type  of  cement  being  tested.  The  representative 


^'Methods  of  sampling  hydraulic  cements. 


sample  of  the  cement  selected  as  above  shall  be 
thoroughly  mixed  before  testing. 

3.  TEMPERATURE 

3.1  The  temperature  of  the   laboratory   shall  be 
maintained  at  27  ±  2**C. 

4.  APPARATUS 

4.1  Le   Chatelier   Flask  —  Standard    LeChate- 
lier  flask  conforming  to  the  dimensions  shown  in 

Fig.  1. 


IS  :  4031  (  Part  11  )  -  1988 


U — *50     — i^ 


GROUND  GLASS 
STOPPER 


ENLARGED  DETAIL 
AT  X 


TWO  0-1  ml  GRADUATIONS 
EXTENDING  ABOVE  1  AND 
SELOW  0  MARK 


CAPACITY   OF  BULK 
250  ml  APPROX 


Note— Variations  of  a  few  millimetres  in  such 
dcmensions  as  the  height  of  flask,  diameter  of  base, 
etc,  are  to  be  expected  and  will  not  be  considered 
sufficient  cause  for  rejection. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  1    Le  Chatelier  Flask  for  Density  Test 

4.2  Analytical  Balance  —  Analytical  balance 
capable  of  reproducing  results  within  0  000  2  g 
with  an  accuracy  of  ±  0  000  2  g 

NoTK  —  Self-indicating  balance  with  equivalent 
accuracy  may  also  be  used. 

4.3  Standard  Weights 

4.4  Constant  Temperature  Water  Bath  —  The 

constant  tenjperature  water  bath  shall  be  capable 
of  naaintaining  temperature  within  ±  0'2°C. 

5.  MATERIAL 

5.1  Kerosine  free  of  water ,  or  naphtha  having  a 
specific  gravity  not  less  than  0'731  3  shall  be 
used  in  the  density  determination. 

6.  PROCEDURE 

6.1  Density  of  cement  shall  be  determined  on 
the  material  as  received,  unless  otherwise  speci- 
fied, if  the  density  determination  on  a  loss-free 
sample  is  required,  the  sample  shall  first  be 
ignited  according  to  the  test  for  loss   on    ignition. 

6.2  The  flask  shall   be  filled  (  see  Note  I  )  with 


either  of  the  liquids  specified  in  5.1  to  a  point  on 
the  stem  between  the  zero  and  the  I -ml  mark. 
The  inside  of  the  flask  above  the  level  of  the 
liquid  shall  be  dried,  if  necessary,  after  pouring. 
The  first  reading  shall  be  recorded  after  the  flask 
has  been  immersed  in  the  water  bath  (seeNoie  2) 
in  accordance  with  6.3.  A  weighed  quantity  of 
cement  (  about  64  g  for  Portland  cement )  shall 
then  be  introduced  in  small  amounts  at  the  same 
temperature  as  the  liquid  (  see  Note  1  ).  Care 
shall  be  taken  to  avoid  splashing  and  to  see  that 
the  cement  does  not  adhere  to  the  inside  of  the 
flask  above  the  liquid.  A  vibrating  apparatus 
may  be  used  to  accelerate  the  introduction  of  the 
cement  into  the  flask  and  to  prevent  the  cement 
from  sticking  to  the  neck.  After  all  the  cement 
has  been  introduced,  the  stopper  shall  be  placed 
in  the  flask  and  the  flask  rolled  in  an  inclined 
position  (  see  Note  1  ),  or  gently  whirled  in  a 
horizontal  circle,  so  as  to  free  the  cement  from 
air  until  no  further  air  bubbles  rise  to  the  surface 
of  the  liquid.  If  a  proper  amount  of  cement  has 
been  added,  the  level  of  the  liquid  will  be  in  its 
final  position  at  some  point  of  the  upper  series  of 
graduations.  The  final  reading  shall  be  taken 
after  the  flask  has  been  immersed  in  the  watei 
bath  in  accordance  with  6.3. 

NoTB  1  —It  is  advisable  to  use  a  rubber  pad  on  the 
table  top  when  filling  or  rolling  the  flask. 

Note  2  —  Before  the  cement  has  been  added  to  the 
flask,  a  loose-fitting  lead-ring  weight  around  the  stem  of 
the  flask  will  be  helpful  in  holding  the  flask  ir>  n  up- 
right position  in  the  water  bath  or  the  flask  maybe  held 
in  the  water  bath  by  a  burette  clamp. 

Note  3  —  For  cleaning  of  Le  Chatelier  flasks,  acid 
cleaning  will  not  be  effective  in  removing  any  deposi- 
tion of  silicic  acid  gel.  They  may  be  satisfactorily 
cleaned  by  using  warm  sodium  carbonate  solution. 

6.3  The  flask  shall  be  immersed  in  a  constant- 
temperature  water  bath,  maintained  at  about 
room  temperature,  for  a  sufiicient  interval  before 
making  either  of  the  readings  so  as  to  avoid 
variations  greater  than  0*2°C  in  the  temperature 
of  the  liquid  in  the  flask.  All  readings  shall  be 
checked  until  they  are  constant  to  ensure  that  the 
contents  of  the  flask  have  reached  the  tempe- 
rature of  the  water  bath. 

7.  CALCULATION 

7.1  The  diff'erence  between  the  first  and  the  final 
readings  represents  the  volume  of  liquid  dis- 
placed by  the  mass  of  cement  used  in  the  test. 
The  density  shall  be  calculated  as  follows  to  the 
second  place  of  decimal  : 

r^       t    —      Mass  of  cement  in  g 
^      Displaced  volume  in  cm* 

7.2  Two  tests  shall  be  carried  out  and  the 
average  shall  be  reported. 

8.  RETEST 

8.1  If  the  diff'erence  between  the  two  values 
difl'ers  by  more  than  0*03,  the  test  shall  be 
repeated. 


Printed  at  Dee  Kay  Printers,  New  Delhi,  India 


