UDC

629-785 : 001-4

IS :`7879

( Part

VI ) - 1978

Indian Standard GLOSSARY OF AERONAUTICAL

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

AND ASTRONAUTICAL

TERMS

PARTvI SPACE TERMS
0. Foreword O.?` Provides standard definitions of technical terms peculiar to aeronautics, astronautics and rel&tcid `subjects. Terms in general use in other branches of engineering are also included where they have some special relevance to aeronautics or astronautics. 0.2 This standard consists of a series of parts, feature, type of aircraft, equipment, service, etc. 0;s ?he general
d

each part covering

terms

specific

.to a paiticular . *`.' .. . .... . .

arrangement

of the terms is alphabetical.

ii

w ..

The first one ( or two) digit, in the 0.4 Each term has been assigned a 4.digit or 5-digit number. This part number with the following digit in the thousandth place, represents the part number. The last two digits represent the position of the definition hundredth place represents the section. within a section. Thus the term 6204 is the 4th definition of section 62, which is in Part VI. 0.5 Assistance has been derived from NASA SP-1 ` Short glossary of space terms "issued by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, USA and BS 185 `Aeronautical and astronautical terms ' issued by the British Standards Institution, in the preparation of this standard.

:: 0 .. %

a

x
w i c

f

1. Scope-This 2. Terminology

part covers the standard

definitions

for space terms.

SECTION No. 6101 Aberration Term

61 Definition

In astronomy, the apparent displacement of the position of a celestial body in the direction of motion of the observer, caused by the combination of the velocity of the observer and the velocity of light. c Material .A material designed to dissipate heat by vaporizing or melting.

6102 6103

Ablating Ablation

The removal of surface material from a body by vaporization, melting or other process; specifically the intentional removal of material from a nose cone or spacecraft during high-speed movement through a planetary atmosphere to provide thermal protection to the underlying structure. To cancel or cut short a flight. It also applies preceding flight but preparatory to it. The to cancelling of events

6104 6105

Abort Absorption

`r 6106, 6iO7 Acceleration Accelerometer > The An

process in which incident electromagnetic radiation is retained by a substance. A further process always results from absorption: that is, the irreversible conversion of the absorbed radiation into some other form of energy within and acc0rdin.g to the nature of the absorbing medium. The absorbing medium itself may emit radiation, but only after an energy'conversion has occurred. rate of change of velocity. ` Negative Acceleration `. Decrease in or velocity gravitational is called forces

instrument which measures acceleration capable of imparting acceleration.

Adopted 18 September 1979 I _ INDIAN
MANAK

@ October 1979, ISI STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

I -_..-.-.. INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

mGr#
f

I

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 7879 ( Part VI INo. 6108 Term Accumulator

1978
Definition A device or apparatus that accumulates or stores up, as: (a) a contrivance in a hydraulic system that stores fluid under pressure. (b) a device sometimes incorporated in the fuel system of a gas turbine engine to store up and release fuel under pressure as an It also applies to storage battery. aid in starting. The The speed of p.ropagation Sound `. of sound waves. Also called ' Speed of

6109 6110

Acoustic Acquisition

Velocity

process of locating an object having a relative motion with respect to the observation past; commonly applied to locating a rocket or missile in flight or a satellite in orbit. signal and tracks the object

6111 6112

Acquisition Tracking Active

and Radar

A radar set that locks on to the desired which is the source of the signal.

Here the satellite or rocket acts not merely as a geometric body but processes the signal that comes to it. The rocket or satellite transmitting can be made ` active ' by placing a transponder in it. A substance added to a propellant more even rate of combustion. The study of the distribution the atmosphere. A to achieve some purpose such as in

6113 6114 6115

Additive Aerobiology Aeroduct

of living

organisms

freely

suspended

ramjet type of engine designed to scoop up ions and electrons freely available in the outer reaches of the atmosphere or in the atmospheres of other spatial bodies, and by a chemical process within the duct of this engine, expel particles derived from the ions and electrons as a propulsive jet stream. heating of a body produced by passage of air or other gases over the body, significant chiefly at high speeds, caused by friction and by compression processes.

6126

Aerodynamic

Heating

The

6117

Aerodynamics

The

science that deals with the motion of air and other gaseous fluids, and of the forces acting on bodies when the bodies move through such fluids, or when, such fluids move against or around the bodies.

6118

Aerodynamic

Vehicle

A device, such as an airplane, glider, etc, capable of flight only within a sensible atmosphere and relying on aerodynamic forces to This term is used when the context calls for maintain flight. discrimination from ' space vehicle `, The study of the effect bodies. of aerodynamic forces on structurally elastic

6119 6120

Aeroelasticity Aeroembolism

1. The formation or liberation body, as brought on by relatively high, atmospheric

of gases in the blood vessels of the too rapid a change from a high, or pressure to a lower one. of by in

caused by the formation or liberation 2. The disease or condition The disease is characterized principally gases in the body. neuralgic pains, cramps and swelling, and sometimes results death. Also called ` decompression sickness `. 6121 6122 6123 Aerol ite Aeronomy Aeropause A meteorite composed principally of stoney material.

The study of the upper regions of the atmosphere where physical chemical reactions due to solar radiation take place.

and

A region of indeterminate limits in the upper atmosphere, considered as a boundary or transition region between the denser portion of the atmosphere and space. Of or pertaining to both the earth's ` aerospace industries `. 2 atmosphere and space, as in

6124

Aerospace

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
No. 6125 Term Aerospace Medicine Definition That branch of medicine dealing with the effects of flight through the atmosphere or in space upon the human body, and with the prevention or cure of physiological or psychological malfunctions arising from these effects. An altitude at about 160 km, above which the atmospheres is so rarefied that the motion of an object through it at high speeds generates no significant surface heat. The study of the aerodynamic and thermodynamic ed with aerodynamic heating. Of or pertaining lessness ). to a condition after of no gravitation. problems (see connectWeight-

6126

Aerothermodynamic Border Aerothermodynamics Agravio Air Breakup Airglow Air Shewer Air Sounding

6127 6128 6129 6130 6131 6132

The breakup of a vehicle

re-entry

into the atmosphere. as distin-

A relatively steady emission guished from the sporadic A grouping The of cosmic-ray

from the upper atmosphere, emission of aurorae. observed

particles

in the atmosphere. or determining by means of by a as a

act of measuring atmospheric phenomena atmospheric conditions at altitude, especially apparatus carried by balloons or rockets.

6133

Al bedo

The ratio of the amount of electromagnetic radiation reflected body to the amount falling upon it, commonly expressed percentage. A special type of dc generator the output voltage responds extensively in servo systems. Period

6134

Amplidyne

used as a power
to changes

amplifier, in which in field excitation; used in the

6135 6136 6137 6138

Anomalistic Anoxis Aphelion Apogee

The interval between two successive perigee passages of a satellite orbit about a primary. Also called perigee-to-perigee period. A complete body. lack of oxygen available for physiological celestial object use within

The point at which a planet or other the sun is farthest from the sun.

in orbit about

In an orbit about any celestial body, say earth, the point at which the satellite is farthest from it the highest altitude reached by a sounding rocket. Rocket A rocket attached to a satellite or spacecraft designed to fire when the craft is at apogee. The effect of the apogee rocket is to establish a new orbit farther from the celestial body or to allow the craft to escape from its orbit. rocket engine in which A type of. electrical heated by passing through an electric arc. the propellant gas is.

6139

Apoges

6140 6141

Arc-jet Artificial

Engine Gravity

A simulated gravity established within a space vehicle, as by rotating a cabin about an axis of a spacecraft, the centrifugal force generated being similar to the force of gravity. One of the many small celestial bodies revolving around the sun, Also most of the orbits being between those of Mars and Jupiter. called ` planetoid `, ` minor planet `. A prefix meaning `star' used as the equivalent or ' stars ' and, by extension, sometimes of ' celestial `, as in ` astronautics `.

6142

Asteroid

6143 6144

Astro Astroballistics

The study of the phenomena arising out of the motion of a solid through a gas at speeds high enough to cause ablation, for example, the interaction of a meteoroid with the atmosphere. The study earth. of living organisms on celestial bodies other than the

6145

Astrobiology

3

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
No. 6146 Term Astrodynamics The Definition practical application of celestial mechanics, astroballistics, propulsion theory, and allied fields to the problem of planning and directing the trajectories of space vehicles. a space vehicle. of operating space vehicles.

6147 6148

Astronaut Astronautics

A person who occupies 1. The art, skill, 2. In a broader

or activity

sense, the science

of space flight.

6149

Astronomical

Unit

system of measures, a unit of length usually In the astronomical defined as the distance from the earth to the sun, approximately 92 900 000 statute miles or 149 600 000 km. The envelope surrounding A of air surrounding the earth: also the body of gases or comprising any planet or other celestial body.

6150 6151

Atmosphere Atomic Clock

precision clock that depends for its operation on an electrical oscillator ( as a quartz crystal ) regulated by the natural vibration frequencies of an atomic system (as a beam of cesium atoms or ammonia molecules ). in its

6152

Attitude

The position or orientation of an aircraft, spacecraft, etc, either motion or at rest, as determined by the relationship between axes and some reference line or plane, such as the horizon. Horizontal direction or bearing. gives space position during a countdown, fails

6153 6154 6155 6156

Azimuth Azusa Backout Backup

A short range tracking system which city of the object being tracked. An undoing of things reverse order. already done

and velousually in

1. An item kept available satisfactorily.

to replace

an item which

to perform

2. An item under development intended to perform the same general function performed by another item also under development. 6157 6158 Baker-Nunn Ballistics Camera A large camera used in tracking satellites.

The science that deals with the motion, behaviour and effects of projectiles, especially bullets, aerial bombs, rockets, or the like; the science or art of designing and hurling projectiles so as to achieve a desired performance. Trajectory The trajectory followed by a body being acted upon gravitational forces and the resistance of the medium which it passes. A rocket, gases) that requires the pressure within it to give it structural of its propellants integrity. energy. which only by through (or Radio other waves so

6159

Ballistic

6160 6161 6162 6163 6164

Ballon-Type Beam Beam Rider Bionics Bipropellant

Rocket

A ray or collection of focused used as a navigation aid. A

rays of radiated

craft following a beam, particularly one automatically, the beam providing the guidance.

does

The study of systems which function after the manner of, or in a manner characteristic of, or resembling, living systems. A rocket propellant consisting chemicals (fuel and oxidizer) separately. of two unmixed or uncombined fed to the combustion chamber electronic device, such as an in a rocket, spacecraft, or the

6165

Black Box

Colloquially, any unit, usually an amplifier, which can be mounted like as a single package. 4

IS : 7879 ( Part No.
6166 Term Black Out Definition I. A fede out of radio communications such as ionospheric disturbances, ing a reenty vehicle.

VI ) - 1978

due to environmental factors or a plasma sheath surround-

2. A condition in which vision is temporarily observed by a blackness, accompanied by a dullness of certain of the other senses, brought on by decreased blood pressure in the head and a consequent lack of oxygen, as may occur in pilling out of a high-speed dive in an airplane. 6167 Block House concrete structure, ( Also written ` Block House ' ). A reinforced often built underground or partly underground, and sometimes dome-shaped, to provide protection against blast, heat, or explosion during rocket launchings or related activities: specifically, such a structure at a launch site that houses electronic control instruments used in launching a rocket. As in `Boiler Plate Capsule `, a metal copy of the flight model, the structure or components of which are heavier than the flight model. The vaporization of a cold propellant, such as liquid oxygen or liquid hydrogen, as the temperature of the propellant mass rises as in the tank of a rocket being readied for launch. Short for ' Booster Engine Engine ' or ' Booster thrust during to the thrust Rocket `. either on

6168 6169

Boiler

Plate

Boil Off

6170 6171

Booster Booster

An engine that provides its own or in addition

initial stage of launch of sustainer engine.

6172

Booster

Rocket

1. A rocket engine that assists the normal propulsive system or sustainer engine of a rocket or aeronautical vehicle in some phase of its flight. 2. A rocket used to set a missile engine takes over. vehicle in motion before another

In sense, the term ` Launch Vehicle' 6173 Boost Glide Vehicle

is more commonly

used.

A vehicle ( half aircraft, half spacecraft ) designed to fly to the limits of the sensible atmosphere, then be boosted by rockets into the space above, returning to earth by gliding under aerodynamic control. A series of ellipses, decreasing in size due Zo aerodynamic followed by a spacecraft in entering a planetary atmosphere. drag,

6174

Breaking

Ellipses

In theory, this manoeuvre will allow a spacecraft to dissipate energy through aerodynamic heating without burning up. 6175 Break Off non PhenomeThe feeling which sometimes occurs to human beings high-altitude flight of being totally separated and detached from the earth and Also called the ' breakway phenomenon `. human society. Electromagnetic radiatian produced by the rapid change in the velocity of an electron or another fast, charged particle as it approaches and atomic nucleus and is deflected by it. A period during which a rocket engine is firing as in ` second burn `, the second period during a Right in which the engine is firing. 1. An act or instance of the end of fuel and exidizer burning in a rocket; the time at which this burnout occurs. Compare cutoff. 2. An act or instance of something burning out or of overheating; specifically, an act or instance of a rocket combustion chamber, nozzle, or other part overheating so as to result in damage or destruction.

6176

Bremsstrahlung

6177

Burn

6178

Burnout

5

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
No. 6179 Capsule Term 1. A boxlike component Definition or unit, often sealed.

2. A small sealed, pressurized cabin with an internal environment which will support life in a man or animal during extremely high altitude flighf, space flight, or emergency escape. 6180 Cascade Shower A group occurrence of cosmic 62 Definition The study of the theory of the motions influence of gravitational fields. An imaginary sphere which all celestial projected. of celestial bodies under the rays. Also called ` air shower `.

SECTION No. 6201 6202 Celestial Celestial Term Mechanics Sphere

of infinite radius concentric with the earth, on bodies except the earth are assumed to be

6203

Centrifuge

Specifically, a large motor-driven apparatus with a long arm at the end of which human and animal subjects or equipment can be revolved and rotated at various speeds to simulate very closely the prolonged accelerations encountered in high-performance aircraft, rockets, and spacecraft. A sequency spacecraft Fuel 1. A of actions taken to test or examine a launch vehicle as to its readiness to perform its intended function. or

6204 6205

Checkout Chemical

fuel that depends upon an oxidizer for combustion development of thrust, such as liquid or solid rocket internal combustion engine fuel; distinguished from fuel. chemicals, such as a boron-based

or for fuel or nuclear fuel. for

2. A fuel that uses special 6206 6207 6208 6209 Chemical Rocket

A rocket using chemical fuel, fuel which requires combustion, such as liquid or solid rocket fuel. The vaguely defined chemical reactions See ` chugging `. region of the upper atmosphere take place.

an oxidizer in which

Chemisphere Chuffing Chugging

photo-

A form of combustion instability, especially in a liquid propellant rocket engine, characterized by a pulsing operation at a fairly low frequency sometimes defined as occurring between particular Also frequency limits; the noise made in this kind of combustion. called ' chuffing `. (Latin cis ` on this side ' ), of or pertaining to phenomena, projects, or activity in the space between the earth and moon, or between the earth and the moon's orbit. A system that provides for the maintenance of life in an isolated living chamber such as a spacecraft cabin by means of a cycle wherein exhaled carbon dioxide, urine, and other waste matter are converted chemically or by photosynthesis into oxygen, water, and food. A test of a efficiency ing and propellant calibration liquid rocket without firing it to check or verify the of a propulsion sub-system, providing for the conditionflow of propellants ( including tank pressurizafion, loading, and propellant feeding); also called water test.

6210

Cislunar

6211

Closed Ecological System

6212

Cold Flow Test

6213

Comet

A luminous member of the solar system composed of a head or coma at fhe cenfre of which a presumably solid nucleus is sometimes situated, and often wifh a spectacular gaseous tail extending a The orbits of comets are highly great distance from the head. elliptical. 6

IS : 7879 ( Part VI )- 1978
No. 6214 6215 Term Command Communications Sate1 I i te Companion Composite Body Materials Definition A signal which initiates or triggers an action in the device receives the signal commonly called ' telecommand `. which

A satellite designed to reflect, process, relay radio or other magnetic waves. A satellite that is used for the purpose of broadcast communication, data relaying, etc. A nose cone, last-stage an earth satellite. rocket, or other body that orbits along with

6212 6217

Structural materials of metal alloys or plastics with built-in strengthening agents which may be in the form of filaments, foils, or flakes of a strong materials. A solid rocket propellant consisting of a fuel and an oxidizer.

6218 6219

Composite Configuration

Propellant

A particular type others of the components or as ` long-range

of a specific aircraft, rocket, etc; which differs from same model by virtue of the arrangement of its by the addition or omission of auxiliary equipment configuration `, ' cargo configuration `.

6220

Console

An array of controls and indicators for the monitoring and control of a particular sequency of actions, as in the checkout of a rocket, a countdown action, or a launch procedure. A vane that reverses ' countervane `. or neutralizes a rotation of flow. Also called a

6221 . 6222 6223

Contravane Control Control Rocket

Specifically, to direct the movements of an aircraft, rocket, or spacecraft with particular reference to changes in altitude and speed. A vernier engine, retrorocket, or other such rocket, used to guide or make small changes in the velocity of a rocket, spacecraft, or the like. The faintly luminous corona `. Dust Rays Small meteoroids outer envelope of the sun. Also called `solar

6224 6225 6226

Corona Cosmic Cosmic

of a size similar

to dust.

The extremely high energy sub-atomic particles which bombard the atmosphere from outer space. Cosmic-ray primaries seem to be mostly protons, hydrogen nuclei, but also comprise heavier nuclei. On colliding with atmospheric particles they produce many different kinds of lower-energy secondary cosmic radiation. ` Committee Abbreviation for Council of Scientific Unions. on Space Research `, InternationaB out only to at

6227 6228 6229 6230 6231

Cospar Countdown Cryogenic Cryogenic ture Cutoff Propellant Tempera-

The time period in which a sequence of event launch a rocket; the sequence of events. A rocket fuel, oxidizer, very low temperatures. or propulsion fluid which

is carried is liquid

In general, a temperature range below about -50�C; more particularly, temperatures within a few degrees of absolute zero. An act or instance of shutting something off; specifically in rocketry, an act or instance of shutting off the propellant flow in a rocket, or of stopping the combustion of the propellant. Transformation information. of observed values into useful, ordered, a device, or simplified or mistakes

6232 6233

Data Reduction Debug

1. To isolate and remove malfunctions from from a computer routine or programme.

2. Specifically, in electronic manufacturing, to operate equipment under specified environmental and test conditions in order to eliminate early failures and to stabilize equipment prior to actual use. 7

IS : 7879( Part VI ) - 1978
No.
6234 6235 Term Deceleration Deep Space Proves Definition The act of process of moving, or of causing speed; the state of so moving. to move, with decreasing

Spacecraft designed for exploring space to the vicinity of the moon and beyond. Deep space probes with specific missions may be referred to as ` lunar prob `, `Mars probe `, ` solar probe' etc. The deliberate action of destroying a rocket vehicle launched, but before it has completed its course. A device enabling an antenna system two frequencies for transmission, transmission and reception. A parabolic type of radio soup bowl. or radar after it has been at of of a

6236 6237

Destruct Diplexer

to be used simultaneously reception or combination roughly the shape

6238 6239 6240 6241

Dish Display Docking Dosimeter

antenna,

The graphic presentation of the output for example, a radar scope. The process of bringing two spacecraft

data of a devioe or system as, together while in space. material, they have

A device, worn by persons which indicates the amount been exposed.

working around radioactive (dose ) of radiation to which

6242

Dovap

From Doppler, velocity and position, a tracking system the Doppler shift caused by a target moving relative transmitter to obtain velocity and position information. Parachute

which uses to a ground also

6243 6244 6245

Drogue Duplexer Dynamic

A type of parachute attached to a body, used to slow it down; called ` deceleration parachute ' or ` drag parachute `. A device which permits a single transmitting and receiving. antenna system

to be used for both of its motion,

Pressure

1. The pressure exerted by a fluid, 2. The

such as air, by virtue

pressure exerted on a body, by virtue of its motion through a fluid, for example, the pressure exerted on a rocket moving through the atmosphere.

6246

Dysbarism

A general term which includes a complex group of a wide variety of symptoms within the body caused by changes in ambient pressure, exclusive of hypoxia. The formation of bubbles, with particular reference to water vapour bubbles in biological fluids, caused by reduced ambient pressure. The apparent annual path of the sun among the stars; section of the plane of the earth's orbit with the celestial System A the intersphere.

6247 6248 6249

Ebullism Eceliptic Ecological

habitable environment, either created artificially, such as in a or occurring naturally, such as the manned space vehicle, environment on the surface of the earth, in which man, animals, or other organism can live in mutual relationship with each other.

6250

Ejection

Capsule

1. In an aircraft or manned spacecraft, a detachable compartment serving as a cokpit or cabin, which may be ejected as a unit and parachuted to the ground. 2. In an artificial satellite, probe, or unmanned spacecraft, a boxlike unit usually containing recording instruments or records of observed data, which may be ejected and returned to earth by a parachute or other deceleration device.

6251

Elasticize,r

An elastic substance or fuel used in a solid rocket propeljant to prevent cracking of the propellant grain and to bind it to the combustion-chamber case. 8

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
NO.

Term Electric Propulsion

Definition The general of thrust for a rocket engine involving acceleration of a propellant by some electrical device, such as an arc jet, ion engine, or magnetohydrodynamic accelerator. Energy propagated through space or through material media in the form of an advancing disturbance in electrical and magnetic fields existing in space or in the media. Also called simply ` radiation `. The use of electronic devices and systems in the processing so as to interpret the data and put it into usable form. An of data

6252

6253

Electromagnetic Radiation Electronic Data Processing Environment

6254 6255

external condition or the sum of such conditions, in which a piece of equipment or a system operates, as in `temperature `, or ` space environment `, environment `, ` vibration environment or larger body must attain field of a planet or star. on celestial bodies in order

6256 6257 6258 6259 6260

Escape Velocity Exobiology Exosphers Exotic Fuel Explosive Bolt

The radial speed which a particle to escape from the gravitational The study of living the earth. The outermost, organisms

existing

other than

topmost

portion

of the atmosphere. as a boronbased fuel.

Any fuel considered A

to be unusual,

bolt incorporating an explosive which can be detonated on command, thus destroying the bolt. Explosive belts are used, for example, in separating a satellite from a rocket. the earth.

6261 6262

Extraterrestrial Eyeballs out In, Eyeballs

From outside

Terminoloav used bv test pilots to describe the acceleration experienced by the persons being accelerated. Thus the acceleration experienced by an astronaut at lift-off is ` eyeballs in ' ( positive g in terms of vehicle a&eleration ), and the acceleration experienced when retrorockets fire is ` eyeballs out' ( negative g in terms of vehicle acceleration ). A section of rocket vehicle that is cast off and separates from the vehicle during flight, especially such a section that falls back to the earth. . A weckening or deterioration member, occurring under or continued loading. of metal or other material, or of a load, especially under repeated, cyclic,

6263

Fallaway

Section

6264

Fatigue

6265

Field

A region of space at each point of which a given physical quantity has some definite value, thus a ' gravitational field `, an ` electric field `, a ' magnetic field `, etc. The cooling of a body or surface, such as the inner surface of a rocket combustion chamber, by maintaining a thin fluid layer over the affected area. A synchronous satellite in a circular, equatorial direction of rotation of the primary body. A bright eruption from the sun's chromosphere. counter in to the usual to the or orbit, moving in the

6266

Film Cooling

6267 6268 6269 6270 6271 6272

Fixed Satellite Flare Flashback Flux Flying Test Bed

A reversal of flame propagation in a system, flow of the combustible mixture. The rate of flow of some quantity, flow of some form of energy. An aircraft, rocket, or other flying devices being flight tested. often vehicle used

reference

used to carry

objects

Free Fall

1. The fall or drop of a body, such as a rocket, not guided, not under thrust, and not retarded by a parachute or other breaking device. 2. Weightlessness. 9

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - `I978 No.
6273 g or G Term Definition An acceleration equal to the acceleration of gravity, approximately 980'6 centimetre per second at sea level; used as a unit of stress. measurement for bodies undergoing acceleration. Miscellaneous objects in orbit, usually material away from a launch vehicle or satellite. ejected or broken

6274 6275

Garbage Gas Cap

The gas immediately in front of a meteoroid or re-entry body as it. travels through the atmosphere; the leading portion of a meteor. This gas is compressed and adiabatically heated to incandescene. In any technical or technological development, as of a missile jet engine, or the like, a stage or period that is marked by features or in a previous period of performances not marked, or existent, development or production, as in ` second generation rocket `, A prefix meaning ` earth `, as in ' geology `, ` geophysics as a centre; the science measured which from deals `. of the and

6276

Generation

6277 6278 6279 6280

Geo Geocentric Geodetic Geomagnetism

Relative to the earth earth. Pertaining to geodesy, shape of the earth.

the centre with the

size

The magnetic phenomena, collectively considered, exhibited by the earth and its atmosphere; by extension, the magnetic phenomena in interplanetary space. SECTION 63 Definition The physics of the earth and its environment, ( by extension ), space. that is, earth, air, and

No. 6301 6302

Term Geophysics Geopotential

The potential energy of a unit mass relative to sea level, numerically equal to the work that would be done in lifting the unit mass from sea level to the height at which the mass is located; commonly expressed in terms of dynamic height or geopotential height. A prefix meaning multipled by one billion.

6303 6304

Giga Gimbal

1. A device with two mutually perpendicular and intersecting ares of rotation, thus giving free angular movement in two directions, on which an engine or other object may be mounted, 2. In a gyro, a support of-freedom. which provides the spin axis with a degree-

6305 6306 6307

Gose Grain Gravity

Gaseous

oxygen. molding of size. or extrusion of solid propellant for a rocket,

An elongated regardless

The force imparted bv the earth to a mass on, or close to the earth. Since the'earth is rotating, the force observed as gravity is the resultant of the force of gravitation and the centrifugal force arising from this rotation. A suit that exerts pressure on the abdomen and lower parts of the body to prevent or retard the collection of blood below the chest under positive acceleration. A tolerance in a person or other animal, or in a piece of equipment, to an acceleration of a particular value. The process of directing the movements of an aeronautical space vehicle, with particular reference to the selection path or trajectory. 10 vehicle or of a flight

6308

Suit or G-Suit

6309 6310

g-tolerance Guidance

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
No. 6311 Gyro Term Definition A device which utilizes the angular momentum of a spinning rotor to sense angular motion of its base about one or two axes at right angles to the spin axes. Also called ' gyroscope `. Any device that protects A something from heat. heat; a device utilizing such a protection device on a spacecraft by actually firing the propellants.

6312 6313

Heat Shield Heat Sink

material capable of absorbing material and used as a thermal or re-entry vehicle. system test conducted

6314 6315

Hot Test Human Engineering

A propulsion

The art of science of designing, building, or equipping mechanical devices or artificial environments to the anthropometric, physiological, or psychological requirements of the men who wilt use them. Fluctuation about a midpoint due to instability, as oscillations needle of an instrument about a median value. 1. Pertaining 2. Pertaining to hypersonic flow. of the

6316 6317

Hunting Hypersonic

to speeds of Mach 5 or greater.

6318

Hypersonic

Flow

In aerodynamics, flow of a fluid over a body at speeds much greater than the speed of sound and in which the shock waves start at a finite distance from the surface of the body. Oxygen deficiency in the blood, cells or tissues of the body in such degree as to cause psychological and physiological disturbances. Any device used to begin combustion, combustion chamber of a jet engine, in a rocket. The area in which An such as a spark plug in the or a squib used to ignite fuel surface. or re-entry capsule integrated orbit or on to or a

6319 6320

Hypoxia Igniter

6321 6322 6323 6324 6325 6326

Impact Area Impact Bag Inertial Injection Interferometer Ionosphere Guidance

a rocket strikes the earth's

inflatable bag attached to a spacecraft absorb part of the shock of landing.

Guidance by means position of velocity The

of acceleration measured and information within the craft. satellite body. into

process of putting an artificial trajectory leading to some celestial

An apparatus used to produce and measure interference more coherent wave trains from the same source.

from two or

The part of the earth's outer atmosphere where ions and electrons are present in quantities suffkient to effect the propagation of radio waves. A vector that specifies the time rate of change of an acceleration; third derivative of displacement with respect to time. The load-bearing base or platform launched. Usually called ` pad `. The metal launch. ring on the launch from which a rocket vehicle the is

6327 6328 6329

Jerk Launch Pad Launch Ring Vehicles

pad on which

a missile

stands

before

6330 Launch

Any device which propels and guides a spacecraft into orbit about the earth or into a trajectory to another celestial body. Often called ` booster `. An interval of time durina which a rocket can be launched to accomplish a particular purpose as ` lift-off occurred 5 minutes after the beginning of the 82 minute launch window `. real or apparent oscillatory oscillation of the moon. 11 motion, particularly the apparent

6331

Launch Window

6332

Libration

A

IS : 7879( Part VI ) - 1978
No.
6333 6334 6335 6336 6337 6338 Lift-off Line of Position Liquid-Propellant Rocket Engine Local Vertical Longitudinal Lox Axis Term The action of rocket vehicle verticle ascent. Definition as it separates all possible from its launch pad in a at a form, acts.

In navigation, line representing given instant.

locations

of a draft in liquid

A rocket engine fueled with a propellant or propellants Also called ` liquid-propellant rocket `. At a particular The fore-and-aft point, the direction in which

the force of gravity of a draft. tank `, `lox oxygen.

line through

the centre of gravity as in `lox

1. Liquid oxygen. Used attributively also called ` loxygon `,

unit `, Hence,

2. To load the fuel tanks of a rocket vehicle ` loxing `. 6339 Mach Number

with liquid

A number expressing the ratio of the speed of a body or of a point on a body with respect to the surrounding air or other fluid, or the speed of a flow, to the speed of sound in the medium; the speed represented by this number. A world-wide disturbance of the earth's magnetic field.

6340 6341

Magnetic

Storm

Magnetohydrodynamics Magnetometer Magnitude Main Bang Main Stage

The study of the interaction that exists between a magnetic field and an electrically conducting fluid. Also called ` magnetoplasma`, ` MHD `. dynamics `, ` hydromagnetics An instrument used in the study magnetic element. Relative brightness of a celestial number, the brighter the body. Within of geomagnetism body. The pulse. the greatest amount for measuring any

6342 6343 6344 6345

smaller

the magnitude

a radar system, the transmitted

1, In a multistage rocket, the stage that develops of thrust, with or without booster engines.

2. In a single stage rocket vehicle powered by one or more engines, the period when full thrust ( at or above 90 percent ) is attained. 3, A sustainer engine, considered as a stage after booster have fallen away, as in ` the main stage of the Atlas `. 6346 6347 6348 6349 6350 Manometer Mass Mass Ratio Mechanoreceptor Meteor An instrument for measuring pressure of gases above and below atmospheric pressure. of matter engines both

and vapours

The measure of the amount

in a body, thus its inertia.

The ratio of the mass of the propellant charge of a rocket to the total mass of the rocket charged with the propellant. A nerve ending that and acceleration. reacts to mechanical stimuli, as touch, tension,

In particular, the light phenomenon which results from the entry into the earth's atmosphere of a solid particle from space, more generally, any physical object or phenomenon associated with such an event. Of or pertaining to meteors, or meteoroids. being

6351 6352 6353

Meteoric Meteorite Meteoroid

A meteoroid which has reached the surface of the earth without completely vaporized.

A solid object moving in interplanetary space, of a size considerably smaller than an asteroid and considerably larger than an atom or molecule. , 12

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
NO.

Term Meteorological Rocket

Definition A rocket designed primarily for routine upper-air observation (as opposed to research ) in the lower 75 000 metres of the atmosphere, especially that portion inaccessible to balloons, i.e.; above 30 000 metres. Also called ` rocketsonde `. A very small meteorite or meteoritic less than a millimetre. particle with a diameter between in general

6354

6355 6356 6357 6358

Micrometeorite Microwave Mini Miniaturize Region

Commonly that region of the radio spectrum 1 000 megacycles and 300 000 megacycles. A contraction component',

approximately as in ` mini-

of ' miniat.ure' used in combination, ` miniradio `, ` minitransistor `,

To construct a functioning minature of a part or instrument. Said of telemetering instruments or parts used in an earth satellite or rocket vehicle, where room is at a premimum. Hence, ' miniaturized `, ' miniaturization `. A satellite tracking system consisting of a field of separate antennas and associated receiving equipment interconnected so as to form interferometers which track a transmitting beacon in the payload itself. Any object thrown, dropped, fired, launched, or otherwise with the purpose of striking a target. Short for ' ballistic ' guided missile `. projected missile `,

6359

Minitrack

6360

Missile

6361

Mock-up

A full-sized replica or dummy of something, such as a spacecraft, often made of some substitute material, such as wood, and sometimes incorporating functioning pieces of equipment, such as engines. Specifically, variation of some characteristic of radio wave, called the values of another ` carrier wave `, in accordance with instantaneous wave, called the ` modulating wave `. 1. A self-contained unit of a launch vehicle or spacecraft which serves as a building block for the overall structure. The module is usually designated by its primary function as `command module `, ` landing module `, etc. one-package assembly parts; usually a plug-in of functionally unit. associated electronic

6362

Modulation

6363

Module

2. A 6364 Monopropellant

A rocket propellant consisting liquid, capable of producing second substance.

of a single substance, especially a a heated jet without the addition of a

6365

Multiplexer

A mechanical or electrical device for sharing of a circuit by two or more coincident signals. A device that allows a cable/anteena system to be used by various frequencies for reception of transmission, The simultaneous channel. A transmission of two of more signals or more within a single fed

6366 6367 6368

Multiplexing Multipropellant Multistage Rocket

rocket propellant consisting of two separately to the combustion chamber.

substances

A vehicle having two or more rocket units, each unit firing after the one in back of it has exhausted its propellant. Normally, each unit, or stage, is jettisoned after completing its firing. Also called `a ` multiple-stage rocket ' or, infrequently, a ` step rocket `. Any undesired sound. By extension, noise is any unwanted disturbance within a useful frequency band, such as undesired When caused electric waves in a transmission channel or device. by natural electrical discharges in the atmosphere noise may be called ' static `. 13

6369

Noise

IS i7879
No. 6370

( Part VI ) - 1978
Term Definition A shock wave perpendicular, or substantially so, to the direction of flow in a supersonic flow field. Sometimes shortened to ` normal shock `. The cone-shaped leading end of a rocket vehicle consisting: (a) of a chamber or chambers in which a satellite, instruments, animals, plants, or auxiliary equipment may be carried; and (b) of an outer surface built to withstand high temperatures generated by aerodynamic heating. A star which suddenly becomes and then gradually fades. many times brighter than previously in which to high

Normal Shock Wave

6371

Nosecone

6372 6373

Nova Nozzle

Specifically, the part of a rocket thrust chamber assembly the gases produced in the chamber are accelerated velocities. Fuel Radiation Fissionable material of reasonably ing energy in a nuclear reactor. The emission of neutrons as the result of nuclear An apparatus supporting

6374 6375 6376

Nuclear Nuclear

long life, used or usable in producnucleus

and other particles from an atomic fission or nuclear fusion.

Nuclear Reactor

in which nuclear fission may be sustained in a selfchain reaction. Commonly called ` reactor `, of a body behind another body of larger apparent

6377 Occultation 6378 6379 Octave Oculogravie Illusion

The disappearance size. The interval

between

any two frequencies

having

the ratio of 1 : 2. caused by the of the vertical

The apparent displacement of an object in space difference which mav exist between the direction and that of resultantg. SECTION 64 Definition

No. 6401

Term Oculogyral Illusion

The apparent movement of an object in the same direction which one seems to be turning when the semicircular the inner ear are stimulated. 1. The

as that in canals of

6402

Orbit

path of a body under the influence of a gravita.. _ _ or particle tional or other force. For instance, the orbit ot a celestial body is its path relative to another body around which it revolves. the earth or other body in an orbit. defining the orbit passages of a satellite. of a satellite. satellite or other orbitting

2. To go around 6403 6404 6405 Orbital Orbital Orbital Elements Period Velocity

A set of seven parameters The interval between

successive

1. The average velocity at which an earth body travels around its primary.

2. The velocity of such a body at any given point in its orbit, as in ` its orbital velocity at the apogee is less than at the perigee `. 6406 6407 6408 6409 6410 Otolith Outgassing Oxidizer Paraglider Passive A small calcareous concretion located part in the mechanism of orientation. The evolution Specifically, supports A of gas from a solid in the inner ear which plays a

in a vacuum. oxygen ) that in recovery

a substance ( not necessarily containing the combustion of a fuel or propellant. vehicle designed for use or as a re-entry vehicle. contrasted

flexible-winged, kite-like system for launch vehicles a signal without 14

Reflecting

transmission,

with active.

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
No. 6411 Payload Term Definition 1. Originally, the revenue producing portion of an aircraft's example, passengers, cargo, mail, etc. load, for

2. By extension that which an aircraft, rocket, or the like carries over and above what is necessary for the operation of the vehicle during its flight. 6412 6413 6414 Pori Porigeo Perturbation A prefix meaning That orbital point attraction. near, as in ` porigeo nearest to the earth `, when the earth is the centre of

Specifically, a disturbance in the regular motion of a celestial body, the result of a force additional to those which cause the regular motion. A projected type of reaction engine from a steam of electromagnetic The intensely bright portion in which thrust radiation. would be obtained eye.

6415 6416 6417 6418

Photon

Engine

Photosphere Physiological Acceleration Pickoff

of the sun visible by a human

to the unaided

The acceleration experienced in an accelerating vehicle. A

or an animal

test subject

used in combination with a gyroscope in an sensing device, automatic pilot or other automatic or robot apparatus, that responds to angular movement to create a signal or to effect some type of control.

6419

Pickup

A device that converts a sound, view, or other form of intelligence into signals ( for example, a microphone, a corresponding electric television camera, or a phonograph pickup 1. Signal indication on the scope of an electronic by a short, sharply peaked pulse of voltage. The programmed turn takes as it describes vertical. instrument, Also called produced ' blip'.

6420 6421

Pip Pitchover

from the vertical that a rocket under power an arc and points in a direction other than that show up as bright patches

6422 6423 6424

Plages Planet Plasma

Clouds of calcium or hydrogen vapour on the visible surface of the sun.

A celestial body of the solar system, revolving around the sun in a nearly circular orbit, or a similar body revolving around a star. An electrically conductive gas comprised of neutral particles, ionized particles, and free electrons but which, taken, as a whole, is electrically neutral. A reaction propellant. engine using magnetically accelerated the ejection plasma as

6425 6426 6427 6428

Plasma Engine Plasma Jet Plasma Sheath Polarization

A magnetohydrodynamic generates thrust.

rocket engine

in which

of plasma through am

An envelope of ionized gas that surrounds atmosphere at hypersonic velocities. A

a body moving

state of electromagnetic radiation in which transverse vibrations take place in some regular manner, for example, all in one plane, in a circle, in an ellipse, or in some other definite curve.

6429 6430

Posigrade Precession

Rocket

An auxiliary rocket which fires in the direction in which the vehicle is pointed, used, for example, in separating two stages of a vehicle. The change in the direction of the axis of rotation of a spinning or of the plane of the orbit of an orbiting body when acted by an outside force. body upon

IS

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978 No.
6431 Term Procession equinoxes Pressure Suit of the Definition The conical motion of the earth's axis about the vertical to the plane of the ecliptic, caused by the attractive force of the sun, moon, and other planets on the ,quaiorial protuberance of the earth. A garment designed to provide the human body an environment above ambient pressure so that respiratory and circulatory functions may continue normally, or nearly so, under low-pressure conditions, such as occur at high altitudes or in space without benefit of a pressurized cabin. Containing air, or other gas, at a pressure pressure outside the container. A step in the action of igniting a large liquid ignition of the full flow, and consisting of propellants into the thrust chamber, The spatial body about which it is escaping, Rays High-energy Any device
information

6432

6433 6434

Pressurized Prestage

that

is higher

than

the

rocket taken prior to the of igniting a partial flow, or from

6435 6436 6437

Primary Body Primary Cosmic Probe

which a satellite or other body orbits, or towards which it is falling. outside the earth's atmosphere.

Particks

originating

in an environment for the purpose of obtaining the environment, specifically, an instrumented vehicle moving through the upper atmosphere or space, or landing UPOn another celestial body in order to obtain information about the specific environment, inserted
about

6438 6439 6440 6441 6442

Prominence Propellant Proving Purge Radar A.stronomy Stand

A filament-like Short

protuberance propellant

from the visible `. especially

portion

of the sun.

for ` rocket

A test stand for reaction

engines,

rocket engines, of fuel or oxygen in the or simulated test firing. system by means of from the body under Radiation `. incident unwanted of nuclear radiation.

To rid a line or tank of residual fluid, especially tanks or lines of a rocket after a test firing The study of celestial radiation originating observation. bodies within the solar on earth but reflected Radiation `, ' Nuclear

6443 6444 6445

Radiation Radiation Radiation Pressure Shield

Short for ' Electromagnetic Pressure exerted upon body. upon

a body by electromagnetic

radiation

1. A device used on certain types of instruments to prevent radiation from biasing the measurement of a quantity. 2. A device used to protect bodies from the harmful radiation, cosmic radiation, or the like. effects

6446

Radiator

1. Any source

of radiant

energy,

especially

electromagnetic

2. A device that dissipates heat from not necessarily by radiation only. 6447 6448 6449 6450 6451 Radio Astronomy Radio Meteor Ridiosonde Radio Telescope Rarefied Gas Dynamics

something,

as from water or oil, of radio frequency from the meteor trail measurement and

The study of celestial objects through observation waves emitted or reflected by these objects. A meteor detected by the reflection of radio signal of relativelv_hiah ion densitvJ ion column 1, A balloon-borne transmission instrument for of meteorological

the simultaneous data.

A &vice for receiving, amplifying, and measuring the intensity waves originating outside the earth's atmosphere. The study of the phenomena related to the molecular nature of gas flow at low densities. 16

of radio

or nOnCOntinUUm

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978 No.
6452 6453 Term Reaction Control System Reaction Engine A system of controlling lieu of aerodynamic Definition the attitude of a craft control surfaces. by using jets of gas in

An engine that develops thrust by its reaction to ejection of a substance from it; specifically, such an engine that ejects a jet or stream of gases created by the burning of fuel within the engine. The action of a radio transmitter transmitting data either instantaneously with the acquisition of the data or by play of a magnetic tape upon which the data have been recorded. from a

6454

Readout

6455 6456 6457

Readout

Station

A recording or receiving radio station at which data are received transmitter in a probe, satellite, or other spacecraft. Time in which reporting with the events. on events or recording

Real Time Recovery

of events is simultaneous

The procedure or action that obtains when the whole of a satellite, or a section, instrumentation package, or other part of a rocket vehicle is recovered after a launch, the result of this procedure. In a countdown: To stop the count and to return to an earlier point in the countdown, as in `we have recycled, now at T minus 80 and counting `. In astronomy, the displacement of observed spectral lines toward longer wavelengths of the red end of the spectrum. the

6458

Recycle

6459 6460

Red Shift Re-entry

The event occurring when a spacecraft or other object comes back into the sensible atmosphere after being rocketed to altitudes above the sensible atmosphere; the action involved in this event. Vehicle Window A space vehicle designed sensible atmosphere. to return with its payload to earth through the

6461 6462

Re-entry Re-entry

The area at the limits of the earth's atmosphere through which a spacecraft in a given trajectory can pass to accomplish a successful re-entry. The cooling of a part of an engine by the propellant being delivered to the cumbustion chamber; specifically, the cooling of a rocketengine combustion chamber or nozzle by circulating the fuel or oxidizer, or both, around the part to be cooled. The event of two or more objects place. meeting at a preconceived time and

6463

Regenerative

Cooling

6464 6465 6466

Rendezvou Retrocket Rocket

A rocket fitted on or in a spacecraft, satellite, thrust opposed to forward motion. 1. A projectile, pyrotechnic rocket engine. 2. A rocket engine. device, or flying

or the like to produce vehicle propelled by a

6467

Rocket Engine

A

reaction engine that contains within itself, or carries along with itself, all the substances necessary for its operation or for the consumption or'combustion o,f its fuel, not requiring intake of any outside substance and hence capable of operation in outer space. Also called ' Rocket Motor `.

6468

Rocket Propellant

Any agent used for consumption or combustion in a rocket and from which the rocket derives its thrust, such as a fuel, oxidizer, additive, ` Rocket Propecatalyst, or any compound or mixture of these. llant' is often shortened to ' Propellant. ' Meteorological rocket

6469 6470

Rocketsonde Rockoon

A high-altitude sounding system consisting of a small solid-propellant research rocket launched from a large plastic balloon. 17

IS : 7879( Part VI ) - 1978
No. 6471 Roll Term Definition The rotational or oscillatory movement of an aircraft or similar body which takes place about a longitudinal axis through the body called `roll ' for any amount of such rotation. Turning of a body about an axis within of the earth. A the body, as the daily rotation

6472 6473

Rotation Rumble

form of combustion instability, especially in a liquid-propellant rocket engine, characterized by a low-pitched, low frequency rumbling noise; the noise made in this kind of combustion.

6474

Satellite

I. An attendant body that revolves about another body, the primary; especially in the so!ar system, a secondary body, or moon, that revolves about a planet. 2. A manmade object that revolves about ` Explorer I ' orbiting about the earth. a spatial body, such as

6475

Scale Height

A measure of the relationship between density and temperature at any point in an atmosphere; the thickness of a homogeneous atmophere which would give the observed temperature or pressure. 1. Regions of different special apparatus. density in a fluid, especially as shown regions by of

6476

Schlieren

2. A method or apparatus for visualizing varying density in a field of flow. 6477 Screaming A

or photographing

form of combustion instability, especially in a liquid-propellant rocket engine, or relatively high frequency and characterized by a high-pitched noise. a scheduled emission rocket firing, either before or during countdown. in the atmosphere stimulated by a primary cosmic

6478 6479 6480

Scrub Secondary Rays Seeing Cosmic

To cancel Secondary rays.

A blanket term long used by astronomers for the disturbing effects produced by the atmosphere upon the image quality of an observed astronomical body. Relating to the centre of the moon; referring to the moon as a centre.

6481

Selenocentric

SECTION

65 Definition

No.
6501

Term Selenographic I. Of or pertaining

to the physical

geography

of the moon.

2. Specifically, referring to positions on the moon measured in latitude from the moon's equator and in longitude from a reference meridian. 6502 6503 Semicircular Sensor Canals Tubes located in the inner ear which balance and orientation. play a part in the mechanism of

The component of an instrument that converts an input signal into a quantity which is measured by another part of the instrument. Also called ` Sensing Element `. A picture or image in which steep density gradients in the flow about a body are made visible, the body itself being presented in silhouette. Short for ' Radiation Shield `, ` Heat Shield `.

6504

Shadowgraph

6505 6506

Shield Shock Tube

A relatively long tube or pipe in which very brief high-speed gas flows are produced by the sudden release of gas at very high pressure into a low-pressure portion of the tube; the high-speed flow moves into the,region of low pressure behind a shock wave. 18

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978 No.
6507 Shoran Term A precision electronic and receiver and fixed points. Definition position fixing system using a pulse transmitter two receiver and two transponder beacons at the `. earth's

6508 6509 6510 6511 6512 6513 6514 6515

Shot Sidereal Sloshing Slurry Soft Radiation Solar Tide Atmospheric

An act or instance of firing a rocket, especially from surface, as ` The shot carried the rocket 300 kilometres Of or pertaining The to the stars.

back-and-forth splashing of a liquid fuel in its tanks, problems of stability and control in the vehicle. of fine solid particles in a liquid. equivalent or

creating

A suspension

Radiation which is absorbed metres of load or less.

by an absorber due

to 10 centigravitational into electrical

Vertical motion of the atmosphere action of the sun. A The photovoltaic energy. device that converts

to thermal directly

Solar Cell Solar Constant

sunlight

rate at which solar radiation is received on a surface perpendicular to the incident radiation and at the earth's mean distance from the sun; but outside the earth's atmosphere. radiation emitted by the sun. both

6516 6517 6518

Solar Radiation Solid Propellant

The total electromagnetic

Specifically, a rocket propellant in solid form, usually containing fuel and oxidizer combined or mixed and formed into grain.

Solid Propellant Rocket Engine

A rocket engine using a solid propellant. Such engines consist essentially of a combustion chamber containing the propellant, and a nozzle for the exhaust jet, although they often contain other components, as grids, liners, etc. 1. Aerodynamics: of or pertaining to the speed of sound; that moves at the speed of sound, as in ` Sonic Flow `; designed to operate or perform at the speed of sound, as in ` Sonic Leading Edge `, 2. Of or pertaining to sound, as in `Sonic Amplifier'. A stream of elementary from the sun. A noise caused other object sound. TheMsa;rf charged particles constantly moving outward

6519

Sonic

6520 6521

Solar Wind Sonic Boom

by the shock wave that emanates from an aircraft or travelling in the atmosphere at or above the speed of by extension, the speed of the of a body natural travelling at for

6522 6523

Sonic Speed Sounding

of sound;

1. In geophysics, any penetration scientific observation. 2. In metrology, connotation

environment

However, a common same as upper-air observation. is that of a single complete radiosonde observation. the atmosphere within 6 400 kilometres the limits of

6524 6525

Sounding Space

Rocket

A rocket designed to explore the earth's surface.

1. Specifically, the part of the universe earth's atmosphere. 2. More generally, earth, move. the volume in which

lying outside all spatial

of the the

bodies,

including

6526 6527

Space-air Spacecraft

Vehicle

A vehicle that atmosphere.

may

be operated

either within

or above the sensible

Devices, manned and unmanned, which are designed to be placed into an orbit about the earth or into a trajectory to another celestial body. 19

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
NO.

Term Space Equivalent Space fvledicine

Definition
A condition within the earth's atmosphere that is virtually identical, terms of a particular function, with a condition in outer space. in

652% 6529

A branch of aerospace medicine concerned specifically with the health ot persons who make, or expect to make, flights into space beyond the sensible atmosphere. The observed reddening, or absorption light from distant celestial bodies particles in interstellar space. of shorter wavelengths, of the caused by scattering by small

6530

Space Reddening

6531 6532 6533 6534 6535

Space Simulator Spatial Spatio Specific Impulse

A device which simulates some condition or conditions existing in space and used for testing equipment, or in training programmes. Pertaining A combining to space. form meaning ` Space `. ,

A performance parameter of a rocket propellant, expressed inseconds, and equal to thrust divided by weight flow rate. See ` Thrust `, An instrument which measures some characteristics, of electromagnetic radiation as a function frequency. of surface particles. atoms of a material such as intensity, of wavelength or by high-energy rocket,

Spectrometer

6536 6537 6538

Sputtering Stage Stage-and-a-Half

Dislocation atomic A propulsion including

bombarded

unit of a rocket, especially its own fuel and tanks.

one unit of a multistage

A liquid-rocket propulsion unit of which only part falls away from the rocket vehicle during flight, as in the case of booster rockets falling away to leave the sustainer engine to consume remaining fuel. A hypothetical vertical distribution of atmosphere temperature, pressure, and density which, by agreement, is taken to be representative of the atmosphere for purposes of pressure altimeter calibrations, aircraft performance calculations, aircraft and rocket design, ballistic tables, etc.

6539

Standard phere

Atmos-

6540

Stationary

Orbit

An orbit in which an equatorial satellite revolves about the primary at the same angular rate as the primary rotates on its axis. From the primary, the satellite thus appears to be stationary over a point on the primary. Of a combustible mixture, complete combustion. having the exact proportions required for

6541 6542 6543

Stoichiometric Subsonic Sudden Ionospheric Disturbance Sunspot

dealing with speeds less than the In aerodynamics, ( see sonic speed ), as in `Subsonic Aerodynamics

speed `.

of sound

combination of sudden changes in the condition of the A complex ionosphere, and the effects of these changes, often abbreviated SID. dark area on the surface of the sun, consisting of a dark A relatively central umbra and a surrounding penumbra that is intermediate in brightness between the umbra and the surrounding photosphere.

6544

6545

Sunspot

Cycle

variation in the number and area of sunspots A periodic average length of 11'1 years, but varying between about years. Pertaining to speeds greater than the speed of sound. the velocity of a missile its programmed velocity

with an 7 and 17

6546 6547

Supersonic Sustainer Engine

An engine that maintains once it has achieved booster engine. 20

or rocket vehicle, through use of a

IS : 7879 ( Part VI ) - 1978
No. 6548 Term
Synchronous Satellite Synergic Curve _ Definition An equatorial west-to-east satellite orbiting the earth at an altitude 41 000 kilometres at which altitude it makes one revolution 24 hours, synchronous with the earth's rotation. of in

6549

A curve plotted for the ascent of a rocket, space-air vehicle, or space vehicle calculated to give the vehicle an optimum economy in fuel with an optimum velocity. A small glassy body containing no crystals, probably of meteoritic origin, and bearing no antecedent relation to the geological formation in which it occurs. The science of measuring a quantity or quantities, transmitting the measured value to a distant station, and there interpreting, indicating, or recording the quantities measured. The line separating illuminated body, as the moon. Pertaining to the earth. between that heat and mechanical is triggered energy. of high and dark portions of a nonluminous

6550

Tektite

6551

Telemetry

6552 6553 6554 6555 6556

Terminator Terrestrial Thermodynamics Thermonuclear Thrust

The study of the relationships Pertaining to a nuclear thermal energy. 1. The pushing engine. force reaction

by particles engine

developed

by an aircraft

or a rocket

2. Specifically, in rocketry, the product of propellant exhaust velocity relative to the vehicle. 6557 6558 6559 6560 Topside Tracking Trajectory Transducer Sounder A satellite designed to measure from above the ionosphere. The ion concentration

mass flow rate and in the ionosphere or rocket by

process of following the movement of a satellite radar, radio, and photographic observations.

In general, the path traced by any body, as a rocket, moving of externally applied forces.

as a result

A device capable of being actuated by energy from one or more transmission systems or media and of supply related energy to one or more other transmission systems or media, as a microphone, a thermocouple, etc. In interplanetary travel an elliptical trajectory tangent both the departure planet and the target planet. 1. The passage of a celestial called ` Meridian Transit body across a celestial `. to the orbits meridian; of

6561 6562

Transfer Transit

Orbit

usually

2. The apparent passage of a celestial celestial body or across any point, 6563 6564 6565 Translunar Transponder T-time Of or pertaining to space outside

body across the face of another area, or line.

the moon's orbit about the earth.

A combined receiver and transmitter whose function is to transmit signals automatically when triggered by an interrogating signal. Any specific time, minus or plus. as referenced to ` zero `? or ` launch ' time, during a countdown sequence that is intended to result in the firing of a rocket propulsion unit that launches a rocket vehicle or missile. The volume of-a container, by the contents. such as a fuel tank, which remains unfilled

6566

Ullage

6567

Ultrasonic

Of or pertaining to frequencies more than 20 000 vibrations 21

above those that effect the human per second.

ear,

IS :.7879

( Part VI ) - 1978
Term Definition Electromagnetic radiation shorter on wavelength than visible.radiatibn but longer than X-rays, roughly, radiation in the wavelength interval between 10 and 4 000 angstroms. Cord Any of the servicing electrical or fluid lines between the ground or`a tower.and an upright rocket missile or vehicle before the launch, often shortened to ' Umbilical `. A measurement of a surface air sounding of atmospheric conditions above the effective range weather observation. Also called "bounding ' ' upper`. the earth beginning

No.
6568

Ultraviolet Radiation Umbilical

6569

6570

Upper-Air Observation Van Alien Belt, Van Allen Radiation Belt Vehicle

6571

The zone of high-intensity radiation surrounding at altitudes of approximately 800 kilometres. Specifically,
rocket,

6572

a structure,
designed to

machine,
carry

or device, such as ai aircraft or a burden through air or space; more

restrictively, 6573 Vernier Engine

a rocket craft.

A rocket engine of small thrust used primarily to obtdin a fine adjustment in the velocity and trajectory of a ballistic missile or space vehicle just after the thrust cutoff of the last propulsion engine, and used secondarily to add thrust to a booster or sustainer engine. Also called ` Vernier Rocket `. Electromagnetic radiation lying within the wavelength interval to which the human eye is sensitive, which is from approximately 0'4 to O-7 micron ( 4 000 to 7 000 angstroms ). This portion of the elctromagnetic spectrum is bounded on the short-wavelength end by ultraviolet radiation, and on the long-wavelength end by infrared radiation. A system of material waves. boundaries capable of guiding electromagnetic
G

6574

Visible

Radiation

6575 6576 6577 6578

Waveguide Weightlessness Whistler Yaw

A condition in which no acceleration, whether of gravity or other force, can be detected by an observer within the system in question. A radio-frequency electromagnetic lightning discharges and during signal nuclear sometimes explosion. generated by

1. The lateral rotational or oscillatory movement or the like about a transverse axis. 2. The amount of this movement,

of an aircraft,

rocket,

that is, the angle of yaw.

22
Printed at New lndla Printing Press.Khl@. lndla

