Indian Standard

IS : 5878 ( Part XV ) - 1971 ( Reaflhed 2000 1990 )) ( Reaffirmed

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS CONVEYING WATER
PART IV TUNNEL SUPPORTS

Fifth Reprint MARCH 1996
( Incorporating
Amendment No. 1 )

UDC

624.191.1:624.023.9

@ Copyright 1979

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC NEW DELHI 110002

Cr6

December 1972

IS: !5878( Part IV)-1971

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS CONVEYING WATER
PART IV TUNNEL SUPPORTS

Water Conductpr Systems Sectional Committee,. BDC 58
Clrairmnn
SHRI P. M. MANP.

Ramalayam, Members
SHRI K. BASANNA SHRX N. M. CHAKRAVORTY CHIEF CONSTRUCTIONENGINEER ENGINEER SUPERINTENDING I TECHNICAL/CIVIL 1 ( Alternate CHIEF ~NOl~ERR.( CWNi) . . SUPERINTENDIN (CIVIL AND ENGINEER

Pedder Road,

Bombay

26

Representing Public Works Department, Government of Mysore Damodar Valley Corporation, Dhanbad Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras ) Andhra

Pradcab State Electricity

Board, Hyderabad

INV~IGA~~N Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum Public Works Department, Government of Nadu

CIRCLE )

( AlUrnafc )
Tamil

CHEEP EN~INRRR ( CrvlL ) CHIEF ENQINEER ( IRRIGATION ) SiJRI J. WALTER ( Allcrnal~ ) DEPUTY DJRECTOR ( DAMS I ) DIRECTOR SHRI H. L. SHARMA (

Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi Land Reclamation, Irrigation & Power Rrscarcb Institute, Amritsar Assam State Electricit: Board, Shillong Bear Designs Organization, Nangal Township The Hindustan Alokudyog Construction Service, Co Ltd, Bombay Xcw Delhi

Allcrnatc)

SHRI0. P. DUTTA SHRI J. S. SINQHOTA ( Al~crnate) SH~UR. G. GANDHI SHRI M. S. DEWAN ( Alternate ) SHRI K. C. GH~~AL SHRI A. K. Bxsw~.~ ( Altemak ) SHRI M. S. JAIN SWRI B. S. KAPRE

SHRI D. N. DUTTA

Cement

Geological Survey of India, Calcutta Irrigation & Power Department, Government Mabarashtra

of

SHRI R. S. KALE ( Afternuf~ ) Pate1 Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI Y. G. PATEL SHRI %. K. CHOK~HI ( Alternafe ) R. 1. Sbah & Co Ltd. Bombav SHRI A..R. RAICHUR Nazonal Projects C ;nstruct& Corpxxtio.1 Ltd, SHR~ S. RAYCHANDRAN New Delhi SHRI K. N. TANEJA( Altcrnafe) ( Conlbrwd on jqc 2 )

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
NEW

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI I!0002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARC

BHAVAN,

IS : 5878 ( Part IV ) - 1971
( Confint&from #age 1 ) Members
SEC~UTARY

Smu G. N. TANDON SHRI D. AJITHASIYHA. Director ( Civ Engg )

@resmting Centra! Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi Irri~p;~~Department, Government of Uttar Dir&or General, ISI ( Ex-o&io Sttrttay SHRI BIYL~~H KUMAR Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1
Mtmbrr )

Panel for Construction of Tunnels, BDC 58 : P2
Conwntr SHRI B. S. KAPRE
Mtmbtrs

Irrigation & Power Department, Mabarashtra

Government of

StIRI R. S. KALE ( rl!rcmott to Shri B. S. Kapre ) Pate1 Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay !&RI C. K. CHOK~HI Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi DEPIJT~DIUECTOR ( DAMSI ) The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHR~M. S. DIWAN Alokudyog Cement Service, New Delhi SHRI K. C. GHOSAL SHRI A. K. BI~WAS ( Al&matt ) R. J. Shah & Co Ltd, Bombay SHRIA. R. RAICHUR Indian Hume Pipe CO Ltd, Bombay S~nr G. L. RAHMWAMIAH SHRX S. A. VIJAYAKE~I~TI ( Allemate ) Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum Sam K. SHANARAO SHII A. S. NAWASASAN ( Akmate ) Irrig;;$ah Department, Government of Uttar SH~UG. N. TANOON

fS : sir78 ( Part IV ) - 1971

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS CONVEYING WATER
PART IV TUNNEL SUPPORTS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part IV ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 October 1971, after the draft finalized by the Water Conductor Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Very few tunnels are loc$ted in perfectly intact strata throughout their whole lengths, the vast magnitude being driven through rock with defects of one kind or another and requiring some support until the permanent lining can be placed. Even intact rock in areas of high initial stresses may require support to prevent popping. Moreover, construction of tunnels involves a large number of problems because of the great longitudinal extent of the work and many kinds of conditions are encountered which for maximum economy should be treated differently. In/view of this it has been appreciated that it would be futile to prepare a rigid set of rules or procedures which shall be enforced without leaving any latitude for the exercise of discretion by the site engineer. The aim of this standard is to summarize the well known and proved principles and to describe the commonly used procedures and techniques for providing guidelines which would permit the site engineer to use his discretion. 0.3 In view of the inherent advantages of steel supports over timber supports, the use of the former is recommended and only steel supports are covered in this standard. In olden days timber was used in tunnel supports but now steel has become almost universally, adopted as the standard material for, supporting tunnels. Sometimes, however, timber may have to be used for tunnel supports. 0.3.1 Steel supports: supports are have easier the following and advantages require much over timber

a)

Steel ribs space;

to handle

less storage sectionwil1 be

b) Steel

ribs when compared to timber wise and as such overall cross-sectional less; 3

would be smaller, area of excavation

ls: 587i)( PartIV)-1971
ribs become a part of permanent lining and also act as Thus, the thickness of lining will be less; reinforcement. d) Steel ribs do not deteriorate like timber; e) Steel ribs can be fabricated to the required shape beforehand in the sbop and, therefore, their erection is faster; and f) No specially skilled personnel are required for erection of steel supports. 0.4 This standard are as follows: Part Part Part Part Part Part is being published in parts. Other parts of this standard

c) Steel

I Precision survey and setting out II Underground excavation in rock III Underground excavation in soft strata V Concrete liuing VI Steel lining VII Grouting

Other 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on tunnels. related standards so far published are given on the fourth cover page. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall he rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-I 360*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 0.7 This reference standard does not cover design of tunnel supports should be made to IS : 4880 ( Part VI )-1971t. for which a

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part IV ) deals with and method of fixing of steel supports, tunnels.
2. TERMINOLOGY the types, selection, fabrication rock bolts and shotcreting for

2.0 For the purpose

of this standard

the following rock and

definitions the ribs

shall apply. to transfer the

2.1 Blocking - It is provided rock load to the ribs.

between

*Rules for rounding OKnumerical values ( rcviscd). tC.bde of practice for design of tunnels conveying water: Part VI Tunnel supports.

4

rS:5878(PartIVj-1971

2.2 Bracing -

It is provided between ribs/posts to prevent their buckling or shifting, unless this purpose is served by lags attached to the frame.

2.3 Bridge Action Period - It is the time which elapses between firing the shots and the breakdown of the equilibrium of the half dome of unsup.ported section beyond the last rib of the tunnel supports. 2.4 Crown Barsto the centre line. 2.5 Lag These.are located at the crown of the tunnel parallel

The elements which compose lagging (see 2.6 ).

2.6 Lagging - These are those members of a tunnel support which span the space between the main supporting ribs.

1 2.7 Minimum Excavation Line ( A-Line ) - It is the line within which no unexcavated material of any kind and no supports other than permanent structural steel supports shall be permitted to remain. 2.8 Packing - It is the material which is used to fill the empty space between the lagging and rock surface. 2.9 Payline ( B-Line ) - It is an assumed line ( beyond A-Line ) denoting mean line to which payment of excavation and concrete lining is made whether the actual excavation falls inside or outside it. 2.10 Rib, Rib and Post or Rib, Post and Invert Strut -These the components of support system. are

2.11 Rock-Load - It indicates the height of the mass of rock which tends to exert pressure on the support. 2.12 Shotcrete Concrete sprayed under pressure.

2.13 Truss Panels - These serve a function similar to that of crown bars. These are located at the spring line and constitute a temporary support,for ribs while taking out the bench and are replaced by posts in the final stage of erection. 2.14 Tunnel Support - It is the structure support the strata surrounding the excavated lining is placed. 2.14.1 Perfnantwt Supports place permanently. erected in the tunnel to space until the permanent

These are tunnel supports which are left in

2.14.2 Temporary Supports - These are tunnel supports which are erected during excavation and removed before erection of either the permanent lining or permanent supports. 2.15 Wall Plates-These serve as sills for ribs and transmit the load from ribs through blocks or posts to the rock. 5

5. MATBRIAL 3.1 Structural steel sections for tunnel supports shall conform to IS : 8081!364* and IS : 226-1!369t. 3.2 Concrete shall generally conform to IS : 45601964$. 4. GR0L0831cAL SURVEY

4.1 Necessary geological surveys shall be conducted and a geological section through the centre line of the tunnel shall be prepared showing the approximate position of the boundaries of different types of strata and all the faults or fault zones discovered during the survey. During the survey, defects should receive special consideration. On the basis of the geological survey a geological report shall be prepared containing detailed descriptions of the observed defects in geological terms as well as a tentative classification of the defective rocks in the terms, such as intact, stratified, moderately jointed, blocky and seamy, crushed, squeezing and swelling, 5. TYPES OF STEEL SUPPORT SYSTEMS classified into

5.1 Rock tunnel support systems of steel may be generally the following principal types: a) Continuous ribs (see Fig. IA ); b) Rib and post ( see Fig. 1B ) ; c) Rib and wall plate ( see Fig. IC ); d) Rib, wall plate and post ( see Fig. 1D ); and e) Full circle rib ( SGG Fig. 1E ) Nora - Invert strut may be used in addition, with types (a)
( see Fig. 1F ) .

prciturea are encountered

to (d) where mild side

6. SELECTION

OF TYPE OF SYSTEM

6.1 GeneraI - When choosing the type of support system, the following factors shall be considered: a) Method of attack; b) Rock, characteristics, its behaviour and development and c) Size and shape of the tunnel cross section.
and Shape of Tunnel

of rock load;

6.2 Selection of SUBORNS with Reference to Surroundiog Seata
*Specification for rolled steel beam, channel and angle sections ( revised ) , ~+e&cation for structural steel ( standard quality ) (four/h revision>. $we of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( secortd revision ).

6

IS:5878(PartIV)-lnl

1A CONTINUOUS

RIBS

18 RIB AND POST

1C RIB AN0

WALL PLATE 10 RIB WALL PLATE AN0 POST

Y

1E FULL CIRCLE

RIB
IF

L INVERT STRUT CONTINUOUS RIB WITH INVERT STRUT

Nom-Joints have not been shown in Fig. IA to 1F and may be located depending upon the construction and fabrication convenience. FIG.

1

TYPES OF STEEL SUPPORT SYSTEW 7

IStS878(PartIV)-1971 6.2.1 ContinuousRibs - This type can be erected more rapidly than the other types and is generally recommended for use in rocks whose bridge action period is long enough to permit removal of gases and mucking. Invert strut may be used in addition where mild side pressures are encountered ( see Fig. lF,). type is generally recommended for use in 6.2.2 Rib and Post -This tunnels whose roof joins the side walls at an angle instead of a smooth curve. It may also be used in large tunnels, such as double-track rail road or two-lane highway tunnels, to keep the size of the -rib segments within handling and transporting limitations. Invert strut may be used in addition where mild side pressures are encountered ( see Fig. 1F ). 6.2.3 Rib and Wall Plate -This type is generally recommended for use in tynnels with a large cross section with high straight sides through good rock or in large circular tunnels, where it is possible to support the wall plate by pins and where the strata below the wall plate does not require support. This type of support may also be used for tunnelling through spalling rock, provided spalling occurs only in the roof. However, in man), cases it is extremely difficult to establish adequate support for the wall plate at any point above the floor-line due to irregularity of the overbreak. 63.4 Rib, Wall Plate and Post - This type of support permits post spacing to be different from the rib spacing and IS generally recommended for use in tunnels with high vertical sides. Invert strut may be used in addition, where mild side pressures are encountered ( see Fig. 1F ). type is recommended for use in tunnels in 6.2.5 Full Circle Rib -This squeezing, swelling and crushed rock, or any rock that imposes considerable side pressure. 6.3 Selection of Supports with Reference to Method of Attack for Tunnel 6.3.1 All the types of supports mentioned in 5.1 are suitable for the full face method of attack for rock where required bridge action period for providing supports is available. 6.3.2 Rib and wall plate or rib, wall plate and post are suitable for heading and bench method. The rib, wall plate and post type may be supplemented by truss panels or crown bars, which are accessories developed to handle heavy loads that come quickly by supporting the intervening ribs while the bench is shot out. 6.3.3 Where it becomes necessary to drive first the top heading only due to bad roof conditions the rib and wall plate type of support is generally recommended for use in the heading, and post may or may not be used when the bench is taken out depending on rock conditions, 8

IS:!i878(PartIV)-1971 6.3.4 Where for driving a large size tunnel in poor rock conditions, the side drift method is used, the rib, wall plate and post type of supports are recommended; the wall plate, however, being flat. The posts and wall plates are erected in the drift which is driven ahead at each side at subgrade ( see Fig. 2 )

CONSTRUCTION OF FULL TUNNEL S&OR

AIN SUPPORT FOR TUNNEL USED AS A SUPPORT FOR DRIFT

FIG. 2

SIDE DRIFT MJZTHOD

ups may and roof take

6.3.4.1Where extreme conditions are encountered, however, breakTemporary posts to the crown may be made, leaving a central core. be quickly placed between the core and the roof at dangerous spots, The crown bars may be slid forward to quickly catch up the roof. ribs should then be placed on the wall plates and securely blocked to the roof load, after which the temporary posts may be removed.

6.3.4.2 The side drifts themselves usually need support which should be removed just prior to shooting out the core of the main tunnel and re-used ahead. The support system used for the drifts is hybrid. The outer side consists of the posts and wall plate which later becomes a part of the support for the main tunnel, whereas the inner side is a continuous rib (see Fig. 2 ).

9

IS:5878(PartIV)-1971 6.4 Type of Support for Shafts - For shafts, usually, the full circle rib or segmental ribs are recommended depending upon the slope and rock In vertical shafts, ribs may be hung from top by hanger rods conditions. and blocked and packed. The spacing of hanger rods may be worked out as in the case of tie rods keeping in v&w that they shall be strong enough to support the weight of ribs. 7. COMPONENTS 7.1 Design accordance OF TUNNEL SUPPORTS supports shall bc done in

of various components of tunnel with IS : 4880 l Part VI )-1971*.

7.2 Ribs-Ribs may be made of structural beams. H-beams or wide flange beams should be preferred to I-beams, as the wider flanges provide more surface for blocking and lagging, and the section has greater Channel sections are not recommended as resistance against twisting. their tinsymmetrical section is prone to twisting, and their flanges are narrow, In small tunnels, however, channels bent about their minor axis When choosing the profiles with may be used under ordinary loads. different weights, it is advisable to select beams of equal depth. 7.3 Posts -The that of the ribs. posts the spacing should be made same as that of sections as long spacing between the posts may be normally equal to However, by inserting wall plate between the ribs and the of the posts can be made independent of ribs. `Ihe posts of H-sections. The depth of these should normally be the the ribs though in many cases they may be of lighter as no side pressure is present.

7.4 Invert Struts - Where side pressures are present and tunnel section has not been converted to a full circle, it is necessary to prevent the inward movement of the rib or post feet and in such cases, invert struts should be provided at tunnel subgrade. They should be so attached to the vertical members that they receive the horizontal pressure. They may be curved to form an inverted arch where there is upthrust from the floor. 7.5 Wall Plates used: a) Double b) Single The following three types of wall plates are commonly

beam, beam, and

c) Flat wall plate. 7.5.1 The double and resist bending in vertical single beam wall plates planes are recommended which are intended for use to transmit to the

*Code df practice for design of tunnels conveying water: Part VI Tunnel supports,

10

ISr!b878(PartIV)-1971
loads from the ribs on to blocks dr posts with a spacing different from that of the ribs. Flat wall plates merely serve as an erection expedient and a convenient surface for horizontal blocking, their resistance to bending in vertical planes being very small; whenever flat wall plates are used, a post shall be placed under each rib. 7.5.2 Double beam wall plates may be made of two I-beams placed side by side, webs vertical, with about a 100 mm space between flanges to give access to the clamping bolt and admit concrete ( see Fig. 3 ). The beams should be spaced by vertical diaphragms welded under each rib seat. Ribs and posts should be clamped by toggle plates and bolts, thus avoiding the This method of attachment also time required for matching bolt holes. This type permits variable spacing of either or" both the ribs and the posts. of beam provides a broad surfa'qe of contact for blocking and to engage Its box section makes it stable with respect to rolling and ribs and posts. twisting.

FIG. 3

DOUBLE BEAM WALL PLATE

To 7.53 Single beam wall plates may be H-beams, with web vertical. enable them to transmit vertical loads from rib to post, they may be reinforced at each rib seat with vertical T-shaped plates, if necessary ( see Fig. 4 ). Attachment of ribs and posts shall be made by bolting through the flanges.

FIG. 4

SINGLE BEAM WALL PLATE

7.5.4 Flat wall plates may be I-beams or wide flange beams used with They function merely as a cap for the posts and a their webs horizontal. sill for erecting roof ribs. The web shall be punched with vent holes to prevent trapping of air when concrete is poured. These holes also serve to pass reinforcing rods if the concrete is reinforced,

11

IS:!i878(

Part IV)-1971'

7.6 Crown Bars - Crown bars may be built up of double channels as shown in Fig. 5 or may be H-beams or square timber beams. They are located parallel to the axis of the tunnel either resting on the outer flanges of the ribs already erected ( see Fig. 6A) or attached to the ribs in hangers as shown in Fig. 6B. Crown bars are an accessory, a construction expedient intended to carry loads till the rib sets are erected and the loads permanently transferred to them. They have one of the two functions to perform: to support the roof immediately after ventilation and thereby gain time for the installation of ribs and to support the roof or roof ribs over the bench shot thereby relieving or supplementing the wall plates.
J CROWN BAR

Fro. 5

CROWN BAR

of 7.7 Truss Panel? - Thpsc are accessories for use with the combinatfon rib and post. types of' support, for the heading and bench or top heading methods of attack and heavy roof loads. Their purpose is to form, in combination with the ribs, a truss to span the gap produced by the bench shot. 7.7.1 The truss panels should be attached to the inside face of the ribs for a distance of one or mote ribs ahead of the bench shot as shown in Fig. 7 and should be left there until posts are installed, at which time they Attachment should be by means of should be removed and sent up ahead. The truss thus formed may even be designed only two bolts at each rib. to to carry the roof over two bench shots thus makin, q it more convenient get in the post. 7.7.2 When truss panels are used, no wall plate is required although the flat wall plate may be used to keep the lower ends of the ribs lined up latel.ally if it is dificult to block the individual ribs against the rock, Tlte tru\s pan& .also eliminate the need for wall plate for drifts. bracing serves to increase the resistance of 7.8 Bracing - Longitudinal ribs and posts to buckling about theu minor axis and to prevent a displaceIf the space between the ribs ment of these set members during blasting. or posts is bridged by lagging which is firmly attached to the webs, no such The most common types of bracing which is known bracing is required. as tie rods and collar braces are shown in Fig. 8. The braces may, however, be placed as most convenient.

12

ISr!i878(PartlV)-1971

SECTION

A A BARS SUPPORTED OVER RIBS

6A CROWN

"`:s'""

-CROWN BAR

SECTION

BB

SECTION

AA

SECTION 6B CROWN BARS IN HANGERS
ROCK AND RIB CROWN BAR

CC

I I
FIG. 6

BLOCKING

BETWEEN

BLOC~~ING BETWEEN AND ROCK RIB

METHOD OF SUPPORT FOR CROWN BARS

13

IS:5878(PartIV)-1971

TRUSS PANEL

CROSS SECTION

fiRUSS PANEL HAS BEEN REMOVED \AND RE-ERECTED IN HEADING \

TRUSS PANEL

FACE7

L BENCH SHOT FLAT WALL PLATE MAY OR MAY NOT BE USED

LONGITUDINAL

SECTION

Fra.7 TRUSS PANEL

14

IS : 5878 ( Part IV ) - 1971

COLLAR

BRACE

FIG. 8

COLLAR BRACE AND

TIE RODS

7.8.1 Tie rods usually may be 15 or 20 mm rods, with thread and two The length shall be at least 100 mm more than the nuts on each end. spacing of the ribs. The spacing of the rods shall be kept such that slenderness ratio I/r for ribs is not greater than 60, where 1 is the spacing of Collar braces the rods, and r is the least radius of gyration of the ribs. may be usually pieces of timber, 75 x 100 mm, 100 X 150 mm, 150 x 150 mm or of any convenient size. Holes in pairs shall be provided in the web of ribs and posts for the tie rods. Collar braces shall be set in the line between ribs, tie rods inserted and the nuts tightened. Wooden collar braces should be removed before placing final lining. 7.8.2 Spreaders ( see Fig. 9 ) which are additional braces may be angles, channels, or l-beams with a clip angle or plate either bolted or welded on These are left in the concrete. In tunnels having each end to the ribs. steep slopes tie rods may be replaced by spreaders. 7.9 Blocking wedged between 7.10 Lagging It is generally done the rock and the rib. It performs protection and transfer by using timber pieces tightly

one or more of the following from falling rock or spalls;

functions:

4
b)

To provide To receive

loads to the rib sets;

Cl To

provide a convenient surface against which to block in case it is not convenient to block directly against the rib, because of irregular overbreak; provide a surface against which to place back packing; lining, if concrete is not serve as an outside form for concrete to be poured against the rock; and 15

4 To e) To

IS : 5878 ( Part IV ) - 1971

FIG. 9

SPREADER DETAILS

f)

To divert concrete.

water,

and to prevent

leaching

and

honey-combing

of

7.10.1 Lagging may be made either of steel, precast concrete or timber. Steel laggings may be made out of channels, beams, beams and plates and liner plates ( see Fig. 10 and 11 ). Liner plates. which are pressed steel panels may also be used with or without ribs depending upon the rock It is recommended that use of timber in underground work conditions. should be minimized as far as practicable, since timber once fixed can be rarely removed safely and likely to deteriorate and prove a source of weakness. Total prohibition of timber is, however, not practicable. 7.10.2 The spacing of lags shall be closest at the crown, increasing down to spring line. On the side only an occasional lag should be used, if Close lagging should be employed where rock conditions make necessary. it necessary. 16

IS : $878 ( Pati

fV ) - 1971

FIG. 10

TYPES OF LAGGING

FIG. 11

LINER PLATE

7.11 Packing-The function and type of packing depends on the rock In dry tunnels through jointed rock, packing is only used to condition. fill large cavities produced by excessive overbreak. In broken, crushed or decomposed rock it serves to transfer the rock load to the lags, thereby acting as a substitute for excessive blocking. In squeezing rock it provides continuous contact through the laggings with the rib sets. In jointed water-bearing rock it has primarily the function of a drain. 7.11.1 Dry Packing - Dry pack, which usually consists of tunnel spoil ( hard ) shoveled or hand packed into the space between the lagging and the rock, is recommended for use only where excessive rock loads are not It should be placed simultaneously with the erection of likely to develop. the lagging. Starting at the lowest point, a few lags should be placed and tunnel spoil ( hard ) shoveled in behind. This procedure should be carried up to the crown at which point it is necessary to pack endwise. 17

IS : 5878( Part IV ) - 1971 7.11.2 Concrde Packing - It is recommended for use where considerable rock loads are anticipated. However, its use is not recommended in case the tunnel supports are designed as yielding supports, Concrete packing may be M-100 concrete conforming to IS: 456-1964;. It may be placed by manual labour or by pneumatic placer to the possible extent. Where excessive loads are anticipated, concrete packing should start from the inner flanges of the steel support so as to embed the whole steel supports in concrete. In such cases it is recommended that precast concrete may be used as additional laggin g between two adjacent ribs so as to serve the purpose of form work. 7.11.3 Pea Gravel Packiyg - Pea gravel packing by blowing of gravel is recommended in shield-drtven tunnels to fill the annular space around the lining !eft by the advancing tail of the shield. Gravel should be blown through the grout holes provided in the liner segments as the shield is shoved forward.
NOTE- Pea gravel packing is considered
purposes but it has not been practised highly desiiable so far in rock tunnels. kind of packing for most

7.11.4 Grouting - Grouting to fill any space outside the concrete shoulcl be usually done after the main concrete lining is in place, there arc occasions where it is desirable to do grouting at low pressure after concrete packing. When the main concrete lining is likely delayed considerably it is desirable to do grouting at low pressure concrete packing. 8. ROOF BOLTS

lining But soon to be after

8.1 General-Roof bolting follows the principle of fastening the loose rocks near the surface to the solid rock above, by means of anchor bolts instead of supporting it from below. Roof bolts not only support the surface rock but also assist it to act as a load carrying element. 8.2 Design - The design of roof bolts shall IS : 4880 ( Part VI )-197lt. be done in accordance commonly with have

8.3 Types of Roof Bolts - The types of roof bolts used been described in 8.3.1 to 8.3.3.

of mild-steel rod, and Slot Bolts-These consist 8.3.1 Wedge threaded at one end, the other being split into halves for about 125 mm length. A wedge made from 20 mm square steel and about 150 mm long shall be inserted into the slot and then the bolt driven into the hole which will make the split end to expand and fit tight into the hole forming the anchorage. Thereafter, a IO-mm plate washer of size 200 X 200 mm
----*Code of practice t&de of practice for plain and reinforced concrete for design of tunnels conveying ( second rsuisian ). water: Part VI Tunnel supports.

18

IS : 5878 ( Part IV ) - 1971 shall be placed and the nut tightened ( see Fig. 12 ). The efliciency of the splitting of the I)olt by the wedge depends on the strata at the end of the hole being strong cmollgh to prevent penetration by the wedge end and on the accuracy 01'the hole drilled for the bolt. `l'he diameter of such bolt may be 25 mm or 30 m;n. 8.3.2 We&e nrzd Sleeve Bolt - Thi,: generally consists of a 20 mm The diarnetter rod at one end of which is a cold-rolled thrcadcd portion. other end of tile rod is shaped to form a solid wed~:c fi)rged integrally with the bolt and over this wedge a loose split sleeve of 33 mm external diameter is fitted (see Fig. 13 ). The anchorage is provided in this case by placing the bolt in the hole and pulling it downwards while holding the sleeve by a thrust tube. Split by the wedge head of the bolt, the sleeve expands until it grips the sides of the tube. Spccinl hydraulic equipment is needed to pull the bolts. method of bolting consists of inserting into a 8.3.3 Perfo Bolts -This hole a perCrated cylindrical metal tube w!lich has been previously filled with cement mortar and then driving into the tube a plain or ridged bolt. This forces part of the mortar through the perforations in the tube and into intimate contact with the sides of the bore hole thus cementing the bolt, the tube and the rock into one homogeneous whole ( see Fig. 14 ). The relation between the diamctcr of the bore hole and tile diameter of perfo sltevc and bolts iy given in Table 1.

SLEE YE

-d

NUT

FIG. 12
SLOT

WEDGE AND BOLT

FIG. 13 WEDGE AND SLEEVE BOLT

19

IS : 5878( Yart IV ) - 1971

7

PERFORATED TUBE

,BOLT

SPACE FOR MORTARi FIG. 14 PEKF~ BOLT

TABLE 1 DlAMETER
h.4 OF

OF

PERFO SLEEVE AND BOLTS
DIA OF BOLTS (3) 30 25 18

All dimensions in millimetres.
BORE (1) 40
HOLE

DIAOP PERFO SLEEVE (2)

38 31

36 31 27

9. GUNITING 9.1 It is recommended that guniting with a mix of 1 : 3 to 1 : 4 may be used as a form of temporary support with or without wire mesh to prevent When used in combination with rock bolts deterioration of rock surface. and chain link fabric, it forms a permanent support. 10. SHOTCRETE 10.1 General - Shotcrete for tunnel supports may be used by itself as a thin skin type reinforcement or used in combination with rock bolts, wire Details are mesh and other more conventional tunnel reinforcements. given below:

4
b) cl

Shotcrete is forced into open joints, fissures, seams and irregularities in the rock surface and in this way serves the same binding function as mortar in a stone wall. Shotcrete hinders water seepage from joints and seams in the rock and thereby prevents piping of joint filling materials and air and water deterioration of the rock. Shotcrete's adhesion to the rock surface and its own shear strength provide a considerable resistance to the fall of loose rock blocks from the roof of a tunnel.
A

4

thicker shbtcrete layer 150 to 250 mm provides structural support, either as a closed ring or as an arch type member.

20

IS:!i978(PartIV)-1971 10.2 Mix - Shotcrete shall be mixture of cement, sand and aggregate. The proportion of cement to aggregate in shotcrete may be normally 1 : 3 or 1 : 4; the aggregate being a mixture of sand and about 20 percent aggregate varying from 5 to 20 mm. The dry mixture of shotcrete shall be applied under pressure of about 3.5 kg/cm2 by means of a nozzle through a concrete gun. To this nozzle, water shall be added also under pressure through a separate pipe, A quick setting agent shall be added to the dry mixture.
~ IO.3 Thickness - The thickness of shotcrete required depends upon the type of rock, the `extent of stratification and/or joints, blockiness and also the size of the tunnel, The thickness may normally range from 50 to 150~mm and whether it should be used plain or with wire-mesh anchored to rock will depend upon the actual site conditions in each case.
As in the case of rock bolts, the application of shotcrctc has not yet reached Nomthe stage when it is potuible to laydown a design criteria. Considcrablc experience has been accumulated in regard to the use of shotcrete as underground support without any consideration for the type ofpressure or rock-shotcrete interaction that was dealt with during construction. The results of such maued experience are frequently expressed in the form of rulaof-thumb guidu for the selection of a shotcrctc design.

11. FABRICATION 11.1 The ribs shall generally be bent cold. fabricated as polygons.
For small jobs ribs may be

11.2 The accuracy of bending shall be such that after bending each segment shall conform to true template at ends. Intermediate portions may depart from true template by not more than f 10 mm. The web shall be true and wrinkles or buckles shall not exceed 5 mm when measured from a straight edge held flush against either aide of web on radial plane.

11.9 To ensure proper space as the crown after wedging, the ribs shall be
fabricated to a slightly larger radius than theoretically computed.

11.4 In tunnels with small cross section the crown joints may be ` kicked up ' or the ribs set high to accommodate the concrete delivery pipe as shown in Fig. 15.
11.5 Ail welding for fabrication of IS : 8161969*. of supports shall conform to the provisions

11.6 Erection Tolerances- The steel- supports shall be erected at spacings shown in the drawings and kept blocked and wedged tightly until final concreting. They shall be erected either vertical or in a plane
*Code practice for use ofmetal :&St r88iSfOtt).

of

arc welding

for gctieral

construction

in mild

a@

21

IS : 5878 ( Part IV ) - 1971
ALLOWANCEFOR INITIAL OEFLECTION

OFFMSEETfy;;NfRE FIG. at right 15

TANGENT

METHOO

KICK UP AT CROWN IN RIM

angles to the slope

The erection shall be done within

of the tunnel as may be found the following tolerances:

practicable.

taken around Spacing of Ribs - Average of three measurements periphery shall not differ from the spacing shown on the drawings by more than f 3 cm. between the inner flanges of ribs Internal Dimension - Dimensions shall be checked at 2 or 3 points in the horizontal plane and such dimensions shall not vary from the theoretical dimensions by more than f 3 cm. Level at Crown -Level of the crown shall be within - 2 cm and + 4 cm of the required level. from vertical or the Deviation in Vertical Plane - The deviation required inclination shall not be more than f 20 mm when measured at the lowest point. Spacing Between the Tie Ro& - This shall be as shown on the drawings with a tolerance of f 3 cm. Gap Between the Joints - The gap between joints of the butt -plates of the ribs shall not be more than 5 mm.

22

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah fafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone Regionel Offices: 331 01 31 Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. 331 13 75 NEW DELHI 110002 I 36 24 99 *Eastern : l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 21843 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 I 3 16 41 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 25 19 ( 41 2916 TWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 Blench Offices: Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg,`Khanpur. 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 SPeenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 38 49 56 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 667 16 BHGPAL 462003 5 36 27 Plot No. 82183. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 531'6. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 58-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampallv Station Road ), 23 1083 HY DERABAD 500001 63471 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 i 6 98 32 21 68 76 1171418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 i 21 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate. PATNA 800013 6 23 05 T.C. No. 14/1421. Universitv P.O.. Palayam 16 21 04 TRIVANDRUM 695035 1621 17 /nspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): 2 61 71 Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, .l332 Shivaji Nager, 6 24 35 PUNE 411005 *Sales office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhro Approach, P. 0. Princap 27 68 00 Strret. Calcutta 700072 tSrlsa Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambera, Grant Road, 8x66 26 Bombay 4OOOO7 $Safer Office in 6angalOre it at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 Bangafora 560002 Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 76

Reprography Unit, E,

New Delhi,

India

AMENDMENT

NO. 2
TO

OCTOBER 1992

IS 5878 ( Part 4 ) : 1971 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS CONVEYING WATER
PART 4 ( Page 19, clause 8.3.3 ) 8.3.3: TUNNEL Insert SUPPORTS the following new clauses after

"8.3.4 Mechanically Anchored, Tensioned and Grouted Bolts This generally consists of a wedge, attached to the bolt shank which is pulled into a conical anchor shell forcing it to expand against the drill hole walls. A rubber grout seal is used to centre the bolt in the hole and ,to seal the collar of the hole against grout leakage. Grout is then injected into the collar end of the hole and the return pipe is extended for the length of the hole. The grout injection is stopped when the air has been displaced and when grout starts flowing from the return tube ( see Pig. 16 ). These type of bolts can be tensioned immediately after installation and grouted at a later stage when short term movements have ceased.
QROUT RETURN TUBE TAPED TO BOLT SHAkK

7 RUBBER GROUT SEAL INSERTEb IN HOLE COLIAR -

NSION SHELL ANCHOR

TUBES ATTACHED TO BOLT SHANK GROUT INLET TUBE

OF BOLT SHANK

GROUT RETURN THROUGH CENTRE HOLE IN BOLT SHANK

FIG. 16 TYPICAL DETAILS OF MECHANICALLY ANCHORED,
TENSIONED AND GROUTED
BOLTS

I

8.3.5 Resin Grouted, Tensioned Threaded-+Bar.Bolts

This method of bolting consists of resin and catalyst contained in plastic capsules, the catalyst being separated in a glass or plastic cahtainer-in .the resin. These' capsules are pushed-into the hole with a loading'stitk,and the bar is then inserted. Rotation of bar during insertion breaks the plastic containers and mixes the resin and catalyst ( see Fig. 17 ). They are very convenient and simple to use. Very high strength anchors can be - formed in rock of poor quality. These can be increasingly used in critical applications in which cost is less important than speed and reliability.'

FAST SETTING RESlN FOR ANCIIORING BAR

SEW. LOCKING SPHEAII WASHER WlTM INTEGRAL
ING TO EXTEND BAR LENGTH SLOW-&nlNG RESIN -GROUT-

L RESIN MIXED WlTH MARDENER BY ROTATION OF BAR DURING INSERTION

FKG. 17 TYPICAL DETAILS OF RESIN GROUTFJD,TENSIONED
THREADED BAR BOLTS

(RVD

14)

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 2

