IS 14581:2006

mm%5-

qmim@5TFTim TwTdvJT * m * fit-qti?ff Rm'l=d
(waTj@MJT)
Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR FORMULATION AND OPERATION OF A SUGGESTION SCHEME IN AN ORGANIZATION (First Revision )

[Cs 03.100

0 BIS 2006

BUREAU
MANAK
December 2006

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002
Price Group 3

Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4

FOREWORD This lndian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the drafl finalized by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. A suggestion scheme is a management encouraged scheme through which the employees can offer their ideas voluntarily for rectification of deficiency, improvements leading to better method of work and/or financial savings, better work culture and environment. Suggestion scheme is a total employee involvement programme. The progress of the organization depends upon the creative ability of its employees and this directly contributes to the enrichment of the organization. It is a medium through which the hidden ideas in a person are brought out and put to meaningful and productive use for the betterment of the organization. It is believed that every individual will find his work more meaningful and challenging when he is given the opportunity to make continuous improvement and create value to it. The objective of the scheme is to enthuse employees to come forward voluntarily with suggestions that they have in mind which could contribute to the enhancement of production, safe work practices, quality, cost/waste/overhead reduction and conservation of the environment, etc. Cooperation fkomthe employees and sustained support from the top management, apart flom total involvement of both in all events connected with suggestion scheme are the main pillars on which suggestion scheme is built. It provides a direct upward communication channel for the employees to put forward their ideas and thus providing an open environment.

IS 14581:2006

Indiati SYmdard GUIDELINES FOR FORMULATION AND OPERATION OF A SUGGESTION SCHEME IN AN ORGANIZATION (First Revision )
1 SCOPE

This standard provides guidelines for the formulation and implementation ofa suWestion scheme in an organization. 2 AIMS OF SUGGESTION SCHEME
2.1 A suggestion scheme is a formal mechanism, which encourages employees to contribute constructive ideas for improving their organization including its working environment.

d) Management's encouragement to employees to give suggestions. 2.5 The major indices of success of such a scheme are: a) Number of employees participating vis-d-vis total number of employees, b) Tangible savings accrued per year, c) Intangible gains, d) Number of suggestions received and accepted, e) Number of suggestions implemented out of the accepted suggestions, and o Time taken for evaluation of suggestions. 3 DEVELOPMENT/AREAS
OF SUGGESTIONS

in a year

2.2 The main emphasis of the suggestion scheme is how to motivate employees and contribute to the management of change. It basically aims to generate ideas from employees at all levels in order to improve standardized procedures for enhancing productivity, quality and cost reduction. However, the success of such schemes depends on the commitment of the top management. 2.3 In the context of employee involvement process, suggestion scheme fidtills a variety of purposes. It can; a) drive both employee improvement, involvement and work

3.1 The progress of an organization comes through well

implemented good ideas. Any idea to improve upon an existing condition can be turned into a suggestion. For evolving effective suggestions, some of the questions that can be asked are given as follows: a) [s this activity/process necessary? i) Can it be eliminated? ii) Can it be simplified? iii) Can it be combined with some other activity? iv) Can it be split? v) Can the split of the activity benefit? vi) Can the effort and time be reduced? vii)Can the sequence of activity be changed for the better? b) 1s there any wastage of resources? i) Can it be avoided? ii) Can these resources be more optimally utilized? c) Are there any unsafe equipment or practice? Can suggestions be made regarding their safety aspects? d) Can it improve the service/product quality, service standard or cut down service time? e) Can it improve process efilciency? f) Is there any scope for improvement in housekeeping or environment?

b) improve both organizational performance,

and personal

c) embrace both the team and individual, d) look at the strategic value of an idea as being both tangible and intangible, e) help in identi~ing ways for design and development of knowledge management systems, and o help in identifying and encouraging creative talent in the organization. 2.4 The critical success factors for any suggestion scheme will be: a) Employee creativity, innovativeness and his/her participation; b) Top management's continuous support for providing a conducive climate for nurturing the suggestion scheme and a periodic review by them of its fimctioning; c) Quality evaluation of the suggestions; and

IS 14581:2006 3.2 Some more questions that can be asked with respect

to the reduction in the amount of paper and paper work are: a) Can the number of copies be reduced? Does everyone receiving copies really require that information? b) 1sthere any duplication of information? c) Can the information provided in different forms be combined in one? d) Can the processing of documents be made faster? e) Is all the information relevant? f) Can the paper work be reduced or eliminated through use of alternate mode like electronic media, etc. 3.3 Suggestions can also be made with respect to the satisfaction level of the customers, by asking the following questions: a) Are your customers, both internal and external, satisfied? b) Does your organization have a formal mechanism for assessing this? c) Is there any procedure for taking follow-up action on complaints and dissatisfaction of the customers? for utilizing the d) 1s there a mechanism feedback received from customers for continual improvement? The answer to these questions will lead to generation of a number of effective suggestions. 3.4 The suggestions can be made in the following areas: a) Building up a better image~f the organization; b) Achieving organizational goals more effectively; c) Quality issues; d) Improving productivity; e) Improving working processes and procedures, including communications; f) Reduction in input cost, wastefil expenditure and wastages; g) Development of HR and increasing motivation and job satisfaction; morale,

3.5 The following areas are excluded considered as an eligible suggestion:

from being

a) Suggestion on organization's/Government policies, etc; b) Personal grievance or complaint regarding wage, promotion or any other; c) Suggestions already received under the scheme; d) Collective bargaining matters; and e) A criticism directed at other statYemployee. 4 SUGGESTION EVALUATION COMMMTEE 4.1 A suggestion evaluation committee should be constituted by the organization comprising senior level persons or nominated representatives drawn from various disciplines, who should be assigned the task of assessing the practicability including accrued savings, one time or recurring, from the suggestions and recommend awards on merit. The departmental head of the suggestor should be a co-opted member in the Committee. One of the members of this Committee should be designated as coordinator. All suggestions should be forwarded to the coordinator, who will be assigned the task of operating the suggestion scheme within the organization. 4.1.1 However, in case of large organizations, departmentwise coordinator could be designated for better handling of the suggestion scheme. A centralized online system could be developed in which the departmental coordinator could enter the suggestions received fkomthe departmental employees. The online system should have debils of the suggestor, the date of suggestion proposal, suggestion details and status of suggestion. This will avoid misunderstanding and provide record of origin in case of overlapping suggestions. These suggestions should be forwarded to the coordinator for consideration of the suggestions evaluation committee. 4.1.2 Since the suggestion scheme is a total employee involvement programme, the organization should devise suitable mechanism to ensure impartiality, objectivity and transparency of the suggestions evaluation process. 4.2 The responsibilities of the coordinator should be as follows: a) Responsible for interacting between the suggestion evaluation committee and the suggestor. b) To receive all suggestions and immediately acknowledge in the prescribed format along with the serial number allotted. A single suggestion proposed by two or more people jointly should also be admissible and a single acknowledgement should be issued to the first person or team leader. c) To scrutinize these suggestions for their eligibility 2

h) Standardization and variety reductiotienhancement within the organization; j) Economic indigenization; k) improving environment both at workplace and surroundings including health and safety; m) Improving customer satisfaction; n) Improvement in service level; and p) Improvement in product design and development.

IS 14581:2006 and put up only eligible suggestions suggestion evaluation committee. to the
5.3 Each suggestion may be submitted separately in the

prescribed form. 5.4 Suggestions could be placed in the suggestion box installed by the organization at conspicuous places. Suggestions can also be forwarded by any other mode including electronic. 5.5 The suggestions may be given in simple English or Hindi/local language. It should describe the existing method, the proposed method and an explanation as to why this suggestion is better. If necessary, sketcheslflow diagrams may be made to explain the ideas, 5.6 While suggestions necessarily mean employees coming forward with a solution to a perceived problem, at times, an employee may a problem for which he . perceive . may not have a direct solution to offer but the organization may be benefited once the problem is solved. The suggestor may have only some sketchy idea regarding the solution. In such cases, a senior officer of that department may be deputed to help the suggestor in crystallizing his thoughts and giving the suggestion to the coordinator. In a large organization, this may be a continuous process and separate officers ti-om different departments may be earmarked for this purpose. The information regarding previous suggestions should be readily available to employees for guidance and to avoid duplication of efforts, 6 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION 6.1 As a first step, an employee should be made aware . . about this scheme and its benefits. A conducive environment must be created and the employee must be enthused to participate wholeheartedly. Encouragement to the suggestor(s) by a suitable reward along with the acknowledgement of eligible suggestion will go a long way in achieving this goal. 6.2 The basis for selecting the suggestions for award should be improvements proposed in any areas of suggestions given under 3.4. The Committee should not make comparative evaluation of the suggestions received but each suggestion should be evaluated on its own merit. Various criteria could be used forgiving consideration for selection of suggestion like, a) reduction in input cost in areas like men, material, machine and money leading to; i) Cost savings per annum. ii) Foreign exchange savings (recurring/nonrecurring). iii) Cost reduction. iv) Quality improvement. v) Productivity improvement.

`d) To maintain records of all suggestions received/ scrutinized. e) To compile the suggestions received and convene meeting of the suggestion evaluation committee for assessment of the suggestions and recommendations. o To inform the suggestor about the status of the accepted suggestion from time to time, in case the evaluation takes a considerable time, otherwise to inform the suggestor about the result of the evaluation. g) To carry out all such acts that calls for smooth functioning of the scheme. 4.3 The responsibility committee should be: a) to meet at periodic suggestions. of suggestion intervals evaluation

for evaluating

b) to co-opt experts for assessing certain suggestions requiring specialized knowledge. c) to have a positive approach to all the suggestions and recommend awards on merits. d) to obtain from the suggestor, if required, firther details/clarifications about his suggestion. e) to make final recommendation of the award.

o

to maintain confidentiality till such time the awards are disbursed.

g) to ensure implementation of the suggestion at the earliest. h) to get feedback on suggestions implemented and recommend necessary changes, if needed. .0 to periodically provide feedback of the scheme to the top management for ensuring its continued effectiveness, suitability and also for continual improvement. k) to notify the rejected suggestions, with a note of encouragement to the suggestor(s) for their continued participation. 5 RECEIITOFSUGGESTIONS 5.1 Suggestions can be given by individual/group of employees of the organization. The organization may decide to consider suggestions received from their retired employees. 5.2 The suggestion forms may be printed in English and Hindi/local language which may be used for receiving suggestions ffom the employees. Atypical form is given in Annex A as an example.

IS 14581:2006

vi) Improvement in service levels. vii) Ingenuity of suggestion (depth of study). viii) Applicability (in work area/entire plant). b) Improved productivity by way of reduction in wastage, wastefil expenditure, improved systems including for marketing, etc. 6.3 Similar type of suggestion received tlom two or more individuals/team should be decided on first come first serve basis for evaluation of suggestions. 6,4 The suggestion could be rejected for any of the following reasons: a) Suggestion is not feasible and/or implementable; b) New method may be a safety/health/enviromnental hazard; and c) Cost of implementation outweighs the benefits. 6.5 The suggestion evaluation committee constituted

relating to the suggestion which has been accepted, should take necessary steps to implement the suggestions and send a progress report of implementation to the coordinator. 8.3 If the concerned department is of the opinion that it would take some more time to implement the suggestion, the same may be conveyed to the coordinator, If there is need for modification, he may do so under intimation to the coordinator. 8.4 The coordinator should submit a report on progress of implementation of the accepted suggestions to the suggestion evaluation committee during its meetings. If considered necessary, on review of position of implementation, the Committee may request the respective activity heads for expediting implementation of the suggestion. The coordinator should receive feedback on suggestions implemented and review for changes, if required. 9 KEY TO SUCCESS OF SUGGESTION SCHEME 9.1 The following key factors like proper organizational setup, open management, systematic procedures, encouragement to the employees, proper communication, timely evaluation, availability of resources, proper publicity of the suggestions, attribute towards the success of a suggestion scheme in an organization. Therefore, the management should help and encourage the employees in this regard by fostering a conducive atmosphere for proper nurturing of the suggestion scheme in the organization. It should periodically review the suggestion scheme, as one of the organization processes, for continual improvement. 9.2 However, the suggestion schemes that encourages staff to come forward with ideas can fail miserably if they are not managed properly, leading to loss of morale and productivity- Badly-run schemes can lead to apathy, ~esentment &d people working less effectively. Some of the common deficiencies observed are as follows: a) A lack of commitment and support from top management; b) Failure to follow-up suggestions; c) Poor communication suggestor; about progress to the

above, will be empowered to judge and select the
suggestions for the award. In case there is a need to modi~ the suggestion for its effective implementation, the suggestion evaluation committee may do so in consultation with the respective departmental head. Specified time norms should be laid down for evaluation of suggestions received. 7 RECOGNITION AND REWARD 7.1 The type of award/appreciation should be decided by the Committee depending on the merit of the suggestion. 7.2 The employee, whose suggestion has been accepted for implementation by the suggestion evaluation Committee, should be suitably awarded appreciated. If, the suggestions given by a team are accepted for implementation, equal credit should be given to each team member for award, etc. 7,3 The names of the employees, along with their photographs, whose suggestions are accepted, may be prominently displayed on the notice board for a specified period. They may be suitably recognized in house magazines, news letters, etc, and the same may also be reflected in their annual appraisal report. 8 IMPLEMENTATION
8.1 The suggestions accepted for implementation should

d) Continuously rejecting ideas; e) Failure to recognize the contribution for ideas; and o Dumping all ideas only on one person to deal with, etc. Therefore, while reviewing the scheme, the organization should also look for above factors and try to correct the deficiencies observed as a measure of continual improvement. 4

be forwarded by the coordinator to the concerned department(s) along with the specified time period for its implementation. 8.2 The concerned department, dealing with the activity

ANNEX A (Clause 5.2)
AN EXAMPLE OFATYPICALFORM FOR RECEIVING SUGGESTIONS FROM EMPLOYEES

Name and Designation

Employee ID No. Present Department OffIceAddress for Communication
;

.......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................... ..........................................................................................................

Residential Address for Communication (in case of retired employee)

:

E-mail

:

Office Telephone No. Personal Phone No. (in case of retired employee) Area of Suggestion Suggestion and Advantage on its [implementation (Enclose details analysis/ sketch/justification, etc, on separate sheets, if required)

..........................................................................................................

(Signature) Date:

For Official Use Only Suggestion Serial No. Acknowledgement Reference Letter dated

5

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Btweau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

RIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reafllrmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from
Doc : No.

MSD 4 (302).

,

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 -{ : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all oftices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 2609285

22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR, KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Rinted at Rabhat Offset Ress, New Dethi-2

