Indian Standard Veen EE 


Tae aed — Brat wet, 
AEM Wet Ta Tat wet 
aaa — Gea steer 


Automotive Vehicles — Safety 
Belts, Restraint Systems and 
Safety Belt Reminder — 
Installation Requirements 


ICS 43.040.60 


© BIS 2018 


ada AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© AM AA, 9 ae VHC APM, As feeet-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2018 Price Group 3 


Passive Safety Crash Protection Systems Sectional Committee, TED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Passive 
Safety Crash Protection Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division 
Council. 


In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been taken from the following standards: 


a) ECE Regulation No. 16-07 (upto Amd 01 dated 06.08.2013) — Uniform provisions concerning the 
approval of: 


1) Safety-belts, restraint systems, child restraint systems and Isofix child restraint systems for occupants 
of power-driven vehicles. 

2) Vehicle equipped with safety-belts, safety-belt reminder, restraint systems, child restraint systems 
and Isofix Child Restraint Systems. 


b) ISO 2575 : 2010 Road vehicles — Symbols for controls, indicators and tell-tales. 


Installation requirements of safety-belts, restraint systems and safety-belt reminder in vehicles are a safety 
requirement. This standard prescribes the requirements for such installation. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16694 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — SAFETY BELTS, 
RESTRAINT SYSTEMS AND SAFETY BELT REMINDER 
— INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down requirements for safety-belts, 
restraint systems and safety-belt reminder for categories 
of Motor vehicles as defined in IS 14272 ‘Automotive 
vehicles — Types — Terminology (first revision)’ as 
described below: 


a) Vehicles of Category M and N with regard to 
the installation of safety-belts and restraint 
systems which are intended for separate use, 
i.e. as individual fittings, by persons of adult 
build occupying forward-facing seats 

b) Vehicles of Category M1 with regard to safety 
belt reminder 

c) The installation of safety belts or restraint 
systems other than those covered by this 
standard are allowed provided that they are 
intended for disabled people. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology (first revision) 

15139 : 2002 Automotive vehicles — Safety 
belt anchorages — Specification 

15140 : 2003 Automotive Vehicles — Safety 
Belt Assembly — Specification 

15223 : 2016 Automotive vehicles — Interior 


fittings — Specification (first 
revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this standard terms and definitions 
given in IS 15140 and the following shall apply: 


3.1 Safety-Belt Reminder — Means a system 
dedicated to alert the driver when he/she does not use 
the safety-belt. The system is constituted by a 
detection of an unfastened safety-belt and by a driver’s 


alert which is either a first level warning and/or a 
second level warning. 


3.2 Visual Warning — Means a warning by visual 
signal (lighting, blinking or visual display of symbol 
or message). 


3.3 Audible Warning — Means a warning by sound 
signal. 


3.4 First Level Warning — Means a visual warning 
activated when the ignition switch is engaged (engine 
running or not) and the driver’s safety-belt is not 
fastened. An audible warning can be added as an 
option. 


3.5 Second Level Warning — Means a visual and 
audible warning activated when a driver operates a 
vehicle without fastening the safety-belt. 


3.6 Safety-Belt is not Fastened — Means at the option 
of the manufacturer, either the driver safety-belt buckle 
is not engaged or the webbing length pulled out of the 
retractor is 100 mm or less. 


3.7 Vehicle is in Normal Operation — Means that 
vehicle is in forward motion at the speed greater than 
10 km/h. 


4 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL 


4.1 The application for approval of a vehicle type with 
regard to the installation of its safety-belts and restraint 
systems shall be submitted by the vehicle manufacturer 
or by his duly accredited representative to the testing 
agency. 


4.2 It shall be accompanied by the under mentioned 
documents and the following particulars: 


a) Drawings of the general vehicle structure on 
an appropriate scale, showing the positions of 
the safety-belts, and detailed drawings of the 
safety-belts and of the points to which they 
are attached; 

b) A specification of the materials used which 
may affect the strength of the safety-belts; 

c) A technical description of the safety-belts; and 

d) In the case of safety-belts affixed to the seat 
structure: 

1) Detailed description of the vehicle type 


IS 16694 : 2018 


with regard to the design of the seats, of 
the seat anchorages and their adjustment 
and locking systems; and 

2) Drawings, on an appropriate scale and in 
sufficient detail, of the seats, of their 
anchorages to the vehicle, and of their 
adjustment and locking systems. 


4.3 A vehicle representative of the vehicle type to be 
approved or the parts of the vehicle considered essential 
for the safety-belt tests by the Testing Agency shall be 
submitted to the Testing Agency. 


5 REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING THE 
INSTALLATION IN THE VEHICLE 


5.1 Safety-Belt and Restraint Systems Equipment 


5.1.1 The types of safety-belts or restraint systems for 
each seating position where installation is required shall 
be those specified in Table 1 of IS 15140. 


In the case of seats, capable of being turned to or placed 
in other orientations designed for use when the vehicle 
is stationary, the requirements of 5.1 shall only apply, 
to those orientations designated for normal use when 
the vehicle is travelling on a road, in accordance with 
this standard. 


5.1.2 On three point belts fitted with retractors, one 
retractor must operate at least on the diagonal strap. 


5.1.3 Except for vehicles of category M1 an emergency 
locking retractor of type 4N may be permitted instead 
of a retractor of type 4 where it has been shown to the 
satisfaction of the testing agency responsible for the 
tests that the fitting of a type 4 retractor would not be 
practical. 


5.1.4 For the front outboard and the front centre seating 
positions, lap belts fitted in accordance with Table | of 
IS 15140 shall be considered adequate only where the 
windscreen is located outside the reference zone defined 
in Annex A of IS 15223. 


5.1.4.1 As regards safety-belts, the windscreen is 
considered as part of the reference zone when it is 
capable of entering into static contact with the test 
apparatus according to the method described in 
Annex A of IS 15223. 


5.1.5 With the exception of the case covered by 5.1.6, 
every passenger seating position which is fitted with 
an airbag shall be provided with a warning against the 
use of a rearward-facing child restraint in that seating 
position. 


5.1.5.1 In the case of a frontal protection airbag on the 
front passenger seat, the warning shall be durably 
affixed to each face of the passenger front sun visor in 
such a position that at least one warning on the sun 


visor is visible at all times, irrespective of the position 
of the sun visor. The text size as applicable shall allow 
the label to be easily read by a normal sighted user 
seated on the seat concerned. 


5.1.5.2 Alternatively, one warning shall be on the 
visible face of the stowed sun visor and a second 
warning shall be on the roof behind the visor, so, at 
least one warning is visible at all times. The text size 
as applicable shall allow the label to be easily read by 
a normal sighted user seated on the seat concerned. 


5.1.5.3 In the case of a frontal protection airbag for 
other seats in the vehicle, the warning shall be directly 
ahead of the relevant seat, and clearly visible at all times 
to someone installing a rear-facing child restraint on 
that seat. 


5.1.5.4 Examples of possible designs of pictogram are 
shown in Fig. 1. The overall dimensions shall be 
120 mm x 60 mm or the equivalent area, as a minimum. 
One of the labels shown below may be adopted in such 
a way that the layout differs from the example below; 
however the content shall meet the above prescriptions. 
This label shall be provided at least in English. 


5.1.5.5 Detailed information making reference to the 
warning, shall be contained in the owner’s manual of 
the vehicle; as a minimum, the following text in Hindi 
or English shall at least include: 


NEVER use a rearward facing child restraint on a seat 
protected by an ACTIVE AIRBAG in front of it, 
DEATH or SERIOUS INJURY to the CHILD can 
occur. 


The text shall be accompanied by an illustration of the 
warning to be found in the vehicle. 


The requirements of 5.1.5.5 do not apply to vehicles 
of which all passenger seating positions are equipped 
with a device which automatically deactivates the 
frontal protection airbag assembly when any rearward 
facing child restraint is installed. 


5.1.6 The requirements of 5.1.5 shall not apply to seating 
positions equipped with a mechanism which senses 
automatically the presence of any rearward-facing child 
restraint, and ensures that the airbag will not be deployed 
when such a child restraint system is fitted. 


5.2 General Requirements 


5.2.1 Safety-belts, restraint systems, shall be fixed to 
anchorages conforming to the specifications of IS15139, 
such as the design and dimensional characteristics, the 
number of anchorages, and the strength requirements. 


5.2.2 The safety-belts, restraint systems, shall be so 
installed that they will work satisfactorily and reduce 
the risk of bodily injury in the event of an accident. In 
particular they shall be so installed that: 


5.2.2.1 The straps are not liable to assume a dangerous 
configuration. 


5.2.2.2 That the danger of a correctly positioned belt 
slipping from the shoulder of a wearer as a result of 
his/her forward movement is reduced to a minimum. 


5.2.2.3 The risk of the strap deteriorating through 
contact with sharp parts of the vehicle or seat structure 
is reduced to a minimum. 


5.2.2.4 The design and installation of every safety-belt 
provided for each seating position shall be such as to 
be readily available for use. Furthermore, where the 
complete seat or the seat cushion and/or the seat back 
can be folded to permit access to rear of the vehicle or 


IS 16694 : 2018 


to goods or luggage compartment, after folding and 
restoring those seats to the seating position, the safety- 
belts provided for those seats shall be accessible for 
use or can be easily recovered from under or behind 
the seat, by one person, according to instructions in 
the vehicle users handbook, without the need for that 
person to have training or practice. 


5.3 Special Requirements for Rigid Parts 
Incorporated in Safety-Belts or Restraint Systems 


5.3.1 Rigid parts, such as the buckles, adjusting devices 
and attachments, shall not increase the risk of bodily 
injury to the wearer or to other occupants of the vehicle 
in the event of an accident. 


LABEL OUTLINE, VERTICAL 
AND HORIZONTAL LINE BLOCK 


ARTWORK BLACK WITH 
WHITE BACKGROUND 


+—CIRCLE AND LINE RED 
WITH WHITE BACKGROUND 


DO NOT PLACE REAR-FACING CHILD 
SEAT ON THIS SEAT WITH AIRBAG 


DEATH OR SERIOUS INJURY 
CAN OCCUR 


BOTTOM TEXT BLACK 
WITH WHITE BACKGROUND 


TOP TEXT AND SYMBOL BLACK 
WITH YELLOW BACKGROUND 


Fic. 1 AN EXAMPLE OF A POSSIBLE DESIGN OF A PICTOGRAM 


IS 16694 : 2018 


5.3.2.1 The device for releasing the buckle shall be 
clearly visible to the wearer and within his easy reach 
and shall be so designed that it cannot be opened 
inadvertently or accidentally. The buckle shall also be 
located in such a position that it is readily accessible to 
a rescuer needing to release the wearer in an emergency. 


5.3.2.2 The buckle shall be so installed that, both when 
not under load and when sustaining the wearer’s mass, 
it is capable of being released by the wearer with a 
single simple movement of either hand in one direction. 


5.3.2.3 In the case of a safety-belts or restraint systems 
for front outboard seating positions, except if these are 
harness belts, the buckle shall also be capable of being 
locked in the same manner. 


5.3.2.4 A check shall be made to ensure that, if the 
buckle is in contact with the wearer, the width of the 
contact surface is not less than 46 mm. 


5.3.2.5 A check shall be made to ensure that, if the 
buckle is in contact with the wearer, the contact surface 
satisfies the requirements of 4.2.2.1 of IS 15140. 


5.3.3 When the belt is being worn, it shall either adjust 
automatically to fit the wearer or be so designed that 
the manual adjusting device is readily accessible to the 
wearer when seated and is convenient and easy to use. 


5.3.4 Safety-belts or restraint systems incorporating 
retractors shall be so installed that the retractors are 
able to operate correctly and stow the strap efficiently. 


5.4 Safety-Belt Reminder Equipment 


5.4.1 Where the vehicle manufacturer equips the driver 
seating position of M1 category of vehicles with a 
safety-belt reminder system the vehicle manufacturer 
shall have the option of providing any of the following: 


a) First level Warning. 
b) Second level Warning. 


The safety-belt reminder system shall satisfy the 
requirements of 5.4.2. 


5.4.1.1 The deactivation of the safety-belt reminder may 
be allowed, provided that such deactivation satisfies 
to the requirements of 5.4.2.6. 


OR 


5.4.2 Safety-Belt Reminder 
5.4.2.1 General requirements 


5.4.2.1.1 Visual warning shall be so located as to be 
readily visible and recognisable in the daylight by the 
driver and distinguishable from other alerts. Where the 
visual signal warning employs the colour red, it shall 
use a symbol as shown in Fig. 2. 


5.4.2.1.2 Visual warning shall be by continuous or 
intermittent signal. 


5.4.2.1.3 Audible warning shall be by continuous or 
intermittent sound signal or by vocal information. 
Where vocal information is employed, the manufacturer 
shall ensure that the alert uses the language either 
English or Hindi. This audible warning may be 
constituted by more than one step. 


5.4.2.1.4 Audible warning shall be easily recognized 
by the driver. 


5.4.2.2 First level warning shall be at least a visual 
warning activated for 4 seconds or longer when the 
driver safety-belt is not fastened and the ignition switch 
is engaged. 


5.4.2.3 The activation of the first level warning shall 
be tested according to the test procedure defined in 
Annex A (see A-1). 


5.4.2.4 Second level warning shall be a visual and 
audible signal activated for 30 s or longer except for 
cases in which the warning stops for over 3 seconds 
when the safety-belt is not fastened, when the vehicle 
is in normal operation and when at least one of the 
following conditions (or any combination of these 
conditions), is fulfilled: 


a) Distance driven greater than the distance 
threshold. The threshold shall not exceed 
500 m. The distance the vehicle is not in 


normal operation shall be excluded. 
Speed greater than the speed threshold. The 
threshold shall not exceed 25 km/h. 
Duration time (engine running) greater than 
the duration time threshold. The threshold 


b) 


c) 


Fic. 2 VISUALWARNING 


4 


shall not exceed 60 s. The first level warning 
duration time and the duration time the vehicle 
is not in normal operation shall be excluded. 


5.4.2.5 The activation of the second level warning shall 
be tested according to the test procedure defined in A-2. 


5.4.2.6 The safety-belt reminder may be designed to 
allow deactivation. 


5.4.2.6.1 In the case a short term deactivation is 
provided, it shall be more difficult to deactivate the 


IS 16694 : 2018 


safety-belt reminder than buckling the safety-belt on 
and off. When the ignition is switched off for more 
than 30 min and switched on again, a short-term 
deactivated safety-belt reminder must reactivate. 


5.4.2.6.2 In the case that a facility for a long term 
deactivation is provided, it shall require a sequence of 
operations to deactivate, that are detailed only in the 
manufacturer’s technical manual and/or which requires 
the use of tools (mechanical, electrical, digital, etc) that 
are not provided with the vehicle. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.4.2.3) 
SAFETY-BELT REMINDER TESTS 


A-1 The first level warning shall be tested according 
to the following conditions: 


a) Safety-belt is not fastened; 


b) Engine is stopped or idling and the vehicle is 
not in forward or reverse motion; 


c) Transmission is in neutral position; 

d) Ignition switch is engaged. 
A-2 The second level warning shall be tested according 
to the following conditions: 

a) Safety-belt is not fastened; 


b) Test vehicle driven with one or any 
combination of the conditions of described in 
A-2.1 to A-2.3 at the manufacturer’s choice. 


A-2.1 Accelerate the test vehicle to 25+} km/h from 
a halt and continue on the same speed. 


A-2.2 The test vehicle is driven forward at least 500 
m from a halt position. 


A-2.3 The vehicle is tested when the vehicle is in 
normal operation for at least 60 seconds. 


A-3 A system that the first level warning stops after a 
certain period of time, the second level warning shall 
be tested according to A-2 after the first level warning 
has been deactivated. A system that the first level 
warning does not stop after a certain period of time, 
the second level warning shall be tested according 
to A-2 while the first level warning is activated. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 29 (0995). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


