Is 15195:2002

Indian Standmd PERFORMANCE GUIDELINES FOR QUALITY A! XNJRANCE IN HOSPITAL SERVICES UP TO 30-BEDDED HOSPITALS

lCS 03,120. 10; 11.020

c) 131S 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002 ()( 't()her 2002 Price Group 8

Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee,

MSD 8

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. Health and medical care delivery system in our country are coming under constantly increasing pressure due to increased uti Iization as a result of population explosion, increased awareness among people, biomedical advancement resulting in the use of sophisticated and advanced technology in diagnosis and therapeutics, and constantly rising expectation levels of the users of these services. Also the Government's commitment to the cause of the common consumer is amply reflected in the enactment of Consumer Protection Act ( COPRA ), 1986. With the introduction of COPRA, the need for evaluating the care being rendered in retrospect has further gained strength. Until now, the quality of health care being provided by the health care organizations could not be subject to critical retrospective evaluation, as there were no checks or controls on the care being rendered and there being no predetermined standards or guidelines in this area. Today, a common consumer expects some sort of assurance that the services rendered should be of desired quality and cost effective. There is an urgent need to provide guidance to those concerned with quality assurance in hospital services to ensure efficiency and effectiveness of the services rendered. In order to enable them to successfully manage the hospital to fulfil ever rising expectations of the consumer in the present economic scenario, it is imperative that health care professionals should bring in certain standards in their respective areas of work so that quality of health care provided can be evaluated against laid-down norms or standards. Various functionaries, such as doctors, nursing and para-medical staff, hospital administrators, etc, should bear responsibility for any failure in the system, so as to make these services more effective, economical and accountable. In contrast with the case of products, where the expected performance is often in terms of measurable attributes, the difficulty in case of services is that the customer's needs and expectations are quite often abstract. Notwithstanding this, a hospital keen to provide satisfactory service or to improve upon its present level of service, needs to evolve' a suitable mechanism to identify the patient's needs and expectations, even if they are imprecise or vague. This Imay be done by communication with the users of the service, customer survey, etc. Such attributes, which are important for the patient's needs and requirements, may be picked up. These attributes may be divided into two broad categories: a) First relating to infrastructure, skills, procedures and systems, etc, which will ensure a satisfactory service at optimum cost. This is a prescription type of provision, adherence to which is expected to result in service of desired quality. The second part comprises identification and quantification, wherever possible, attributes of quality which is a performance based provision. Successful achievement of these quality attributes is expected to provide necessary confidence to hospital management as well as users of these services.

b)

Adopting primary health care and health centres as the principal instrument of action for providing guidelines for planning and managing these services, guidelines have been developed for prescriptive type attributes like infrastructure, skills, manpower, etc, in the following five parts of IS 13808 Quality management for hospital services ( up to 30bedded hospitals ) -- Guidelines: Part 1:1993 Part 2:1993 Part 3:1995 Part 4:1996 Part 5:1996 The composition Out-patient Diagnostic department ( OPD ) and emergency services theatre services

and blood transfusion

Wards, nursing services Hospital Hospital support services

and operation

equipment

management for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C

of the Committee

responsible

lnspite of great demand, presently there is no guidance readily available on those attributes of quality which are absolutely performance based for hospital services. This standard is intended to fulfil this long felt need. This standard lays down necessary guidelines on the performance requirements of hospital services and the system for their evaluation.

Is 15195:2002

Indian Standard PERFORMANCE GUIDELINES FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE IN HOSPITAL SERVICES UP TO 30-BEDDED HOSPITALS
1 SCOPE This standard covers guidelines for performance requirements for services in 30-bedded hospitals and the system for their evaluation. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards given below contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standard indicated below: IS No, 12433 (Part l): Title Basic requirements for hospital 1988 planning: Part 1 Up to 30-bedded hospitals Quality management for hospital services (up to 30-bedded hospitals ) -- Guidelines: 1993 Out-patients department ( OPD ) and emergency services 1993 Diagnostic services and blood transfusion 4 GENERAL 4.1 In order to consistently provide the services of desired quality at optimum cost for providing effective and efficient patient-care services, a hospital management should develop, implement and continuously improve the quality management system. Such a system consists of organizational structure, procedures, processes and resources needed to implement the quality management. 4.2 The basic requirements for 30-bedded general hospitals have been clearly defined in terms of infrastructure, personnel, material, etc in IS 12433 ( Part 1 ) which covers the physical facilities required for delivery of service to the patients. 4.3 The service delivery processes for 30-bedded general hospitals have been covered in 5 parts of IS 13808 in respect of OPD and emergency services, diagnostic and blood transfusion services; wards, nursing services and operation theatre; hospital support services and hospital equipment management. Some of the aspects of these quality management system characteristics may not always be observable by the customer, but directly affect service performance. 4.4 The characteristics of hospital services in terms of infrastructure and systems form the starting point. The other set relates to quality considerations which should follow thereafter. These may be quantitative ( measurable) or qualitative ( comparable). Both these types of characteristics should be evaluated by hospital authorities against defined standards of acceptability. Quality is generally expressed in terms of the following attributes: a) 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. 3.1 Customer Recipient of the services rendered by hospital/health care organization. 3.2 Service Result generated by activities at the interface between the hospital/health care organization and the customer and the internal activities of the hospital/health care organization to meet the customers' needs and expectations. 1 c) the following b) Availability-- The services shall be available to the patient whenever needed. Reliability -- The services shall be accurate and reliable, for example if a blood sample is tested in a pathological laboratory, the values obtained shall be accurate and free from avoidable errors. Completeness -- The services rendered shall be complete in all respects. If a laboratory test is done for an in-patient but report not sent to the ward, it is not a satisfactory service because it is not complete. Timeliness -- Rendering the services in time

13808

(Part l):

(Part 2):

(Part 3):1995

Wards, nursing operation theatre support

services

and

(Part 4): (Part 5):

1996 Hospital 1996 Hospital

services management

equipment

3 TERMINOLOGY

d)

Is 15195:2002 is a very important consideration, which otherwise, may even cost a patient's life. The medical service, in order to be called as good quality or satisfactory, shall adhere to the time specified. e) ~'ourfesy -- A hospital service is a highly personalized one and should be rendered with due courtesy and pleasant behaviour to the customer. A patient, while suffering from a disease, heaves a sigh of relief through courteous behaviour. Economy -- A hospital service should be provided to the patient at reasonable cost which is generally affordable. Consciousness -- A strong will to redress grievances and make good losses arising out of lapses in service is also an attribute of quality of services rendered. Other Considerations -- These may include confidentially, hygiene considerations responsiveness, comfort, aesthetics of environment and effective communication and transparency particularly in costs and communications. WITH CUSTOMERS 5.3 Communication with customers involves listening to them and keeping them informed. Difficulties in communication or interaction with customers should be given prompt attention. These difficulties provide important information on areas for improvements in the service delivery process. Effective communication with customers involves: a) b) c) d) Describing availability the service, and timeliness its scope, of delivery; its an important source of information for the ongoing quality improvement process. Management should regularly review the methods used for promoting contacts with customers. 5.2.4 Since health service is mainly people-oriented, prevention and reduction of human errors at all levels are of vital importance. This means that top priority shall be given to human resource development. Some common examples of waste, re-work, negligence and error in patient-care in hospitals are: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j) k) m) 5 COMMUNICATION 5.1 One of the major indicators of quality of health care services is the feed-back received from patients. It is essential that such feed-back percolates down the line to every employee in the hospital. Another major element in this service area is the concept of considerateion. Usually, price is a very important concept in any industry and service. But in health care service area, price has been replaced by the element of consideration. Consideration is price plus loss of dignity, waiting time, anxiety, etc. The latest concept in management is that of customer delight. It has now become essential not only to ensure customer satisfaction but also to aspire for customer delight. Customer delight, for example, means that a receptionist is not merely courteous, but is warm, empathic and well trained in counseling. 5.2 Interface with Customers f) g) X-ray/investigation ordered but not done;

f)

Prolonged stay before and after the operation; Consultation indicated and not carried out;

g)

Wrong label on samples; Wrongly numbered Missing requisitions, reports; reports, etc;

h)

Inferior quality of drugs used; Delayed reports; not explained; but not given by the

Prescriptions

Medicine prescribed nurse; and Incorrect

patient identification.

Stating how much the service will cost; Explaining the interrelationships service, delivery and cost; between

Explaining to customers the effect of any problem and how it will be resolved, should it arise; Ensuring that customers are aware of the contribution they can make to service quality; Providing adequate and readily accessible facilities for effective communication; and Determining the relationship between the service offered and the real needs of the customer.

e) 5.2.1 Hospital management should establish and monitor effectiveness of interaction between customers and hospital personnel. This is crucial to achieve customer satisfaction. 5.2.2 Management can influence this perception by creating an appropriate image based on the reality of actions taken to meet customer needs. This image presented by personnel at all levels, has a primary effect on the hospital's relationship with the customer. 5.2.3 Personnel having direct customer contact are 2

The customers' perception of service quality is acquired often through communication with the service organization's personnel and facilities. 5.4 The control of service and service delivery characteristics should be achieved by controlling the

Is 15195:2002 process that delivers the service. Process performance measurement and control are, therefore, essential to achieve and maintain the required service qua!ity. 6 IDENTIFYING AND DATA RELEVANT INFORMATION

d
h)

Emergencies and

should be attended to promptly; should be taken in

Life saving measures minimum time, -- General

7.4 Parameters 7.4.1 a) b) c) 7.4.2 a) b) c) 7.4.3 a) b) c) 7.4.4 Reception

Performance

6.1 It is important to identi~ and analyze the relevant information data which may involve: a) b) Giving priority to those activities having the greatest adverse impact on service quality; Providing feedback of results of the analysis with management to operational recommendation for immediate service improvement; Reporting periodically to senior management for a management review of long-term quality improvement recommendations; and Admission and discharge analysis patients (monthly statistical report). of the

and Registration response, provided, needed. and

Courteous Information Guidance Staff Service

Courtesy, Comfort. and Promptness. Housekeeping Cleanliness and Sanitation and hygiene, disposal of garbage, and

c)

d)

6.2 Members from different parts of the service organization working together may be able to offer fruitful ideas that could be directed towards improving quality and reducing cost. Management should encourage personnel at all levels to contribute programmed for quality improvement, with recognition for their efforts and participation. 7 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Safe and effective

Linen and laundering. Hospital Infection Control

Qualitative 7.4.5 a) b) c) d) e) 7.4.6 a) b) c) d) e) ~ 7.4.7 a) b) c) d) e) 9 g) h) 3

indicator. Team

Patient Management Doctor, Nurse, Para-medicals, Technicians, Attendants. Medical ECG, X-ray, Pathological, Sonography Essential Others. Other Facilities Canteen, Laundry, Kitchen, Drinking water, Chemist shop, Facilities and

7,1 Parameters have to be identified which describe the performance of each activity of the work phase. These parameters should relate to the quality of patientcare activity and should be associated with the appropriate type of service required. 7.2 In order to define standards of acceptable performance, the value of each parameter needs to be specified in terms of both the acceptable level and allowable tolerances. 7.3 Customer's needs and expectations from various activities of hospital services should be kept in mind while laying down various quality parameters. Some of these customer satisfiers are given below: a) b) c) d) e) 9 Patients should get cured;

( optional

),

drugs, and

Curing should be done in the shortest possible time and at the lowest cost; Cure should be lasting; Psychologically the patients should feel that they are cared for and being treated well; The hospital and inviting; environment should be clean

The environment should prevent the spread of diseases to others including doctors, nurses and other patients;

Waiting space for patient's

relatives,

Public relation and social work, Horticulture and landscaping,

Is 15195:2002 j) k) m) 7.4.8 7.4.8.1 a) b) c) d) e) f) @ Parking facility, STD/ISD andinternet TV. facilities, and Minimum possible time depending on the patient's condition and the work-load in the emergency at a given time, but not more than 2 h before being shifted to minor procedure room or emergency ward for fi.uther observatiordtreatment. 7.5.11 Adequate Instructions, Oral and Written About Follow-up -- Instructions should be given to the patient about fiu-ther follow-up treatment/action as per hospital guidelines. 7.5.12 Opinion Regarding Arrangements in the Emergency Department -- Performance of the emergency department should be certified as satisfactory based on the following parameters: a) b) c) d) e) The patient is attended properly and in-time with minimum waiting, Availability ofstaffand infrastructure laid down norms of the hospital, Prompt and efficient handling for diagnosis and treatment, Lab investigation primarily, ordered as per

Light music/Cable

Follow- up Care Quantitative Bed occupancy Average Hospital Hospital rate,

length of stay, death rate, acquired infection rate,

Number of admissions, Number of discharge on non-medical grounds, and Number of LAMA's ( Left Against Medical Advice ). in Casualty and OPD

7.5 Parameters

of the patient and facilitated

7.5.1 Basic Resuscitation Equipment -- availability of emergency drugs and consumables. 7.5.2 Time-gap Between Arrival in Emergency Department and Arrangement of Wheel-chair/Trolley along with the Bearer -- least possible time but less than 10 min. 7.5.3 Escort for Patient -- serious patients, on reaching the casualty, should preferably be provided escort by hospital attendant. 7.5.4 Receptionist -- should be helpful courteous in providing necessary information and guidance to patients and their relatives and should display identity. 7.5.5 Waiting Hall -- should be available in wellmaintained condition alongwith facilities like toilets, drinking water, telephones, etc. 7.5.6 Waiting Period Before Being First Seen.LAssessed by Doctor/Nurse -- should be least possible time. 7.5.7 Information of Possible Delays -- Soon after arrival in the waiting hall, patients or their relatives to be informed by receptionist/nursing staff, if there is any likelihood of delay. In addition, the condition of the patient may also be appropriately communicated. 7.5.8 Waiting Time for Treatment/Advice -- Treatment to be started immediately after being examined by the doctor and this may be modified, if necessary, after receipt of reports of investigation or otherwise. 7.5.9 Radiological/Laboratory Investigation -- Investigation, requisitioned should be reported upon in least possible time, but it should not take more than 1 h. 7.5.10 Time Spent in Emergency Department -- 4

Patient/Patient's relatives informed regarding conditio n/man agement/fo now-up requirements, and Courteous and efficient staff of department. behaviour of every

o

7.5.13 Dress Code -- All medical and para-medical staff should be wearing proper uniforms. 7.6 Performance Parameters and Norms for Inpatient Services Inclusive of Nursing Care Services 7.6.1 Infrastructure Infrastructure for in-patient services nursing care should be available IS 12433( Part 1 ). 7.6.1.1 a) Physical facilities Patient Holding Area -- Availability space per bed should be according IS 12433 (Part 1 ). of to inclusive as given of in

General cleanliness and maintenance should be according to satisfactory level of acceptance so as to prevent any nosocomial infection, b) c) Patient Conveniences/Toilets -- These should be clean, hygienic and functional, Nursing Station -- Nursing station should be maintained in well functioning condition, and Ancillary Room -- Ancillary room for doctors, nurses and supporting staff should be well maintained and functional.

d)

Is 15195:2002 7.6.1.2 Medical instruments and equipment should be alongwith 7.6.3.3 Organization of diagnostic investigation

Medical instruments and equipment available in serviceable condition maintenance record. 7.6.1.3 Human resources

Timely and proper collection of samples for investigation, their transportation to respective laboratories, receiving and filing the reports in respective patient's medical record should be ensured. 7.6.3.4 Monitoring of vitals

Availability of human resources, namely doctors, nursing staff, supporting staff and others according to IS 12433 ( Part 1 ) should be ensured during working hours. 7.6.2 Medical Care evaluation of patient

Monitoring of vital parameters of the patient shall be done routinely, at least every 8 h or as per medical advice. This shall be recorded simultaneously. 7.6.3.5 Monitoring fluid levels

7.6.2.1 Time offirst medical by the doctor after admission

It shall be done as soon as possible but not exceeding 1 h. However, initial management should always be advised by the admitting physician, particularly for emergency admissions. 7.6.2.2 Medical records of provisional clinical diagnosis, investigations requested and management advised and initiated at the time offirst evaluation Up-to-date medical record should be available at any given time [see IS 13808( Part 3 ) ]. 7.6.2.3 Periodicity the hospitalization of visits of medical staff during of patient

Record of L V. fluid administration and, where advised, intake and output charts shall be maintained and available. 7.6.3.6 Basic nursing procedures

It shall be ensured as per laid down norms 7.6.3.7 Supervision of support service stafl

Support service staff attached to the ward should be properly scheduled and supervised so as to meet patient care needs in the ward. This should be monitored through duty rosters and staff movement records. 7.6.3.8 Behaviour of nursing staff

Periodicity of visits of medical staff shall be at least once a day. It should be in accordance with the type of sickness and its management. Each visit and observations to be recorded in patient's case sheet with date and time. 7.6.2.4 Behaviour of medical staff

Nursing staff should be courteous, helpful and sympathetic to the patients' needs. Continuous evaluation of patient's satisfaction through exit opinion poll and employees' interpersonal relationship ( see Annex A ) should be carried out. 7.6.3.9 Maintenance of nursing record protocol.

Behavicmr of medical staff with patient and employees shall be communicative, sympathetic and courteous. Continuous evaluation of patient's satisfaction, through exit opinion poll and employees' interpersonal relationship ( see Annex A ) shall be carried out. 7.6.3 7.6.3.1 Nursing Care of patient in the ward

It should be maintained 7.6.4 7.6.4.1 Ancillary Personal Care

as per standard

assistance

to the patient

Need based assistance to the patient should be given by appropriate staff and its evaluation should be done in exit-poll analysis ( see Annex A ). 7.6.4.2 areas Transportation of patient to other service

Reception

Patient shall be received with courtesy and warmth. All documentation including patient's consent ( see Annex B ) shall be carried out as per hospital Standard Operative Procedure ( SOP). Freshly prepared bed shall be made available to the patient immediately on arrival in the ward but not later than 15 min. The patient shall be made comfortable. 7.6.3.2 Administration of oral/parental drugs

It should be safe, comfortable and timely. The nursing staff should monitor the patient's movement records and services received. 7.6.4.3 Provision of appropriate linen

Linen should be changed 7.6.4.4 Provision of diet

at least thrice a week.

It shall be administered as per schedule and prescription of medical staff and proper records shall be maintained. 5

Diet should be in accordance with therapeutic advise, as per time schedule and served in a pleasant and

Is 15195:2002 courteous manner. Continuous evaluation ofpatient's satisfaction through exit opinion poll should be carried out. 7.6.4.5 Security andsafety j) Security and safety of patients and staff ensured by hospital administration. The security implies physical safety and safety of patient and hospital and it should be per laid down procedures. `?.6.4.6 Storage and serviceability m) should be safety and of property ensured as h) Quality control of investigation -- Internal quality control by testing known value samples alongwith test samples should be done every day and recorded. Recording of report of investigations and record of all indexing -- A proper investigation reports should be maintained and indexed in specified registers. Emergency laboratory services -- Availability of restricted emergency laboratory services beyond routine sample collection time is desirable. General cleanliness in laboratory and disposal of laboratory wastes -- General instructions of cleanliness should be followed. Laboratory wastes should be disposed off properly according to SOP of the hospital. Specific improvement and up-gradation of laboratory services -- Proposals for upgradation oftechniques/instruments shall be placed to competent authorities periodically, as and when required. Imaging a) Diagnostic Service

k)

The provision for storage and serviceability of essential equipments and essential drugs should be done as per laid down procedures. It should be monitored as per the patient drug-administration record and servicerecord of equipments/ledgers. 7.6.4.7 Attitude of supporting helpful care stafl and sympathetic to

n)

Itshould be courteous, the patient's need. 7.7 Performance Diagnostic Services

Parameters

and

Norms

for 7.7.2

Diagnostic services in a 30-bedded covers the following: 7.7.1 a) Lab Diagnostic Service

hospital generally

Information, registration and receipt of samples -- Least possible time to be taken for information, identification, registration and Iabelling of samples. It should generally take 3 to5 min. Storage and transport of sample(s) -- Appropriate storage and transport of samples of blood, urine, tissues, body fluids, etc, should be done according to Standard Operating Procedures ( SOPS). Time taken to process the samples -- It should vary from half-an-hour to one hour depending upon the type of investigation. Despatch ofreport(s) -- Immediate despatch facilities for emergency cases should be available. Despatch facilities for routine cases should be available on the same way. Numbers ofsamples tested-- 25 to 30 samples of varied spectrum per day. Number and spectrum 80 to 120 investigation of investigations -- of varied spectrum.

Information, receipt of requisition and registration -- Time required for information, receipt of requisition and registration should be done promptly and should be less than 10 min for each patient. Relevant information should be prominently displayed bilingually ( English and local language). Number of radiographs/ultrasound -- Number of X-ray/ultrasound investigations should be generally between 15 to 20 per day. Record of utilization of radiographic films -- Proper record of utilization of radiographic films should be maintained. This should also include a record of over-exposedl under-exposed or repeat films for each case. Radiation protective devices -- Proper use of radiation protection devices should be ensured for the staff as well as patients. Record of exposure counter reading for X-ray tube -- Record of exposure counter reading of X-ray tube should be properly monitored with a view to planning preventive maintenance of the machine as per manufacturer's instruction/manual. Fixing and developing ofX-r~films -- Fixing and developing of X-ray films should be done according to laid down procedure. Reporting and dispatching of X-ray reports -- The time required for reporting and dispatching of X-ray reports should be less

b)

b)

c)

c)

d)

d)

e)

e)

f) @

f)

Technique(s) used for investigation -- Availability and compliance of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) manual, conventional method or semi/fully automated technique used should be mentioned. 6

g)

IS 15195:2002 than lhforemergency cases andwithin same day for routine cases. 7.7.3 a) ECG Service Receipt of ECG demand and registration -- Time required for receipt and registration of ECG demand should be less than 5 min. Recording, reporting and despatch of ECG reports -- Time for each ECG procedure should be less than 10 min. Maintenance of ECG machine History sheet of ECG machine maintained and available. Blood Transfusion a) Service record -- should be b) the records from medico-legal and licensing point of view, should be ensured. 7.8 Parameters 7.8.1 in Support Services ( CSSD )

Central Sterile Supply Department

If a hospital is having CSSD then it should meet the following parameters: a) Transportation of articles to CSSD from various user departments -- Appropriate containers and trolleys for transportation should be available. Receipts -- A registration counter shall be available for receipt of the non-sterile material. Staff shall be available for the receipt of the items. Receipt of material shall be recorded and counterfoil of indent books to be maintained. Rinsing and cleaning of articles -- Washing taps, sinks, antiseptic/disinfectants and detergent solutions shall be available. Drying, packing and Iabelling -- Physical facilities for packing and labelling shall be available. Availability of appropriate packing material for wrapping and Iabelling of material should be ensured. Physical checking of individual packages/trays as per norms to be ensured. Methods for sterilization -- Steam sterilization -- The following shall be ensured: 1) 2) 3) 4) Functioning of autoclave,

b)

c)

7.7.4

Information, receipt of demand and registration for requisition of blood demand-- The availability of appropriate and adequate information should be ensured. Receipt of demand and registration for requisition of blood demand should be done within 10 min. Selection of donor -- Selection of donor should be done according to the notified criterion for selection of blood donors. These criteria should be available. The entire selection procedure should take less than 30 min. Collection, grouping and cross-matching of blood -- This should be done within 45 min following the laid down procedure in Standard Operative Procedure ( SOP) manual. Screening of blood donor for safety measures -- Screening of blood donor for safety measures for testing Hepatitis B, V.D.R.L., HIV and Malaria should be completed in less than 1 h. Functioning blood storage facilities from blood collection to blood transfusion -- Storage cabinet of minimum 10 bags capacity should be available. Blood bags collected should be transported to the blood bank facility within 2 h. Blood should be stored in the blood bank refrigerator and should be used within the time specified according to Standard Operative Procedure ( SOP). Issue procedure -- Blood should be issued within 10 min after appropriate crosshatching. However, issue of blood should not take more than 1 h after receipt of requisition of initial demand. Maintenance of record of blood transfusion services -- Availability of complete record of entry of donors, number of issues of crosshatched blood and mandatory investigation 7

c)

b)

d)

c)

e)

d)

Checking of temperature and holding time, Availability of colour tapes, and are maintained

Charts and records manually.

e)

f) Maintenance
1) 2) 3) 4)

of equipment -- The following shall be ensured: Preventing action is taken for maintenance of equipment, Spare parts are available, Break down maintenance and is carried out, is

o

Periodic check up of the equipments regularly performed.

g)

Storage and issue of sterilized material -- Space for sterile material is earmarked and made available. Physical facilities such as racks with air COOIIAC arrangements are available. Space for issue counter is also available. h) Quality control -- The following shall be

Is 15195:2002 ensured for Quality Control Maintenance: 1) 2) 3) Intactness supplies; of wrappers over sterile and b) following: a) Frequent and scheduled cleaning of various hospital areas including toilets, washbasin, pantry, etc, with copius amount of water. Adequate water supply, cleaning materials including brooms, mops, detergents, chemicals, stain removers, deodorants, etc. Application of various methods of cleaning as per functional requirement ofpatient-care and other areas such as sweeping, dusting, moping, waxing, stain removing, scrubbing and vacuum cleaning. Active supervision of the various sanitation and hygiene activity including documentation and record keeping. Maintenance function

Records of temperature, pressure holding time are maintained;

Heat sensitive tapes and Bacillus sterothermophilus culture tubes are available and used; Records of random sampling sterile items for culture to be maintained; and Availability of SOP and its follow up with periodical amendments shall be ensured. and Maintenance Services

c)

4) 5)

7.8.2 7.8.2.1

House Keeping

d)

Was(e management of the following shall be ensured: 7.8.2.3

Availability a)

Guidelines for hospital waste management issued by Government of India, with periodical amendments. Segregation, collection, transportation, storage, treatment and disposal. 1) 2) Colour code for the waste segregation and disposal to be followed. Segregation at its site of generation to be collected in prescribed bags/ containers. Special care shall be taken to separate hazardous waste from nonhazardous waste. Transportation in covered trolleys/bags.

Regular cleaning, positioning and maintenance of all the equipment including maintenance of a log-book for the same shall be ensured. Preventive maintenance of equipment including fhrniture and fixtures, doors, lifts, trolleys, etc, shall also be ensured. 7.8.2.4 Safety and security function shall be ensured: security procedures are being

b)

The following a) b) c)

Standing followed;

3) 4)

Safety code including to all concerned;

fire safety are given

Stored in a secured place and out of reach from the animals, rodents, pests and ragpickers Treatment of hazardous/infected prior to disposal. waste

5) 6)

Fire procedures and policies are ready with housekeeping department at any given time and staff concerned must know what to do, how to operate the equipments in any emergency; Fire regulations `NO SMOKING' pasted; are permanently signs posted;

Disposal of waste as per the classification. The hazardouslinfected waste shall be disposed by incineration or any other acceptable scientific methods.

d) e)

are permanently

0 g) 7.8.2.5

Ensure the proper upkeep of the fire fighting equipment; and Fire fighting drill is carried out periodically. Rodent and pest control

c)

Needles and sharps are blunted and collected separately in hard sturdy ( puncture proof) containers after treatment with hypochlorite solution. Proper documentation records. and maintenance of

Ensured that pest control measures are being followed. 7.8.2.6 Linen management shall be ensured: interval and at

d) e)

Appropriate protection and safety precautions for personnel handling the waste. Sanitation and hygiene

The following a) b)

7.8.2.2

Linen is changed at regular least once a day,

Sanitation and hygiene of the hospital premises and various function areas shall be ensured by the 8

Clean linen is available at anytime and every time, and

IS 15195:2002 c) 7.8.2.7 Co-ordination is being laundry services. Horticulture maintained with of adequate space, proper lighting, ventilation and humidity control so as to ensure preservation of food values; 4) The following a) b) shall be ensured: premises is cleaned regularly, 6) 7) S) Hospital Pest and rodent control; Principle of first in first out ( FIFO ) for issuance of material; Maintenance of stock registers and other documentation; and Issue of ration to the preparation area as per diet demand received from inpatient areas ( Wards). -- and

and landscaping

Proper horticulture and landscaping are made available by adequate plantation of trees and seasonal plants, and Adequate available. Procedure open space for parking be made d)

c)

7.8.2.8

manual

The following a)

shall be ensured: e)

Maintenance of kitchen appliances Ensure timely preventive maintenance repairs. Preparation preparation 1) 2) 3) 4) 5)

Availability of SOP with complete guidelines for day-to-day working and exigency situations to the working personnel; Periodical training schedule to the personnel; All the persomel should follow the universal precaution procedures while cleaning and handling the wastes; Availability of equipment maintenance record; and Availability of entire inventories, receipts and issue records. Hospital Dietary Services

of food -- Check if the of food is being carried out: diet scale.

as per prescribed

b) c)

as per menu planning. under hygienic by preserving requirement. conditions. food values -- calorie

d) e)

within the time schedule. offood-- Ensure the following: covered,

O

Distribution 1) 2) 3) 4)

Food is properly Distribution temperature

7.8.3 a)

is done under appropriate and palatable state,

Location -- Availability of the following shall be ensured: 1) 2) Accessible and hygienic location; and

Right quantity of the food is distributed to right person at right time, and Courteous distributing behaviour the food. of the person

Availability of physical infrastructure, equipment and trained manpower as per IS 12433 (Part 1).

g) h)

Disposal ofrefuge and waste -- Ensure timely collection and safe disposal of dietary waste. Patient system patient Annex satisfaction -- Ensure patient feedback in appropriate proforma for improving satisfaction on regular basis ( see B). Services

b)

Demand estimation, selection and procurement of the kitchen stores -- Check the following: 1) 2) 3) Quantity and quality of raw material, of proper requisition slip/

Availability format,

7.8.4 a)

Linen and Laundry

Diet requisition originating from various wards is in prescribed format containing details of therapeutic and general diet, and Dietary store purchase committee. and issue --

Total sets of linen -- There should be at least four sets of linen/bed, eventhough six sets are preferable. Number of changes -- Number of changes of linen are recommended as below: Patient linen : Body linen -- daily Bed linen -- daily/ alternate days Staff linen : OT and critical areas -- daily care

b)

4) c)

Receipt, storage, preservation Ensure the following: 1) 2) 3)

Receipt and inspection of perishable and non-perishable stores; Adequate storage space;

Proper storage facilities for perishable and non-perishable dietary items in terms 9

Other areas -- weekly Other departmental linen : Fortnightly

IS 15195:2002 c) Collection of linen -- Linen to be sent for the laundering must be segregated at the level of the generation and this should be done as per the following categories: 1) ContaminateaYin fected linen -- It should be removed from patient-care area and disinfected before sending to laundry. It should be packed in eco-friendly red polythene bags; Soiled and fowl linen -- Itshould be cleaned, washed and packed in yellow eco-friendly polythene bags before sending to laundry, and Dirty linen -- Itshould be packed in black eco-fi-iendly polythene bags before sending to laundry. a) Type and number of transport -- Hospital should have following types of transport vehicles. The nature of vehicle can be decided upon rurallurban, trained etc: 1) 2) b) Ambulance: Multi-utility transport 1 vehicle: At least 1

2)

Trained drivers -- Each vehicle should have a trained and licensed driver. The tilver should be given training in first-aid. Ambulance/ any heavy vehicle should have a attendant cleaner and he should also be given training in first-aid. Supervision -- A responsible officer of the hospital should be given additional responsibility/charge of the transport services. He would also be responsible for making arrangement for maintenance and repair services with in and outside the hospital. Preventive maintenance -- Inspection at regular specified intervals should be carried out for every vehicle. For ensuring the same following aspects are to be ensured: 1) Daily maintenance: -- Check petrol/diesel, oil, water level, etc, and inspect for any leakage anywhere; Check battery water, air cleaners for tightness, fan belt, tyre pressure and condition, clutch, brake pedal, lights and dynamo charging, etc; Completely clean the vehicle from inside and outside; and Check tools.

c)

3)

d)

Transportation of linen -- All categories of bags should be transported through trolley or manually everyday to the laundry. The quantity transported should be accounted for through a proforma/register. Receipt -- Ensure that mentioned is received and documented. Laundering 1) process quantity

c)

e) o

Ensure that the various categories of linen received in the laundry are processed as per the standard process that is sorting, sluicing, washing, drying and storing. Laundry should have regular and adequate supply of water along with the following consumables per 100 kg of wet linen: Detergent Soda ash Bleaching Blue Whitener Starch/softener powder 1.2 kg 2.0 kg 0.5 kg 30-50 g 30-50 g as per requirement 2)

--

2)

. --

Weekly maintenance: -- -- Wash the vehicle thoroughly;

Check and attend coiling system, fiel system, lubricant system, exhaust and silencer system; Check all the wheels for proper alignment and adjustment; Check tyres for abnormal tear; wear and

-- -- --

g)

Issue -- Ensure issue of linen as per the demand of working area and it should be accounted for. Maintenance of equipment -- Ensure corrective and preventive maintenance of equipment as per hospital equipment maintenance norms. Linen control and quali~ assurance -- An official should be designated for linen control and its quality assurance. Transport Services e)

h)

Remove battery. Clean and top up, clean the terminals and apply mineral jelly; Remove air cleaners and clean it; and Check body holding bolts, springs, clamps, shackle bolts, gear box, petrol tank, radiator, etc.

-- --

j)

7.8.5

To have a functional transport service for the hospital, the hospital should meet the following parameters:

Maintenance of log-books -- Log-book summary report for a month should be prepared and submitted to in-charge. It should contain

Is 15195:2002 following 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) n 8) 9) details: accountable equipment shall be ensured: a) management, the following

Type of vehicle with registration number; Date of servicing, Kilometres of month; Kilometres month; servicing done by;

remaining remaining

at the beginning at the end of the during the c) b)

Planning of equipment -- As per identified list of equipments for 30-bedded hospitals given in IS 12433 ( Part 1 ). Procurement -- A cost effective and scientific system be followed such as specifications with terms and conditions suitable to the organization and to the best of its uses. Utilization of equipment

Total kilometres month; Balance

covered

of petrol/diesel

of last month; and

Petrol/diesel purchased, consumed balance at end of the month;

Physical availability of each functioning and non-functioning equipment in respective usage area shall be ensured. 1) Output record of each equipment shall be endorsed in respective register as per the format. Number of hours an instrument functioning per day shall be asset by using `Use coefficient' formula as given below: Use coefficient where N = Average instrument and number of hours functioning per day, number of hours the can be used per day. = NIMx 100

Engine oil, gear oil, grease purchased during month; Average diesel; kilometres per litre of petrol/

2) of days worked during the

10) Number month;

II) Name of driver; and 12 Name of officer and signature. Entries should be made on day-to-day basis and should be verified at the end of month by competent authority. f) Vehicle breakdown shall be recorded breakdown: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) g) report -- The following in a register for every

M = Maximum instrument

Vehicle number, kilometre reading; Description happened; of breakdown, how it

Have the defect rectified and by whom, details of spares, labour, etc; Date of breakdown, Number Signature date of repair; and d)

Less than 50 percent, use coefficient indicates under utilization of equipment. However, this is not applicable to life saving equipment. 3) Costly and hi-tech equipment should be handled by trained personnel. -- The following system of by

of days out of service; and designation.

Repair and maintenance shall be ensured: 1) 2) 3)

Quality control -- The following control measures shall be ensured: 1) 2) Availability requirement, of vehicles

quality during

Establishment of a scientific repair and maintenance.

Regular and preventive maintenance user on day-to-day basis.

Number of days in a month the vehicles are off the road ( to be calculated individually for each vehicle ), Number of times a vehicle is required to sent for repair and maintenance other then routine servicing, Availability of the drivers in time, and

Annual maintenance contract by an authorized agency of the companyi supplier. In-house facility for maintenance repair for minor breakdowns. and disposal and

3)

4) e)

Condemnation 1) 2)

4) 5) 7.8.6

Training of the drivers in handling of the patients during transportation. Management an effective, economical and 11 9

Identified equipment beyond economical repair, obsolete, non-functional, hazards. Constitute a committee to find ways and means for disposal of such equipments. audit -- Wherever applicable audit be carried out with respect

Equipment

In order to establish

Equipment equipment

Is 15195:2002 to equipment use coefficient, performance, break even analysis, breakdown/downtime, cost on repair and maintenance, availability of consumable ( reagents and kids ) and operational safety and quality of its performance. 7.8.7 Hospital Supply System (Stores ) Local purchase emergencies ). d) ( in case of

To have an efficient ( stores ), the hospitals parameters: a)

hospital supply system should meet the following

Receipt and inspection -- The authorized person only should receive the supply for the hospital. On receipt of each item same should be inspected thoroughly, whether they are supplied as per the specifications and having the mandatory Quality Control Certificate attached alongwith. The inspection should be done on folIowing lines: 1) Physical verl>cation:

Types of store items: Hospital should have availability of following three categories of stores: 1) 2) Medical stores -- Drugs, vaccines and contraceptives, lab chemicals and kits, Surgical instruments i) stores ): and ( including

Quantity ( that is exact number asked for ); Physical appearance ( colour, shape, consistency, etc ); -- Hardness and dispensability tablets ); ( for

Expandable,

Turbidity or any suspended particles ( for all injectable); and furniture, 2) Validity considering manufacturinglexpiry. date of

ii) Non-expandable. 3) b) General stores -- Stationery, linen and other items.

Demand estimation -- Availability of Committee to look into matters of preparation and time-to-time update of hospital drug formulary which is based upon morbidity pattern and consumption rate, shall be ensured. Procurement ofstore items -- The following shall be ensured: 1) All the procurement procedure to be done under the supervision of a Committee ( Store purchase). One of the Medical Officer should be made in-charge of all the proc~rement procedures. All the items to be procured from the formulary only. should be

of Chemical analysis -- 10 percent random stores item to be sent for chemical analysis to authorized labs for certification within 15 days. shall be ensured:

e)

Storage -- The following 1)

Cj

Maintenance by proper authorized person(s) having sufficient experience of dispensing of drugs. Order of arrangements of items for storage and dispersing as per norms. Maintenance of registerslrecords pertaining to procurement, storage distribution of items. These registers to be maintained very meticulously supervised at a regular interval by competent authorities. Out of these following registers are must: -- -- -- Stock registers, Expiry drug registers, Narcotic drug registers, and etc. and are and the the

2) 3)

2)

3) 4)

The demand for each item alongwith its quantity should be initiated by the respective user departments. Procurement of the items should be done as per the laid down rules of Government of India, that is: -- -- -- -- Tender system; 5) ( Public 6) 4)

5)

Conduction of physical verification of items at regular interval at least of vital and essential items. Lead-time should be known before hand and to be followed strictly so that there should not be any stock outs. Reorder level ( once a year ) to be calculated properly and to be applied in regular procurement of the items.

Rate contract; Authorized manufacturers sector firms );

Authorized agencies ( MSD, MSO, Super bazaar ); and 12

Is 15195:2002 7) Buffer stock to be worked out properly applying the inventory control techniques/scientific techniques and to be followed strictly. 6) 7) Amount of items/drugs wasted/damaged due to pilferage, spoiled, etc; and Number of times physical verification regular interval occurred or not, OF STATISTICAL METHODS at

f)

Condemnation and disposal of items -- Condemnation and disposal of nonconsumable surgical instruments shall be conducted through Condemnation Committee. This procedure shall be carried out at reguiar intervals, at least once a year. Quality Control parameters shall be checked regularly: 1) 2) Number of times the items are available when asked for; Delay on procurement of items, over and above the normal lead time; Number of items rejected after quality analysis/label led supervision or substandard; Delay in getting the results of chemical analysis; Amount expired; of items/drugs getting time

8 APPLICATION

g) Quality control -- The following

Modern statistical methods can assist in most aspects of data collection and application, whether it be to gain a better understanding of customer needs, in process control, capability study, forecasting, measurement of quality to assist in making decisions or continuous improvement in quality of service. Few exampies are given below: a) Seven quality control tools can be applied, for example, if a patient does not respond to a particular line of treatment, a team of doctors could carry out a cause-and-effect analysis of the problem and work out a more effective treatment instead of relying on experimentation or intuition or expertize of one doctor. Trend charts can be prepared for average time any required to cure a disease to see continuous improvement; number of patients treated per month.

~)

4) 5)

b)

13

1s 15195:2002

ANNEX A ( Clauses 7.6.2 .4,7.6.3.8 and 7.6.4.1 )
EXIT INTERVIEW You may kindly express your frank and honest opinion regarding the experience you had for availing services from this hospital. Scale in: Good (3), Average (2), Poor (1). 1 Reception a) b) c) d) and Registration in answering and politeness replies questions PROFORMA c) d) e) t) Quickness Condition of bed and linen

General comfort Availability of medicines

Promptness Courtesy

8 Nursing Services a) b) c) d) Courtesy and sympathetic attitude

Well-informed/explained Promptness Area in service

Smiling and pleasant when talk to Promptness Punctuality Competence when called in giving medicine, injection, etc

2 Waiting a) b) c) d)

General condition Setting arrangement Toilets Drinking water

and cleanliness

e)

9 Dietary Services a) b) Timely services Palatability

3 Doctors a) b) c) d) e) Accessibility Courteous Listened and sympathetic and explained attitude

10 Other Support Staff a) b) c) d) e) Ward boy Dressers Physiotherapist Medico-social worker

properly

Punctuality/Availability Helpful with quarries Services in service of prescription

Safai karamchari Services

4 Pharmacy a) b) c) d)

11 Ancillary a) b) c) d) e) in services

Promptness Explanation

House keeping Security Water Electricity Maintenance Procedures in discharge process

Helpful and well informed replies Availability/Quality Services of medicines

5 Diagnostic a) b) c) d)

Primitiveness Courtesy

12 Discharge a) b)

and politeness of procedures

Promptness Directions

Explanation

about home care

Helpful in answering and Registration and politeness ofprocedures/forms in admission process

13 Additional

Comments(Suggestions

6 Admission a) b) c)

14 Overall Rating 15 Identify of the Patient ( Optional ) a) b) c) Name: Age/Sex: C.R. No.: Address: Signature:

Courtesy

Explanation Promptness

7 Indoor Services a) b) Cleanliness Cleanliness of room and maintenance of toilets 14

d) e)

Is 15195:2002

ANNEX B ( Clause 7.6.3.1 )
CONSENT FORM

C. R.No./O.P.D. No. ............................................ . ........ ...... ...... ..... ....................................................................... Name ................................................................ Sex ............................................. Age ............................................. Son/Daughter/Wi feof ................................................................................................................................................ Ad&ess .................................................................................................................................................................................... ....... Insured Consent of Anesthesia and performance of Surgical Operation . . ........................... .................................................................................... ........ ........ .......

Authorization for Medical Treatment, Administration and/or Diagnostic/Therapeutic Procedure. 1

1 hereby authorize .. ...................................................................... ... hospital to perform upon ..........................................................thefollowing medical treatment surgical operation mWordiagnostic/ therapeutic procedures .......................................................... . It has been explained to me that, during the course of the operation/procedure, unforeseen conditions may be revealed or encountered which necessitate surgical or other emergency procedures in addition to or different from those contemplated at the time of initial diagnosis. 1therefore, further authorize the above designated medical official to perform such additional surgical or other procedures as they deem necessary or desirable. I consent to the administration of a anesthesia and to use such anesthetics or desirable, except to the following exceptions: ............. ...... ............................................................................................... . ( Indicate exception or `None' ) disorders/Heart diseases or as may be deemed necessary

2

3

4

I state that I am/am not suffering from Hypertension/Diabetes/Bleeding .............................. . . .......... . . I also state that I am not suffering from any known allergies

5 6

or drug reactions. plasma or blood transfusions or any

I further consent to the administration of such drugs, infusions, other treatment or procedures deemed necessary.

7

The nature and purpose of the operation and/or procedures, the necessity, thereof, the possible alternative methods, treatment, prognosis, the risks involved and the possibility of complications in the investigative procedures/investigations and treatment of my condition/diagnosis have been fully explained to me and I understand the same. I have been given an opportunity for any second opinion. I acknowledge that no guarantee procedure/treatment. to ask all/any questions and I have also been given option to ask

8

9

and promises

has been made to me concerning

the result of any

10

I consent to the photographing or televising of the operations of procedures to be performed, including appropriate portions of my body, for medical, scientific or educational purposes, provided my identity is not revealed by the pictures or by descriptive texts accompanying them. medical education, I hereby give consent to the admittance of observers

11 For the purpose of advancing to the operating room. 12

I also give consent to the disposal by hospital authorities during the course of operative procedure/treatment. 15

of any tissues or parts which maybe removed

Is 15195:2002 1 certify that the statements made in the above consent letter have been read over and explained to me in my mother tongue and I have fully understood the implications of the above consent and further submit that statements therein referred to were filled in and any inapplicable paragraphs stricken off before I signed/put my thumb impression. Signature Date Signature, 1. names and address of the witnesses: 2. ................................................................................ Name of patient/Thumb impression

................................................................................

When patient is a minor or unable to aftlx signature

due to mental or physical disability. Signature/Thumb guardian impression of natural guardiad

Name and relationship Signature, 1. names and address of witnesses: 2.

with patient

................................................................................ ................................................................................

................................................................................ ................................................................................ to the person who has signed

I confirm that I have explained the above consent form.

the nature and effects of the operatiordtreatment

Signature Name Date Designation

of Doctor-in-Charge

16

ANNEX C ( Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION MSD 8

Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee, Organization Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi All India Institute of Medical Sciences ( AHMS ), New Delhi
All India Occupational Therapists' Association, New Delhi

Representatives)
DR V, H. TALIB( Chairman ) DR R. K. SARMA DR D. K. SHARMA ( Alternate ) DR R. K. SHARMA DR ANILSRIVASTAVA ( Alternate LT-COLR. K. BHASKAR SHRIAMITDEY DR G. D. KUNDE~ DR K. C. MEHTA

)

Armed Forces Medical College, Pune B. M. Birla Heart Research Centre, Kolkata Cauvery Medical Centre, Bangalore Commissionerate of Health, Medical Services and Medical Education, Gandhi Nagar Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi
Directorate of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi Directorate of Health Services, Chandigarh Directorate of Health Services, Gujarat Directorate of Health Services, Mumbai

DR K. B. LOGANI DR V. K. SINHA( Allernate ) SHRIDILIP KUMAR DIRECTOR DIRECTOR DR SUBHASH R. SALUNKE DR RAMS. BHARUKA ( Alternate )

Escorts Heart Institute New Delhi

and Research

Centre ( EHIRC ),

DR ( SHRIMATI ) ANITAARORA

Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation ( India ) Limited, New Delhi Indira Gandhi National Open University ( IGNOU ) School of Health Sciences, New Delhi Indian Hospital Association, Indian Medical Association, New Delhi New Delhi

SHRIS,%NJtV SOOD SHRIV. S. KRISHNAN ( Alternate ) PROFA. K. AtiARWAL

DR S. D. VOHRA D~ KtTANDESAI D~ SANJEEV MALIK( Alternate ) DR ASHOKSAHNI BRIGJ. K. BANSAL ( Alternate ) LT-COL G. KHOSHOO SUPERINTENDENT DIRECTOR HEADOF DEIIARTMt+NT or ANESTHESIOLOCiY ( Ahernate I ) HEADOF RADIO-DIAGNOSIS ( Alternate 11) DR K. K. ARORA COL H. S. GULARIA LT-COLS. C. ACHARYa ( Alternate )

Indian Society of Health Administrators ( ISHA ), Bangalore INMAS, New Delhi

Jaipur Golden Hospital, New Delhi JIPMER Medical College, Pondicherry

Medical Council of India, New Delhi Ministry of Defence, New Delhi

( Confirmed

on page

18 )

17

Is 15195:2002
( ('ontinuedfrom page 17 )

Organir.alien
Nat]onal Institute of Health and Family Welfare ( NIHFW ), New Delhi Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata

Repre.sen(alive(s)

D~ J. K. DAS

DII/fxTO~ AMXTIONAI. DIRECTOR ( Alternale ) and Medical Research Bwi ( Rt;TCI ) JoI: CLWIAN SHtOANUKAN VERMA ( Alternate DR ANILNARANCi

P, L. Hinduja National Ccntre, Mumbai

Hospital

)

Post-Graduate Institute of' Medical Education and Research (PG1), Chandigarh Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi SanJay Gandhi Post-Graduate Lucknow ~lniversi(y College Institute of Medical Sciences, Sciences and Guru Tegh

DR ARVIND THEOGAONKAR DR A. K. SRIVASTAVA D~ HEMCHAN~RA ( Alrernare ) DR S. DWIVEM

of Medical

t3ahadur Hospital, Delhi
[n personai capacity ( C-5/38 VasantKunj, New Delhi 110 070) BIS Div.x[orate General LT-COL ( RETD) S. K, MATHUR SHRIP. K. GAM~HIR,Director& Head ( MSD ) )] [ Representing Director General ( h-officio
Member Secretary

SHRILALITKUMAR MEHTA Deputy Director ( MSD ), BIS

Subcommittee
Ind]ra Gandhi National Open

for Quality Assurance
University ( IGNOU ),

Standards

for Hospital

Services,

MSD 8:3

PROFA. K. ACARWAL (Convener)

New Delhi
All India Institute of MedicaI Sciences ( AIIMS ), New Delhi Dtrector of Health Services ( DHS ), New Delhi DR SHAKTI GUPTA DR SURESH SETH DR RAMESH CHUGH ( Alternare ) ( EHIRC ), DR ( SHRIMAT1 ) ANITAARORA

Escorts Heart Institute New Delhi Municipal Corporation

and Reseach

Centre

of Delhi, Delhi

DR K. N. TIWARI DR N. C. SHA~MA ( Alternate ) DR K, K. ARORA DR J. K. DAS

Medical Council of India, New Delhi National Institute of Health and Family Welfare ( NIHFW ), New Delhi Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi In personal capacity ( C-5/38 Va.~ant Kunj, New Delhi 110 070)

DR V. H. TALIB DR ARVtND THEOGAONKAR ( Alternate ) LT-COL (RETD) S. K. MATHUR

Panel for Quality Assurance
Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi

Standards

with Respect to Patient Care Services,

MSD 8:31P-6

DR V. H. TALIB( Convener ) DR SHAKTI GUPTA DR J. N. MOHANTY
( Continued on page 19 )

All India Institute of Medical Sciences ( AIIMS ), New Delhi Director of Health Services ( BHS ), New Delhi

Is 15195:2002
( Conturuedjirom page 18 )

Organization
National Institute of Health and Family Welfare ( NIHFW ), New Delhi Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd ( Telco ), Jamshedpur In personal capacity ( C-5/38 Vasanl Kunj, New Delhi 1/007'0)

Repre.sentativec.~)
DR J, K. DAS

DR ARViN~THLOCiAONKA~ CAPT( RLTO) ARORA LT-COL( RET!}) S. K. MATHU~

Panel for Quality Assurance
Indira Gandhi New Delhi National Open

Standards
University

with Respect
( lGNOU ),

to Hospital

Support Services,

MSD 8:3/P-7

Pmt A. K. A~ARWAI, ( Converser )

All India Institute of Medical Sciences ( AIIMS ), New De!hi

DR P. C. CtlAUlll:Y COL PAWAN KAIWOR ( Alternate LT-COLR. K. BHASKAR

)

Director General New Delhi

Medical

Services

( DGMS ) (Army),

Escorts Heart Institute New Delhi

and Research

Centre ( EHIRC ),

DR ANITA ARORA

Employees State Insurance Corporation ( ESI ), New Delhi Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi

D~ S.K. JAIN DNANJAN PRAKASH

19

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of CBIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MSD 8 ( 108). Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Amendments Amend No.

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices : Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Eastern: Northern:

1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 600113

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBA1400093

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR, NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
Printed at New India Prlnttng Press, Khurja, India

