Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


WRU чет ch UM ch этч 
Weed Hate ATs aT dT 
fae — tifa аат 
( чест FRAT ) 


Ductile Design and Detailing of 

Reinforced Concrete Structures 

Subjected to Seismic Forces — 
Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 47.020.99; 93.140 


© BIS 2016 


Rs 9799 mu 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM зая, 9 TUE wx art, ae feeei-110002 
Lm. МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2016 Price Group 8 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


IS 4326 : 1976 ‘Code of Practice for earthquake-resistant design and construction of buildings’ had provisions for 
addressing special features in the design and construction of earthquake-resistant RC buildings. It included then, 
some details for achieving ductility in reinforced concrete (RC) buildings. To keep abreast with the rapid 
developments and extensive research on earthquake-resistant design of RC structures, the technical committee 
decided to formulate separate provisions for earthquake-resistant design and detailing of RC structures, which 
resulted in the formulation of IS 13920 : 1993 ‘Code of Practice for Ductile Design and Detailing of Reinforced 
Concrete Structures Subjected to Siesmic Forces’. 


IS 13920 : 1993 incorporated some important provisions that were not covered in IS 4326 : 1976 for design of RC 
structures. The formulation of the standard addressed the following salient aspects: 


a) Significant experience gained from performance of reinforced concrete structures (that were designed and 
detailed as per IS 4326 : 1976 during past earthquakes. Many deficiencies were identified and corrected. 

b) Provisions on design and detailing of beams and columns as given in IS 4326 : 1976 were revised with an 
aim to provide them with adequate stiffness, strength and ductility and to make them capable of undergoing 
extensive inelastic deformations and dissipating seismic energy in a stable manner. 

c) Specifications were included on lower limits for strengths of material of earthquake-resistant RC structural 
systems. 

d) Geometric constraints were imposed on cross-sections of flexural members. Provisions were revised on 
minimum and maximum reinforcement limits. Requirements were made explicit for detailing of 
longitudinal reinforcement in beams at joint faces, splices and anchorage requirements. Provisions were 
included for calculating seismic design shear force, and detailing transverse reinforcement in beams. 

e) Formembers subjected to axial load and bending moment, constraints were imposed on cross-sectional aspect 
ratio and on absolute dimensions. Also, provisions are included for (1) location of lap splices, (2) calculation 
of seismic design for shear force of structural walls, and (3) special confining reinforcement in regions of 
columns that are expected to undergo cyclic inelastic deformations during a severe earthquake shaking. 

f) Specifications were included on a seismic design and detailing of reinforced concrete structural walls. 
These provisions assisted in (1) estimation of design shear force and bending moment demand on structural 
wall sections, (2) estimation of design moment capacity of wall sections, (3) detailing of reinforcement 
in the wall web, boundary elements, coupling beams, around openings, at construction joints, and (4) 
providing sufficient length for development, lap splicing and anchorage of longitudinal steel. 

Following the earthquakes that occurred after the release of IS 13920 : 1993 (especially the 1997 Jabalpur, 2001 
Bhuj, 2004 Sumatra, 2006 Sikkim, and 2011 Sikkim earthquakes), it was felt that this Code needs further improvement. 
In this revision, the following changes are incorporated: 

a) The title is revised to reflect the ‘Design’ provisions that existed and new ones added, that determine the 
sizing, proportioning and reinforcement in RC members meant to resist earthquake shaking. All RC 
frames, RC walls and their elements in a structure need not be designed to resist lateral loads and the 
designer may judiciously select effective lateral load resisting RC frames and walls and design those 
members for full design lateral force. All columns in frames not designed as lateral load resisting frames 
will be designed as gravity columns in line with the requirements of 11. 

Most provisions that existed earlier have been redrafted. Also, the sequence of sections is re-organized 
for greater clarity to designers and for removing ambiguities. All the figures have been redrawn which 
increases the clarity. Some new figures have been added. 

b) The following new provisions are added: 

1) Column-to-beam strength ratio provision has been added in keeping with the strong column — weak 
beam design philosophy for moment resisting frames; 

2) Shear design of beam-column joints; 

3) Design of slender RC structural walls is improved. The principle of superposition is dropped for 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 13920 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


DUCTILE DESIGN AND DETAILING OF REINFORCED 
CONCRETE STRUCTURES SUBJECTED TO SEISMIC 
FORCES — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the requirements for 
designing and detailing of members of reinforced 
concrete (RC) structures designed to resist lateral 
effects of earthquake shaking, so as to give them 
adequate stiffness, strength and ductility to resist severe 
earthquake shaking without collapse. Even though the 
general concepts adopted in this standard for structures 
are also applicable for RC bridge systems, provisions 
of this standard shall be taken only as a guide for RC 
bridge piers and wells of large cross-sections, but are 
not sufficient. This standard addresses lateral load 
resisting structural systems of RC structures composed 
of, 


a) RC moment resisting frames, 


b) RC moment resisting frames 
unreinforced masonry infill walls, 


with 


c) RC moment resisting frames with RC 
structural walls, and 


d) RC structural walls. 


1.1.1 Provisions of this standard shall be adopted in 
all lateral load resisting systems of RC structures 
located in Seismic Zone III, IV or V. The standard is 
optional in Seismic Zone II. 


1.1.2 The provisions for RC structures given herein 
apply specifically to monolithic RC construction, and 
not for precast RC structures. Precast and/or pre 
stressed concrete members may be used, only if they 
are designed to provide similar level of ductility as that 
of monolithic RC structures during or after an 
earthquake. Likewise, flat slab structures must have a 
lateral load resisting system capable of providing 
similar level of performance as envisioned in this 
standard and must be designed for drift compatibility 
as per 11. Specialist literature must be referred to for 
design and construction of such structures. The 
adequacy of such designs shall be demonstrated by 
adequate, appropriate experimentation and nonlinear 
dynamic structural analyses. 


1.1.3 All RC frames, RC walls and their elements in a 
structure need not be designed to resist lateral loads 


and the designer can judiciously identify the lateral load 
resisting system based on relative stiffness and location 
in the building and design those members for full lateral 
force. RC monolithic members assumed not to 
participate in the lateral force resisting system (see 3.7) 
shall be permitted provided that their effect on the 
seismic response of the system is accounted for. 
Consequence of failure of structural and non-structural 
members not part of the lateral force resisting system 
shall also be considered in design. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 


Code of Practice (fourth revision) 


1343 : 2012 Code of Practice for prestressed 
concrete (second revision) 

1786 : 2008 High strength deformed steel bars and 
wires for concrete reinforcement 
(fourth revision) 

1893 Criteria for earthquake resistant 


design of structures 

General provisions and buildings 
(fifih revision) 

Liquid retaining tanks — Elevated 
and ground supported 

Industrial structures including stack 
like structures (first revision) 
Earthquake resistant design and 
construction of buildings — Code of 
Practice (third revision) 
Reinforcement couplers for 
mechanical splices of bars in concrete 
— Specification 


(Part 1) : 2002 
(Part 2) : 2014 
(Part 4) : 2015 


4326 : 2013 


16172 : 2014 


IS 13920 : 2016 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Beams — These are members (generally 
horizontal) of moment resisting frames with flexural 
and shearing actions. 


3.2 Boundary Elements — These are portions along 
the ends of a structural wall that are strengthened by 
longitudinal and transverse reinforcement. They may 
have the same thickness as that of the wall web. 


3.3 Columns — These are members (generally 
vertical) of moment resisting frames with axial, flexural 
and shearing actions. 


3.4 Cover Concrete — It is that concrete which is 
not confined by transverse reinforcement. 


3.5 Transverse Reinforcement — It is a continuous 
bar having a 135° hook with an extension of 6 times 
diameter (but not < 65 mm) at one end and a hook not 
less than 90° with an extension of 6 times diameter 
(but not < 65 mm) at the other end. The hooks shall 
engage peripheral longitudinal bars. In general, the 90° 
hooks of two successive crossties engaging the same 
longitudinal bars shall be alternated end for end. 
Transverse reinforcement (also called hoops) in 
columns is typically called stirrups and that in beams 
is called cross-ties. 


3.6 Gravity Columns in Buildings — It is a column, 
which is not part of the lateral load resisting system 
and designed only for force actions (that is, axial force, 
shear force and bending moments) due to gravity loads. 
But, it should be able to resist the gravity loads at lateral 
displacement imposed by the earthquake forces. 


3.7 Lateral Force Resisting System — It is that part 
of the structural system which participates in resisting 
forces induced by earthquake. 


3.8 Moment-Resisting Frame — It is a three- 
dimensional structural system composed of 
interconnected members, without structural walls, so 
as to function as a complete self-contained unit with or 
without the aid of horizontal diaphragms or floor 
bracing systems, in which the members resist gravity 
and lateral forces primarily by flexural actions. 


3.8.1 Special Moment Resisting Frame (SMRF) — It 
is a moment-resisting frame specially detailed to 
provide ductile behaviour as per the requirements 
specified in 5, 6, 7 and 8. 


3.8.2 Ordinary Moment Resisting Frame (OMRF) — 
It is a moment-resisting frame not meeting special 
detailing requirements for ductile behaviour. 


3.9 Link — It is a single steel bar bent into a closed 


loop having a 135° hook with an extension of 6 times 
diameter (but not < 65 mm) at each end, which is 
embedded in the confined core of the section, and 
placed normal to the longitudinal axis of the RC beam 
or column. 


3.10 Shear Wall (also Called Structural Wall) — It 
is a vertically oriented planar element that is primarily 
designed to resist lateral force effects (axial force, shear 
force and bending moment) in its own plane. 


3.11 Special Shear Wall — It is a structural wall 
meeting special detailing requirements for ductile 
behaviour specified in 10. 


4 SYMBOLS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following letter 
symbols shall have the meaning indicated against each; 
where other symbols are used, they are explained at the 
appropriate place. All dimensions are in millimetre, loads 
in Newton and stresses in MPa, unless otherwise specified. 
A, = Effective cross sectional area of a joint 
A,, = Effective shear area of a joint 
A, = Gross cross-sectional area of column, wall 
A, = Horizontal reinforcement area within 
spacing S, 
A, = Area of concrete core of column 


A = Reinforcement along each diagonal of 
coupling beam 


Аһ = Area of cross section of bar forming spiral 
or link 


A, = Area of uniformly distributed vertical 
reinforcement 


A, = Vertical reinforcement at a joint 
b, — Width of beam 

В, b, = Width of column 

b. = Effective width of a joint 

D = Overall depth of beam 


D, = Diameter of column core measured to the 
outside of spiral or link 


d — Effective depth of member 
d, — Diameter of longitudinal bar 
d, — Effective depth of wall section 
E, = Elastic modulus of steel 
fa = Characteristic compressive strength of 
concrete cube 
f, = Yield stress of steel reinforcing bars, or 0.2 
percent proof strength of reinforcing steel 
h — Longer dimension of rectangular confining 
link measured to its outer face 


zm- 


с = Depth of column 


IS 13920 : 2016 


h; = Effective depth of a joint 

st = Clear storey height 

= Overall height of RC structural wall 
Lay = Clear span of beam 


compression fibre 

о = Inclination of diagonal reinforcement in 
coupling beam 

p = Area of longitudinal reinforcement as a 
fraction of gross area of cross-section in a 


L, = Development length of bar in tension RC bëam, column or'structural wall 


l = Length of member over which special 


confining reinforcement is to be provided 


p, = Area of longitudinal reinforcement on the 


compression face of a beam as a fraction of 


L ee length a M RE cross- gross area of cross-section 
section dimension of wa A А : 
: (py), = Minimum area of horizontal reinforcement 
L, — Clear span of couplings beam of a structural wall as a fraction of gross 
M, = Design moment of resistance of entire RC area of cross-section 
beam, column or wall section (Р, ьи» = Minimum area of vertical reinforcement in 
M, = Design moment of resistance of top column each boundary element of a structural wall 
at a joint as a fraction of gross area of cross-section 
M,, = Design moment of resistance of bottom of each boundary element 
column at a joint (Pac), = Minimum area of vertical reinforcement of 
M,, = Design moment of resistance of left beam a structural wall as a fraction of gross area 
at a joint of cross-section of the wall 
M, = Design moment of resistance of right beam —(Py.web)min E Minimum area of vertical reinforcement 
at a joint in web of a structural wall as a fraction of 
m | . | gross area of cross-section of web 
M; Hogging design moment of resistance of | on . 
beam: atend A Pmax = Maximum area of longitudinal reinforce- 
ment permitted on the tension face of a beam 
As H ы H š - 
M," = Sagging design moment of resistance of as a fraction of gross area of cross-section 
beam at end A Pmin = Minimum area of longitudinal reinforcement 
MP" = Hogging design moment of resistance of to be ensured on the tension face of a beam 
beam at end B as a fraction of gross area of cross-section 
MP = Sagging design moment of resistance of Te = Design shear strength of concrete 


beam at end B 


Maximum nominal shear stress permitted at 


a section of RC beam, column or structural 


MP- = Design moment of resistance of beam wall 


framing into column from the left . : 
t, — Nominal shear stress at a section of RC 


beam, column or structural wall 


5 GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS 


Мв = Design moment of resistance of beam 
framing into column from the right 


Mẹ = Design moment of resistance of web of RC 

structural wall alone 5.1 The design and construction of reinforced concrete 
buildings shall be governed by provisions of IS 456, 
except as modified by the provisions of this standard for 


those elements participating in lateral force resistance. 


P. = Factored axial load 


s, = Spacing of links along the longitudinal 
direction of beam or column 


t, = Thickness of web of RC structural wall 


Урт = Factored shear force demand at end A of 
beam due to dead and live loads a) 


5.2 Minimum grade of structural concrete shall be 
M20, but M25 for buildings, 


more than 15 m in height in Seismic Zones 
III, IV and V; and 


but not less than that required by IS 456 based 
on exposure conditions. 


Vix" = Factored shear force demand at end B of 
beam due to dead and live loads b) 
V, = Design shear resistance of a joint 
5.3 Steel reinforcement resisting earthquake-induced 
forces in RC frame members and in boundary elements 
of RC structural walls shall comply with 5.3.1, 5.3.2 
and 5.3.3. 


V. = Factored shear force 


V. = Design shear resistance offered at a section 
by steel links 


x, = Depth of neutral axis from extreme 


и? 


5.3.1 Steel reinforcements used shall be, 


IS 13920 : 2016 


a) of grade Fe 415 or less (conforming to 
IS 1786); and 
b) of grade Fe 500 and Fe 550, that is; high 
strength deformed steel bars produced by 
thermo-mechanical treatment process having 
elongation more than 14.5 percent, and 
conforming to IS 1786. 
5.3.2 The actual 0.2 percent proof strength of steel bars 
based on tensile test must not exceed their characteristic 
0.2 percent proof strength by more than 20 percent. 


5.3.3 The ratio of the actual ultimate strength to the 
actual 0.2 percent proof strength shall be at least 1.15. 


5.4 In RC frame buildings, lintel beams shall preferably 
not be integrated into the columns to avoid short column 
effect. When integrated, they shall be included in the 
analytical model for structural analysis. Similarly, plinth 
beams (where provided), and staircase beams and slabs 
framing into columns shall be included in the analytical 
model for structural analysis. 


5.5 RC regular moment-resisting frame buildings shall 
have planar frames oriented along the two principal 
plan directions of buildings. Irregularities listed 
in IS 1893 (Part 1) shall be avoided. Buildings with 
any of the listed irregularities perform poorly during 
earthquake shaking; in addition, buildings with floating 
columns and set-back columns also perform poorly. 


When any such irregularities are adopted, detailed 
nonlinear analyses shall be performed to demonstrate 
that there 1s no threat to loss of life and property. 


6 BEAMS 


6.1 General 


Requirements of this section shall apply to beams 
resisting earthquake-induced effects, in which the 
factored axial compressive stress does not exceed 0.08 
fa. Beams, in which the factored axial compressive stress 
exceeds 0.08 f, shall be designed as per requirements 
of 7. 


6.1.1 Beams shall preferably have width-to-depth ratio 
of more than 0.3. 


6.1.2 Beams shall not have width less than 200 mm. 


6.1.3 Beams shall not have depth D more than 1/4th 
of clear span. This may not apply to the floor beam of 
frame staging of elevated RC water tanks. 


6.1.4 Width of beam b,, shall not exceed the width of 

supporting member c, plus distance on either side of 

supporting member equal to the smaller of (a) and (b) 
a) Width of supporting member, c, 


b) 0.75 times breadth of supporting member, c, 
(see Fig. 1A and Fig. 1B) 


Transverse reinforcement through the column to 
confine beam longitudinal reinforcement passing 
outside the column core 


C1 


PLAN 
1A Plan View of a Beam Column Joint Showing Effective Breadth and Width of Joint 


Not greater than the smaller of c2 
and 0.756, 


DL 


| 


ae 


"SECTION: A-A - 
1B Maximum Effective Width of Wide Beam and Required Transverse Reinforcement 


Fic. 1 BEAM COLUMN JUNCTIONS 


4 


Transverse reinforcement for the width of a beam that 
exceeds width of the column c, shall be provided as 
shown in Fig. 1B throughout the beam span including 
within the beam column joint 


6.2 Longitudinal Reinforcement 


6.2.1 The longitudinal reinforcement in beams shall 
be as given below: 


a) Beams shall have at least two 12 mm diameter 
bars each at the top and bottom faces. 

b) Minimum longitudinal steel ratio P „in required 
on any face at any section is: 


Pas = auf 


X 


6.2.2 Maximum longitudinal steel ratio Pmax provided 
on any face at any section is 0.025. 


6.2.3 Longitudinal steel on bottom face of a beam 
framing into a column (at the face of the column) shall 
be at least half the steel on its top face at the same 
section. At exterior joints, the anchorage length 
calculation shall consider this bottom steel to be tension 
steel. 


6.2.4 Longitudinal steel in beams at any section on top 
or bottom face shall be at least 1/4th of longitudinal 
steel provided at the top face of the beam at the face of 
the column; when the top longitudinal steel in the beam 
at the two supporting column faces is different, the 
larger of the two shall be considered. 


6.2.5 Atan exterior joint, top and bottom bars of beams 
shall be provided with anchorage length beyond the 
inner face of the column, equal to development length 
of the bar in tension plus 10 times bar diameter minus 
the allowance for 90? bends (see Fig. 2). 


X = Anchorage length 
as per Cl. 6.2.5 


Fic. 2 ANCHORAGE OF LONGITUDINAL BEAM BARS AT 
EXTERIOR BEAM-COLUMN JOINT 


IS 13920 : 2016 


6.2.6 Splicing of Longitudinal Bars 
6.2.6.1 Lap splices 


When adopted, closed links shall be provided over the 
entire length over which the longitudinal bars are 
spliced. Further, 


a) the spacing of these links shall not exceed 
150 mm (see Fig. 3). 

b) the lap length shall not be less than the 
development length of the largest longitudinal 
reinforcement bar in tension. 

c) lap splices shall not be provided, 

1) within a joint ; 

2) within a distance of 2d from face of the 
column; and 

3) within a quarter length of the beam 
adjoining the location where flexural 
yielding may occur under earthquake 
effects. 

d) not more than 50 percent of area of steel bars 
on either top or bottom face shall be spliced 
at any one section. 


? La 


- + E 


—| |-—< 150 тт 


Fic. 3 Lap LENGTH AT LOCATION OF SPLICING OF 
LONGITUDINAL Bars IN BEAM 
6.2.6.2 Mechanical couplers 


Mechanical couplers (conforming to IS 16172) shall 
be used when longitudinal steel bars have to be 
continued for beam spans larger than their 
manufactured lengths. Further, 


a) only those mechanical splices conforming to 
the above code and capable of developing the 
specified tensile strength of spliced bar shall 
be permitted within a distance equal to two 
times the depth of the member from the 
member face or in any location where yielding 
of reinforcement is likely to take place; and 

b) the spacing between adjacent longitudinal bars 
shall be based also on the outer size of the 
coupler to allow easy flow of concrete. 


6.2.6.3 Welded splices 


Welded splices shall not be used in beams for a distance 
equal to two times the depth of the member from the 
member face or in any location where yielding of 
reinforcement is likely to take place. At any location, 


IS 13920 : 2016 


not more than 50 percent of area of steel bars shall be 
spliced at any one section. 


Welding of links, ties, inserts or other similar elements 
to vertical reinforcement bars required as per design is 
not permitted, in any seismic zone. 


6.3 Transverse Reinforcement 


6.3.1 Only vertical links shall be used in beams 
(see Fig. 4A); inclined links shall not be used. And, 


a) innormal practice, a link is made of a single 
bent bar. But, it may be made of two bars also, 
namely a U-link with a 135° hook with an 
extension of 6 times diameter (but not less than 
65 mm) at each end, embedded in the core 
concrete, and a cross-tie (see Fig. 4B). 

b) the hooks of the links and cross-ties shall 
engage around peripheral longitudinal bars. 
Consecutive crossties engaging the same 
longitudinal bars shall have their 90° hooks at 
opposite sides of the beam. When the 
longitudinal reinforcement bars are secured 
by cross-ties in beams that have a slab on one 
side, the 90° hooks of the cross-ties shall be 
placed on that side. 


6d(265 mm) oe TIE 
6d(265 mm) 
dix U-STIRRUP 


Fic. 4 DETAILS OF TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENT IN 
BEAMS 


6.3.2 The minimum diameter of a link shall be 8 mm. 


6.3.3 Shear force capacity of a beam shall be more 
than larger of, 


a) factored shear force as per linear structural 
analysis; and 

b) factored gravity shear force, plus equilibrium 
shear force when plastic hinges are formed at 
both ends of the beam (see Fig. 5) given by : 
1) Forsway to right: 


As Bh 
у= 2-14 Ме tM ana 
Lap 
As Bh 
Vay ре +14 Me tM 
‘AB 
2) For sway to left: 
Ah Bs 
yay pu 14 Ма Ма ара 
Lap 
М“ + мв 


„= V+ 1.4 
u,b ub Ec 
where MP,M^',MP and MP" are sagging and 
hogging moments of resistance of the beam section at 
ends A and B, respectively. These shall be calculated 
as per IS 456. L,, is clear span of the beam. УРТ and 
Vik" are the factored shear forces at ends A and B, 
respectively, due to vertical loads acting on the span; 
the partial safety factor for dead and live loads shall be 
1.2, and the beam shall be considered to be simply 
supported for this estimation. 


The design shear force demand at end A of the beam 
shall be the larger of the two values of V, computed 
above. Similarly, the design shear force demand at end 
B shall be the larger of the two values of V, computed 
above. 


1.2 (D+L) 


"Ei 


bus 


5] 
u, 
(SWAY TO RIGHT) 


| 
Vu,b 


| Vua (SWAY TO LEFT) 


Fic. 5 CALCULATION OF DESIGN SHEAR FORCE DEMAND 
ON BEAMS UNDER PLASTIC HINGE ACTION AT THEIR ENDS 


6.3.4 In the calculation of design shear force capacity 
of RC beams, contributions of the following shall not 
be considered: 


a) Bent up bars, 


IS 13920 : 2016 


MIN 2 BARS FOR FULL LENGTH 


>| 50 mm MAX 


ALONG TOP AND BOTTO 


ke 50 mm MAX 


HOOP SPACING 
d 
^ 
HOOP SPACING 
< d/4, 8 d; and 100mm 


d = EFFECTIVE DEPTH OF BEAM 
d» = DIAMETER OF LONGITUDINAL BAR 


Fic. 6 DETAILS OF TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENT IN BEAMS 


b) Inclined links, and 
c) Concrete in the RC section. 


6.3.5 Close Spacing of Links 


Spacing of links over a length of 2d at either end of a 
beam shall not exceed, 


a) d/4; 


b) 8 times the diameter of the smallest 
longitudinal bar; and 


c) 100 mm (see Fig. 6). 


6.3.5.1 The first link shall be at a distance not 
exceeding 50 mm from the joint face. 


6.3.5.2 Closely spaced links shall be provided over a 
length equal to 2d on either side of a section where 
flexural yielding may occur under earthquake effects. 
Over the remaining length of the beam, vertical links 
shall be provided at a spacing not exceeding d/2. 


7 COLUMNS AND INCLINED MEMBERS 


7.1 Geometry 


Requirements of this section shall apply to columns 


Minimum column width 
> 300 mm 
2 15d, 


and inclined members resisting earthquake-induced 
effects, in which the factored axial compressive stress 
due to gravity and earthquake effects exceeds 0.08 fy. 
The factored axial compressive stress considering all 
load combinations relating to seismic loads shall be 
limited to 0.40 f. in all such members, except in those 
covered in 10. 


For various shapes of columns other than rectangular 
and circular like ‘Т’ shaped, ‘X’ shaped, etc., 
appropriate designs and detailing shall be carried out 
using specialist literature where such columns are part 
of lateral load resisting systems. 


7.1.1 The minimum dimension of a column shall not 
be less than, 


a) 20 d, where d, is diameter of the largest 
diameter longitudinal reinforcement bar in the 
beam passing through or anchoring into the 
column at the joint, or 


b) 300 mm (see Fig. 7). 


7.1.2 The cross-section aspect ratio (that is, ratio of 
smaller dimension to larger dimension of the cross- 
section of a column or inclined member) shall not be 


Minimum column width 
2 300 mm 
>15аь 


Fic. 7 MINIMUM SIZE or RC Согоммѕ BASED ON DIAMETER OF LARGEST LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT BAR IN 
BEAMS FRAMING INTO IT 


IS 13920 : 2016 


less than 0.45. Vertical members of RC buildings whose 
cross-section aspect ratio is less than 0.4 shall be 
designed as per requirements of 9. 


7.2 Relative Strengths of Beams and Columns at a 
Joint 


7.2.1 At each beam-column joint of a moment-resisting 
frame, the sum of nominal design strength of columns 
meeting at that joint (with nominal strength calculated 
for the factored axial load in the direction of the lateral 
force under consideration so as to give least column 
nominal design strength) along each principal plane 
shall be at least 1.4 times the sum of nominal design 
strength of beams meeting at that joint in the same plane 
(see Fig. 8). 


In the event of a beam-column joint not conforming to 
above, the columns at the joint shall be considered to 
be gravity columns only and shall not be considered as 
part of the lateral load resisting system. 


7.2.1.1 The design moments of resistance of a beam 
shall be estimated based on the principles of mechanics 
and the limiting strain states of the limit state design 
method enunciated in IS 456. The design moment of 
resistance of a column shall be estimated as in case of 


So 


Mob 


УМ; > 1.4 2 Ms, where 
УМЬ = My + Mor and X М, = Ma + Mo 


*Mc > 1.4 Mp, where 
УМ, = Met + Mob 


beams corresponding to zero axial force on the design 
P-M interaction diagram. 


7.2.1.2 This check shall be performed at each joint 
for both positive and negative directions of shaking in 
the plane under consideration. Further, in this check, 
design moments of resistance in beam(s) meeting at a 
joint shall be considered in the same direction, and 
similarly the design moments of resistance of column(s) 
at the same joint shall be considered to be in the 
direction opposite to that of the moments in the beams. 


7.2.1.3 This check shall be waived at all joints at roof 
level only, in buildings more than 4 storeys tall. 


The provisions of 7.2 are not applicable for flat slab 
structures. 


7.3 Longitudinal Reinforcement 

7.3.1 Circular columns shall have minimum of 6 bars. 
7.3.2 Splicing of Longitudinal Bars 

7.3.2.1 Lap splices 


When adopted, closed links shall be provided over the 
entire length over which the longitudinal bars are 
spliced. Further, 


Ma 


Mo 


Fic. 8 STRONG COLUMN — WEAK BEAM REQUIREMENT 


8 


IS 13920 : 2016 


MINIMUM LONGITUDINAL 
AND TRANSVERSE STEEL 
AS PER IS 456 


>100 mm 


Fic. 9 REINFORCEMENT REQUIREMENT IN COLUMNS WITH PROJECTION More THAN 100 MM BEYOND CORE 


a) the spacing of these links shall not exceed 
100 mm. 


b) the lap length shall not be less than the 
development length of the largest longitudinal 
reinforcement bar in tension. 

c) lap splices shall be provided only in the central 
half of clear column height, and not 
1) within a joint, or 
2) within a distance of 2d from face of the 

beam. 

d) not more than 50 percent of area of steel bars 
shall be spliced at any one section. 

e) lap splices shall not be used for bars of 
diameter larger than 32 mm for which 
mechanical splicing shall be adopted. 


7.3.2.2. Mechanical couplers 


Mechanical couplers (conforming to IS 16172) shall 
be used. Further, only those mechanical splices 
conforming to the above standard and capable of 
developing the specified tensile strength of spliced bar 
shall be permitted within a distance equal to two times 
the depth of the member from the column face in any 
location where yielding of reinforcement is likely to 
take place. 


7.3.2.3 Welded splices 


Welded splices shall not be used in columns for a 
distance equal to two times the depth of the member 
from the member face or in any location where yielding 
of reinforcement is likely to take place. At any location, 
not more than 50 percent of area of steel bars shall be 
spliced at any one section. But, welding of links, ties, 
inserts or other similar elements to vertical 
reinforcement bars required as per design is not 
permitted, in any seismic zone. 


7.3.3 A column that extends more than 100 mm beyond 
the confined core owing to architectural requirement 
(see Fig. 9) shall be detailed in the following manner: 


a) When the contribution of this area is 
considered in the estimate of strength of 


columns, it shall have at least the minimum 
longitudinal and transverse reinforcement 
given in this standard. 


b) When the contribution of this area is not 
considered in the estimate of strength of 
columns, it shall have at least the minimum 
longitudinal and transverse reinforcement 
given in IS 456. 


7.4 Transverse Reinforcement 


7.4.1 Transverse reinforcement shall consist of closed 
loop, 


a) spiral or circular links in circular columns, and 
b) rectangular links in rectangular columns. 


In either case, the closed link shall have 135° hook 
ends with an extension of 6 times its diameter (but not 
< 65 mm) at each end, which are embedded in the 
confined core of the column (see Fig. 10A). 


7.4.2 When rectangular links are used, 


a) the minimum diameter permitted of transverse 
reinforcement bars is 8 mm, when diameter 
of longitudinal bar is less than or equal to 32 
mm, and 10 mm, when diameter of 
longitudinal bar is more than 32 mm; 

b) the maximum spacing of parallel legs of links 
shall be 300 mm centre to centre; 

c) across-tie shall be provided, if the length of 
any side of the link exceeds 300 mm (see 
Fig. 10B); the cross-tie shall be placed 
perpendicular to this link whose length 
exceeds 300 mm. Alternatively, a pair of 
overlapping links may be provided within the 
column (see Fig. 10C). In either case, the hook 
ends of the links and cross-ties shall engage 
around peripheral longitudinal bars. 
Consecutive cross-ties engaging the same 
longitudinal bars shall have their 90° hooks 
on opposite sides of the column. Crossties of 
the same or smaller bar size as the hoops shall 
be permitted; and, 


IS 13920 : 2016 


6d (> 65 mm) 


h.>300mm 


Bc $300 mm 


hc s300mm 


h SHALL BE LARGER OF hc AND Bc 


h's 3300 mm 


Вг $300 mm 


2 
h SHALL ВЕ 
LARGER OF hc 
AND Bc 
(А) PLAN (B) 


h’c>300mm 


A, 6d (265 mm) 


B.«300mm 


CONSECUTIVE CROSSTIES 
ENGAGING THE  SAME 


hc 300mm 
B. «300mm 


(C) 


PLAN 


LONGITUDINAL BAR HAVE 
THEIR 90-DEG HOOKS ON 
OPPOSITE SIDES OF 
COLUMN 


Fic. 10 DETAIL OF TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENT IN COLUMNS 


d) the maximum spacing of links shall be half 
the least lateral dimension of the column, 
except where special confining reinforcement 
is provided as per 8. 


7.5 Design Shear Force in Columns 


The design shear force demand on columns is the larger 


of, 


a) factored shear force demand as per linear 
structural analysis; and 

b) factored equilibrium shear force demand when 
plastic hinges are formed at both ends of the 
beams given by: 


1) Forsway to right: 
(MF +M) 


V, -14 к 
st 
2) For sway to left: 
(MP My) 
V, -14 


hy d 

where МА, МА, М and MP" are design sagging and 
hogging moments of resistance of beams framing into 
the column on opposite faces A and B, respectively, with 
one hogging moment and the other sagging (see Fig. 11); 
and h,, the storey height. The design moments of resistance 
of beam sections shall be calculated as per IS 456. 


7.5.1 The calculation of design shear force capacity 
of RC columns shall be calculated as per IS 456. 


8 SPECIAL CONFINING REINFORCEMENT 


The requirements of this section shall be met with in 
beams and columns, unless a larger amount of 
transverse reinforcement is required from shear strength 
considerations given in 6.3.3 for beams and 7.5 for 
columns. 


8.1 Flexural yielding is likely in beams during strong 
earthquake shaking and in columns when the shaking 
intensity exceeds the expected intensity of earthquake 
shaking (see Fig. 12). This special confining 
reinforcement shall, 


a) be provided over a length /, from the face of 
the joint towards mid-span of beams and mid 
heights of columns, on either side of the joint; 
where /, is not less than 


1) larger lateral dimension of the member 
at the section where yielding occurs, 


——— 


Vu 


IS 13920 : 2016 


2) 1/6 of clear span of the member; or 
3) 450mm. 
b) have a spacing not more than, 
1) l/Aofminimum member dimension of the 
beam or column; 


2) 6 times diameter of the smallest 
longitudinal reinforcement bars; and 


3) 100 mm link. 


c) have area A,, of cross section of the bar 
forming links or spiral of at least: 


1) in circular links or spirals: 


0.09 s, D, a 
Аһ = Maximum of NA 
0.024 s, D, Ja 
Íy 
where 


s, = pitch of spiral or spacing of links, 


D, = diameter of core of circular column measured 
to outside of spiral/link, 


—— 


Vu 


Fic. 11 EQUILIBRIUM DESIGN SHEAR FORCE DEMAND ON COLUMN WHEN PLAsTIC HINGES ARE FORMED AT 
BEAM ENDS 


IS 13920 : 2016 


| 


E 
pa 


JOINT REINFORCEMENT 
AS PER 8.1 


x [d 
Pi 
ое B 
z к [vai 
22 О y = 
ci Е TRANSVERSE 
Sg g REINFORCEMENT 
Og ш F AS PER 7.2.3 
no [ 
LO mca 
Oz-2r m 
aut Yu 
NN 5 a 
- < х 
ae 
4 | — E 
BEN 
ШШЕ Tm 
LIII iu = | 


N CONFINED JOINT WITH BEAMS FRAMING 
— — INTO ALL FOUR SIDES CONFINING 
REINFORCEMENT AS PER 8.2 


Fic. 12 COLUMN AND JOINT DETAILING 


fa = characteristic compressive strength of 
concrete cube, 
f, = 0.2 percent proof strength of transverse steel 
reinforcement bars, 
A, = gross area of column cross-section, and 
T a2 
A, = area of concrete core of column = J” 
2) in rectangular links: 
A 
0.18 s, Л b (n 
Ay, = Maximum of f, AA 
0.05 s, h —— 
y 
where 
h = longer dimension of rectangular link 
measured to its outer face, which does not 
exceed 300 mm (see Fig. 10B), and 
A, = areaofconfined concrete core in rectangular 


link measured to its outer dimensions. 


h of the link could be reduced by introducing crossties 
(see Fig. 10C). In such cases, A, shall be measured as 
overall core area, regardless of link arrangement. Hooks 
of cross-ties shall engage peripheral longitudinal bars. 


8.2 When a column terminates into a footing or mat, 
special confining reinforcement shall extend at least 
300 mm into the footing or mat (see Fig. 13). 

SPECIAL CONFINING 


REINFORCMENT 
2300 mm 


Fic. 13 PROVISION OF SPECIAL CONFINING 
REINFORCEMENT IN FOOTING 


8.3 When the calculated point of contra-flexure, under 
the effect of gravity and earthquake effects, is not within 
the middle half of the member clear height, special 
confining reinforcement shall be provided over the full 
height of the column. 


8.4 Special confining reinforcement shall be provided 
over the full height of a column which has significant 
variation in stiffness along its height. This variation in 
stiffness may result due to abrupt changes in cross- 
section size, or unintended restraint to the column 
provided by stair-slab, mezzanine floor, plinth or lintel 


DEVELOPMENT 
LENGTH OF 
LONGITUDINAL BAR 


SHEAR WALL 


IS 13920 : 2016 


Fic. 14 CoLuMNs WITH VARIABLE STIFFNESS 


beams framing into the columns, RC wall or masonry 
wall adjoining column and extending only for partial 
column height. 


8.5 Columns supporting reactions from discontinued 
stiff members, such as walls, shall be provided with 
special confining reinforcement over their full height. 
(see Fig. 14). This reinforcement shall also be placed 
above the discontinuity for at least the development 
length of the largest longitudinal bar in the column. 
Where the column is supported on a wall, this 
reinforcement shall be provided over the full height of 
the column; it shall also be provided below the 
discontinuity for the same development length. 


9 BEAM-COLUMN JOINTS OF MOMENT- 
RESISTING FRAMES 


9.1 Design of Beam-Column Joint for Distortional 
Shear 


9.1.1 Shear Strength of Concrete in a Joint 


The nominal shear strength т, of concrete in a beam- 
column joint shall be taken as 


1.5 Aj fx 
for joints confined by beams on 
12 Aga) fox three faces 


1.0 A, Jf for other joints 


for joints confined by beams on 
all four faces 


je 


where A is effective shear area of joint given by bw,, 
in which b; is the effective breadth of joint perpendicular 
to the direction of shear force and w; the effective width 
of joint along the direction of shear force. The effective 
width of joint b; (see Fig. 15) shall be obtained from 
following: 


тіп [b,; b, 40.5 A] if b, < b. 
where 
b, = width of beam and b= width of column 
h, = depth of column in considered direction. 
9.1.2 Design Shear Stress Demand on a Joint 


a) Design shear stress demand acting 
horizontally along each of the two principal 
plan directions of the joint shall be estimated 
from earthquake shaking considered along 
each of these directions, using 


Ton Vix for shaking along plan direction 
WX pw, X of earthquake shaking, 
JJ 
pix Va for shaking along plan direction 
iY рур Y of earthquake shaking 
Jud 


It shall be ensured that the joint shear capacity 

of joint concrete estimated using 9.1.1 exceeds 

both тх and Tay. 
b) Design shear force demands V; and Vay 
acting horizontally on the joint in principal 
plan directions X and Y shall be estimated 
considering that the longitudinal beam bars 
in tension reach a stress of 1.25 f, (when over 
strength plastic moment hinges are formed at 
beam ends). 


9.1.3 Width of Beam Column Joint 


When beam reinforcement extends through beam- 
column joint, the minimum width ofthe column parallel 
to beam shall be 20 times the diameter of the largest 
longitudinal beam bar. 


IS 13920 : 2016 


Effective joint width 
bj = рь+һсог bj = ђь+ 2x 


Direction of shear force 
——————— 


| 
bc 


Direction of shear force 


Plan 


Fic. 15 PLAN View ОЕ A BEAM COLUMN JOINT SHOWING EFFECTIVE BREADTH AND WIDTH OF JOINT 


9.2 Transverse Reinforcement 
9.2.1 Confining Reinforcement in Joints 


a) When all four vertical faces of the joint are 
having beams framing into them covering at 
least 75 percent of the width on each face, 

1) At least half the special confining 
reinforcement required as per 8 at the two 
ends of columns, shall be provided 
through the joint within the depth of the 
shallowest beam framing into it; and 
2) Spacing of these transverse links shall not 
exceed 150 mm. 

b) When all four vertical faces of the joint are 

not having beams framing into them or when 

all four vertical faces have beams framing into 
them but do not cover at least 75 percent of 
the width on any face, 

1) special confining reinforcement required 

as per 8 at the two ends of columns shall 

be provided through the joint within the 
depth of the shallowest beam framing into 
it, and 

2) spacing of these transverse links shall not 

exceed 150 mm. 


9.2.2 In the exterior and corner joints, all 135? hooks 
of cross-ties should be along the outer face of columns. 


10 SPECIAL SHEAR WALLS 


10.1 General Requirements 


10.1.1 The requirements of this section apply to special 
shear walls that are part of lateral force resisting system 
of earthquake-resistant RC buildings. 


10.1.2 The minimum thickness of special shear walls 
shall not be less than, 


a) 
b) 300mm for buildings with coupled shear walls 
in any seismic zone. 


150 mm; and 


The minimum thickness provided must conform to the 
fire resistance requirements based on occupancy as laid 
down in IS 456. 


10.1.3 The minimum ratio of length of wall to its 
thickness shall be 4. 


10.1.4 Special shear walls shall be classified as squat, 
intermediate or slender depending on the overall height 
h, to length L, ratio as 


a) Squat walls: A, /L,,<1, 


b) Intermediate walls: 1 < A, / L, <2, and 
c) Slender walls: h,/L,,> 2. 


10.1.5 In the design of flanged wall sections, only that 
part of the flange shall be considered which extends 
beyond the face of the web of the structural wall at 
least for a distance equal to smaller of, 


a) actual width available; 

b) halfthe distance to the adjacent structural wall 
web; and 

c) 1/10thof the total wall height. 


10.1.6 Special shear walls shall be provided with 
uniformly spaced reinforcement in its cross-section 
along vertical and horizontal directions. At least a 
minimum area of reinforcement bars as indicated in 
Table 1 shall be provided along vertical and horizontal 
directions. 


10.1.7 Reinforcement bars shall be provided in two 
curtains within the cross-section of the wall, with each 
curtain having bars running along vertical and 
horizontal directions, when, 


a) factored shear stress demand in the wall 
exceeds 0.25./ f, MPa; or 
b) wallthickness is 200 mm or higher. 


When steel is provided in two layers, all vertical steel 
bars shall be contained within the horizontal steel bars; 
the horizontal bars shall form a closed core concrete 
area with closed loops and cross-ties. 


10.1.8 The largest diameter of longitudinal steel bars 
used in any part of a wall shall not exceed 1/10th ofthe 
thickness of that part. 


10.1.9 The maximum spacing of vertical or horizontal 
reinforcement shall not exceed smaller of, 


a) l/Sth horizontal length L, of wall; 
b) 3times thickness t, of web of wall; and 
c) 450mm. 


10.1.10 Special shear walls shall be founded on 
properly designed foundations and shall not be 
discontinued to rest on beams, columns or inclined 
members. 


10.2 Design for Shear Force 


10.2.1 Nominal shear stress demand т, on a wall shall 
be estimated as: 
V. 
== 
a 

where V, is factored shear force, t, thickness of the 
web, and d,, effective depth of wall section (along the 
length of the wall), which may be taken as 0.8 L, for 
rectangular sections. 


IS 13920 : 2016 


Table 1 Minimum Reinforcement in RC Shear 
Walls 


(Clause 10.1.6 ) 
SI. 
No. 
i) Squat walls (Pa у = 0.002 5 


Type of Reinforcement Details 


Wall 


(bibas oan ssos[i А to 0.002 5) 


(р) = (Pres )+ ооо -2.5(p,...)] 


(р, Juss ps (р, Jis 
ii) Intermediate (рь) in ^ 0.002 5 
walls 
(p... pi = 0.0080 
(Passed in = 0-002 5 
ty 
(ру) „ = 0-002 5+ 0.013 Fd ; 
ш) нш (рь), = 0.002 5+ o$- 2) – 0.002 5) 
(рә), = 0-008 0 
(рә) „ = 0-002 5 
(р) = 0.002 5+ 0.013 ЫЗ \ 


10.2.2 Design shear strength t, of concrete shall be 
calculated as per Table 19 of IS 456. 


10.2.3 When nominal shear stress demand т, on a wall 
is, 


a) more than maximum design shear strength 
Tomax Of concrete (given in Table 20 of IS 456), 
the wall section shall be re-designed; 

b) less than maximum design shear strength T, nax 

of concrete and more than design shear 

strength т, of concrete, design horizontal shear 

reinforcement shall be provided of area A, 

given by: 


V. V- 
A, us u T, ty dy 


o7 f, | © 0.87 f| © 
Sy integral Sy Integral 


which shall not be less than the minimum area 
of horizontal steel as per 10.1.5; and 


c) less than design shear strength t, of concrete, 
horizontal shear reinforcement shall be the 


minimum area of horizontal steel as per 10.1.5. 
10.3 Design for Axial Force and Bending Moment 


10.3.1 Design moment of resistance M, of the wall 
section subjected to combined bending moment and 
compressive axial load shall be estimated in accordance 
with requirements of limit state design method given 


IS 13920 : 2016 


in IS 456, using the principles of mechanics involving 
equilibrium equations, strain compatibility conditions 
and constitutive laws. 


The moment of resistance of slender rectangular 
structural wall section with uniformly distributed 
vertical reinforcement may be estimated using 
expressions given in Annex A. Expressions given in 
Annex A are not applicable for structural walls with 
boundary elements. 


10.3.2 The cracked flexural strength of a wall section 
shall be greater than its uncracked flexural strength. 


10.3.3 In structural walls that do not have boundary 
elements, at least a minimum of 4 bars of 12 mm 
diameter arranged in 2 layers, shall be concentrated as 
vertical reinforcement at the ends of the wall over a 
length not exceeding twice the thickness of RC wall. 


10.4 Boundary Elements 


Boundary elements are portions along the wall edges 
that are strengthened by longitudinal and transverse 
reinforcement even if they have the same thickness as 
that of the wall web. It is advantageous to provide 
boundary elements with dimension greater than 
thickness of the wall web. 


10.4.1 Boundary elements shall be provided along the 
vertical boundaries of walls, when the extreme fibre 
compressive stress in the wall exceeds 0.2 fy, due to 
factored gravity loads plus factored earthquake force. 
Boundary elements may be discontinued at elevations 
where extreme fiber compressive stress becomes less 
than 0.15 f. Extreme fibre compressive stress shall be 
estimated using a linearly elastic model and gross 
section properties. 


10.4.2 A boundary element shall have adequate axial 
load carrying capacity, assuming short column action, 
so as to enable it to carry axial compression arising 
from factored gravity load and lateral seismic shaking 
effects. 


10.4.2.1 The load factor for gravity load shall be taken 
as 0.8, if gravity load gives higher axial compressive 
strength of the boundary element. 


10.4.3 The vertical reinforcement in the boundary 
elements shall not be less than 0.8 percent and not 
greater than 6 percent; the practical upper limit would 
be 4 percent to avoid congestion. 


10.4.4 Boundary elements, where required as 
per 10.4.1, shall be provided with special confining 
reinforcement throughout their height, given by 


Ía 
Í 


x 


A, = 0.05 s, h 


and have a spacing not more than, 


a) 1/3 of minimum member dimension of the 
boundary element; 

b) 6 times diameter of the smallest longitudinal 
reinforcement bars; and 

c) 100 mm but may be relaxed to 150 mm, if 


maximum distance between cross-ties/parallel 
legs of links or ties is limited to 200 mm, 


but need not be less than 100 mm. 


10.4.5 Boundary elements need not be provided, if the 
entire wall section is provided with special confining 
reinforcement, as per 8. 


10.5 Coupling Beams 


10.5.1 Coplanar special structural walls may be 
connected by means of coupling beams. 


10.5.2 If earthquake induced shear stress Т,, in 
coupling beam exceeds 


L, 
Te > 0.1 fa (5) 


where L, is clear span of coupling beam and D overall 
depth, the entire earthquake-induced shear, bending 
moment and axial compression shall be resisted by 
diagonal reinforcement alone. Further, 


a) 


area of this diagonal reinforcement along each 
diagonal shall be estimated as: 


V, 


u 


(174 f sino.’ 


sd 


Where V, is factored shear force on the 
coupling beam and the angle made by diagonal 
reinforcement with the horizontal. 

at least 4 bars of 8 mm diameter shall be 
provided along each diagonal. All longitudinal 
bars along each diagonal shall be enclosed by 
special confining transverse reinforcement as 
per 8 at a spacing not exceeding 100 mm. 


b) 


10.5.3 The diagonal of a coupling beam shall be 
anchored in the adjacent walls with an anchorage length 
of 1.5 times the development length in tension (see Fig. 
16). 


10.6 Openings in Walls 


10.6.1 Shear strength of a wall with openings should 
be checked at critical horizontal planes passing through 
openings. 


10.6.2 Additional steel reinforcement shall be provided 
along all four edges of openings in walls. Further, 


a) 


the area of these vertical and horizontal steel 
should be equal to that of the respective 


Horizontal beam 
reinforcement at wall does 
not develop f, 


Aw- total area of 
reinforcement in each 
group of diagonal bars 


Wall boundary 
reinforcement 


IS 13920 : 2016 


Transverse reinforcement spacing 
measured perpendicular to the axis of the 
diagonal bars not to exceed 350mm 


07 
4 


pce | 


Section : A-A 


Fic. 16 CoupLING BEAMS WITH DIAGONAL REINFORCEMENT 


interrupted bars, provided half on either side 
of the wall in each direction. 
b) these vertical bars should extend for full height 
of the storey in which this opening is present. 
c) the horizontal bars should be provided with 
development length in tension beyond the 
edge of the opening. 


10.7 Construction Joints 


Vertical reinforcement across a horizontal construction 
joint shall have area, A,, given by: 


A, 0.92 Р, 
s> T, 
A, Sy A, 
where 1, is factored shear stress at the joint, P, factored 


axial force (positive for compression), and A, gross 
cross-sectional area of joint. 


10.8 Development, 
Requirement 


Splice and Anchorage 


10.8.1 Horizontal reinforcement shall be anchored near 
the edges of wall or in confined core of boundary 
elements. 


10.8.2 In slender walls (A/L,,> 2), splicing of vertical 
flexural reinforcement should be avoided, as far as 
possible, in regions where flexural yielding may take 
place, which extends for a distance larger of 

a) L, above the base of the wall; and 

b) 1/6 of the wall height; 
but not larger than 2L. 


10.8.3 Splices 
10.8.3.1 Lap splices 


When adopted, closed links shall be provided over the 
entire length over which the longitudinal bars are 
spliced. Further, 


a) the spacing of these links shall not exceed 
150 mm. 


b) the lap length shall not be less than the 
development length ofthe largest longitudinal 
reinforcement bar in tension. 

с) lap splices shall be provided only in the central 
half of clear wall height, and not, 

1) within a joint; or 

2) within a distance of 2d from a location 
where yielding of reinforcement is likely 
to take place. 

d) not more than 50 percent of area of steel bars 
shall be spliced at any one section. 


10.8.3.2 Mechanical couplers (conforming to 
IS 16172) shall be used. Further, only those mechanical 
splices conforming to the above standard and capable 
of developing the specified tensile strength of spliced 
bar shall be permitted within a distance equal to two 
times the depth of the member from the beam-column 
joint or in any location where yielding of reinforcement 
is likely to take place 


10.8.3.3 Welded splices 


Welded splices shall be avoided as far as possible. In no 
case shall they be used for a distance equal to two times 
the depth ofthe member from the member face or in any 
location where yielding of reinforcement is likely to take 
place. At any location, not more than 50 percent of area 
of steel bars shall be spliced at any one section. 


Welding of links, ties, inserts or other similar elements 
to vertical reinforcement bars required as per design is 
not permitted, in any seismic zone. 


10.8.4 In buildings located in Seismic Zones II and 
III, closed loop transverse links shall be provided 
around lapped spliced bars larger than 16 mm in 
diameter. The minimum diameter of such links shall 
be 1/4th of diameter of spliced bar but not less than 8 
mm at spacing not exceeding 150 mm centres. 


11 GRAVITY COLUMNS IN BUILDINGS 


Gravity columns in buildings shall be detailed 


IS 13920 : 2016 


according to 11.1 and 11.2 for bending moments 
induced when subjected to ‘R’ times the design lateral 
displacement under the factored equivalent static design 
seismic loads given by IS 1893 (Part 1). 


11.1 The provisions in 11.1.1 and 11.1.2 shall be 
satisfied, when induced bending moments and 
horizontal shear forces under the said lateral 
displacement combined with factored gravity bending 
moment and shear force do not exceed the design 
moment of resistance and design lateral shear capacity 
of the column. 


11.1.1 Gravity columns shall satisfy 7.3.2, 7.4.1 and 
7.4.2. But, spacing of links along the full column height 
shall not exceed 6 times diameter of smallest 


longitudinal bar or 150 mm. 


11.1.2 Gravity columns with factored gravity axial 
stress exceeding 0.4f shall satisfy 11.1.1 and shall have 
transverse reinforcement at least one half of special 
confining reinforcement required by 8. 


11.2 When induced bending moments and shear forces 
under said lateral displacement combined with factored 
gravity bending moment and shear force exceed design 
moment and shear strength of the frame, 11.2.1 
and 11.2.2 shall be satisfied. 


11.2.1 Mechanical and welded splices shall 
satisfy 7.3.2.2 and 7.3.2.3. 


11.2.2 Gravity columns shall satisfy 7.4 and 8. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 10.3.1) 


A-1 MOMENT OF RESISTANCE ОЕ 
RECTANGULAR SHEAR WALL SECTION 


The moment of resistance M, of a slender rectangular 
structural wall section with uniformly distributed 
vertical reinforcement may be estimated as: 


a) For (x, /L,) « (x; /L, ) 
M. |1 | 1-04165 
ЛА» Ф 2 Ly 

2 


where 

«| gtr } 

L, (294036 | 

0.003 5 

L, 0.003 5 (0.002 4- 0.87 f, / E, ) ° 


Р Р А А, 
р = vertical reinforcement ratio = | —— |, 
ty WwW 


A, = area of uniformly distributed vertical 
reinforcement, 


_ (0.002+0.87 f, /E, ) 
0.003 5 


Е, = elastic modulus of steel, and 


Р = factored compressive axial force on wall. 


b) For (x, /L, ) « (x, /L, ) « 1.0 
M x x ў А 
u 5 СА CA u 0, u CA 
fads ls Ly Ly 2 
where 


a, = [os6+a[1- 


| ps an 
"|. Br x) i 


о, Ф Bs s 3 

6p x, /L, 
x,/L,, to be used in this expression shall be obtained by 
solving the equation: 


0, Jus: 


IS 13920 : 2016 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


Chairman 
Dr D. K. PAUL 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Organization Representative(s) 


SHRI SANDEEP SHIRKHEDKAR 
Dr AswarH M. U. (Alternate) 


Dr L. К. Bısnnor 
Suri Rosuan A. D. (Alternate) 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers, Bangalore 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi Suri Ravi KUMAR 


Suri J. К. PRASAD 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Dr NAvsJEEV SAXENA 
Dr Asay Chaurasia (Alternate) 


Dr M. Ravi KUMAR 
Dn N. PunNACHANDRA Rao (Alternate) 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-National Geophysical Research Institute, Hyderabad 


Dn N. GOPALAKRISHNAN 
Dr К S KrisHNamoortuy (Alternate) 


Suri А.К. GARG 
Suri RasesH Kuare (Alternate) 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Dr Manisu Gupta (Alternate) 


Director, Смрр (E & NE) 
Director, EMBANKMENT (A/ternate) 


Central Soils and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
SHRI AMANDEEP GARG 


SHRI BARJINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr К. G. Buara 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ghaziabad 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 


DDF Consultants Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi Dr (SuniMarI) РКАТ!МА R. Bose 


SHRI SADANAND Owa (Alternate) 
Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi Suri B. S. PANDEY 


Ms ША Dass 
Dr С С Srinivas Acuary (Alternate) 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


SHRI V. N. HEGGADE 
Suri ANAND Desai (Alternate) 


Suri К. C. Josui 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Geological Survey of India, Lucknow 
Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI SAMIR MITRA 
Dr A. R. SANTHAKUMAR 


Dr Ravi SINHA 
Dr Arok Goyat (Alternate) 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar Dr SURESH RANJAN DasH 


Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati Dr Hemant B. KAUSHIK 


Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


19 


Dr C. V. R. Murty 
Dn Юовсеѕн C. Ral 


Dr A. MEHER PRASAD 
Dr КОРЕМ Goswami (Alternate 1) 
Dr Arun MENON (Alternate П) 


PROF ASHOK JAIN 
Dr MANISH SHRIKHANDE (Alternate) 


IS 13920 : 2016 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gandhinagar 
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Meterological Department, New Delhi 


Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Research, Design and Standards Organization, Lucknow 


Risk Management Solutions Inc (RMSI), Noida 
RITES Limited, Gurgaon 
Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Vakil-Mehta-Sheth Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, Nagpur 


Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 


In personal capacity, (L-802, Design Arch, e-Homes, 
Sector-5, Vaishali, Gaziabad 201 010) 


In personal capacity, (174/2 F, Solanipuram, Roorkee 247 667) 


In personal capacity, (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Raod, 
Nagpur 440 015) 


In personal capacity, (K-L/2 Kavi Nagar, Ghaziabad 201 002) 


In personal capacity, (2014/2, Saraswati Kunj, IIT Roorkee, 
Roorkee 247 667) 


In personal capacity, (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother 
Dairy Road, Patpar Ganj, Delhi, 110 092) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Dn S. K. Јам 
DR PRADEEP KUMAR RAMANCHARLA 


Suri SURYA BALI JAISWAR 
Suri RasesH PRAKASH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


PRor H. R. WASON 
Pror M. L. SuanMa (Alternate) 


Bric. B. D. PANDEY 
Suri Ravi Smaa (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 
Dn RAVINDER SINGH 


DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
SHRI SAURABH Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri Racupati Roy (Alternate) 


Suri PIYUSH AGARWAL 
Suri К. К. Сов: (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHIL GUPTA 
Suri А. K. MATHUR 


ProF MAHESH TANDON 
Suri Vinay K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri К. V. SUBRAMANIAN 
Suri B. B. Guarat (Alternate) 


Ms Arra R. SHETH 
Suri К. D. Cuaupnani (Alternate) 


Dr O. R. JAISWAL 
Dn R. K. INGLE (Alternate) 


Dn Ѕоѕни, KUMAR 
Dr Vikram Gupta (Alternate) 


Pror A.S. ARYA 


Dr S. K. THAKKAR 
Suri L. K. Jain 


DR A. К. MITTAL 
Dr I. D. Gupta 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri B. К. Smaa, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist ‘D’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


20 


(Continued from second cover) 


estimating the design moment of resistance of structural walls with boundary elements. Instead, 
procedure is mentioned for estimating the same. 
c) Additional significant modifications incorporated are as under : 
1) The detail of anchorage of longitudinal beam bars at exterior beam-column joint has been revised 
(see 6.2.5). 
2) Clauses giving detail about mechanical couplers, welded splices in beam, column and shear wall 
have been added (see 6.2.6.2, 6.2.6.3, 7.3.2.2, 7.3.2.3, 10.8.3.2 and 10.8.3.3). 
3) The minimum diameter of a link has been changed to 8 mm in all cases (see 6.3.2). 
4) The factored axial compressive stress consisting of all load combinations related to seismic loads is 
limited to 0.40 f, has been added (see 7.1). 
5) The minimum dimension of a column has been modified to 20 d, or 300 mm (see 7.1.1). 
6) The minimum dimension of a column has been modified to 20 d, or 300 mm (see 7.1.1). 
7) The expression for area of cross section A,, for the bars forming circular and rectangular links or 
spiral have been modified [see 8.1(c)]. 
8) Design of beam-column joints of moment resisting frames has been added and expressions for 
evaluating nominal shear strength 1s also given (see 9.1.1). 
9) Expression for calculating special confining reinforcement in boundary element in shear wall is 
added (see 10.4.4). 
10) A figure showing reinforcement detail of coupled shear wall with diagonal reinforcement has been 
added (see 10.5.3). 
Further, while the common methods of design and construction have been covered in this standard for RC structural 
systems with moment resisting frames and RC structural systems with structural walls that participate in resisting 
earthquake force, design and construction of other lateral load resisting structural systems made of reinforced 
concrete but not covered by this standard, may be permitted by the approving agency or a Committee constituted 
by the agency only on production of satisfactory evidence from experiments on prototype sub-assemblages and 
structures, and non-linear analyses demonstrating their adequacy to resist earthquake shaking expected in the 
region where the structures are expected to be built. Such non-linear analyses shall demonstrate that the collapse 
mechanism of the proposed structure is desirable and that the lateral deformation capacity of the structure is 
sufficient to resist the ground deformation imposed in the region where the structure is located. The Committee of 
the approving agency shall comprise of competent engineers with the necessary experience and shall have the 
authority to review the data submitted, ask for additional data, tests and to frame special rules for such structural 
systems not covered under this Code. 
The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard has taken into consideration the views of 
manufacturers, users, engineers, architects, builders and technologists, and has related the standard to the practices 
followed in the country in this field. Also, due weightage has been given to the need for international coordination 
among standards prevailing in different seismic regions of the world. 
In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 
ACI 318-11, ‘Building code requirements for structural concrete and commentary’, issued by American 
Concrete Institute. 
IBC 2012 ‘International Building Code’, published by International Code Council, Inc. 
prEN 1998-1 : 2005(E) Eurocode 8: *Design of structures for earthquake resistance — Part 1: General 
rules, seismic actions and rules for buildings’, issued by European Committee for Standardization, Brussels. 
NZS 3101 (Part 1) : 2006 ‘Concrete structures standard’, issued by Standards Council, New Zealand. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 39 (7941). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2017 
TO 
IS 13920 : 2016 DUCTILE DESIGN AND DETAILING OF REINFORCED — 
CONCRETE STRUCTURES SUBJECTED TO SEISMIC FORCES — CODE OF 
PRACTICE 


(First Revision) 
[Page 1, clause 2, IS 1893 (Part 1)] — Substitute the following for the existing entry: 
*(Part 1) : 2016 General provisions and buildings (sixth revision)" 
(Page 2, clause 3.8.1, line 4) — Substitute ‘7.6’ for ‘8’. 
(Page 4, clause 5.5, last sentence) — Substitute the following for the existing sentence: 


*When irregularities appear in a building as listed in Tables 5 or 6 of IS 1893 (Part 1), the guidance given 
therein for the respective irregularity in Tables 5 or 6 shall be followed." 


[Page 5, clause 6.2.6.2 (a)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


*a) only those mechanical couplers which are conforming to IS 16172 and capable of developing the 
specified tensile strength in spliced bar shall be permitted. At any section, not more than 50 
percent of bars shall be coupled, and the next location of couplers shall be at least 300 mm away; 
and’ 


[(Page 6, clause 6.3.1(a), lines 4 and 5] — Substitute ‘extension of 8 times diameter (but not less than 
75 mm)’ for ‘extension of 6 times diameter (but not less than 65 mm)’. 


[Page 6, Fig. 4(A) and Fig. 4(B)] — Substitute ‘8d (= 75 mm)’ for ‘6d (= 65 mm)’. 


(Page 7, Fig. 6) — Substitute ‘HOOP SPACING < d/4, 6 d, and 100 mm’ for ‘HOOP SPACING < 4/4, 8 
d, and 100 mm’. 


[Page 7, clause 6.3.5 (b)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 
*b) 6 times the diameter of the smallest longitudinal bar; and’ 
(Page 7, clause 6.3.5.2) — Insert the following new clause at the end: 


*6.3.5.3 Construction joint shall not be provided in the regions of beam having closely spaced transverse 
reinforcements.’ 


(Page 7, clause 7.1, para 2) — Substitute the following for the existing para: 


‘For columns of shapes other than rectangular and circular (such as “Т”, ‘X’ and ‘+’ shaped), which form part of 
the lateral load resisting system, appropriate designs and detailing shall be carried out using specialist literature.’ 


(Page 7, Fig. 7) — Substitute ‘> 20d,’ for ‘> 15d,’ in both figures. 
(Page 7, clause 7.1.2, line 4) — Substitute ‘0.4’ for ‘0.45’. 
(Page 8, clause 7.2.1.1, second sentence) — Substitute the following for the existing sentence: 


Price Group 3 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 13920 : 2016 


‘The design moment of resistance of a column shall be estimated for factored axial forces arising in all load 
combination using the design P-M interaction diagram.’ 


(Page 9, clause 7.3.2.2, second sentence) — Substitute the following for the existing sentence: 


‘Further only those mechanical splices capable of developing the specified tensile strength of spliced bar shall 
be permitted. At any section, not more than 50 percent of bars shall be coupled. The next section of couplers 
shall be at least 300 mm away.’ 


(Page 9, clause 7.3.2.3, line 4) — Substitute ‘section,’ for ‘location’. 

(Page 9, clause 7.4.1, lines 6 and 7) — Substitute ‘8 times’ for “6 times’ and < 75 mm’ for ‘< 65 mm’. 
[Page 9, clause 7.4.2 (c), line 2] — Insert “(Л or В')” after the word ‘link’. 

[Page 9, clause 7.4.2 (d), line 4] — Substitute ‘7.6’ for ‘8’. 

[Page 9, clause 7.4.2 (d)] — Insert the following at the end: 


*e) Construction joints shall not be provided in regions of columns with closely spaced transverse 
reinforcement." 


(Page 10, Fig. 10) — Substitute the following for the existing figure: 


Вс < 300 mm 


h's < 300 mm 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 13920 : 2016 


ће > 300 mm 
(PROVIDE A CROSS TIE) 


8d(275 mm) 


h SHALL BE LARGER OF h's and B's 


10A 


8d (275 MAN 


> 300mm 


s « 300 mm 


д QS 4 
220 


10B 


ONSECUTIVE CROSS TIES 
ENGAGING THE SAME 
LONGITUDINAL BAR HAVE 
THEIR 90° HOOKS ON 
OPPOSITE SIDES OF 
COLUMN 


FIG. 10 DETAIL OF TRANSVERSE REINFORCEMENT IN COLUMNS 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 13920 : 2016 
(Page 11, clause 8) — Substitute ‘7.6’ for ‘8’. 


(Page 11, clause 8.1, line 1) — Renumber the clause as: ‘7.6.1’; and in line 1, delete the words ‘in beams’ 
and in line 2, delete the word ‘and’. 


[Page 11, clause 8.1(b)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 
*b) have a spacing not more than 6 times the diameter of the smallest longitudinal reinforcement bars.’ 


(Page 11, Fig. 11) — Substitute the following for the existing figure: 


Vu 
—— 
1.4Ma^s 
Vu Vu 
dt ———— 
SWAY TO RIGHT SWAY TO LEFT 


FIG. 11 EQUILIBRIUM DESIGN SHEAR FORCE DEMAND ON COLUMN WHEN PLASTIC HINGES ARE FORMED AT 
BEAM ENDS 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 13920 : 2016 


(Page 12, Fig. 12) — Substitute the following for the existing figure: 


ШП 


| 


Pall 


I 


111111 


ШШЩ 


El 


ee eee 


y I 
2.78 
[5 x 8] 
I I 
[ E] 
I | 
| 
© [| 
г ИШ 
xv 5 Ге 
ш а ER 
oo OF i] TRANSVERSE 
| Bos Yt) REINFORCEMENT 
Sit Wen — 1] 
zz Zor I 1| AS PER 7.3.2.1 
zz 220 | 4 
SERERE, 1 2, 
па Бе |__| 
х9 E] 
Ө) = 
2 EX 
eu гд 
СОП — I 
2] 
I —1 


JOINT REINFORCEMENT 


ШЇ 


CONFINED JOINT WITH BEAMS FRAMING 
INTO ALL FOUR SIDES — CONFINING 
REINFORCEMENT AS PER 9.2.1 


FIG. 12 COLUMNS AND JOINT DETAILING 


(Page 12, clause 8.2) — Renumber the clause as ‘7.6.2’. 


(Page 12, clause 8.3) — Renumber the clause as ‘7.6.3’. 


(Page 12, clause 8.4) — Renumber the clause as ‘7.6.4’. 


(Page 13, clause 8.5) — Renumber the clause as ‘7.6.5’. 


(Page 13, clause 9.1.3, line 2) — Insert ‘and the shear wall’ before the word ‘parallel’. 


[Page 14, clauses 9.2.1 (a) (1) and 9.2.1 (b) (2), line 2] — Substitute ‘7.6’ for ‘8’. 


Amendment No. 1 to IS 13920 : 2016 
[Page 15, Table 1, SI No. (1), col 3] — Substitute ‘Lw’ for ‘tw’ in the formula for (Py) min- 
[Page 15, Table 1, SI No. (iii), col 3] — Substitute ‘py wep’ for ‘py’ in the formula for (pi) min- 
(Page 16, clause 10.4.5, line 3) — Substitute ‘7.6’ for ‘8’. 
[Page 16, clause 10.5.2 (b), line 5] — Substitute ‘7.6’ for ‘8’. 
(Page 18, clause 11.1.2, line 4) — Substitute “7.6” for ‘8’. 


(Page 18, clause 11.2.2, line 1) — Substitute ‘7.6’ for ‘8’. 
[Third cover page, Foreword, SI No. (c) (6)] — Delete. 


[Third cover page, Foreword, SI No. (c) (7)] — Substitute *7.6.1(c)' for ‘8.1(c)’. 


(CED 39) 2 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


AMENDMENT NO. 2 NOVEMBER 2020 
TO 


IS 13920 : 2016 DUCTILE DESIGN AND DETAILING OF 
REINFORCED CONCRETE STRUCTURES SUBJECTED 
TO SEISMIC FORCES — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


(Page 2, clause 3.5, lines 2 and 4) — Substitute ‘8 times’ for “6 times’. 
(Page 2, clause 3.10, title) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
*3.10 Ordinary RC Structural Wall (also called Shear Wall)’ 

(Page 2, clause 3.11, title) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
*3.11 Special RC Structural Wall (also called Special Shear Wall)’ 

(Page 3, clause 5.3.1) — Substitute the following clause for the existing: 


“5.3.1 Steel reinforcement shall comply with all of the following: 


a) Elongation shall be at least 14.5 percent, 

b) Ratio of ultimate stress to 0.2 percent proof stress shall not exceed 1.25, 

c) Ratio of ultimate stress to 0.2 percent proof stress shall be at least 1.15, 
and 


Steel shall be only of strength grades with minimum 0.2 percent proof 
stress of 415 MPa, 500 MPa or 550 MPa, in addition to other requirements 
of IS 1786.’ 


d 


М7 


(Page 4, clause 5.3.2, lines 1 апа 3) — Substitute ‘stress’ for ‘strength’. 


(Page 4, clause 5.3.3) — Delete. 


Price Group 1 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 13920 : 2016 


[Page 6, clause 6.3.3(b) (2)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 
`2) For sway to left: 


м^ + MF 

а LA z “— and 
м^ + мв 

y =y ig Se Ts 

ч, ц, Lia 


(Page 7, clause 7.1, para 1, last sentence) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘The factored axial compressive stress considering all load combinations 
involving earthquake loads shall be limited to 0.407, in all such members, except 
in those covered in 11.’ 


[Page 11, clause 7.6 (see also Amendment No. 1)] — Substitute the following 
for the existing: 


*In beams and columns, the requirements of this clause shall be met with, unless 
a larger amount of transverse reinforcement is required from shear strength 
considerations given in 6.3 for beams and 7.5 for columns.’ 


[Page 13, clause 9.1.1] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


'9.1.1 Shear Strength of Concrete in a Joint 


The nominal shear strength Tj. of concrete in а beam-column joint shall be taken 
as: 


1.54 fa for joints confined by beams on all four faces 
т = 11.24 f, for joints confined by beams on three faces 


je 
1.0,/f, for other joints 


The nominal shear stress demand T; on the joint shall be estimated as: 


where 4 = horizontal shear force on the joint and А„ is as given in 9.1.2 (а). 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 13920 : 2016 


[Page 13, clause 9.1.2(a)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


*a) Design shear stress demand acting horizontally along each of the two 
principal plan directions of the joint shall be estimated from earthquake 
shaking considered along each of these directions: 


V. 
Tux = PR for shaking along plan direction X of earthquake shaking, 


ej 


V. 
= -© for shaking along plan direction Y of earthquake shaking. 


T iay 
ej 


where A is effective shear area of joint given by bw, in which b, is the effective 
breadth of joint perpendicular to the direction of shear force and w. is the effective 
width of joint along the direction of shear force. The effective breadth of joint bi 
(see Fig. 15) shall be obtained from following: 


min [ b; b, + 0.5h,] if b. <b, 
where 
b,= width of beam, 
b= width of column, and 
h,= depth of column in the considered direction. 


It shall be ensured that the joint shear capacity of joint concrete estimated using 
9.1.1 exceeds both т. and т.” 


[Page 14, clauses 9.2.1 (a) (1) and 9.2.1 (b) (1), line 2 (see also Amendment 
No. 1)] — Substitute ‘7.6’ for ‘8’. 


(Page 17, clause 11, line 1) — Substitute ‘designed’ for ‘detailed’. 


(CED 39) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


