**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13233 (1991) : Low Voltage High Current Arc Resistance 
Test - Method of Test [ETD 2: Solid Electrical Insulating 
Materials and Insulation Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

LOW VOLTAGE HIGH CURRENT ARC 

JRESISTANCE TEST — 

METHOD OF TEST 



iS 13233:1991 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



UDC 621'315-619 



© BIS 1991 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1991 Price Groap I 



Solid Electrical InsulatiDg Materials Sectional Committee, ETD 2 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard, was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standard, after the draft finalized 
by the Solid Electrical Insulatirg Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 

The test method covered in this standard is for insulating materials to test their ability to 
withstand low voltage high current arcs. 

In reporting the results of a test or aralysis made in accordance, with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 



IS 13233 : 1991 



Indian Standard 

LOW VOLTAGE HIGH CURRENT ARC 
RESISTANCE TEST — 

METHOD OF TEST 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers the classification and 
method of test for insulating materials in so far 
as their ability to withstand low voltage high 
current arcs are concerned. 

2 TERMINLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the follow- 
ing definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Arc Resisting 

The material is considered to be arc resisting 
if it resists the action of an electric arc index 
conditions specified in Annex A. 

2.2 Arc Resistance 

It is the index assigned to insulating materials 
for the purpose of classification and is numeri- 
cally equal to the number of arcs ( up to a 
maximum of 200 arcs ) required to ignite the 
material under conditions specified in Annex A. 



2.3 IgDltlDg 

To ignite or to set on fire. 

2.4 Ignitable 

A material which is capable of being ignited. 

2.5 Burning 

To undergo combustion ( see 2.6 ). 

2.6 Combustion 

The combustible material with a supporter of 
combustion producing heat and sometimes both 
heat and light. 

2.7 Free Burning 

A material which burns freely on ignition and 
continues to do so even after the removal of 
the source of ignition. 

2.8 Inflammable 

A material which is capable of being easily 
ignited. 



ANNEX A 
( Clauses 2.1 and 22) 

METHOD OF LOW VOLTAGE HIGH CURRENT ARC RESISTANCE TEST 

Al TEST SYSTEM A-3 PROCEDURE 



Two round electrodes each of diameter 3*2 mm, 
one of copper and another of stainless steel 
< 303 ) are used. The copper electrode is fixed 
and provision should be there for movement of 
the stainless steel electrode. The copper 
electrode is sharpened to a 30"^ chisel point 
while the SS electrode to a 60° cone. The 
electrodes are set in a vertical plane at 45° to 
the insulation surface under test. The movable 
electrode is operated by an air piston which, 
in turn, is controlled by an external relay. 

A-2 SOURCE 

Power shall be supllied from a 240 V 50 Hz 
high capacity source. A series ( inductive- 
resistive ) air core impedance shall be used to 
give a short circuit current of 32*5 A and a 
power factor of 0'5. The SS electrode shall be 
drawn at the rate of 254 ± 25'4 mm/S so as lo 
jet 40 complete arcs per minute. 



A-3.1 Five test specimens of 100 mm square are 
conditioned in accordance with A-4. The 
thickness of material shall be 6 mm. For 
specimens of higher thickness, one of the 
sides shall be machined to get a thickness 
of 6 mm. The specimen is placed in position 
and clamped suitably. Accurately sharpened 
SS electrode is mounted on the spring loaded 
holder with the holder in midposition and 
the tip of the electrode firmly touching the 
specimen surface. The electrode set screw is 
then tightened to hold the movable electrode 
and a locknut is used to prevent its loosening. 
The apparatus is shown in Fig. 1. 

A-3.2 The movable electrode is then pulled 



away from the specimen until the electrode 
holder reaches the end. It is then released to 

down against the specimen which ensures 

ct Dosition durins normal ooeration. 



1 



IS 13233 : 1991 




1. SS Electrode 

3. Set Screw 

5. SS electrode 

7. Holder stops 



2. Electrode holder 

4. Air piston 

6. Screw for fixing the electrode assembly to the work table 

8. Specimen 



Fig 1. Apparatus for Low Voltage High Current Arc Resistance Test 



A-3.3 The fixed electrode assembly is moved 
away from the specimen and copper electrode 
is inserted and held in position by tightening 
the TiUt of the electrode holder. The electrode 
assem.bly is moved so that the chisel edge is in 
light contact with the point of the SS electrode. 
In this position the copper electrode assembly 
is firmly fixed to the horizontal work surface. 

A-3.4 For greater consistency an oscilloscope 
may be connected across the electrodes to 
monitor voltage during dwell and arcing periods. 

A-4 CONDITIONING 

The iQst specimens are conditioned in a 



controlled atmosphere of 65 ± 5 percent RH 
and a temperature of 27 ± 2°C for 17 to 24 
hours. The specimens are arranged so as to 
expose maximum surface of the specimen to the 
controlled atmosphere. The specimens shall be 
tested within 3 minutes after removal from the 
controlled atmosphere. 



A-5 RESULTS 

Average of five tests in which consistent and 
intense arcings are obtained shall be reported as 
the arc resistance of the material. 



Standard Mark 



The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the lequiretnents of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quah'ty control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Irdian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. ETD 2 ( 3249 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



J>ate of Issue 



Text Aflfected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephones 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
NEW Delhi-1 10002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.LP. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, 
COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, 
HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR; PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



331 01 31 


331 13 75 


37 86 62 


53 38 43 


412916 


6 32 92 95 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



