( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS:9822 -1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED PAR WAL
AFDC 23 Fruits and Vegetables Sectional Committee,
DR P. IL KYMAL,

A-29, DDA Flats, Saket, New Delhi 110017 Members Representing (Ministry
AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISER Directorate of Marketing & Inspection TO TEE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA of Agriculture), Faridabad

DEPUTYAGRICULTURAL MARKETMG AovLSER ( Akemtate ) SHRI S. R. BAJAJ Bajaj Consultants, New Delhi Srnu BALJEETSINGH Department of Agriculture, Government SHRI NARAINDASSDUDEJA( Alternate ) SHRI M. BHATIA Central Fruit Products Advisory ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New CHAIRMAN
Smr B. P. CHAKLADAR

of Haryana Committee Delhi )

Technical Standardization Committee (Foodstuffs (Ministry of Agriculture) , New Delhi

SECR~ARY ( Alternate )

Department of Agriculture, Government of West Bengal SHFZ CH.QANJ~TSINGH All India Cold Storages Association, New Delhi SHRI S. K. M~ITAL (Alternate) COL S. K. CHIB Directorate of Supplies & Transport, Army Headquarters, New Delhi LT-COL K. N. ACHARYA( Alternate) DR B. CHOUDHUR? Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), New Delhi DR J. C. ANAND (Alternate) SHRI S. D. DEWAN Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Agriculture >, New Delhi SHRI 0. P. DHAMIJA Export Inspection Council ( Ministry of Commerce ), Calcutta JoMT DIRECTOR op AGRICULTURE DepruNrnmn of Agriculture, Government of Tamil ( CJMMERCIAL CROPS) JOINTDIRECTOROF AGRICULTURE (INSPECTION, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATION) ( Alternate) SHRI B. C. MATHUR National Co-operative Development Corporation, New Delhi ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1981 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9822- 1981
( Continuedfrom page 1) Representing Department of Agriculture, Maharashtra

DR

Members R. L. NAGPAL

Government

of

DEPUTYDIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE ( HORTICULTURE ) ( Alternate) All India Food Preservers' Association. New Delhi DR A. G. NAIK-KURADE SJXRIM. S. KOHLI (Alternate) The Metal Box Company of India Limited, Calcutta SHRI K. R. NARASIMHAM DR S. C. CHAKRAVARTY ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute DR M. V. PATWARDHAN ( CSIR), Mysore SHRI V. B. DALAL (Alternate) Development Council for Food Processing IndusSHRI S. RAMASWAW tries (Directorate General of Technical Development ), New Delhi Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR K. S. RANDHAWA DR G. S. NIJJAR (Alternate) Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay SHRI V. REGUNATHAN SHRI S. M. NEMBHANI(Alternafe) Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry SECRETARY of Health & Family Welfare), New Delhi ASSISTANT SECRETARY ( PFA) ( Alternate ) Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of DR T. R. SHARMA Defence), Mysore Srrm K. S. JAYARAMAN (Alternate) Export Promotion Cell, Ministry of Agriculture, SHRI S. S. S~HU New Delhi Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi SHRI J. P. SINGH DR R. N. SINGH ( AlterHate) Processed Foods Export Promotion Council, SHRI P. S. SRINIVASAN New Delhi; and Ministry of Commerce SHRI B. K. IYENGAR ( Alternate ) Directorate of Fruit Utilization, Government of DR S. S. TEAOTIA Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow DR S. K. BOSE (Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member) SHRI T. PU~NANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food) Secretary SHRI V. S. MATHUIX Deputy Director (Agri & Food), IS1

Processed Fruits and Vegetables Subcommittee,
Convener SHRI M. BHATIA AGRICULTURAL MARKETING Aovrsna TO THEGOVWNMENT
OFINDIA DIRECTOR OF LABORATORJM

AFDC 23 : 3

Advisory Committee Central Fruit Products (Ministry of Agriculture), New Delhi Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (Ministry of Agriculture ), Faridabad (Alternote) ( Continued on page 16)

2

IS : 9822 - 1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED PAR WAL
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 8 May 1981, after the draft finalized by the Fruits and Vegetables Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Canned PAR WAL is the product known as Pointed Gourd, of suitable packed in brine. They are processed after being sealed in containers so as prepared from mature PAR WAL, also varieties. PAR WAL is cleaned and in appropriate manner before and to prevent their spoilage.

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 and the Fruit Products Order, 1955. However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under these statutes, wherever applicable. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements for PAR WAL ( Trichosanthes &.&a Roxb. ) canned in brine. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For apply. the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall

2.1 Fill of Container - Expressed as water capacity of the container. The water capacity of the container is the volume of distilled water at 20�C which the sealed container shall hold when completely filled. *Rules for rounding off numerical values (raised). 3

IS : 9822 - 1981 2.2 Drained Mass - The mass of product obtained after cutting open the can and draining the liquid product ( see 7 of IS : 2860-1964* ). 2.3 Absence of Defects - The degree of freedom from extraneous material, such as ends of PAR WAL, freedom from hard yellow or pinkish seeds and damage due to physical injury. 2.3.1 Blemished Unit - Unit which is blemished with injury, like wormhole, insect damage, physiological disorder or any other abnormality, such as sun burn, scab and enzyme activity on the surface, readily visible to the naked eye. A unit shall be considered blemished when aggregate blemished area exceeds area of a circle 0.32 cm in diameter. Uneven distribution of pigments and changes in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects. 2.3.2 Disintegrated Unit - Unit which has lost normal shape or form, or from which some portion have been separated. 2.4 Can 3. STYLES 3.1 The PARWAL forms: used for canning shall be in any one of the foIlowing Round open top sanitary can conforming to IS : 9396-1979t.

a) Whole pieces, unstrapped, with ends removed; b) Whole pieces ends removed, unstrapped, and longitudinal and c) Halves, ends removed, unstrapped.

slit;

4. GRADES 4.1 Canned PARWAL ( see Table 1 ). 5. REQUIREMENTS 5.1 Hygienic Requirements - The material shall be prepared and handled under strict hygienic conditions in accordance with IS: 6542-1972$ by persons free from contagious and infectious diseases and only in the premises maintained in a thoroughly clean and hygienic condition and having
*Methods of sampling and test for processed fruits and vegetables. iSpecification for round open top sanitary cans. $Code for hygienic conditions for fruit and vegetable canning units.

shall be of two grades, namely, Grade 1 and Grade 2

4

IS: 9822-1981
adequate and safe water supply. All workers shall use clean, white, washed clothing. Necessary precautions shall be taken to prevent incidental contamination of the product from soiled equipment or from personnel suffering from injuries. 5.1.1 All equipment coming in contact with raw materials or products in the course of manufacture shall be kept clean. An ample supply of steam and water, and hose, brushes and other equipment necessary for proper cleaning of machinery and equipment shall be available. The equipment shall be properly cleaned by suitable chlorine solution having at least 50 mg/kg of available chlorine. 5.2 General - The PAR WAL selected for canning shall be of good quality, of the proper stage of maturity and shall have characteristic colour, flavour and texture and shall be free from blemishes and damage by insects or disease. Colour of seeds shall not be black or red. Texture of seeds shall not be hard. PARWAL used in each can should be of the same variety. 5.3 Freedom from Preservatives, Artificial Colouring Matter and Flavouring Agents - The material shall be free from any preservative, artificial colouring matter or flavouring agents. 5.4 Requirements for Covering Brine - The covering brine shall be clear. It shall contain edible common salt from 1 to 2 percent. It may also contain small quantity of sucrose, citric or tartaric acid or other permitted acidulants not more than 0.1 percent of the brine. 5.5 Requirements for the Finished Product - The contents opening shall display the following characteristics: a) of the can on

Grade 1 - The material shall possess a good characteristic and practically uniform colour; shall be practically uniform in size; shall be practically free from defects; shall be practically free from disintegration; shall possess a characteristic good texture and flavour; and shall be of such quality with respect to clarity of covering brine as to score not less than 85 points.

b) Grade 2 - The material shall possess a characteristic and reasonably uniform colour; shall be reasonably uniform in size; shall be reasonably free from defects; shall be reasonably free from disintegration; shall possess a characteristic reasonably good texture and flavour; and shall be of such quality with respect to clarity of covering brine as to score not less than 75 points. c) Scoring shall be done according to the method prescribed in Appendix A. The maximum and the minimum numbers of points to be scored by different factors shall be as in Table 1. 5

IS : 9822- 1981

TABLE 1 NUMBERS OF POINTS TO BE SCORED BY DIFFERENT FACTORS ( Clauses 4.1 and 5.5 ) SL
FACTORS MAXIMUM 55kzT-MINIMUM No.

Grade 2 (5) 179 ::,

(1) i) ii ) iii ) iv )

(2) Colour Texture and uniformity of size Taste and flavour Absence of defects

(3) 15 25 Z

(4) 11 19 :;

5.5.1

CoIour

b)

shall possess a good practically uniform colour, characteristic of PARWAL of the proper maturity (the colour of the units shall be pale green but not yellowish which is indicative of over mature units ) free from any discolouration. Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects. Grade 2 - The units shall possess a good, reasonably uniform colour, characteristic of PARWAL at the right stage of maturity ( the colour of the units shall be pale green but not yellowish which is indicative of over mature units ) free from any discolouration. Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects.

Grade 1 -- The units

5.5.2

Texture and Uniformity of Size

a) Grade 1 - The units shall possess practically good texture that is firm and tender. The seeds of PARWAL shall not be unduly hard and horny. The units shall be practically uniform in size. b) Grade 2 - The units shall possess a reasonably good texture that is firm and tender. The seeds of the PAR WAL shall not be unduly hard and horny. The units shall be reasonably uniform in size. 5.5.3 Taste and Flavour
a)

The units shall possess characteristic taste and flavour of the canned PAR WAL in brine. The units shall be completely free from any objectionable off-taste, smell and odour.
Grade 1 -

6

IS:9822-1981

b) Grade 2 - The units shall possess characteristic taste and flavour of the canned PAR WAL in brine. The units shall be free from any objectionable off-taste, smeI1 and odour. 5.5.4 Absence of Defects Grade 1 - The units shall be practically free from defects, which means that there shall not be present any extraneous material like the ends; and there shall not be present more than 5 percent or 1 blemished unit whichever is more; not more than 5 percent or 1 disintegrated unit whichever is more; and not more than 0.5 percent detached seeds calculated on the drained mass. The covering brine shall be thin, practically clear, free from cloudiness, blackening or discolouration and suspended matter. b) Grade 2 - The units shall be reasonably free from defects which means that there shall not be present any extraneous material like the ends; and there shall be present not more than 10 percent or 2 blemished units whichever is more; not more than 10 percent or 2 disintegrated units whichever is more; and not more than 1 percent of detached seeds calculated on the drained mass. The covering brine shall be thin, reasonably clear, free from cloudiness, suspended matter, blackening or discolouration.

a>

'

5.5.5 The material in Table 2.
TABLE SL No. 2

shall also conform

to the requirements

prescribed

REQUIREMENTS

FOR CANNED REQUIREMENT

PARWAL METHOD OF TEST, REFTO < Appendi? ClNo.of

CHARACTERISTIC

(1)

(2)

(3)

IS :28601964* (4) 5 1 13 14
:z

175 i> Vacuum in the can in mm, ii4in ii ) Fill of container, percentage by mass, Min 2: iii) Drained mass of contents of can, as percentage of net mass, Min iv ) Arsenic, mg/kg, Max 0.5 Lead, mg/kg, Max v) ::; vi ) Copper, mg/kg, Max 5.0 vii ) Zinc, mg/kg, Max 250 viii ) Tin, mg/kg, Max ix ) Iron, mg/kg, MUX 15 Microbiologtcal requirements To satisfy x) requirements of the test

of IS :77321975t (5) -

17 Is B -

*Methods of sampling and test for processed fruits and vegetables. tSpecitication for apple juice.

7

IS : 9822 - 1981 6. PACKING AND MARKING

6.1 Packing - The material shall be packed in cans made of electrolytic or any other suitable tinplate. The cans shall be either plain or internally lacquered and hermetically sealed. The side seam shall also be lacquered. The lacquer used internally shall be non-toxic and conforming to IS : 58181970". The exterior of the can shall be free from dents, rust, perforations and seam distortions. The cans shall not show leaking, panelling or swell. The interior of the lacquered cans shall not show any visible black discolouration, rusting or pitting and inside lacquer shall be in good condition. The interior of the plain cans may show visible black discolouration. Normal feathering shall not be considered as a defect.

6.1.1 The cans shall conform to IS : 9396-1979t. 6.1.2 Packing in Cases - The cans shall be packed in wooden packing cases ( see IS : 1503-1979t: ) or corrugated fibre board boxes [ see IS : 2771 ( Part I ) - 19770 or IS : 7149-1973111 or any other case as agreed between the purchaser and the vendor. 6.2
Marking 6.2.1 Each can shall be marked with the following particulars:

a) Name, packing medium and grade of material with brand name,
if any;

b) Name and address of the manufacturer; 4 Net mass of contents of can in grams; 4 Date of manufacture or code number indicating date of manufacture;

e) Manufacturing licence number; and f) List of ingredients in descending order of proportion.
NOTE- Any other marking required under Fruit Products Order. 1955 and Weights and Measures (Packaged Commodities) Regulations, 1977 may also be given.

6.2.2 Each packing case shall also be marked with the following information: a) Name of the product; b) Number of cans x mass of each can;
*Specification $Specification @pecification &Specification Gpecification for lacquer and decorative finish for food cans. for round open top sanitary cans. for wooden packing cases ( second revision ). for fibreboard boxes: Part I Corrugated fibreboard boxes (first revision). for fibreboard boxes for canned sea foods for export.

8

IS : 9822 - 1981

cl Date of manufacture
manufacture;

or code number indicating the date of

d> Manufacturing licence number; and e) Name and address of the manufacturer and gross mass.
6.3 The containers Mark. may also be marked with the IS1 Certification

NOTE - The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard asa further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

7. SAMPLING
7.1 Representative

samples of the material shall be drawn and tested for conformity to this standard by the method prescribed in 3 of IS : 28601964*.

8. TESTS 8.1 The samples of the canned PARWAL shall be tested for conformity of the material to the requirements of this specification by the methods given in IS : 2860-1964" and IS : 7732-1975t. Reference to relevant clauses is given in co1 4 and 5 of Table 2.

APPENDIX [ Clause 5.5 (c) ]
METHOD A-l. A-l.1 APPARATUS

A

OF SCORING

White Porcelain Bowls can under examination.
A-1.2 Stainless Steel

Big enough

to hold the contents of the

Spoons -

Table spoons.

*Methods of sampling and test for processed fruits and vegetables. @pecification for apple juice.

9

IS:9822

-1981

A-2. PROCEDURE A-2.1 Panel of Judges -

Scoring of the product shall be done by a panel of three to five judges. All the judges constituting the panel shall be conversant with the factors governing the quality of the product. The cans shall be opened and the contents poured separately into white porcelain bowls. Each judge shall independently examine the contents from each can and assign scores for different characteristics._

A-2.1.1 The judges shall consider the characteristics, such as colour, texture, uniformity of size, taste, flavour and absence of defects. A-2.2 System of Scoring - The variations within each factor are so described that the scores may be ascertained for each factor and expressed numerically. The relative importance of each factor has been expressed numerically on a scale of 100. Each judge shall give a score for individual factors, by the method described in Table 3 and record his observations in the Score Sheet. A-2.2.1 The scores as number of points given on the score sheet by the judges for the contents of each can for the four factors shall be recorded in a tabular form in the score card. The average score calculated for each factor with overall average for each can is entered in the appropriate column of the score card after complying with the conditions specified in A-2.3.1 and A-2.3.2. A-2.2.2 A specimen Score Sheet and Score Card is given at the end of this specification. A-2.3 Ascertaining the Grade A-2.3.1 Agreement Among Judges -- To ascertain the consistency of judgement among the judges, the total score assigned by each of them for the contents of the same can shall be calculated by adding up the scores for the various individual characteristics. If the difference between the maximum and the minimum of the total score SO obtained does not exceed ( Kf5 ), where K is the number of judges, the most outlying score that is, the one which is farthest from its immediate neighbour ( the scores being arranged in one order ), shall be discarded and the consistency among the remaining shall be examined. A-2.3.2 When the consistency is thus established ( A-2.3.1), the overall average scores given by the judges, whose scoring has been found to be consistent, shall becalculated for each can. The average score for each of the individual characteristic shall also be calculated by taking into account the corresponding scores given by the judges for the contents of the same can. A-2.3.3 Assignment of Grade - Assigning of grade shall be done on the basis of points as given in Table 3. 10

IS:9822-1981
TABLE 3 METHOD FOR GIVING SCORES FOR CANNED PARWAL ( Clause A-2.2 ) SL ORGANOLEP~K No. CHARA~~TERISTIC REQUIREMENTS MAXIMUM NUMBER PO% (3) Pale green, uniform characteristic of the variety and of PARWAL of proper maturity; free from any black or discolouration. (Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with processing shall proper not be considered as defect) ii ) Texture and uniz;tn;; Good texture, firm and tender; seeds not unduly hard. Well graded uniform in size 15 PR0P~arrm WHICH PorNTs REDUCETHEVALUE REDUCING THE VALUE UP To (5) quite uniform, slightly varying shades of the characteristic colour. Very slight discolouration b) Not uniform, some units may have yellowish colour non-uniform, cl Dull yellow colour, black discolouration (6)
11

a) Not

9 0

25

a) Texture

. *

not very good. Some units slightly hard. Seeds somewhat hard. Almost uniform size varying within reasonable limits

19

b) Units rather hard. Size cl
Leathery texture very hard units. Seed very very hard. Size not at all uniform variation in normal taste. A trace of metallic taste

17

0

iii)

and flavour Taste and Pleasant characteristic taste of flavour PARWAL. Free from any objectionable odour. Free from sourness, staleness or metallic taste

20

a) Slight
b)

15

Rather a flat taste not so typical of PAR WAL. Slight smell of sourness or sulphide odour Strong offensive smell.

13

cl Off-taste, bad flavour.

0

*While rating texture may be allotted 10 points and uniformity of size 15 points. ( Continued )

IS:9822- 1981
TABLE 3 METHOD FOR GIVING SCORES FOR CANNED PARWAL-Confd
?sz2

SL ORGANOLEPT~C RBQUIREMENTS No. CHARACTERISTIC

PGFms ( 1) iv ) (2) AbFfnce defects* (3) Free from defects, no extraneous material present; free from blemished, disintegrated units. No detached seeds. Covering brine shall be clear, blackening, free from thickening and sediment ( 4) 40

PROPERTIES WHICH POINTS REDUCING REDUCE THE VALUE VALUE UP TO (5) up a) Blemished units to 5 percent or 1 units disintegrated and up to 5 percent or 1 of the drained mass. Detached seeds up to 0.5 percent of the drained mass b) Blemished units up to 10 percent or 2 and disintegrated units up to 10 percent or 2 of mass. the drained Detached seeds up to 1 percent .Brine slightly cloudy and disintegrated units above 10 percent of the drained mass. Excessive detached seeds. Brine thick, cloudy and blackened. (6) 30

26

c> Blemished

0

*While rating a tentative maximum score of 15 points for the absence of blemished units, 10 points for absence of disintegrated units, 5 points for absence of detached seeds and 10 points for clarity of brine may be considered.

12

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 9822 - 1981 SCORE SHEET FOR INDIVIDUAL JUDGE

Sample No. . . . . . . . . , Date of Sampling.. DETAILS OF THE SAMPLE CAN b ) Name of Manufacturer.

....

..

a) Product ......................

.....

...... ......

.. ..

c) Type..
e ) Date

.................... of Manufacture.

d ) Batch No.

................

......

-

-

I
FACTOR SCOREPOINTS
1 --

SAMPLECANS

2 3

4

5

6

8 ~--

-i9

10

-_
Colour Grade 1 : 11-15 Grade 2 : 9-10

_-

--

-_

-_
Texture and uniformity of size Grade 1 : 19-25 We=8

Y_

_

r

--

-

-_

-

--

-

r

-_

-c

__

,-

,-

_-

r

-

Taste and flavour
-_

Grade 1 : 15-20 Grade 2 : 13-14
---

_-

-

. _

,-

-

--

Absence od defects -

Grade 1 : 30-40 Grade 2 : 26-29
-

of

-

Signature

the Judge..............................

Place : Date

:

IS:9822 - 1981
( Continuedfron~ page 2 ) M&nbers DR J. C. ANAN~ SHRI N. P. BHARGAVA CHAIRMAN Represertting Jndian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR 1, New Delhi The Midland Fruit & Vegettible Products (India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Technical Standardization Committee (Foodstuffs) ( Minis&v ), New Delhi < of Agriculture Directorate of Supplies & Transport, Army Headquarters, New Delhi The Canning Industries ( Cochin ) Limited, Trichur Surti Mancro Pickles. Untdi

SECRETARY (Alternate) CAL S. K. CHIB
SHRI M. I. DAV~I SHRI T. B. DESAI Srnu A. T. DESAI (Alternate) &RI GIRD~RI LAL Smu K. S. JAYARAMAN

Provision Merchants' Association, Delhi Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of Defence), Mysore SHRI L. A. RAMANA~HAN ( Alternate) Fruit and Vegetable Co-operative Processing Society SHRI V. S. MAMADAPUR Limited, Kushatnagar Natio;;: Fe--xratrve Development Corporation, SHIU B. C. MATHUR

All India Food Preservers' Association, New Delhi DR A. G. NAIK-KURADE SHRI A. K. TIK~O (Alternate ) Research Institute SHRI A. M. NANJUNDASWAMY Central Food Technological ( CSIR ) . Mvsore ~ " * SHRI M. V. SASTRY (Alternate) Punjab State Co-operative Supply & Marketing SHRI M. K. REHMAN Federation Limited, Chandigarh Central Committee for Food Standards (Ministry SECRETARY of Health & Family Welfare), New Delhi Development Council for Food Processing IndusSECRETARY tries (Directorate General of Technical Development ), New Delhi Tims Products Limited, Calcutta SHRI V. L. SHARDA DR L. L. KHATRI ( Alternate)

16

AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 1996 TO IS 9822 : 1981 SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED PARWAL ( Puge3, Foreword, clause 0.3 ) - Insert the following new clause 0.4
after 0.3 and renumber the subsequent clause: `0.4 A scheme for labelling environment friendly products known as ECO-Mark has been introduced at the instance of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MEF), Government of India. The ECU-Mark shall be administered by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) under the BZSAct, 1986 as per the Resolution No. 71 dated 20 February 1991 and Resolution No. 425 dated 28 October 1992 published in the Gazette of the Government of India. For a product to be eligible for marking with the ECO-Mark it shall also carry the Standard Mark of BIS for quality besides meeting additional environment friendly (EF) requirements. The environment friendly requirements for canned PARWAL are, therefore, included through Amendment No. 1 to this standard. This amendment is based on the Gazette Notification No. 624 Q dated 6 September 1995 for Labelling Beverages, Infant Foods, Processed Fruits and Vegetable Products as environment friendly, published in the Gazette of the Government of India .' ( Page 7, clause 525.5) - Insert the following new matter after 5.55: "5.6 Additional Requirements for ECO-MARK 56.1 General Requirements 5.6.1.1 The product shall conform to the requirements prescribed under 5.1 to 55.5. 5.6.1.2 The manufacturer shall produce the consent clearance as per the provisiona of Water (PCP) Act, 1974, Water (PCP) Cess Act, 1977 and Air (PCP) Act 1981 along with the authorization if required under Envitwunent (Profec~ion) Ach 1986 and the Rules made thereunder to Bureau of Indian Standards while applying for the ECO-Mark and the product shall also be in accordance with the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and the Rules made theteunder. Additionally, FPO 1955 (Fruit Product Order) framed under Essential Commodides Act, 1955, Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1977 requirementa wherever applicable has to be complied with. 1

5.6.13 The product/packaging may also display in brief the criteria based on which the product has been labelled environment friendly.

5.6.1.4 The material used for product/packing shall be recyclable biodegradable.

or

5.6.1.5 The date of manufacture and date of expiry shall be declared on the product/package by the manufacturer. 5.6.1.6 The product shall be microbiologically safe when tested as per IS 5403 : 1969 `Method for yeast and mould count of foodstuffs' and IS 5887 ( Part 5 ) : 1976 `Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning: Part 5 Isolation, identification and enumeration of Vibrio Cholerae and Vibrio Purahaemolyricus ( fvst revision )' and shall be free from bacterial and fungal toxins. 5.6.1.7 The pesticide residues, if any in the product shall not exceed the limit as prescribed in PFA Act, 1954 and the Rules made thereunder. 5.6.1.8 The product/package or leaflet accompanying it may display instructions of proper use, storage and transport ( including refrigeration temperaturn compliance ) so as to maximize the product performance, safety and minimize wastage. 5.62 Specifii Requirements 5.63.1 The product shall not contain any of the heavy metal contaminants in excess of the quantities ptescribed in Table 2." (Page 9, clause 6.3 ) `6.4 ECO-Mark The product may also be marked with the E-Mark, be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.' the details of which may Insert the following new clause 6A after 63:

(FADlO)

ReproonphyUnit, BE, New Delhi, India

2

