( Reaffirmed 1997 )

Is:4535-1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SAW-GRIP TERMINAL DEVICE FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS
Artificial Limbs Sectional Committee,
Chairman

CPDC 20
Medical

Representing Directorate General of Armed Forces Services ( Ministry of Defence )

COL L. K. ANANTHANARAYANAN
Members

SHRI B. L. ARORA

India Medico Instruments, Delhi CIBA of India Ltd, Bombay National Metallurgical Jamshedpur Laboratory ( CSIR ),

SHRI A. K. AURORA ( Alternate )

SHRI C. S. BHATNACAR DR S. S. BHATNAGAR CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER DIVISIONAL MEDICAL OFFICER ( Alternate ) DR P. K. DURAISWAMY

Ministry of Railways ( Medical Department )

Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of Health, Family Planning & Urban Development ) Directorate General of Technical Delhi Development, New

SHRI V. KRI~HNAMOORTHY COLD.C.

SACHDEVA

Directorate General of Armed Forces Services ( Ministry of Defence ) All India Institute of Physical habilitation, Bombay Medicine

Medical and Re-

DR M. V. SANT SHRI S. N. SHAaMA MAJ SOHAN Smcrr SHRI K. L. TALWAR ( Alternate) SHRIP.S.

Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi Centrsadrather (Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o#cio Member ) Secretary SHRI N. B. RINDANI Assistant Director ( Consr Prod ), IS1 Research Institute ( CSIR),

VENKATACHALAM

DRT.S.RANGANATHAN
SHRI A. B. RAO, Director ( Consr Prod )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 1 ZAFAR MARG

Is:453501968
( Continuedfrom page 1 )

Prosthetic and Orthotic Appliances Subcommittee,
Convsnrr
COL D. C.
SACHDEVA

CPDC 20 : I
Medical

Rqbsenting
Directorate General of Armed Forces Services ( Ministry of Defence )

General of Armed Forces COL L. K. ANANTHANARAYANAN Directorate Services ( Ministry of Defence ) MAJ S. P. CHAIJDHRI Da M. V. SANT Directorate General of Armed Forces Services ( Ministry of Defence )

Medical Medical

All India Institute of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Bombay

2

IS : 4535 - 1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SAW-GRIP TERMINAL DEVICE FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 21 March 1968, after the draft finalized by the Artificial Limbs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products Division Council. 0.2 The formulation of Indian Standards on artificial limbs, prosthetic and orthotic appliances and rehabilitation equipment has been taken up at. the instance of the Advisory Committee for Development of Surgical Instruments, Equipment and Appliances, Government of India. 0.3 Terminal devices for artificial limbs are working accessories to be fitted These into the dress or working arm of an amputee of the upper extremity. devices aid the amputee to perform some of the normal functions of the hand. 0.4 This standard is one of a series on terminal devices for artificial limbs. Other specifications in this series are: IS : 4534-1968 Adapter for terminal devices, artificial limbs IS : 4554-1968 Hammer terminal devices, ball pein and claw, for artificial limbs IS : 4555-l 968 Biprong terminal device, draughtsman, for artificial limbs Finger terminal device, typing, for artificial limbs IS : 4556-1968 Appliance, office, flat adjustable, for artificial limbs IS : 4557-1968 Pliers terminal device, quick grip, for artificial limbs IS: 4567-1968 Spade grip terminal device for artificial limbs IS : 4577-1968 0.5 This standard is a necessary adjunct to IS : 4534-1968*. 0.6 This standard contains a clause 7.1 which calls for agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Specification for adapter for terminal devices, artificial limbs. tRules for roundingoff numerical values ( revised ). 3

IS : 4535 - 1968 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specrfies the requirements pertaining to material, shape, dimensions, workmanship, finish and performance for saw-grip terminal device. 2. MATERIAL 2.1 The saw grip shall be manufactured from carbon steel conforming to Class 2 of Table 1 of IS : 1875-1966*. The material for the pivot pin shall conform to IS : 1148-19647. The wing-headed clamping screw shall be manufactured from carbon steel conforming to Designation C20 or CM of IS : 2073 - 19621. 3. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 3.1 The general shape and dimensions of the saw grip shall be as given in Fig. 1.

M 10 THREADS TO RECEIVE ADAPTEf

MARK

HERE

MAXIMUM OPENING AT THE TIP.OF THE GRIP TO BE 15 mm

b

PIVOT

Pi\

*See IS : 4534-1968 Specification for adapters for terminal devices, artificial limbs. All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 1

SAW-GRIP TERMINAL DEVICE FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS

*Specificatioq for carbon steel billets blooms and slabs for forgings ( mired ). tspecification for rivet bars for structural purposes (raised ). Sspecification for carbon steel bars for production of machined parts for general engineering purposes. 4

IS:453501968 4. MANUFACTURE, WO RKMANSHIP AND FINISH

4.1 The saw grip shall be manufactured by forging carbon steel (see 2.1 ). The saw grip shall be free from burrs, pits, scales, cracks, seams and other surface flaws. The device shall grip a saw handle firmly when the wingheaded screw is tightened. There shall be no movement of the saw handle relative to the saw grip in the gripped position. The saw grip shall be The plating shall conform to Grade C of plated chromium over nickel. IS : 1068-1958*. 5. TESTS 5.1 Drop Test-The saw grip shall be dropped from a height of two metres, with the gripping jaws pointing downwards, on a hard floor. This procedure shall be carried out five times. At the end of the test the saw grip shall not have broken or developed cracks. 5.2 Performance Test-The device shall be made to grip the handle of a saw firmly by tightening the wing-headed screw. By suitably holding the saw from the adapter-end of the saw grip, it shall be made to cut through a 50-mm square piece of wood of variety cedrus deodara (deodar) or mangiAfter the test, the handle shall not have become f&a indica (mango). loose at the grip, and shall not have developed any movement vertically. 6. MARKING 6.1 The saw grip shall be clearly and legibly marked with the manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade-mark. 6.1.1 The saw grip may also be marked with the IS1 Certification Mark.

NOTE -The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 7.

PACKING

7.1 The saw grip shall be packed in the manner as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier.
*Specification for copper, nickel and chromium electroplated coatings.

5

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION
The Indian Standards Institution (ISI), which started functioning in 1947, is the national standards organization for India. 1ts principal object is to prepare standards on national and international basis and promote their general adoption. The overall control of ISI, which is run and financed jointly as ; a non-profit making body by the Government and private enterprise, is exercised by the General Council, composed of representatives of Central and State Governments; leading trade, scientific and technological organizations; and subscribing members. The ~ Union Minister of Industry is the ex-officio President of ISI. The presnet technical activity of IS1 is carried out through 8 Division Councils for Agricultural and Food Products; Chemical; Civil Engineering; Consumer Products; Electrotechnical; Mechanical All technical work Engineering; Structural and Metals; and Textile. s relating to the formulation and revision of standards is done by committees appointed by and under the direction of their respective These committees consist of experts drawn from Division Councils. manufacturing units, technical institutions, purchase organizations and other concerned bodies. man, To make available benefits of Indian Standards to the common IS1 has introduced its Certification Marks Scheme under the Indian Standards Znstitution ( Certification Marks ) Act, 1952, as amended by the Amendment Act, 1961. According to this Act, quality goods conforming to Indian Standards can carry the IS1 This Mark is a third-party guarantee of quality Certification Mark. of marked goods. Licences to use the IS1 Certification Mark are granted to manufacturers using reliable methods of quality control subject to overall inspection by ISI.

In the international field, IS1 represents India on the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). IS0 and IEC respectively link 54 and 40 countries, and function through 118 and 58 technical committees; IS1 participates in 83 technical committees of IS0 and The committees and subcomall the technical committees of IEC. mittees of IEC and IS0 for which IS1 holds the secretariat deal with: Electric Fans, Lac, Mica, Pictorial Markings for Handling of Goods, Liquid Flow Measurements in Open Channels, Procedures for Interconversion of Values, Spices and Condiments, and Stimulant Foods.
I'
I

