( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 8509 ( Part

I ) - 1977

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TESTS AND TRIALS OF DREDGERS
PART I SELF-PROPELLED TRAI-LING SUCTION DREDGERS
Harl,our Craft Sectional Committee,
Reperenting Ports Consultative AIfrvrrrlr to
T-ioogl~ly )

HOPPER

Inland
Chairman

and

MCPD

2

SHrLIP. c. Mwmi
Mmbers
SHRI v. 13 \EtI,iA,~.\N i

Organization,

New Delhi

Shri P. C. Mitcra Srri:r S. Il.zrSIIRI

)

H0\VlYlh

Ihckinl:

8z

I~nginrrrinp

Co

I.imitrd,

srinr

S. I<. (:lrosrr s. 1). 11.21'11.\ ~HAKIIAIK~T\

( ,I/tetmt~

l)irectorate

Slrlrr H.
Srrl:r

SIIILI S. RAGHAV.\N V. G. Daarr,~
SHRI R. D. P.\RAT.K

Shipping llinirtry of \Ying )
)

General of Shipping ( Ministry of & Transport ) Shipping & Trannpo~t ( Transport 1301nbn> ( Ministry of

( Alt~rnntc )
\R ( .I/trrnn/r

AI:CO I.imited, Diwrtorat?
Shipping

Srrr:r S. C. DTR~ITT~

S F(~LI P. K. Drew \ ( .4//e,_wle ) Drl J. P. GIIOSE: DI< R. P. GOE.\I:N ( illterwl? ) SHI:I V. IL\xrrr\lta;v Slrl:r I<. M. Jw:I:PIr S1rrtr s. fi. BH \ril~l:v ( illlrmtctr (:IlIL s. R. 1<.\3141'1( S111:r G. 1;. I<I~r:rVAY
STll<T I-1. s. R \o

of Inland War~r Transport & Transport )

Intlian Tnstitrrtr of Trchnology,

Kharagpur

Sw:r

R. H.\I,\s~73R.4v.\sv\v

\\Zadras Port Trust: Madras Explornlo~y Fishcwcs l'rojvct, Bomba) ) Indian Navy Pishcrics (:rntral Institnte of Ernakulam

Trchnologv,

( Alternate )

Strr: r S. Ii. Ro\-

Sl<ILl 13. c. r%lSrnAS ( AltPrnnte ) Gnrdrn Rrach STXX I A.-RI-nna <:n1cr1tta SHI11 `\. I;. Sev ( .l//rmtrlc )

Indian Register of Shipping, I%ombny (:rntral Inland Water Transport Corporation Calcutta Shipbuilders Kr Engineers

Ltd,

Limited,

( Continmi @ Copyright STANDARDS 1977 INSTITUTION

on p"gP 2 )

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Co&ighl Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8509 ( Part I ) - 1977 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members SHRI K. SARICAR The Representing Peoples' Engineering & Motor Works Ltd , Howrah SHRI B. BHATTACHARJEE( Ahrrnatc ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI SATISH CHANDRA New Delhi SHRI A. K. ANAND ( Alternate) & SHIP Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Ports Wing ) SEN~OE ENCINEEX SURVEYOR American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay SHRI SYDNEY G. SCRAEFFER SHRI K. SHA~LMA ( Alternate ) Mazagon Dock Limited, Bombay SHRI D. N. S~ARXA Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI P. S. DAS. Director ( MkPD ) ( Secretary ) f Port Convener &RI S. K. D.~s GTTP'I~A Members SHRI RAJAT ROY CEOWDHARY Shri S. K. Das Gupta ) SHRI S. BA~U SHRI N. CEARRABORTY
(

Craft

Subcommittee,

MCPD

2

: 1

Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta

.Ilternate to & Engineering & Transport Co Limited,

Hooghzwraocking Ministry of Wing )

Shipping

( Transport

SHRI S. RAIXAVAN ( Alternate ) Bombay Port Trust, Bombay SHRI 0. D'MELLO &RI R. RAMACHANDRAN ( Alttvnate ) Standardization ( Ministry of Directorate of CAPT V. P. GARB Defence ), New Delhi LT R. NATH ( Alternate ) Madras Port Trust. Madras SHRI V. HARIXARAN Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited, SHRI A. K. JAIN Calcutta Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI S. MAJUMDAR New Delhi SHRI S. P. CHOUBEY ( Alternate ) Lloyd? Register of Shipping, Calcutta SHRI S. RATRA SHRI D. ~MADHOI~ (clternate ) SHIP Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Ports Wing ) SENIOR ENGINEER SURVEYOR

2

IS : 8509 ( Part I ) - 1977

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TESTS AND TRIALS OF DREDGERS
PART I SELF-PRO-PELLED TRAILING SUCTION DREDGERS HOPPER

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 June 1977, after the draft finalized by the Inland and Harbour Craft Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 The dredgers are mainly port and harbour crafts. The basic There division of dredgers come under selEpropelled and dumb ones. have been continuous changes in size and power for the dredgers, primemovers have changed to direct diesel-drive, diesel-electric, steam turbine, gas turbine and shore-supplied electric drive and the mechanical The type of dredge may elevators have changed to hydraulic elevators. be classified as follows: a) Grab c) Bucket d) Suction e) Cutter dredge, dredge, dredge, dredge, suction dredge. dredge, and b) Dipper

f ) Trailing

0.3 Among the different test requirements, the shop tests for the engines In fact the shop test requirements of the dredgers are also included. for marine engines for different types of vessels are mostly common and will be covered in a separate standard. In the absence of such a these requirements for main and auxiliary at present, standard, machinery for dredgers have been given in Appendix A of this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) lays down tests and trials required to be carried out with self-propelled, trailing, hopper suction dredgers and their systems for assessing their performance for acceptance. 3

IS : 8509 ( Part I ) - 1977 2. SHOP TESTS 2.1 Shop tests shall be carried

out on all main and auxiliary machinery in the manufacturer's shop. The extent of tests shah be as agreed to between the shipbuilder and the owner, subject to the provisions of statutory authorities/classification societies. The guidelines on shop test requirements are given in Appendix A. 3. TESTS stability of requirements

AND

TRIALS

AFTER

COMPLETION
shall ensure in accordance sufficient with the

3.1 Stability

Requirements - The builder the vessel for the intended service of the statutory authorities.

3.2 Basin Trials - Basin trials shall be carried out with the objective of ensuring proper functioning of main and auxiliary machinery and other equipment. 3.2.1 All controls and instruments checked for proper functioning. 3.2.2 All auxiliary machinery including ~safety devices shall be

and equipment

shall be tested on load.

3.2.3 Main load condition

machinery including the gear box shall be run on light for making adjustment and proper matching.

3.2.4 The total air-receive capacity is to be sufficient to provide without replenishment, not less than 12 consecutive starts of each engine. When electrical starting engines have been accepted by the owner the battery capacity shall be such that at least 12 consecutive starts will be possible without recharging the battery but arrangement must be provided to charge the battery in case it is needed. 3.2.5 Parallel Operotion be run for four consecutive

of

Geuerators -All alternators/generators hours under available load conditions.

shall

3.2.6 All other electrical installations shall be tested with the statutory/classification society requirements. 4. PERFORMANCE

in accordance

TRIALS

4.0 The following

performance tests/trials shall be carried out and all relevant observations shall be recorded. During speed and endurance trials, the vessel shall be at design full load draught,

4.1 Endurance Test -- Endurance test shall be carried out for 6 hours at rated power. Fuel consumption, cooling and lubricating oil temperature, etc, shall be recorded. All machinery tests shall be recorded. Allmachinery shall be watched against unsatisfactory operation, excessive vibration and overheating at any point. Suitable runs shall be taken to test the stern gear under full load conditions. 4

IS : 8509 ( Pa+ hopper doors shall be closed. 4.2 Hopper Test -The the dredger materials shall be tested with hopper full. 4.3 Speed Trialmeasured distance, consecutive double Full power the speed runs. speed being

I ) - 1977 for

Tightness

trials shall be carried out over a measured as the mean of three

4.4 Steering and Manoeuvrability Trial - Steering and manoeuvrlability trials shall be carried out to verify the manoeuvring qualities at light or loaded conditions as agreed to between the owner and the builder. In addition tests shall also be carried out on stand-by/hand steering gears to meet the statutory/classification society requirements. 4.5 Ventilation Test -Ventilation statutory requirements. 4.6 Anchor performance classification tests shall be carried out to

Trials-Anchor trials shall be carried out to test the of windlasses and anchoring gear to meet with the statutory/ society requirements. TRIALS

5. DREDGING

5.1 Dredging trials shall be carried out at a site and with materials as agreed to between the owner and the builder. The dredge pumps shall be tested for the rated discharge. The recorded performance shall be verified against the guaranteed performance. 5.2 Dredging shall be done both with and against the tide specified draughts shall be maintained throughout the operation. 5.3 The following taken taken shall be recorded to take full load, to dump the load, and flow velocity of the dredged mixture. The shall be measured subject to the availability of the of the dredge depth of water, trim and list reading, the hopper, doors, and pump engines, during the dredging trials: a) Time b) Time c) and the

Concentration flow velocity equipment,

d) Revolutions f) Dredging

e) Main ~engine revolutions, g) Spoil j) II,) Time samples, taken to dewater taken vacuum

h) Draught k) Time n) Time

to open and close the hopper readings,

Suction

taken to pump out the load pressures. 5

overside,

p) Swell compensator

IS: 8509 ~(Part 5.4 Trials

I ) - 1977
to test the following, wherever applicable:

shall also be made dredging selection discharge

a) Agitation b) Mixture

gear, gear, and load into shore pipe lines.

c) Overside 6. FINAL

of the hopper

UNDER

WATER

INSPECTION
underwater fittings, construction before by the owner.

6.1 The vessel shall be dry-docked

for inspection of machinery and gear, painting, etc, at the port of sailing for final trials at port of delivery, if required

APPENDIX A ( Clauses 0.3 and 2.1 )
SHOP A-l. A-l.1 PROPULSION TEST REQUIREMENTS PUMP ENGINE

AND

DREDGE

Each engine shall be tested individually and preferabIy with its gear box and complete with all controls and instruments. In case combined test is not possible, the gear box alone shall be tested for 4 hours on full load and 1 hour on 10 percent overload. A-1.2 The schedule of tests shall be as follows.

A-1.2.1 Part L,oad `Test - The engine shall be tested under part loads of 25 percent, 50 percent and 75 percent of full load for 30 minutes each and be capable of running smoothly on each test without need for any adjustment. A-1.2.2 Fall Load Test -The engine shall be run in the ahead direction for 2 hours continuously at the guaranteed power and speed. The rate of fuel consumption at full load test shall lie within the values specified by the manufacturer. The allowable excess consumption shall not exceed 5 percent of the rated value. The engine shall be capable of running continuously during this period steadily with a clear exhaust without excessive vibration, without undue heating of bearings and other parts and without unusual engine noise. A-1.2.3 10 Percent Overload Test -Following the full load test, the engine shall run with 10 percent overload for a period of 30 minutes. The engine shall run steadily with clear exhaust gas and without excessive vibrations. 6

IS : 8509 ( Part I ) - 1977 engine shall be operated suddenly from A-1.2.4 Governor Test -The full load to no-load running and the momentary increase in revolutions per minute shall not exceed 20 percent of the rated revolutions at its full load output. A-1.2.5 Endurance Test - This test shall be carried of 5 hours under full load and at the rated speed. out for a period

A-1.2.6 .Non-supmcharing Test - Engines equipped with supercharger shall be tested with supercharger detached recording the output.

exhaust turbofor 20 minutes

of the above A-1.2.7 Dismantling and Inspection - After the completion tests the recorded data shall be examined and any part of engine may be dismantled for examination as may be required by the classification The defective parts shall be changed and societies/statutory authorities. retest carried out as may be necessary. A-1.3 Peak Compression Pressure and Temperature - The temperatures of exhaust gas, fresh circulating water, sea circulating water, lubricating oil, etc. fuel consumption, lubricating oil consumption and the cooling water rate shall be recorded. The maintenance and service manuals shall indicate the maximum allowable temperature and pressure as well as the normal working values. A-2. MAIN AN-D AUXILIARY GENERATOR generator ENGINE engines shall be carried

A-2.1 The tests on main and auxiliary out with full load for 4 hours. A-3. GENERATORS AND MOTORS

A-3.1 These tests shall be carried society standards and shall include: a) heat run test, b) winding and insulation overload

out

to

the

statutory/classification

resistance

test,

c) momentary d) high voltage A-4.

test, and

tests for insulation. PUMPS AND FANS

COMPRESSORS,

A-4.1 The full load test in accordance with statutory/classification society standards shall be carried out to test efficiency, smooth operation and vibration. 7

IS : 8509 ( Part I ) - 1977

A-5. HYDRAULIC
MOTORS A-5.1 A-6. These HOPPER

EQUIPMENT

OTHER

THAN

PUMPS pressure.

AND

shall be tested for leaks at twice the working GEAR

A-6.1 Hopper operating gear shall be tested to a prodf than 1.25 times the safe working load. A-7. WINCHES AND LIFTING GEAR

lo&d of

not

less

Ai7.1 Winches and all the lifting gear shall be tested at load to check if An overload test shall the rated hauling speed is obtained at full load. In case it is be carried out on each of these at 125 percent rated load. not possible it may be carried out on-board.

8

