NAT HIAF IS 17738 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Nara rii cht nad fears — 
TATE Wert ch feu Hha 


Sustainable Development 
of Habitats — Indicators 
for Smart Cities 


ICS 13.020.20 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2022 Price Group 13 


Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Cities 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Cities need indicators to establish their baseline, measure and evaluate their performance. However, existing 
indicators may often not be standardized, consistent, or comparable over time or across cities. To address these 
challenges, a new series of standards are being developed to provide standardized indicators that enable a uniform 
approach to what is measured, and how that measurement is to be undertaken. 


The Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 has taken up the work of formulation of standards in the area of 
development of smart and sustainable cities including indicators for sustainable development of habitats, resilient 
cities and smart cities. Also, the Committee has taken up standard development in the field of smart transportation 
and allocation of parking lots, etc. In fact, smartness acts as an accelerator to sustainable development, hence the 
various concepts and standards being evolved have to be understood from the same consideration. 


The first standard in this series, IS 17000 : 2019 ‘Sustainable development of habitats — Indicator’ is designed to 
assist cities in steering and assessing the performance management of city services and all service provisions as 
well as quality of life. It considers sustainability as its general principle and resilience and inclusiveness as guiding 
concepts in the development of cities. 


This standard complements IS 17000 : 2019 and establishes indicators and indicator definitions and methodologies 
to measure and consider aspects and practices that dramatically increase the pace at which cities improve 
their social, economic and environmental sustainability outcomes, responding to challenges, such as climate 
change, rapid population growth, and political and economic instability by fundamentally improving how cities 
engage society, apply collaborative leadership methods, work across disciplines and city systems, and use data 
information and modern technologies. Another standard in this series is IS 17785 : 2022 ‘Sustainable development 
of habitats — Indicators for resilient cities’. 


These standards when used in conjunction with IS 17000 will help cities to identify indicators to implement smart 
city policies to: 


a) Provide better services for citizens; 


b) Provide a better life environment where smart policies, practices and technology are put to the service 
of citizens; 


c) Achieve their sustainability and environmental goals in a more innovative way; 
d) Identify the need for smart infrastructure; 

e) Facilitate innovation and growth; and 

f) Build a dynamic and innovative economy ready for the challenges of tomorrow. 


For developing this standard, assistance has been derived from ‘ISO 37122 : Sustainable cities and 
communities — Indicators for smart cities’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that specified value in this standard. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


CONTENTS 
Page No. 
1 SCOPE ee 1 
2 REFERENCES u 1 
3 TERMINOLOGY u 1 
4 CITY INDICATORS s 1 
5 ECONOMY m 2 
5.1 Percentage of Service Contracts Providing City Services Which Contain an 
Open Data Policy is 2 
5.2 Survival Rate of New Businesses per 100 000 Population a 2 
5.3 Percentage of Work Force Employed in Occupations in the Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) Sector es 3 
5.4 Percentage of the Labour Force Employed in Occupations in the Education 
and Research and Development Sectors ai 3 
6 EDUCATION a 4 
6.1 Annual Number of Visits to Online Databases Offered by Public Libraries 
per 100 000 Population ze 4 
6.2 Percentage of City Population with Professional Proficiency in One or More 
Foreign Languages wis 4 
6.3 Number of Computers, Laptops, Tablets, or Other Digital Learning Devices 
Available per 1 000 Secondary School Students sa 5 
6.4 Number of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) 
Higher Education Degrees per 100 000 Population = 5 
7 ENERGY za 6 
7.1 Percentage of Electrical and Thermal Energy Produced from Wastewater 
Treatment, Solid Waste and Other Liquid Waste Treatment and Other Waste 
Heat Resources, As a Share of The City’s Total Energy Mix for a Given Year is 6 
7.2 Electrical and Thermal Energy (GJ) Produced from Wastewater Treatment 
Per Capita Per Year sts 7 
7.3 Electrical and Thermal Energy (GJ) Produced From Solid Waste or other 
Liquid Waste Treatment per Capita Per Year ss 7 
7.4 Percentage of the City’s Electricity that is Produced using Decentralized 
Electricity Production Systems vhs 7 
7.5 Storage Capacity of the City’s Energy Grid per Total City Energy Consumption _... 8 
7.6 Percentage of Street Lighting Managed by a Light Performance Management 
System wea 9 
7.7 Percentage of Street Lighting that has been Refurbished and Newly Installed vss 9 
7.8 Percentage of Public Buildings requiring Renovation/Refurbishment wes 9 
7.9 Percentage of Buildings in the City with Smart Electricity/Energy Meters sis 10 


7.10 Number of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations per Registered Electric Vehicle ee 10 


IS 17738 : 2022 


Page No. 
8 ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE sh 11 
8.1 Percentage of Buildings Built or Refurbished within the last 5 years in 
Conformity with Green Building Principles si 11 
8.2 Number of Real-Time Remote Air Quality Monitoring Stations Per 
Square Kilometre (km?) = 11 
8.3 Percentage of Public Buildings Equipped for Monitoring Indoor Air Quality ss 11 
9 FINANCE wa J2 
9.1 Annual Amount of Revenues Collected from the Sharing Economy as a 
Percentage of Own-Source Revenue ae 12 
9.2 Percentage of Payments to the City that are Paid Electronically Based 
on Electronic Invoices ge 
10 GOVERNANCE . 13 
10.1 Annual Number of Online Visits to the Municipal Open Data Portal 
per 100 000 Population wt 13 
10.2 Percentage of City Services Accessible and that can be Requested Online ae 13 
10.3 Average Response Time to Inquiries Made through the City’ 
Non-Emergency Inquiry System (Days) os 13 
10.4 Average Downtime of the City’s IT Infrastructure si 14 
11 HEALTH o l4 
11.1 Percentage of the City’s Population with Online Unified Health File 
Accessible to Health Care Providers . 14 
11.2 Annual Number of Medical Appointments Conducted Online per 
100 000 Population oe 15 
11.3 Percentage of the City Population Registered with Public Alert Systems 
for Air and Water Quality Advisories e 15 
12 HOUSING w S 
12.1 Percentage of Total Land Area that is A Mixed-Use Zone sa 15 
12.2 Percentage of Households with Smart Energy Meters ns 16 
12.3 Percentage of Households with Smart Water Meters i 16 
13 POPULATION AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS w I6 


13.1 Percentage of Public Buildings that are Accessible by Persons with 
Disabilities (PwDs) and the Elderly “sy 16 


13.2 Percentage of Municipal Budget Allocated for Provision of Mobility 
Aids, Devices, and Assistive Technologies to Persons with Disabilities 


(PwDs) and the Elderlies pe 17 

13.3 Percentage of Marked Pedestrian Crosswalks Equipped with Accessible 
Pedestrian Signals & 17 

13.4 Percentage of Municipal Budget Allocated for Provision of Programmes 
Designated for Bridging the Digital Divide ne 17 
14 RECREATION 18 
14.1 Percentage of Public Recreation Services that can be Booked Online si 18 
15 SAFETY 18 


15.1 Percentage of the City Area Covered by Digital Surveillance Cameras a 18 


ii 


IS 17738 : 2022 


Page No. 
16 SOLID WASTE w 18 
16.1 Percentage of Waste Drop-Off Centres (Containers) Equipped with 
Telemetering ss 18 
16.2 Percentage of the City Population that has a Door-to-Door Garbage 
Collection with an Individual Telemetering of Household Waste Quantities s 19 
16.3 Percentage of Total Amount of Waste in the City that is Used to Generate 
Energy ve 19 
16.4 Percentage of Total Amount of Plastic Waste Recycled in the City . -20 
16.5 Percentage of Public Garbage Bins that are Sensor-Enabled Public 
Garbage Bins ag 20 
16.6 Percentage of the City’s Electrical and Electronic Waste that is Recycled wa “20 
17 SPORT AND CULTURE w= 2l 
17.1. Number of Online Bookings to Cultural Facilities per 100 000 Population | 
17.2 Percentage of the City’s Cultural Records that have been Digitised | 
17.3 Number of Public Library Book and E-Book Titles per 100 000 Population as 2d 
17.4 Percentage of City Population that are Active Public Library Users wm, 22 
18 TELECOMMUNICATION wr 22 
18.1 Percentage of the City Population with Access to Sufficient Speed Broadband we 22 
18.2 Percentage of City Area under a White Zone/Dead Spot/Not Covered by 
Telecommunication Connectivity w 23 
18.3 Percentage of City Area Covered by Municipally provided Internet 
Connectivity w 23 
19 TRANSPORTATION a 23 
19.1 Percentage of City Streets and Thorough fares Covered by Real-Time 
Online Traffic Alerts and Information v5 23 
19.2 Number of Users of Sharing Economy Transportation per 100 000 Population w= 24 
19.3 Percentage of Vehicles Registered in the City that are Low-Emission Vehicles w= 24 
19.4 Number of Bicycles available through Municipally provided Bicycle 
Sharing Services per 100 000 Population w= 24 
19.5 Percentage of Public Transport Lines Equipped with a Real-Time System ue 29 
19.6 Percentage of the City Public Transport Network Covered by a Unified 
Payment System se 25 
19.7 Percentage of Public Parking Spaces Equipped with E-Payment Systems . 26 
19.8 Percentage of Public Parking Spaces Equipped with Real-Time Availability 
Systems . 26 
19.9 Percentage of Traffic Lights that are Intelligent/Smart . 26 
19.10 City Area Mapped by Real-Time Interactive Street Maps as a Percentage of 
City’s Total Land Area ay. 27 
19.11 Percentage of Vehicles Registered in the City that are Autonomous Vehicles wa A 
19.12 Percentage of Public Transport Routes with Municipally provided and/or 
Managed Internet Connectivity for Commuters a 27 
19.13 Percentage of Roads Compliant with Autonomous Driving Systems a 2I 


19.14 Percentage of Vehicles Fined for Traffic Violations making a Payment 
through an Online E-Fine System = 28 


iii 


IS 17738 : 2022 


Page No. 
20 URBAN/LOCAL AGRICULTURE AND FOOD SECURITY a 28 
20.1 Annual Percentage of Municipal Budget Spent on Urban Agriculture 
Initiatives se J28 
20.2 Annual Total Collected Municipal Food Waste Sent to a Processing Facility 
for Composting per Capita (In Tonnes) w 28 
21 URBAN PLANNING w, 29 
21.1 Annual number of Citizens Engaged in the Planning Process per 100 000 
Population wn. -29 
21.2 Average Time for Building Permit Approval (Days) Her 129 
21.3 Percentage of Building Permits Submitted through an Electronic Submission 
System as 30 
21.4 Percentage of the City Population Living in Medium-To-High Population 
Densities wt 30 
22 WASTEWATER ve 90 
22.1 Percentage of Treated Wastewater Being Reused ce 20 
22.2 Percentage of Biosolids that is Reused (Dry Matter Tonnes) we ood 
22.3 Energy Derived from Wastewater as a Percentage of Total Energy 
Consumption of the City = 31 
22.4 Percentage of Total Amount of Wastewater in the City that is Used to 
Generate Energy ee 31 
22.5 Percentage of the Wastewater Pipeline Network Monitored by a Real-Time 
Data Tracking Sensor System we 32 
23 WATER wy. o2 
23.1 Percentage of Drinking Water under Water Quality Monitoring by a 
Real-Time Water Quality Monitoring Station wy 32 
23.2 Number of Real-Time ICT-Based Environmental Water Quality Monitoring 
Stations per 100 000 Population ha 93 
23.3 Percentage of the City’s Water Distribution Network Monitored by a Smart 
Water System we 33 
23.4 Percentage of Buildings in the City with Smart Water Meters we 99 
24 REPORTING AND RECORD MAINTENANCE = 34 
ANNEX A MAPPING OF SMART CITY INDICATORS TO UNITED NATIONS 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs) (2015) we 3d 
ANNEX B COMMITTEE COMPOSITION we «42 


IS 17738 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OF HABITATS — 
INDICATORS FOR SMART CITIES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard defines and establishes methodologies 
for a set of indicators for smart cities. 


1.2 This standard is applicable to a new city or any city, 
municipality or local body that undertakes to measure 
its performance in a comparable and verifiable manner, 
irrespective of size and location. These indicators 
can be adopted for the rural areas also, with suitable 
consideration. 


1.3 This standard shall be read in conjunction with 
IS 17000. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute the provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards 
including amendments, if any. 


IS No. Title 
17000: 2019 Sustainable development of 
habitats — Indicators 
17457: 2020 Sustainable development of 
habitats — Vocabulary 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this document, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 17000, IS 17457 and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Smart City — A smart city is one that increases 
the pace at which it provides social, economic, 
and environmental sustainability outcomes. Smart 
cities respond to challenges, such as climate change, 
rapid population growth, and political and economic 
instability by fundamentally improving how they 
engage society, apply collaborative leadership 
methods, work across disciplines and city systems, 
and use data information and modern technologies to 
deliver better services and quality of life to those in 
the city (residents, businesses, visitors), now and for 
the foreseeable future, without unfair disadvantage of 
others or degradation of the natural environment. 


4 CITY INDICATORS 


4.1 Sustainability is a general principle and ‘smart 
city’ is a guiding concept in the development of 
cities. Indicators shall be reported on an annual basis. 
Depending on their objectives in terms of smartness, 
cities will choose the appropriate set of indicators to 
be reported. For data interpretation purposes, cities 
shall take into consideration contextual analysis when 
interpreting results. The local institutional environment 
may affect the capacity to apply indicators. In some 
cases, services may be delivered by the private sector 
or the community itself. 


4.2 The list of indicators is based on the following 
criteria: 


a) Completeness — Indicators should measure all 
relevant aspects for evaluation of the smart city. 


b) Technology neutral — Indicators should not 
favour one technology over another, existing or 
future. 


c) Simplicity — Indicators can be expressed and 
presented in an understandable and clear way. 


d) Validity — Indicators are an accurate reflection of 
the facts and data can be collected using scientific 
techniques. 


e) Verifiability — Indicators are verifiable and 
reproducible. Methodologies are rigorous enough 
to give certainty to the level of implementation of 
the criteria. 


f) Availability — Quality data are available or it is 
feasible to initiate a secure and reliable monitoring 
process that will make it available in the future. 


4.3 When interpreting the results of a particular service 
area, it is important to review the results of multiple 
types of indicators across themes; focusing on a 
single indicator can lead to a distorted or incomplete 
conclusion. Elements of aspiration should also be taken 
into consideration in the analysis. 


4.4 Users may also consider the following aspects 
which shall be clearly stated in the report and justified: 


a) Indicators can be aggregated to larger 
administrative areas (metropolitan region/district 


etc.); 
b) Indicators can be grouped together for analysis 
when taking into consideration holistic 


characteristics of a city; and 


IS 17738 : 2022 


c) This set of indicators may be complemented 
by other indicator sets in order to have a more 
comprehensive holistic approach for the analysis 
of smart and sustainable cities. 


Itis alsoimportant to acknowledge potential antagonistic 
effects of the outcome of particular indicators, either 
positive or negative, when analysing results. 


4.5 Data sources may vary depending on the cities 
and may be different from the ones indicated in this 
standard. However, data shall be verifiable, auditable, 
trustworthy and justified. Cities may not have access to 
all data required for indicators within this standard as 
the services are performed by a third party. However, 
it is still important for cities to obtain this data. An 
important component of smart cities is the role of 
public/private partnerships and this collaboration 
including sharing of data should be encouraged. 
NOTE — Cities using this standard shall report at least 
50 percent of the indicators in this standard as it is meant to be 
used in conjunction with IS 17000. ‘Smart Cities’ is a relatively 
new concept that cities worldwide are beginning to address and 
it is important that cities report progressively more indicators 
in this standard over time. 
For each indicator, the correspondence with the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is 
noted is given at Annex A. 


5 ECONOMY 


5.1 Percentage of Service Contracts Providing City 
Services Which Contain an Open Data Policy 


5.1.1 General 


An open data policy demonstrates a city’s commitment 
to better manage business information throughout the 
information lifecycle. Identifying and making data 
accessible helps to ensure that the public is informed 
and engaged through a transparent, accountable and 
accessible government. 


5.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of service contracts providing city 
services which contain an open data policy shall be 
calculated as the total number of service contracts 
providing city services which contain an open data 
policy (numerator) divided by the total number of 
service contracts in the city (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of service contracts providing city services 
which have an open data policy. 


Open data policy shall refer to data that are to be 
provided to and used by the city which can be analysed 
and open to the public, including residents and non- 
residents of the city. 


Service contracts shall refer to agreements with 
businesses providing city services. 


City services shall refer to services provided by the 
city and typically cover the following areas: utilities, 
garbage and recycling; public safety; fire department; 
roads and traffic; recreation; construction; bylaws, 
violations and enforcement; permits and licences; 
planning; building; policies, projects and initiatives; 
rentals and catering of city buildings; water, wastewater 
and sewers; and property taxes and utilities. 


5.1.3 Data Sources 


Data from service contracts should be sourced 
from relevant city departments, or market research 
companies and survey companies. 


5.1.4 Data Interpretation 


A higher percentage of service contracts providing 
city services which have data openly available leads 
to greater transparency of city service performance 
and a technologically forward community. This allows 
people to review the data and performance of businesses 
contracted by the city to complete city services that are 
not normally covered by performance measurements 
published by the city. 


5.2 Survival Rate 
100 000 Population 


of New Businesses per 


5.2.1 General 


New businesses make a positive contribution to local 
economies, and start-up activity can signal a city’s 
economic potential. New businesses can potentially 
contribute a substantial number of new jobs to 
the economy and tend to have faster employment 
growth rates, especially those in innovation-driven/ 
technologically focused enterprises, such as computer 
or software development. 


5.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The survival rate of new businesses per 
100 000 population shall be calculated as the survival 
rate of new businesses in the city (numerator) divided by 
1/100 000 of the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the survival rate of new 
businesses per 100 000 population. 


Survival rate shall refer to those new businesses 
which have been created during the last two years, 
registered in the city and still operating during the last 
year (numerator) divided by the total number of new 
businesses which have been created during the last two 
years and registered in the city (denominator). 


Businesses shall refer to companies or enterprises in 
the city. 


These businesses can be considered to have innovative 
business processes and/or products. Cities reporting on 
this indicator shall specify the sectors and categories 
of innovative businesses that are included in this 
calculation. The enterprise is the smallest combination 


of legal unit, which is an organizational unit producing 
goods or services. Business can either be categorized 
as simple (one operating entity) or complex (multiple 
operating entities) as stated in 4.6 of IS 17000. 
An innovative business refers to a business that is 
implementing new ideas, creating dynamic products or 
improving existing services in any industry 


5.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on new businesses should be obtained through 
relevant city departments or ministries that oversee the 
approval of new business licenses or new registrations 
of businesses. 


5.3 Percentage of Work Force Employed 
in Occupations in the Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) Sector 


5.3.1 General 


ICT sector is a combination of manufacturing and 
services industries that capture, transmit and display 
data and information electronically. With the rapid 
development of ICT and the mainstreaming of ICT into 
everyday life, the link between ICT technologies and 
human development has never been more evident. ICT 
has long been recognized as key enablers for bridging 
the digital divide and achieving the three dimensions 
of sustainable development that is economic growth, 
environmental balance and social inclusion; as well 
as promoting innovation in society. Thus, having a 
work force to develop the ICT sector will be one of 
the main drivers for economic growth, augmenting 
labour productivity and enhancing international 
competitiveness via innovative ICT development, 
including by the wider use of ICT products and services 
across the economy and society. 


Those implementing this Indian Standard should report 
on this indicator in accordance with the following 
requirements. 


5.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of work force employed in occupations 
in ICT sector shall be calculated as the number of city 
residents in the work force employed in occupations in 
the ICT sector (numerator) divided by the city’s total 
work force (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
work force employed in occupations in the ICT sector. 


The ICT sector shall refer to a combination of 
manufacturing and services industries that capture, 
transmit and display data and information electronically. 
For manufacturing industries, the products of a 
candidate industry must be intended to fulfil the 
function of information processing and communication 
including transmission and display; and must use 
electronic processing to detect, measure and/or record 
physical phenomena or control a physical process. For 


IS 17738 : 2022 


services industries, the products of a candidate industry 
must be intended to enable the function of information 
processing and communication by electronic means. 


The workforce shall refer to the sum of persons in 
employment plus persons in unemployment who are 
legally eligible to work. Thus, working-age shall refer 
to all persons that are the same age or older than the 
legal working age in the jurisdiction of reference. This 
indicator shall exclude child labour, which is labour 
completed by persons 14 years of age or younger. 


5.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on employment by industry should be obtained 
through work force surveys or city employment 
assessments administered by labour department. 


5.4 Percentage of the Labour Force Employed in 
Occupations in the Education and Research and 
Development Sectors 


5.4.1 General 


As cities and communities strengthen their focus on the 
development of their knowledge economy the role of 
the education and research and development industries 
are all the more important in the development of human 
capital. Both of these industries play a critical role in 
economic development, promoting innovative thought 
processes to enhance existing products or services or 
to develop new products and services. In addition, 
the education sector also includes those employed 
in all levels of the educational system, ensuring that 
citizens have access to education and receive effective 
educational services. Thus, the work force employed 
in these two industries aid in the development or 
enhancement of products and services, as well as 
ensure that citizens receive quality education to become 
actively involved in the knowledge economy. 


5.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of work force employed in occupations 
in the education and research and development sectors 
shall be calculated as the number of city residents in the 
work force employed in occupations in the education and 
research and development sectors (numerator) divided 
by the city’s total work force (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of the work force employed in occupations 
in the education and research and development sectors. 


The education sector shall refer to organizations 
primarily engaged in providing instruction and training 
in a wide variety of subjects. This instruction and 
training is provided by specialized establishments, such 
as schools, colleges, universities and training centres. 


The research and development section shall refer to 
organizations primarily engaged in conducting original 
investigation, undertaken on a systematic basis to gain 
new knowledge (research), and in the application of 


IS 17738 : 2022 


research findings or other scientific knowledge for the 
creation of new or significantly improved products or 
processes (experimental development). Cities shall 
refer to organizations that includes the activities of 
three types of research and development: 


a) Basic research — Experimental or theoretical work 
undertaken primarily to acquire new knowledge 
of the underlying foundations of phenomena and 
observable facts, without particular application or 
use in view; 


b) Applied research Original investigation 
undertaken in order to acquire new knowledge, 
directed primarily towards a specific practical aim 
or objective; and 


c) Experimental development — Systematic work, 
drawing on existing knowledge gained from 
research and/or practical experience, directed to 
producing new materials, products and devices, 
to installing new processes, systems and services, 
and to improving substantially those already 
produced or installed. 


The numerator of this indicator shall be calculated 
as the sum of the total number of persons employed 
in occupations in these two sectors, education and 
research and development. 


The work force shall refer to the sum of persons in 
employment plus persons in unemployment who are 
legally eligible to work. Thus, working-age shall refer 
to all persons that are the same age or older than the 
legal working age in the jurisdiction of reference. This 
indicator shall exclude child labour, which is labour 
completed by persons 14 years of age or younger. 


5.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on employment by industry should be obtained 
through work force surveys or city employment 
assessments administered by Labour Department. 


6 EDUCATION 


6.1 Annual Number of Visits to Online Databases 
Offered by Public Libraries per 100 000 Population 


6.1.1 General 


Libraries help to educate the general population, in 
addition to providing civic spaces for interaction. 
Online databases are an important supplement to 
printed resources provided by libraries, such as books, 
since they are easily accessible and feature a variety of 
data through virtual means. 


6.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual number of visits to online databases offered 
by public libraries per 100 000 population shall be 
calculated as the total number of visits to online databases 
offered by public libraries (numerator) divided by one 


100 000" of the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the annual number of 
visits to online databases offered by public libraries per 
100 000 population. 


Online databases shall refer to databases of articles, 
encyclopedias, consumer reviews and much more that 
you can find online. Online databases available through 
public libraries refer to online databases where access 
is provided by public libraries, and available for use at 
public libraries or remotely. Online databases available 
through public libraries allow access for public library 
users to informational materials that might otherwise 
be accessible only via academic collections. Examples 
of online databases available through public libraries 
may include databases of scientific, legal, and scholarly 
journals, newspaper archives, curricula to learn new 
skills, and other resources. 


A visit shall refer to an individual visitor who arrives 
at a public library’s online database(s) and proceeds to 
browse and peruse the online database(s). A visit counts 
all visitors, no matter how many times the same visitor 
may have been to a public library’s online database(s). 


Public libraries shall refer libraries within a city’s 
administrative boundaries. 


6.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of visits to online databases offered 
by public libraries should be sourced through library 
network. 


6.2 Percentage of City Population with Professional 
Proficiency in One or More Foreign Languages 


6.2.1 General 


Foreign language skills are indicative of a diverse, 
employable workforce. They also suggest a highly 
successful educational programming. 


6.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city population with professional 
proficiency in one or more foreign languages shall be 
calculated as the total number of people who are able 
to communicate in one or more foreign languages 
with professional proficiency (numerator) divided 
by the city’s total population (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of city population with professional 
proficiency in one or more foreign languages. 

A foreign language shall refer to a language spoken 


with professional proficiency other than one of the 
country’s official languages in which the city is located. 


Professional proficiency shall refer to the following 
level of competence: 


a) Able to speak the language with sufficient 
structural accuracy, vocabulary and cohesiveness 


in discourse to participate effectively in most 
formal and informal conversations on practical, 
social, and professional topics; 


b) Understanding is essentially complete; 


c) Discussing with fluency and ease, abstract issues 
and special fields of competence and interest; 


d) Supporting opinion and hypothesize; 


e) Providing a structured argument that is clear and 
well organized; and 


f) while the influence of the speaker’s first language 
can be noticed (in pronunciation, grammar and 
vocabulary), there should not be any patterned 
errors and errors should never distract the listener 
or interfere with communication. 


6.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on foreign languages spoken by the city population 
should be sourced using census data. 


6.2.4 Data Interpretation 


A high percentage of residents who can communicate 
in more than one foreign language indicates that the 
city has a well-educated and diverse population that 
can handle interactions that extend beyond national 
borders. Globalization, economic growth in developing 
economies and improved transport infrastructure have 
resulted in a considerable shift in world trading patterns 
and a higher proportion of the world’s population being 
able to visit other countries, whether for business, 
pleasure or other reasons. 


Foreign language skills have the potential to 
increase one’s mobility, employability and personal 
development. 


6.3 Number of Computers, Laptops, Tablets, or 
Other Digital Learning Devices Available per 
1 000 Secondary School Students 


6.3.1 General 


Computer literacy is becoming an essential aspect 
of professional employability and also allows an 
alternative form of civic engagement for citizens. 
The increase in accessibility of electronic devices 
for students, as well as the exposure to computers, 
laptops, tablets, or other digital learning devices, can 
enhance a student’s computer literacy. In addition, 
computer literacy allows citizens to access a broader 
array of information, where such information literacy 
empowers people in all walks of life to seek, evaluate, 
use and create information effectively to achieve their 
personal, social, occupational and educational goals. 


6.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of computers, laptops, tablets, or other 
digital learning devices available per 1 000 secondary 
school students shall be calculated as the total number 


IS 17738 : 2022 


of computers, laptops, tablets, or other digital learning 
devices with internet access available to secondary 
school students attending secondary school in the city 
(numerator) divided by one 1 000" of the city’s total 
secondary school population (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of computers, laptops, 
tablets, or other digital learning devices available per 
1000 secondary students. 


6.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of electronic devices with internet 
access should be sourced from local school boards, or a 
Ministry or Department of Education. 


6.4 Number of Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM) Higher Education Degrees 
per 100 000 Population 


6.4.1 General 


Receiving higher education provides individuals with 
a foundation for meaningful participation in the labour 
force and helps reduce poverty and inequality. This 
pillar of human development is widely recognized as 
the main avenue for social mobility. All disciplines 
taught by higher education institutions benefit 
society in some way, such as science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines, 
which are critical to the technological development and 
innovation of a city. STEM education helps to create 
critical thinkers, increase science literacy, and enable 
the next generation of innovators. Furthermore, STEM 
is important because science pervades every part of 
our lives, and the demand for STEM degree holders is 
increasing with the growing demand for innovators of 
products and processes that will help sustain, as well as 
promote, economic growth. 


Those implementing this Indian Standard should report 
on this indicator in accordance with the following 
requirements. 


6.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM) higher education degrees per 
100 000 population shall be calculated as the number 
of people holding higher education degrees with a 
specialization or major in a discipline within a STEM 
subject (numerator) divided by one 100 000% of the 
city’s total population (denominator). The result shall 
be expressed as the number of STEM higher education 
degrees per 100 000 population. 


STEM higher education degrees shall refer to higher 
education degrees specializing in subjects within the 
fields of science, technology, engineering, medicine and 
mathematics, and is intended to capture a broad field of 
education and employment opportunities, beyond the 
more narrow fields of science and mathematics. STEM 
programmes of study are typically classified based 


IS 17738 : 2022 


upon several occupational clusters: computer science 
and technology; mathematical sciences; digital music 
and digital arts, engineering and surveying; and natural, 
physical and life sciences. 


This indicator shall only include people that comprise 
the city’s total population, and shall not include 
temporary residents or foreign students. 


6.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on higher education degrees by subject should 
be sourced from local tertiary/post-secondary degree, 
diploma or certificate granting institutions, or the 
relevant Ministry or Department of Education, if 
available. If higher education data from these sources 
is not available, data from surveys or censuses may be 
used. 


6.4.4 Data Interpretation 


This indicator provides an overview of the skill set of 
the population. These data can also have an impact 
on surrounding cities because the population with 
STEM degrees can work in those cities or, in other 
contexts, may force lower educated people to move to 
surrounding cities, creating intellectual ghettos in the 
city. Although only STEM disciplines are considered 
for this indicator, social science and other disciplines 
are also important for the city’s labour force and can 
contribute to the smartness of the city. 


7 ENERGY 


7.1 Percentage of Electrical and Thermal Energy 
Produced from Wastewater Treatment, Solid Waste 
and Other Liquid Waste Treatment and Other 
Waste Heat Resources, As a Share of The City’s 
Total Energy Mix for a Given Year 


7.1.1 General 


Waste heat is an endogenous energy resource of every 
city. Waste heat can be obtained from waste water and 
solid waste treatment plants or any other industrial 
processes, as well as from the tertiary and transport 
sectors 


Wastewater is a renewable resource that conveys 
thermal and chemical energy. In some instances, 
wastewater is found to contain nearly five times the 
amount of energy needed to process and treat the 
wastewater. It is important for cities to recognize the 
potential of wastewater as a sustainable energy source 
and utilize wastewater in their energy source mix. 


Furthermore, wastewater treatment plants use a lot of 
energy and create greenhouse gas emissions, but they 
also have the potential to be sources of renewable 
energy for cities. Wastewater treatment plants can use 
sewage to generate energy on site, where this energy can 
then be used to help operate the wastewater treatment 
plants helping to reduce a wastewater treatment plant’s 


operating costs, energy consumption and greenhouse 
gas emissions. 


Waste heat can be categorized into high enthalpy and 
low enthalpy. While high enthalpy waste heat allows the 
production of electricity, low enthalpy heat can be used 
directly for heating (and even cooling) of buildings, 
typically through district heating and cooling networks. 


7.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The electrical and thermal energy (kWh) produced 
from waste water treatment, solid waste treatment 
and other waste heat resources as part of the city’s 
energy mix (in percent) shall be calculated as the total 
amount of electrical and thermal energy expressed in 
kWh produced from waste water treatment, solid waste 
treatment and other waste heat resources (numerator) 
divided by the city’s total end-use energy demand. The 
result shall be expressed as the percentage of electrical 
and thermal energy in kWh produced from waste water 
treatment, solid waste treatment and other waste heat 
resources on the total energy mix of the city for a given 
year. 


Where possible, data from wastewater treatment, solid 
waste treatment and other waste heat resources shall be 
included and listed individually. 


Thermal | Electrical | Total energy 
energy energy (percent of 
(percent | (percent of | the total 
of the the total | energy mix) 
total energy 
energy mix) 
mix) 


Waste water 
resource 


Solid waste 
treatment 


Other waste 
heat sources 


Total 
(percent) 


Waste heat shall be considered as all residual thermal 
energy generated in the city which is not used, as well 
as potential chemical energy sources that are not valued 
as energy. 


Wastewater shall refer to the physical, chemical, 
and biological processes used to remove, reduce, 
or neutralize contaminants from wastewater before 
discharging it into a water body. Wastewater treatment 
can include primary, secondary or tertiary treatment, or 
wastewater treatment of higher standard. 


Solid waste treatment shall refer to the physical, 
chemical, and biological processes used to remove, 
reduce, or neutralize contaminants from solid waste 
before recycling, recovery or final disposal. 


7.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the amount of electrical and thermal energy 
produced from waste water treatment, solid waste 
treatment and other waste heat resources should be 
sourced from city departments or ministries that 
oversee such matters, as well as from regulators, local 
utility providers and urban local bodies. 


7.2 Electrical and Thermal Energy (GJ) Produced 
from Wastewater Treatment Per Capita Per Year 


7.2.1 General 


Wastewater is a renewable resource that conveys 
thermal and chemical energy. In some instances, 
wastewater is found to contain nearly five times the 
amount of energy needed to process and treat the 
wastewater. It is important for cities to recognize the 
potential of wastewater as a sustainable energy source 
and utilize wastewater in their energy source mix. 


Furthermore, wastewater treatment plants use a lot of 
energy and create greenhouse gas emissions, but they 
also have the potential to be sources of renewable 
energy for cities. Wastewater treatment plants can use 
sewage to generate energy on site, where this energy can 
then be used to help operate the wastewater treatment 
plants helping to reduce a wastewater treatment plant’s 
operating costs, energy consumption and greenhouse 
gas emissions. 


7.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The electrical and thermal energy (GJ) produced from 
wastewater treatment per capita per year shall be 
calculated as the total amount of electrical and thermal 
energy expressed in GJ produced from wastewater 
treatment in the city (numerator) divided by the city’s 
total population (denominator). The result shall be 
expressed as the amount of electrical and thermal 
energy in GJ produced from wastewater treatment per 
capita for a given year. 


Wastewater treatment shall refer to the physical, 
chemical and biological processes used to remove, 
reduce or neutralize contaminants from wastewater 
before discharging into a water body. Wastewater 
treatment can include primary, secondary or tertiary 
wastewater treatment, or wastewater treatment of a 
higher standard. 


7.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the amount of electrical and thermal energy 
produced from wastewater treatment should be sourced 
from city departments or ministries that oversee 
such matters, as well as from regulators, local utility 
providers and urban local bodies. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


7.3 Electrical and Thermal Energy (GJ) Produced 
From Solid Waste or other Liquid Waste Treatment 
per Capita Per Year 


7.3.1 General 


While reduction, recycling and composting can do their 
part to mitigate the environmental impacts of municipal 
solid waste, not all types of materials can be practically 
and economically recycled in an environmentally 
beneficial manner. This leftover solid waste might 
therefore present an opportunity to recover energy, 
using new and possibly cleaner technologies. Other 
liquid waste such as fats, oils and grease are also a 
source of energy. 


7.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The electrical and thermal energy (GJ) produced from 
solid waste or other liquid waste treatment per capita 
per year shall be calculated as the total amount of 
electrical and thermal energy expressed in GJ produced 
from solid waste and other liquid waste treatment in the 
city (numerator) divided by the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
amount of electrical and thermal energy in GJ per 
capita for a given year. 


This shall include the on-site use of recovered electrical 
and thermal energy at the wastewater facilities and 
off-site use by external parties. 


Wastewater treatment shall refer to the physical, 
chemical and biological processes used to remove, 
reduce or neutralize contaminants from wastewater 
before discharging into a water body. Wastewater 
treatment can include primary, secondary or tertiary 
wastewater treatment or wastewater treatment of a 
higher standard. 


7.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the amount of electrical and thermal energy 
produced from solid waste treatment should be sourced 
from city departments or ministries that oversee such 
matters, as well as from regulators and local utility 
providers/discoms. 


7.4 Percentage of the City’s Electricity that 
is Produced using Decentralized Electricity 
Production Systems 


7.4.1 General 


A decentralized electricity production system can be 
defined as locating electricity production closer to 
the site of consumption, such as locating electricity 
production facilities within a city rather than sourcing 
electricity from a regional electricity production 


IS 17738 : 2022 


facility that is most likely distant from a city. Although 
a relatively new approach for the power industry 
and utility providers, a decentralized system may 
potentially lead to more optimal use of renewable 
energy sources, which in turn can reduce fossil fuel use 
and increase energy efficiency and sustainability of a 
region. Therefore, tracking the amount of decentralized 
electricity production can be used to assess a region’s 
potential for utilizing renewable energy sources and 
expanding access to clean energy services, such as 
Combined Heat and Power that may not otherwise 
have been available due to distance from centralized 
electricity production facilities. 


Besides the environmental issues of decentralized 
electricity production mentioned before, that is, 
adoption of renewable energy sources and reduction 
of primary energy usage, decentralized electricity 
production can also be advantageous for the resilience 
of the electrical grid of the city, particularly during a 
crisis event, such as a large storm. 


7.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s electricity that is produced 
using decentralized electricity production systems shall 
be calculated as the amount of electricity produced by 
decentralized electricity production systems/facilities in 
kilowatt-hours (kWh) (numerator) divided by the total 
amount of electricity consumed in the city in the same 
units as the numerator (kWh)-this includes electricity 
produced by both centralized and decentralized 
electricity production facilities (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of the city’s electricity that is produced 
using decentralized electricity production systems. 


Decentralized electricity, also referred to as distributed 
electricity production shall refer to electricity 
production at, or near the point of use, irrespective 
of size, technology, or fuel used-both off-grid and 
on-grid. In addition, decentralized electricity production 
refers to the wide range of technologies that include 
wind turbines or plants, photovoltaic (solar) panels, 
micro-turbines and modular internal combustion 
engines, etc. 


7.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on the amount of electricity produced by both 
centralized and decentralized electricity production 
systems/facilities should be sourced from local 
utilities, and relevant city departments or ministries 
that oversee energy production. It may be acceptable 
to use estimates based on energy audits performed on 
sample sites to address the electricity production that 
is immediately used as auto consumption, which may 
not be communicated to the electrical utilities/power 
discoms. 


7.5 Storage Capacity of the City’s Energy Grid per 
Total City Energy Consumption 


7.5.1 General 


The peak energy demand is a less spoken vector that 
increases energy costs and limits the penetration of 
renewables. Smart grids will accommodate energy 
storage (typically electrical and thermal storage, 
but also ‘clean’ fuels such as hydrogen) to reduce 
demand peaks and transfer energy usage to periods 
of intermittent renewable energy production. Efficient 
storage capacity is essential to balance the supply and 
demand for energy in a region, and it can be achieved 
by several strategies, such as: 


a) Electricity storage, onsite or nearby, including 
chemical storage, such as hydrogen; 


b) Electrical storage of electrical vehicles (excluding 
hybrid vehicles); 


c) Thermal storage (for example, heat and cold 
storage in nearby district heating and cooling 
schemes); 


d) Geothermal energy storage (for example, some 
heat pump/chiller-driven district heating and 
cooling schemes); and 


e) Thermal mass of buildings considered onsite 
thermal storage if associated with predictive heat 
consumption. 


7.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


Storage capacity of the city’s energy grids per total 
city energy consumption shall be calculated as the total 
amount of energy that can be stored annually on the 
city’s electrical grid and thermal grids (district heating 
and cooling schemes) in gigajoules (GJ) (numerator) 
divided by the city’s total energy consumption 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
storage capacity of the city’s energy grid per total city 
energy consumption. 


Energy storage shall refer to the process of converting 
energy into a stored form that can later be converted 
back into energy when needed. Thus, storage capacity 
shall refer to the amount of energy capable of being 
stored. For total end-use energy consumption refer to 
IS 17000. 


Where possible, specify and report the types of energy 
consumption used in the calculation. Also, if the energy 
storage facility is not within the city boundaries, the 
city should report the distance of the energy storage 
facility. 


7.5.3 Data Sources 


Data for storage capacity should be sourced from 
relevant city departments that oversee the energy grid 
of the city, or local utilities provider. 


7.6 Percentage of Street Lighting Managed by a 
Light Performance Management System 


7.6.1 General 


Remotely managed light points contribute to higher 
energy efficiency, and can be optimized and adapted 
concerning switch on and off and dimming to use in any 
area of the city. In addition, remotely managed lights 
can also potentially improve the safety in the city, where 
any failure of a light point which leads to not sufficiently 
illuminated streets can be immediately monitored 
and localized to take care for fast repairs. Lastly, real 
energy consumption per light point can be measured and 
reported accurately with light management system, in 
order to better monitor energy cost and CO, reduction 
schemes. 


7.6.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of street lighting managed by a light 
performance management system shall be calculated 
as the number of light points that can be controlled by 
a light performance management system (numerator) 
divided by the number of total light points in the city 
(denominator). The results shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of street lighting 
managed by a light performance management system. 


Controlled by a light performance management system 
shall refer to the ability to monitor light points, set 
schedules for switching off/on and adjust light levels 
by dimming. This means a light point can be changed 
individually and remotely with an ICT-based system, 
which is connected via a communication network to the 
light points. This system shall also be able to accurately 
measure the electrical energy consumed by the light point 
and indicate via the ICT-based system to the operator 
any occurring failure affecting the light performance of 
the light point. 


7.6.3 Data Sources 


Data on remote management of lighting should be 
sourced from urban local bodies/discoms responsible for 
street lighting inventory and street light management, 
and tracking the number of remotely managed light 
points and the number of existing light points. 


7.7 Percentage of Street Lighting that has been 
Refurbished and Newly Installed 


7.7.1 General 


Street lighting can account for up to 15-50 percent of 
the total electricity consumption of municipalities. 
Refurbishing city street lights can help improve 
energy efficiency, thus reducing street lighting energy 
consumption. In addition, the recent market introduction 
of energy efficient technologies for street lighting offers 
high cost savings with comparatively short pay-back 
times. The annual energy and maintenance cost savings 
may then possibly cover the investment and capital costs. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


7.7.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of street lighting that has been 
refurbished and newly installed within the year shall 
be expressed as the number of refurbished and newly 
installed light points (numerator) within the year divided 
by the total number of light points (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of street lighting that has been 
refurbished and newly installed. 


Where possible, cities shall report and indicate 
separately the percentage of street lighting that is 
refurbished and newly installed. 


Refurbishment of existing street light systems, for 
example upgrading ballasts, shall refer to activities that 
aim not only to decrease energy consumption but also 
improve energy efficiency of the street lighting system. 
Newly installed as well as retrofitted street lighting 
for upgrading to high efficiency technologies shall be 
included. 


A light point shall refer to any single source of public 
street lighting, such as a street light, light pole, 
lamppost, street lamp, light standard, or lamp standard. 


7.7.3 Data Sources 


Data on street lighting refurbishment and street lighting 
systems should be sourced from urban local body/power 
discoms responsible for street lighting inventory, and 
tracking the number of new light points and the number 
of existing light points. 


7.8 Percentage of Public Buildings requiring 
Renovation/Refurbishment 


7.8.1 General 


Buildings are the largest energy consumers in most 
cities. Reduced and efficient energy use can create 
substantial savings and can enhance stability of 
the energy supply. As such, buildings requiring 
renovation/refurbishment can hinder progress to reduce 
energy consumption thus contributing more to climate 
change and other negative externalities. 


7.8.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public buildings requiring renovation/ 
refurbishment shall be calculated as the square metres 
of public buildings requiring renovation/refurbishment 
(numerator), divided by the total square metres of 
public buildings (denominator). The result shall then 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage 
of public buildings requiring renovation/refurbishment. 


Public building shall refer to a government-owned 
or leased building that functions as a municipal 
and administrative office, library, recreation centre, 
hospital, school, fire station or police station. 


Renovation/refurbishment shall refer to the 
remodelling, refashioning and general renovation of 


IS 17738 : 2022 


a building to gain better energy use, improvements to 
structural integrity and conformity to safety standards. 
Buildings requiring renovation/refurbishment shall be 
assessed by a city’s audit and registration of buildings 
in need of renovation/refurbishment. Renovation 
and refurbishment of a building shall not include the 
demolition/removal and replacement of buildings, but 
does include buildings requiring renewal. 


7.8.3 Data Sources 


Data on public buildings requiring 
renovation/refurbishment should be sourced from urban 
local body or agencies that oversee the building and 
maintenance of buildings in the city. 


7.9 Percentage of Buildings in the City with Smart 
Electricity/Energy Meters 


7.9.1 General 


Smart energy meters record and display the consumption 
of energy in real time. Smart meter data can be sent 
to a central location wirelessly, thus providing energy 
providers with the means to understand how and 
when power is being used to better plan and conserve 
energy. Also, smart meter data help consumers better 
understand and monitor energy usage. 


7.9.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of buildings in the city with smart 
energy meters shall be calculated as the number 
of buildings in the city with smart energy meters 
(numerator) divided by the total number of buildings 
in the city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the percentage of buildings in 
the city with smart energy meters. 


Data for public and commercial and industrial buildings 
shall be included and listed individually, as follows: 


Number of Total Percentage 
buildings | number of | of buildings 
in the city | buildings in the city 
with smart | in the city | with smart 
electricity electricity 

meters meters 
Public 
buildings 
Commercial 
and Industrial 
buildings 


Public buildings shall refer to a government-owned 
or leased building that functions as a municipal 
and administrative office, library, recreation centre, 
hospital, school, fire station or police station. 


Commercial and industrial buildings shall refer to those 
which have been designated by the city for commercial 
and industrial use. 


A smart energy meter shall refer to an energy meter that 
includes real-time digital displays or that is available 


10 


through a real-time online application, so a customer 
can better understand their energy usage. Also, a 
smart energy meter can digitally send meter readings 
to an energy supplier for more accurate energy bills, 
and for better planning and conservation of energy by 
providers. 


7.9.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of buildings in the city with 
smart electricity meter figures should be sourced from 
discoms that have data on local smart energy meters. 


7.10 Number of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations 
per Registered Electric Vehicle 


7.10.1 General 


Unlike conventional vehicles that use gasoline or 
diesel-powered engines, electric vehicles (EVs) are 
powered by electricity from batteries. EVs therefore 
emit fewer greenhouse gases and tailpipe pollutants 
than conventional vehicles. EVs are also cheaper to 
operate because fuel costs are minimal or nil. However, 
with limited motor and battery capacity (meaning 
shorter travel range), electric cars need regular and 
convenient access to vehicle (that is, battery) charging 
stations. 


7.10.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of electric vehicle charging stations per 
registered electric vehicle shall be calculated as the 
total number of electric vehicle charging stations in 
the city (numerator) divided by the total number of 
registered electric vehicles in the city (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the number of electric 
vehicle charging stations per registered electric vehicle. 


Electric vehicle shall refer to any means by which 
something or someone is carried or conveyed with an 
engine and wheels (including cars, buses, motorcycles 
and auto rickshaws, but not trains) and which runs 
fully or partially on a battery-powered electric motor. 
Electric vehicles, therefore, require ‘plugging in’ to an 
electricity source to recharge their batteries. There are 
two types of electric vehicles: 


a) ‘Hybrid’ vehicles that are powered from a gasoline 
or diesel engine as well as an electric motor; and 


b) ‘Battery electric’ vehicles that are powered 
exclusively from a battery and require no liquid 
fuels. 


Charging station shall refer to publicly accessible 
equipment (also called ‘electric vehicle supply 
equipment’ or EVSE) that supplies electric energy for 
recharging battery electric vehicles. Charging stations 
are often provided in municipal parking locations by 
electric utility companies or at retail shopping centres 
by private companies. Some charging stations have 
advanced features, such as smart metering, cellular 
capability and network connectivity. 


Registered vehicle shall refer to any vehicle that has 
been officially listed or recorded with a government 
authority and that displays a vehicle registration plate 
and/or a vehicle registration certificate. 


7.10.3 Data Sources 


Data for this indicator should be obtained from 
municipal or state departments or ministries responsible 
for transportation and vehicle registration in the city. 


8 ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE 


8.1 Percentage of Buildings Built or Refurbished 
within the last 5 years in Conformity with Green 
Building Principles 


8.1.1 General 


Buildings that are constructed in conformity with green 
building principles are substantially more sustainable. 
‘Green’ buildings are built with higher design standards 
which dramatically reduce energy consumption. Green 
buildings can also be built or refurbished according 
to Green building standards, which offer continual 
building benchmarking to track environmental 
performance. 


8.1.2 Indicator requirements 


The percentage of buildings built or refurbished within 
the last 5 years in conformity with green building 
principles shall be calculated as the total number of 
buildings built or refurbished within the last 5 years in 
conformity with green building principles (numerator) 
divided by the city’s total number of buildings built 
or refurbished in the last 5 years (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of buildings built or refurbished within 
the last 5 years in conformity with green building 
principles. 


Refurbishment of buildings shall refer to activities 
that have an aim to not only help to decrease energy 
consumption but also improve energy efficiency 
and lessen the environmental impacts of a building. 
Refurbishment shall not include the removal and/or 
replacement of buildings. 


Green building principles shall refer to a set of guidelines 
and criteria against which a building can be judged 
to have been built in conformity to ‘green building’. 
Green building is the practice of creating structures and 
using processes that are environmentally responsible 
and resource-efficient throughout a building’s 
life-cycle from siting to design, construction, operation, 
maintenance, renovation and deconstruction. 


8.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of buildings built or refurbished 
within the last 5 years in conformity with a green 
building principle should be sourced from urban 


IS 17738 : 2022 


local body or agencies that oversee the construction 
and maintenance of buildings in the city, or oversee 
building permits and standards. 


8.2 Number of Real-Time Remote Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations Per Square Kilometre (km?) 


8.2.1 General 


A remotely operated, real-time system can help to 
monitor climate change impacts on environment (for 
example, air quality). Such systems can also provide 
real-time observations, data processing, and analysis, 
giving people timely information on the safety of a 
city’s air quality. 


8.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of real-time remote air quality monitoring 
stations per square kilometre (km?) shall be calculated 
as the total number of real-time remote air quality 
monitoring stations in the city (numerator) divided by 
the city’s land area (denominator). The result shall be 
expressed as the number of real-time remote air quality 
monitoring stations per km’. 


A monitoring station shall refer to a physical structure 
or device that uses specialized equipment and analytical 
methods to track pollutant levels, such as fine particles 
(PM 2.5), carbon dioxide (CO,) and sulphur dioxide 
(SO,). 


A real-time remote system shall refer to any form of 
technology that provides instantaneous information 
such as mobile applications. More specifically, a remote 
system is a set-up consisting of hardware, software, 
data and the people who use them. A remote system 
commonly includes communications technology, such 
as the internet. 


8.2.3 Data Sources 


The number of real-time remote air quality monitoring 
stations should be sourced from pollution control board 
that oversee the air quality of the city. 


8.3 Percentage of Public Buildings Equipped for 
Monitoring Indoor Air Quality 


8.3.1 General 


Poor indoor air quality affects health, comfort and 
productivity of the occupants. These impacts can affect 
a large number of occupants and especially sensitive 
persons, such as children or elderly. To limit the health 
and economic consequences of a poor indoor air quality 
smart cities could measure and identify the sources and 
factors that influence the quality of indoor air and then 
propose appropriate solutions. 


8.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public buildings equipped for 
monitoring indoor air quality shall be calculated as the 
total number of public buildings within the city that 


IS 17738 : 2022 


are equipped to monitor indoor air quality (numerator) 
divided by the total number of buildings in the city 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of public buildings 
equipped for monitoring indoor air quality. 


The monitoring of indoor air quality shall include only 
primary pollutants [PM 10, PM 2.5, NO,, SO,, CO, O,, 
NH,, Pb, Ni, As, Benzo(a)pyrene, and Benzene]. 


8.3.3 Data Sources 


Information should be obtained from the state pollution 
control boards. 


9 FINANCE 


9.1 Annual Amount of Revenues Collected from the 
Sharing Economy as a Percentage of Own-Source 
Revenue 


9.1.1 General 


The sharing economy or peer-to-peer based sharing of 
access to goods and services is a growing component 
of the municipal economy. The inclusion of these 
economies into existing policy allows for taxation 
which supplements municipal capital budgets. 


9.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual amount of revenues collected from the 
sharing economy as a percentage of own-source 
revenue shall be represented as the total amount of funds 
collected per year from permit fees, user fees, licensing 
fees and taxes as permitted by law or legislation from 
sharing economy transactions (numerator) divided by 
the city’s total own-source revenue (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the annual amount of revenues collected from the 
sharing economy as a percentage of own-source 
revenue. 


Total own-source revenue shall be calculated as the 
total revenue minus transfers. 


The sharing economy shall refer to the use of digital 
platforms or portals to reduce the scale of viable hiring 
transactions or viable participation in consumer hiring 
markets (that is, ‘sharing’ in the sense of hiring an 
asset) and thereby reduce the extent to which assets 
are under-utilized for accommodation, transportation, 
consumer durables, labour and human capital, and 
intellectual property. In a broad approach, the sharing 
economy is a socio-economic ecosystem built around 
the sharing of human and physical resources. It includes 
the shared creation, production, distribution, trade and 


12 


consumption of goods and services by different people 
and organizations. 


9.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on taxes collected from the sharing economy 
should be sourced from urban local body. 


9.2 Percentage of Payments to the City that are Paid 
Electronically Based on Electronic Invoices 


9.2.1 General 


The use of electronic invoices (e-invoices) and 
transfer of payments to the city increases security and 
quality and reduce costs for the city, businesses and 
citizens. Cities that combine e-invoice and e-transfers 
with automatic accounting and control systems can 
experience a noticeable increase in productivity. This 
indicator reflects the living and working environment 
issue and allows an evaluation of the contribution to 
preservation and improvement of environment purpose 
of the city. 


9.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of payments to the city that are paid 
electronically based on electronic invoices (e-invoices) 
shall be calculated as the number of payments to the 
city that are made electronically based on an e-invoice 
(numerator) divided by the total number of payments 
made to the city (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
payments to the city that are paid electronically based 
on e-invoices. 


Electronic invoicing (e-invoicing) shall refer to the 
exchange of an invoice document between the city 
and a business or a citizen in an electronic format. The 
invoice is generated directly from the relevant systems 
and is not just a scanned paper invoice or a Word/PDF 
document or paper invoice mailed to a business or 
citizen. Generating the e-invoice is therefore a natural 
part of the administrative working process. 


Electronic payment is a payment via an electronic 
medium without the use of cash or cheques. 

9.2.3 Data Sources 

Data on payments to the city that are paid electronically 
should be sourced from the urban local body/agencies. 
9.2.4 Data Interpretation 


A high percentage of e-payments is a sign of a city with 
a high level of digitalization. 


10 GOVERNANCE 


10.1 Annual Number of Online Visits to the 
Municipal Open Data Portal per 100 000 Population 


10.1.1 General 


Open data portals provide a means of increasing public 
access to data managed by municipalities. It creates 
greater transparency and allows for innovation by 
community organizations and citizens. Although many 
municipalities offer online portals, not all are equally 
visited. 


10.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual number of online visits to the municipal open 
data portal per 100 000 population shall be calculated 
as the total number of municipal open data portal visits 
(numerator) divided by one 100 000th of the city’s total 
population (denominator). The result shall be expressed 
as the annual number of online visits to the municipal 
open data portal per 100 000 population. 


An open data portal shall refer to a data portal operated 
by the city providing access to open data, which shall 
be defined as structured data that is machine-readable, 
freely shared, used and built on without restrictions. 


An online visit shall refer to an individual visitor 
who arrives at the city’s open data portal online and 
proceeds to browse and peruse the open data portal. A 
visit counts all visitors, no matter how many times the 
same visitor may have been to the open data portal. 


10.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of visits to the open data portal 
should be obtained from websites hosting statistics 
obtained from the urban local body. 


10.2 Percentage of City Services Accessible and that 
can be Requested Online 


10.2.1 General 


Delivering city services through digital portals 
provide benefits to citizens and local governments. 
Municipalities are able to provide services without 
fixed hours and are able to provide these services 
with reduced resources. Moreover, the use of mobile 
technology, such as geotagging and photos, is aiding 
the efficiency and effectiveness of city services. 


10.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city services accessible and that can 
be requested online (that is, via the Internet) shall be 
calculated as the total number of city services offered 
to people and businesses through a centralized Internet 
interface (numerator) divided by the total number of 
city services offered by the city (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of city services accessible and that can 
be requested online. 


13 


IS 17738 : 2022 


City services shall refer to services provided by the 
city including those contracted to third parties and 
typically cover the following areas: garbage and 
recycling; public safety; fire department; roads and 
traffic; bylaws, violations and enforcement; permits 
and licences; planning; building; policies, projects 
and initiatives; rentals and catering of city buildings; 
water and sewers; and property taxes and utilities. 
City services is a broad term encompassing the many 
‘touch-points’ cities have with citizens and businesses. 
Particularly for city services accessible online this term 
can include, for example, requesting and receiving 
permits; assessing and collecting taxes; lodging and 
addressing complaints; and requesting information on 
services within the city’s jurisdiction or authority. 


10.2.3 Data Sources 


An inventory ofall city services offered shall be taken to 
provide an accurate percentage output. Information on 
city services should be sourced from city departments, 
or institutions that provide services. Figures on services 
available through urban local body/agencies and mobile 
operators 


10.2.4 Data Interpretation 


As not all services can be requested and delivered 
online, a value of 100 percent is not an objective. 


10.3 Average Response Time to Inquiries Made 
through the City’ Non-Emergency Inquiry System 
(Days) 


10.3.1 General 


A non-emergency inquiry system is an important access 
point to municipal services. It refers to the response 
rate of non-emergency access points through various 
mediums including telephone, apps, twitter, email, in 
person contacts etc. The access point can be used by 
citizens as well as businesses. 


10.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The average response time to inquiries made through 
the city’s non-emergency inquiry system shall be 
expressed as the total number of hours taken to respond 
to all relevant inquiries made through the city’s 
non-emergency system (numerator) divided by the 
total number of relevant inquiries received by the city’s 
non-emergency system (denominator). The result shall 
be divided by 24 and expressed as average response 
time to relevant inquiries made through the city’s 
non-emergency inquiry system in days. 


Inquiries shall refer to inquiries from citizens and 
business that actually refer to an existing problem that 
is economically and practically realistic to address on 
a shorter-term basis. It is, for example, not a relevant 
inquiry to ask for a new bike lane or a new park, but an 
inquiry addressing a matter that is urgent and timely, 
such as reporting a dead animal or request planning, 


IS 17738 : 2022 


pruning or removal of a tree or making an accessibility 
complaint about a city programme or service. 


A non-emergency inquiry system shall refer to a system 
citizen contact when their health, safety or property is not 
in immediate jeopardy, or there is not a crime currently 
in progress. Non-emergency inquiry systems may 
include hotlines, internet-based applications (webpage, 
social media, mobile applications, etcetera) that allow 
residents to submit an inquiry, such as a complaint about 
unfavorable city conditions or nuisances (that is, report 
a pothole, request a street clean-up or graffiti removal, 
report a broken traffic signal etc.), to a centralized 
location. The system dispatcher then relays the inquiry 
to the appropriate city authority to address, rather than 
requiring the resident to know which city department 
should properly address their inquiry. 


10.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the response time to relevant inquiries made 
through the city’s non-emergency inquiry system 
should be sourced from urban local body. 


10.4 Average Downtime of the IT 


Infrastructure 


City’s 


10.4.1 General 


In a commercial environment the cost of downtime 
during a security incident — from lost sales and revenue, 
to a loss of customer confidence — can negatively impact 
your business. The equivalent impact to a city can be 
estimated on city services performances/commitments. 


10.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


Average downtime of the city’s IT infrastructure during 
an incident shall be calculated as the number of hours 
that the city’s IT infrastructure is not available due to 
an incident (that is, system power outage, scheduled 
maintenance, etc.) (numerator) divided by the total 
number of incidents causing IT infrastructure outages 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
average downtime of the city’s IT infrastructure. 


An incident shall include both planned and unplanned 
system outages of the city’s IT infrastructure (that is, 
website, payment systems, etc.). This may include 
planned system maintenance outages, as well as 
outages of the city’s due to unexpected events such as 
cyber-attacks, and power outages. 


IT infrastructure shall refer to hardware, software, 
networks, data centres, facilities and related equipment 
used to develop, test, operate, monitor, manage and/or 
support information technology services, for example, 
but not limited to, municipal data centres, computer 
servers and computers, multi-function devices and 
wireless devices. 


14 


10.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on the downtime of the city’s IT infrastructure 
during an incident should be sourced from command 
and control centre/urban local body. 


11 HEALTH 


11.1 Percentage of the City’s Population with Online 
Unified Health File Accessible to Health Care 
Providers 


11.1.1 General 


The digitisation of health histories enables health care 
providers to care for patients from a holistic approach. 
Health care providers, regardless of their specialty 
or location, can access the health history of these 
individuals and provide better care accordingly. 


Although health care is often beyond the jurisdiction 
of city-level governments, the availability of, and 
access to, primary health care is one characteristic of 
cities that has the potential to impact health, therefore, 
representing an important area of focus for cities. 
Furthermore, city health care providers face some of 
the greatest cost pressures and difficulties in adapting 
health care delivery to reduce the cost of providing 
health care while improving the quality of that care, 
and thus, allowing health care providers to access a 
patient’s unified health file online may help conquer 
some of these problems by allowing health providers to 
more efficiently and easily access a unified health file 
online rather than awaiting for a paper copy. 


11.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s population with online 
unified health file accessible to health care providers 
shall be calculated as the total number of persons with 
an online unified health file that can be accessed by any 
type of health care provider (numerator) divided by the 
total population in the city (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of the city’s population with online unified 
health file accessible to health care providers. 


Aunified health file shall refer to a health file containing 
all of a patient’s health records, which would usually 
otherwise be spread among multiple health care 
providers, resulting in fragmented care. The unified 
health file should show all medication and medical 
records made by public and private medical doctors. It 
brings together relevant information from different parts 
of the health service system, for example, hospitals and 
family doctors, clinics, test centres, etc. 


Disclosure of data within a health care system shall be 
done with care and discretion, taking into consideration 
the privacy and security measures needed to ensure 


that the information will be used only to the benefit of 
citizens. 


11.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of persons with unified health 
histories that are accessible to health care providers 
should be sourced from health department and urban 
local body. 


11.2 Annual Number of Medical Appointments 
Conducted Online per 100 000 Population 


11.2.1 General 


Online medical appointments provide a vital alternative 
to traditional walk-in appointments. Consideration 
could include aging populations, decreased mobility, or 
limited access to transportation. 


Those implementing this Indian Standard should report 
on this indicator in accordance with the following 
requirements. 


11.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual number of medical appointments conducted 
online per 100 000 population shall be calculated as the 
total number of medical appointments conducted online, 
such as through online video services (numerator) 
divided by one 100 000" of the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
annual number of medical appointments conducted 
online per 100 000 population. 


A medical appointment shall refer to a patient visit to 
a health care facility, in which a patient discusses their 
health needs and concerns with one or more health 
care providers. Only official consultations shall be 
included. Medical appointments conducted online shall 
include those enabled with video and teleconferencing 
technologies in accessible formats; mobile phones; 
remote data-collection equipment and telemonitoring 
(that is, cardiac monitors). Face to face consultations 
shall be excluded. 


11.2.3 Data Sources 


The annual number of medical appointments 
conducted online services data should be sourced from 
departments that oversee the health care provided 
to people of the city and track modes of health care 
provided to its citizens. 


11.3 Percentage of the City Population Registered 
with Public Alert Systems for Air and Water Quality 
Advisories 


11.3.1 General 


Poor air and water quality affect human health and 
contribute to human mortality and morbidity in cities. 
Air quality alert systems provide important information 
and advice to the public to minimize air pollutant 
exposure. Similarly, water quality alert systems inform 


15 


IS 17738 : 2022 


people whether or not the quality of the city’s water is 
suitable for drinking, or use for other activities. Air and 
water quality public alert systems can help to mitigate 
or lessen the impacts of pollutants to health and prevent 
mortality. 


11.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of the city population registered with public 
alert systems for air and water quality advisories shall 
be calculated as the number of people registered with 
public alert systems for air and water quality advisories 
(numerator) divided by the city’s total population. The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of the city population registered with 
public alert systems for air and water quality advisories. 


A public alert system for air and water quality shall 
refer to a system that reports and notifies the public 
on the levels of pollutants, allergens and particulate 
matter, and releases to the public near real-time data or 
data based on forecasting methods, and facilitates early 
identification of local air and water pollution problems 
and issues timely warnings of air and water pollution 
episodes reflecting levels of particulate matter and 
pollutants to the public via text message, email or 
pre-recorded voice message. An alert system may be in 
the form of mobile or online applications. 


In some instances, air and water quality may be 
reported by two separate public alert systems, one 
responsible for air quality and another responsible for 
water quality. People registered with more than one 
public alert system shall be counted once towards the 
calculation of this indicator. In addition, the calculation 
shall only include those people that reside in the city 
and exclude those that would not be included in the 
city’s total population count, such that they reside 
beyond the city’s administrative boundaries. 


11.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of people registered with public 
alert systems should be sourced from relevant city 
departments that are responsible for the management 
of alert systems. 


12 HOUSING 


12.1 Percentage of Total Land Area that is A 
Mixed-Use Zone 


12.1.1 General 


Mixed use development can improve neighbourhood 
livability and sustainability by providing a higher 
density of varying uses in an area. Also, communities 
or neighbourhoods with mixed use buildings and land 
that have a variety of uses, such as residential, retail 
and commercial, promote walking, cycling, and public 
transportation, making these areas more engaging 
environments for citizens. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


12.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of land area that is a mixed-use zone 
shall be calculated as the total land area that is a 
mixed-use zone (numerator) divided by the city’s total 
land area (denominator). The result shall be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the percentage of land area that 
is a mixed-use zone. 


Amixed-use zone shall refer to a development of city land 
area consisting of three or more significant uses (such as 
retail/entertainment, office, industry, residential, hotel, 
and/or civic/cultural/recreation) that in well planned 
projects are mutually supporting. Mixed use zones 
have a significant physical and functional integration 
of project components (and thus a relatively close-knit 
and intensive use of land), including uninterrupted 
pedestrian connections and are developed in conformity 
with a coherent plan (that frequently stipulates the type 
and scale of uses, permitted densities, and related items). 


12.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on mixed use developments and land use should be 
sourced from city planning departments through Master 
Plans/Development Plans. 


12.2 Percentage of Households with Smart Energy 
Meters 


12.2.1 General 


Smart energy meters record and display the consumption 
of energy in real time. Smart meter data can be sent to 
a central location wirelessly, thus providing electricity 
providers with the means to understand how and when 
power is being used to better plan and conserve energy. 
Also, smart meter data help consumers better understand 
and monitor energy usage. 


12.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of households with smart energy meters 
shall be calculated as the total number of households 
with smart energy meters (numerator) divided by the 
total number of households in the city (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of households with smart energy 
meters. 


A smart energy meter shall refer to an energy meter 
that includes in-home, online visualized real-time 
digital displays or that is available through a real-time 
online application so customers can better understand 
their energy usage. Also, a smart energy meter can 
digitally send meter readings to an energy supplier for 
more accurate energy bills, and for better planning and 
conservation of energy by providers. 


12.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on smart energy meter figures should be sourced 
from discoms that may have data on local smart energy 
meters. 


16 


12.3 Percentage of Households with Smart Water 
Meters 


12.3.1 General 


Smart water meters record and display the consumption 
of water in real-time. Smart meter data can be sent to 
a central location wirelessly, thus providing water 
providers with the means to understand how and when 
water is being used to better plan and conserve water. 
Also, a smart water meter data helps consumers better 
understand and monitor water usage. 


12.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of households with smart water meters 
shall be calculated as the total number households with 
smart water meters (numerator) divided by the total 
number of households in the city (denominator). The 
result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of households with smart water meters. 


A smart water meter shall refer to a water meter that 
includes in-home real-time digital displays with online 
visualized real-time information or be available through 
a real-time online application, so a customer can better 
understand their water usage. Also, a smart water meter 
can digitally send meter readings to a water supplier for 
more accurate water bills, and for better planning and 
conservation of water by providers. 


12.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on smart water meters should be sourced from 
water boards that may hold data on local smart water 
meters. 


13 POPULATION AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


13.1 Percentage of Public Buildings that are 
Accessible by Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) and 
the Elderly 


13.1.1 General 


Public buildings that are accessible by persons with 
disabilities and the elderly create an inclusive city by 
removing barriers for persons affected by mobility 
challenges. 


13.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public buildings that are accessible by 
persons with disabilities shall be calculated as number 
of public buildings within the city that are accessible by 
persons with disabilities and the elderlies (numerator) 
divided by total number of public buildings in the city 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage. 


The definition of an accessible public building shall 
be based on the National Building Code of India, SP 7 
that has to be followed to identify, remove and prevent 
barriers so that persons with disabilities and the elderly 


have more opportunities in everyday life. In relation to 
public buildings, it will typically include requirements 
given in the National Building Code of India, SP 7. 


13.1.3 Data Sources 


Information should be obtained from the local 
authorities, officials, or the Department responsible for 
public buildings. 


13.2 Percentage of Municipal Budget Allocated for 
Provision of Mobility Aids, Devices, and Assistive 
Technologies to Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) 
and the Elderlies 


13.2.1 General 


Ensuring a city is accessible for all its citizens and 
visitors promotes an equitable and inclusive society. 
Allocating a portion of the municipal budget for 
provision of mobility aids, devices and assistive 
technologies to persons with disabilities and the 
elderlies (PwDs) and the Elderly help to maintain the 
accessibility of the city year over year for all its citizens 
and visitors and to support autonomy (and homecare) 
of persons with special needs, including senior citizens. 


13.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the municipal budget allocated 
for provision of mobility aids, devices, and assistive 
technologies to citizens with special needs shall be 
calculated as the sum of the cost of providing mobility 
aids, devices, and assistive technologies the city has to 
spend in one fiscal year (numerator) divided by the total 
city budget allocated for a given year (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as a percentage. 


13.2.3 Data Sources 


Data for the amount of the municipal budget allocated 
for provision of mobility aids, devices, and assistive 
technologies to citizens with special needs should 
be sourced from the municipal budget and audited 
financial documents, or departments or ministries 
overseeing municipal spending on the provision of 
mobility aids, devices, and assistive technologies to 
citizens with special needs. 


13.3 Percentage of Marked Pedestrian Crosswalks 
Equipped with Accessible Pedestrian Signals 


13.3.1 General 


Accessible pedestrian signals enable persons with 
special needs to safely cross intersections, allowing 
those with special needs to perform their daily activities. 


13.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of marked pedestrian crosswalks 
equipped with accessible pedestrian signals shall 
be calculated as the number of marked pedestrian 


17 


IS 17738 : 2022 


crosswalks equipped with accessible pedestrian signals 
(numerator) divided by the total number of marked 
pedestrian crosswalks (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of marked pedestrian crosswalks equipped 
with accessible pedestrian signals. 


Accessible pedestrian signals shall refer to devices that 
communicate the intervals that a crossing is safe or 
unsafe to enter using either non-visual communication, 
usually through audible, or vibrotactile (that is, 
vibrations), or visual methods. 


13.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the percentage of marked pedestrian crosswalks 
equipped with accessible pedestrian signals should be 
sourced from transport and traffic police departments. 


13.4 Percentage of Municipal Budget Allocated for 
Provision of Programmes Designated for Bridging 
the Digital Divide 


13.4.1 General 


As cities experience a demographic shift, the need 
for age-friendly urban design and city services is 
becoming ever more critical. Cities need to address 
the consequences of this unprecedented demographic 
shift through age-friendly planning and city services. 
Developing programmes (for example, technology 
classes for senior citizens) is one way to create an 
environment in which senior citizens, but also people 
with disabilities, can acquire or improve technological 
skills to actively participate in a technology-driven 
society and fight against digital divide. This also 
empowers citizens to become active users of new 
technology. 


13.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the municipal budget allocated for 
the provision of programmes designated for bridging 
the digital divide shall be calculated as the sum of the 
city’s annual expenditure on programming designated 
for bridging the digital divide (numerator) divided 
by the city’s total annual budget (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as a percentage of municipal budget allocated for the 
provision of programmes designated for bridging the 
digital divide. 

Digital divide shall refer to the economic, educational 
and social inequalities in access to information and 
communication technology, such as computers or 
the Internet. Programming designated for bridging 
the digital divide can include, but is not limited to, 
programmes to help lower-income and vulnerable 
people (for example, children, youths and seniors) 
get access to, and learn about, new technologies by 
providing hardware, software and Internet access. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


13.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on municipal budgets allocated for provision of 
programmes designated for bridging the digital divide 
should be sourced from the municipal budget. 


14 RECREATION 


14.1 Percentage of Public Recreation Services that 
can be Booked Online 


14.1.1 General 


Recreation is an important aspect of city life, 
contributing to the health of citizens and the vitality 
of the city. Online recreation booking offers increased 
accessibility and awareness for the public, as well as 
data sources for public recreation participation. It 
creates virtually no ecological footprint compared 
to paper registration distribution and collection, and 
easier record creation or modification. 


14.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public recreation services that can 
be booked online shall be calculated as the number 
of public recreation services that can be booked 
online (numerator) divided by total number of public 
recreation services that a city offers (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of public recreation services that can be 
booked online. 


Recreation services shall refer to services that operate 
facilities or provide services that enable people to 
participate in sports or recreational activities or 
pursue amusement, hobbies and leisure-time interests. 
Recreational services could include the city providing 
public recreation space, which is defined broadly as land 
and buildings open to the public for recreation, such 
as swimming, sports and skating facilities and fitness 
centres. Also, city recreation services could include 
city-run programmes, camps and facility rentals. 


14.1.3 Data Sources 


The percentage of public recreation services that can 
be booked online should be sourced from urban local 
body. 


15 SAFETY 


15.1 Percentage of the City Area Covered by Digital 
Surveillance Cameras 


15.1.1 General 


The presence of surveillance cameras is a deterrent 
against crime. When incidents do occur, video 
surveillance offers an accurate representation of the 
events, as well as key information to solving cases. 


18 


Digital cameras are more reliable than still pictures, 
have a higher capacity, have better picture quality, and 
create files that can be distributed easily and are harder 
to tamper with. 


15.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city area covered by digital 
surveillance cameras shall be calculated as the amount 
of city land area covered by digital video surveillance 
cameras in square kilometres (numerator) divided by 
the city’s total land area (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of the city area covered by digital 
surveillance cameras. 


Digital surveillance cameras, or sometimes referred 
to as Internet Protocol (IP) cameras, shall refer to 
video cameras that can send and receive data via a 
computer network, as opposed to sending a feed to 
a Digital Video Recorder (DVR) (that is, disk/USB 
drive). Measurement of coverage is determined by the 
technical specifications of the systems in use. 


This indicator shall include digital surveillance 
accessible by the city, such as any digital video 
surveillance the city or law enforcement can directly 
access, without the permission of or request from 
private camera owners. 


The digital surveillance camera systems shall take into 
consideration how the data/images generated is used, 
taking all the privacy and security measures needed to 
ensure the safety of the citizens. 


15.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the percentage of the city area covered by 
digital surveillance cameras should be sourced from 
police departments. 


16 SOLID WASTE 


16.1 Percentage of Waste Drop-Off Centres 
(Containers) Equipped with Telemetering 


16.1.1 General 


Drop-off centre (container) collection is defined as 
follows: it is a collection mode where the community 
gives to the population a network of bins that are spread 
on the city area and are available for all citizens with 
an open access. The citizen has not a proper bin. He or 
she has to dispose the sorted materials on a site which is 
organized by the communities: a container on the public 
road, on parking facilities or commercial centers, on a 
district collection point. 


Collection trucks will collect the bins (containers) in the 
allocated points in the city. When trucks are equipped 
with telemetering to optimize their rounds depending 


on bins filling, this can be considered as an access for 
citizens to drop-off collection with telemetering 


16.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of waste drop-off centers (containers) 
equipped with telemetering shall be calculated as the 
number of waste drop-off centres (containers) for 
garbage disposal equipped with telemetering devices 
(numerator) divided by the total waste drop-off centres 
(containers) within the city (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of waste drop-off centers (containers) 
equipped with telemetering. 


A waste drop-off centre (container) shall refer to a place 
where people bring waste in accordance with sorting 
criteria. Drop-off centres can, for example, be placed 
near a public road or on a parking facility. People 
who use a drop-off centre do not have a private waste 
container. Collection trucks will collect the bins at the 
drop-off centre (container). 


Waste drop-off centres (containers) and garbage 
collection vehicles are equipped with telemetering 
to optimize garbage collection rounds based on 
information about bins filling. 


Telemetering shall refer to measurement with the aid of 
intermediate means which permit the measurement to 
be interpreted at a distance from the primary detector. 
The distinctive feature of telemetering is the nature of 
the translating means, which includes provision for 
converting the measurand into a representative quantity 
of another kind that can be transmitted conveniently 
for measurement at a distance. Therefore, if a waste 
drop-off centre (container) has telemetering, the amount 
of garbage in a waste drop-off centre (container) can be 
transmitted to garbage collection trucks remotely. 


16.1.3 Data Source 


Data on the percentage of waste drop-off centres 
equipped with telemetering should be sourced from 
urban local body/public health department. 


16.2 Percentage of the City Population that has a 
Door-to-Door Garbage Collection with an Individual 
Telemetering of Household Waste Quantities 


16.2.1 General 


Door-to door garage collection corresponds to a 
collection organization where the container is allocated 
to an identifiable group of users. The point of collection 
of selected waste is located in proximity to the user’s 
home. Individual waste collection containers and 
garbage collection vehicles that are equipped with 
telemetering to optimize garbage collection rounds 
based on information about bins filling can be 
considered as door-to-door garbage collection with an 
individual telemetering of household waste quantities. 
Telemetering shall refer to measurement with the aid of 


19 


IS 17738 : 2022 


intermediate means which permit the measurement to 
be interpreted at a distance from the primary detector. 
The distinctive feature of telemetering is the nature of 
the translating means, which includes provision for 
converting the measurand into a representative quantity 
of another kind that can be transmitted conveniently for 
measurement at a distance. 


16.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city population that has a 
door-to-door garbage collection with an individual 
telemetering of household waste quantities shall be 
calculated as the number of people living in the city 
where there is a door-to-door household garbage 
collection equipped with telemetering (numerator) 
divided by the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of the city population that has a 
door-to-door garbage collection with an individual 
telemetering of household waste quantities. 


16.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the percentage of the city population that 
has door-to-door garbage collection equipped with 
telemetering data should be sourced from urban local 
body and public health department. 


16.3 Percentage of Total Amount of Waste in the 
City that is Used to Generate Energy 


16.3.1 General 


Waste which has significant organic matter content 
can be a source of energy either directly by recovering 
heat from energy from waste plant (incinerator) or by 
producing energy from the digestion of waste or other 
new technologies using this energy for cogeneration, 
bio methane production for injection in the gas network, 
or for fuel production. 


In a context where energy consumption from fossil 
energy resources has to be decreased for sustainable 
development purposes, it is advantageous to use this 
source of heat, electricity, gas or fuel for other services 
across the city (that is, heating of swimming pools, fuels 
for city vehicle fleet, energy sales to local industries 
etc.). In case of disadvantages of fossil energy tariffs, 
it is also a way for the city to achieve a level of energy 
independence. 


16.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of total amount of waste in the city that is 
used to generate energy shall be calculated as the total 
amount of waste utilized to generate energy (numerator) 
divided by the total amount of waste generated in the 
city (denominator). The result shall then be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the percentage of total quantity 
of waste in the city that is used to generate energy. 


Energy generated from the waste treatment plant shall 
be expressed in gigajoules (GJ) per year. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


The total amount of waste utilized to generate energy 
shall refer to waste treatment having a positive net 
energy production rate. 


16.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the quantity of waste in the city can be derived 
from IS 17000 ‘collected municipal solid waste per 
capita’ multiplied by the population of the city. Data 
on the total amount of waste in the city that is used to 
generate energy should be sourced from discoms and 
urban local body. 


16.4 Percentage of Total Amount of Plastic Waste 
Recycled in the City 


16.4.1 General 


Plastic waste is a global environmental issue. To 
prevent the dispersion in the environment of plastics 
the best solution is to limit the production of plastics 
and develop plastic recycling. Taking into account 
the potential ecological impacts of microplastics on 
waterbodies and oceans, cities can promote plastic 
recycling within their territories. This necessitates 
the monitoring of plastic production and promotes 
increased use of recycled plastics within other products. 


16.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of total amount of plastics waste recycled 
shall be calculated as the total amount of plastics 
coming out of sorting plants and recycled (numerator) 
divided by the total amount of plastics on the market 
within the city boundaries (denominator). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of total quantity of recycled plastics in the 


city. 
16.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on the quantity of plastics issued from waste 
sorting plants in the city should be sourced from local 
utilities, or relevant city departments that oversee waste 
treatment. Data on plastics on the city market should 
be sourced from commercial activities, industrial 
activities and waste collection utilities for household 
consumption or from the plastic industry. 


16.5 Percentage of Public Garbage Bins that are 
Sensor-Enabled Public Garbage Bins 


16.5.1 General 


Solid waste management and monitoring requires 
immediate attention in all cities. Sensor-enabled 
solutions for public garbage bins is one way cities can 
improve waste monitoring and collection of public 
garbage bins. Sensor-enabled garbage bins can lead 
to optimized route planning and scheduling of waste 
collection, potentially leading to significant cost 
reductions in solid waste collection. 


20 


16.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public garbage bins that are 
sensor-enabled public garbage bins shall be calculated 
as the number of public garbage bins that are 
sensor-enabled (numerator) divided by the total number 
of public garbage bins in the city (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of public garbage bins that are 
sensor-enabled public garbage bins. 


Public garbage bins shall refer to garbage bins provided 
by the city that are in public spaces, such as on the 
streets and in public parks. 


Sensor-enabled public garbage bins shall refer to 
public garbage bins that are equipped with a sensor, or 
sensors, that monitors the level of garbage, and are part 
of a larger network of sensor-enabled public garbage 
bins connected through telecommunication network 
that generates data and allows for the monitoring of the 
fill-level of each garbage bin remotely. 


16.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on public trash bins should be obtained from 
urban local body. 


16.6 Percentage of the City’s Electrical and 
Electronic Waste that is Recycled 


16.6.1 General 


With the rapid increase in the popularity of cellular 
phones, computers, televisions and other electronic 
devices, it is increasingly important that cities 
ensure that electronic waste (or e-waste) undergoes 
environmentally sound management at the end of its 
useful life. E-waste recycling programmes help keep 
electronic devices out of landfills and recover useful 
resources. 


16.6.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s electrical and electronic 
waste that is recycled shall be calculated as the total 
amount of the city’s electrical and electronic waste that 
is recycled in tonnes (numerator) divided by the total 
amount of electrical and electronic waste produced in 
the city in tonnes (denominator). The result shall then 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
the city’s electrical and electronic waste that is recycled. 


Electrical and electronic waste, commonly referred as 
e-waste, shall refer to electronics, such as computers, 
printers or fax machines, televisions or computer 
displays, audio-video equipment (including DVD 
players, VCRs, speakers and portable digital music 
players), cellular phones and electronic gaming 
equipment. 


This indicator shall include electrical and electronic 
waste produced by all property classes: residential, 
commercial, industrial and public buildings. 


Recycling shall refer to diversion, recovery 
and/or reprocessing of materials from the waste stream, 
following local government permits and regulations. 


16.6.3 Data Sources 


Data on e-waste may be sourced from urban local body. 
17 SPORT AND CULTURE 


17.1 Number of Online Bookings to Cultural 
Facilities per 100 000 Population 


17.1.1 General 


Cultural facilities and cultural/sporting events play a 
pivotal role in connecting people and in building a more 
cohesive and open society. The digitisation of access to 
cultural institutions helps to increase the availability of 
cultural resources to a broader audience. 


17.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of online bookings to cultural facilities per 
100 000 population shall be calculated as the number 
of online bookings for cultural facilities (numerator) 
divided by one 100 000th of the city’s total population 
(denominator). 


A cultural facility shall refer to a public or non-profit 
institution within a city which engages in the cultural, 
intellectual, scientific, environmental, educational, 
sporting or artistic enrichment of the people living in 
a city. ‘Cultural facilities’ includes, without limitation, 
aquaria, botanical societies, historical societies, land 
conservation organizations, libraries, museums, 
performing arts associations or societies, scientific 
societies, wildlife conservation organizations, sporting 
facilities (that is, indoor and outdoor arenas, fields, etc) 
and zoological societies. ‘Cultural facilities’ should 
not include educational institutions (that is, schools) or 
institutions primarily engaged in religious or sectarian 
activities. 


17.1.3 Data Sources 


Data of the number of online bookings for cultural 
facilities should be sourced from urban local body and 
other agencies. 


17.1.4 Data Interpretation 


This indicator measures how an online booking system 
may increase the availability of cultural resources to a 
broader audience. 


17.2 Percentage of the City’s Cultural Records that 
have been Digitised 


17.2.1 General 


The process of digital preservation, or digitisation, is 
the formal endeavour of ensuring digital information, 
such as digital data, is managed to ensure continued 


21 


IS 17738 : 2022 


access and usability. The digital preservation of cultural 
records is one form of digital preservation which ensures 
cultural artefacts are maintained for future users. 
Furthermore, digital preservation connects and provides 
people with wider access to heritage materials, which 
helps to stimulate an innovative information society. 
Digitisation of a city’s cultural record contributes to the 
conservation and preservation of heritage and scientific 
resources; it creates new educational opportunities; it 
can be used to encourage tourism; and it provides ways 
of improving access by citizen to their heritage. 


17.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s cultural records that 
have been digitised shall be calculated as the number 
of the city’s cultural records that have been digitised 
(numerator) divided by the total number of cultural 
records of the city (denominator). The result shall be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
cultural records that have been digitised. 


Digitisation shall refer to the conversion of traditional, 
analog materials such as books, maps, and other 
physical (that is, paper records) items into an electronic, 
digital copy. 

Cultural records shall refer to the tangible cultural 
heritage, or the legacy of physical artefacts and texts, of 
a city and include: movable cultural heritage (paintings, 
sculptures, coins, manuscripts); immovable cultural 
heritage (monuments, archaeological sites, and so on); 
and underwater cultural heritage (shipwrecks, underwater 
ruins and cities), if applicable. The cultural record of a 
city is most likely vast, especially when considering the 
cultural record in all its myriad forms, thus, this indicator 
shall only include the tangible cultural heritage owned 
and/or managed by the city to ensure data accessibility, 
and exclude any privately-owned components of a city’s 
cultural record. 


17.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the cultural record of a city should be sourced 
through department of culture and tourism. 


17.3 Number of Public Library Book and E-Book 
Titles per 100 000 Population 


17.3.1 General 


Libraries help to educate the general population, in 
addition to providing civic spaces for interaction. 
Libraries can be considered a local gateway to 
knowledge, and provide a basic condition for lifelong 
learning, independent decision-making and cultural 
development of the individual and social groups. 
E-books have become popular amongst the public 
due to their ease of accessibility, allowing citizens 
to more conveniently continue lifelong learning, 
cultural development, and be exposed to a plethora of 
information. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


Furthermore, the availability of e-books indicates the 
level of digitisation of a community’s libraries, and 
also the ease of access to books via a library’s website 
Moreover, e-books are comparatively eco-friendlier 
and promote sustainability, since e-books require less 
paper and labour to manufacture, and do not require 
shelf space. Also, ebooks have grown significantly 
in popularity and prevalence within the publishing 
industry. 


17.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of library book and e-book titles per 
100 000 population shall be calculated as the total 
number of library book and the total number of library 
e-book titles (numerator) divided by one 100 000" of 
the city’s total population (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of library book titles 
per 100 000 population. 


Public libraries shall refer libraries within a city’s 
administrative boundaries. 


The proportion of e-book within the total number of 
library book shall be specified in addition. 


The city shall include in this indicator the number of 
library book and e-book titles available to its citizens 
from public libraries. The city shall count any book titles 
available and accessible at a public library within city 
limits, and include both physical books/monographs 
and e-books, which include those books/monographs 
that have been digitised and are available for reading on 
a computer or other electronic devices. A public library 
is any library that has an organized collection of printed 
or other library materials, or a combination thereof, is 
supported in whole or in part with public funds and has 
an established schedule in which services of the staff 
are available to the public. 


17.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of library book titles should be 
sourced through library network. 


17.4 Percentage of City Population that are Active 
Public Library Users 


17.4.1 General 


An active public library user shall refer to a registered 
public library member, or an individual with a user 
account at a public library that frequently utilizes 
library services with at least one transaction per month, 
such as accessing library/online databases to download 
articles or e-books that require library user privilege, 
or signing out library books. The active library users 
accounted for in this indicator shall only include those 
users that reside in the city. 


17.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city population that are active public 
library users shall be calculated as the total number of 


22 


city residents that are active library users measured as 
citizens who are registered public library members or 
measurably use library services (numerator) divided 
by the city’s total population (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as percentage of city population that are active public 
library users. 


The city shall include in this indicator the number 
of active library users who are library members at 
public libraries, or are measurably known to access 
the foregoing library services. The city shall count 
any active library users with a public library within 
city limits. Users from outside the administrative 
boundaries shall be excluded. A public library is any 
library that has an organized collection of printed or 
other library materials, or a combination thereof, is 
supported in whole or in part with public funds and has 
an established schedule in which services of the staff 
are available to the public. 


17.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of active library users should be 
sourced through library network. 


17.4.4 Data Interpretation 


A high number of active library users indicates that the 
city’s libraries meet the needs of the population and that 
libraries help to educate the population. 


18 TELECOMMUNICATION 


18.1 Percentage of the City Population with Access 
to Sufficient Speed Broadband 


18.1.1 General 


Broadband may be defined as a data transmission 
capacity associated with a particular speed of 
transmission and the provision of high-speed Internet 
access. Broadband provides support to applications 
such as web-browsing, video services IP TV, and so 
forth. Broadly speaking, broadband infrastructure is 
the underlying communication infrastructure that is 
deployed to enable the provision of broadband services, 
that is, Internet access at a certain speed/bandwidth. 


Sufficient broadband and broadband speed enable 
individuals to exercise their right to freedom of opinion 
and expression, and promotes the progress of society 
through wider access to information. 


18.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city population with access 
to sufficiently fast broadband shall be calculated as 
the total number of people in the city with access to 
sufficiently fast broadband (numerator) divided by 
the city’s total population (denominator). The total 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of the city population with access to 
sufficiently fast broadband. 


Broadband shall refer to the data transmission capacity 
associated with a particular speed of transmission 
and the provision of high-speed Internet access. 
Broadband provides support to applications such as 
web-browsing, video services IP TV, and so forth. 
Broadly speaking, broadband infrastructure is the 
underlying communication infrastructure that is 
deployed to enable the provision of broadband services, 
that is, Internet access at a certain speed/bandwidth. 


Sufficiently fast broadband shall refer to a network 
capable of speeds of no less than 256 kbit/s in both 
directions, uploading and downloading. This speed is 
sufficient for Internet surfing and emailing. Sufficient 
speed shall take into consideration the potential 
demands from service providers and their recipients on 
the network. 


18.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of people with access to sufficient 
speed broadband data should be sourced from telecom 
operators. 


18.2 Percentage of City Area under a White 
Zone/Dead Spot/Not Covered by Telecommunication 
Connectivity 


18.2.1 General 


Telecommunication enables not only communication 
without barriers, but access to services such as the 
Internet. White zones and dead spots are therefore 
a hindrance to communication and access to basic 
services. 


18.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city area under a white zone/dead 
spot/not covered by telecommunication connectivity 
shall be calculated as the total city land area classified 
as being under a white zone/ dead spot/not covered by 
telecommunication connectivity in square kilometres 
(numerator) divided by the city’s total land area in 
square kilometres (denominator). The result shall then 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
city area under a white zone/dead spot/not covered by 
telecommunication connectivity. 


A white zone/dead  spot/not covered by 
telecommunication connectivity shall be defined as 
an area without telecommunication (that is, internet, 
telephone or mobile) connectivity and function, 
typically due to radio interference or range issues. 


18.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the city area under a white zone/dead/not 
covered by telecommunication connectivity spot 
should be sourced from telecom operators and internet 
providers. 


23 


IS 17738 : 2022 


18.3 Percentage of City Area Covered by Municipally 
provided Internet Connectivity 


18.3.1 General 


A public internet connection allows people to connect 
to the internet that may not have mobile data plans or 
regular internet access-enabling them to take advantage 
of the enormous economic and social benefits the 
Internet can offer. In addition, publicly accessible 
internet can help enable municipalities to passively 
track users for future planning purposes. 


18.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city area covered by municipally 
provided internet connectivity shall be calculated as 
the total land area of the city serviced with internet 
connectivity in square kilometres (numerator) divided 
by the city’s total land area in square kilometres 
(denominator). The total shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of city area 
covered by municipally provided internet connectivity. 


Municipally provided internet connectivity shall refer 
to internet connectivity services provided by the city 
or third party providers under license by the city to the 
public and shall be accessible by anyone within city 
limits regardless of if they are a resident or visitor of 
the city. 


Publicly available places for internet connectivity shall 
be defined by location, not by routers. For example, if 
multiple routers exist within a park, the park would be 
considered as only one place. 


18.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the city area covered by municipally provided 
internet connectivity should be sourced from telecom 
operators. 


19 TRANSPORTATION 


19.1 Percentage of City Streets and Thorough fares 
Covered by Real-Time Online Traffic Alerts and 
Information 


19.1.1 General 


The prominence and growth of online civic tools 
has created a culture of sharing civic data in 
real-time, including online traffic alerts and 
information. This data can be user-driven by utilizing 
geospatial crowdsourcing of mobile data, or collected 
through sensors or cameras installed by road and 
transportation authorities. The application of such 
technologies enables authorities to efficiently plan for 
future conditions, and for users to effectively travel 
through city streets and thoroughfares. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


19.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of city streets and thoroughfares covered 
by real-time online traffic alerts and information shall 
be calculated as the number of street and thoroughfare 
kilometres within the city covered by real-time online 
traffic alerts and information (numerator) divided by 
the total number of street and thoroughfare kilometres 
within city limits (denominator). The result shall then 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage 
of city streets and thoroughfares covered by real-time 
online traffic alerts and information. 


Streets and thoroughfares shall refer to all local roads, 
streets and major and minor arterial roads of the city. 


A real-time information system shall refer to any 
information processing system which has to respond 
to externally generated input stimuli within a finite 
and specified period. In the context of online traffic 
alerts and information, real-time corresponds to the 
traffic information that is instantaneously available and 
reflects the current traffic levels at any given time. 


19.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on streets and thoroughfares covered by real-time 
online traffic alerts and information should be sourced 
from command and control centre. 


19.2 Number of Users of Sharing 
Transportation per 100 000 Population 


Economy 


19.2.1 General 


Cities are increasingly utilizing sharing economy 
transportation to supplement existing mobility needs. 
The extent to which policymakers and planners are 
aware of the number of users of sharing economy 
transportation in the city will allow for better 
development of plans and reconfiguration of a city’s 
transportation system to accommodate for these 
changes. 


19.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of users of sharing economy transportation 
per 100,000 population shall be calculated as the total 
number of users actively using sharing economy 
transportation (numerator) divided by one 100 000" 
of the city’s total population (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of users of the sharing 
economy transportation per 100,000 population. 


The sharing economy shall refer to any form of 
economic activity where platforms enable providers 
and customers to exchange, often underutilized, goods 
and services using information technology. The sharing 
economy consists of marketplaces and platforms that 
allow individuals and organizations to buy and sell 
goods and services directly from one another, and 
rent, share or lend goods or assets on a short-term or 
time-share basis. Sharing economy transportation for 
this indicator shall refer to any transportation modes in 


24 


which individuals are able to utilize assets owned by 
another individual or organization, such as ride sharing 
services and automobile sharing services. 


19.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of users of sharing economy 
transportation data should be sourced from transport 
department. 


19.3 Percentage of Vehicles Registered in the City 
that are Low-Emission Vehicles 


Low-emission vehicles provide an alternative to 
traditional vehicles operating through internal 
combustion which expel noxious gasses such as 
unburned hydrocarbons. Low emission vehicles have 
the potential to improve local air quality. 


19.3.1 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of vehicles registered in the city that 
are low-emission vehicles shall be calculated as the 
total number of registered and approved low-emission 
vehicles registered in the city (numerator) divided 
by the total number of registered vehicles in the city 
(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as a percentage of vehicles registered 
in the city that are low-emission vehicles. 


Low-emission vehicles (LEVs) shall refer to vehicles 
that emit low levels of emissions and may include 
electric, hybrid, and hydrogen fuel cell driven vehicles. 
LEVs shall be certified under appropriate exhaust 
emissions standards and the vehicle shall meet other 
special requirements applicable to conventional or 
clean-fuel vehicles and their fuels. 


Regarding the term ‘low-emission’ the need to consider 
the energy source needs to be highlighted. 


19.3.2 Data Sources 


The number of registered and approved low-emission 
vehicles should be sourced from transport department. 


19.4 Number of Bicycles available through 
Municipally provided Bicycle Sharing Services per 
100 000 Population 


19.4.1 General 


Bicycle sharing or a bike-share scheme is a service 
in which bicycles are made available for shared 
use to individuals on a short-term basis. Generally, 
individuals are able to borrow and return the bike at 
different locations. Bicycle sharing promotes greater 
rates of bicycle use in cities by reducing traditional 
barriers to ridership, including costs, bicycle theft, 
and repair. Bicycle sharing provides an alternative or 
addition to traditional transportation methods, such as 
public transportation or driving. This indicator provides 
municipalities with a measure of the availability of 
bicycles in the bicycle share system. 


19.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number of bicycles available through municipally 
provided bicycle sharing services per 100 000 population 
shall be calculated as the total number of bicycles 
available through municipally provided bicycle sharing 
services in the city (numerator) divided by one 100 000" 
of the city’s total population (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the number of bicycles available 
through municipally provided bicycle sharing services 
per 100 000 population. 


Bicycle sharing services shall refer to a bicycle sharing 
system with bicycles available through self-serve 
docking stations, or person operated docking stations, 
located throughout a city, where bicycles can be rented 
as needed. Users should be able to rent and return 
bicycles to any docking station within the bicycle 
sharing system. Municipally provided bicycle sharing 
services shall refer to bicycle sharing services funded 
and operated by the city. 


19.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of bicycles available through 
bicycle sharing services in the city should be sourced 
from transport department. 


19.5 Percentage of Public Transport Lines Equipped 
with a Real-Time System 


19.5.1 General 


Real-time information on public transport lines that 
can be shared with citizens can help people in the city 
avoid traffic congestion or wait for a service that isn’t 
going to arrive. Real-time service alerts keep citizens 
well-informed of what’s happening with the city’s 
public transport lines. 


19.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public transport lines equipped with 
a real-time system shall be calculated as the number 
of public transport lines that are equipped with a 
real-time system to provide people with real-time 
operation information (numerator) divided by the total 
number of public transport lines within the city limits 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of public transport 
lines equipped with a real-time system. 


A public transport line shall refer to a portion of the 
public transport network where a public transport 
vehicle departs and arrives from two points of the 
public transport network in one single continuous trip, 
and follows a timetable with driving and stopping 
times, which should be the same at all times; and 
the computation of this indicator shall include both 
rail-based and road-based public transport. A public 
transport line shall be distinguished from a public 
transport route when computing this indicator, such 
that a public transport route may include multiple 
public transport lines. 


25 


IS 17738 : 2022 


A real-time system shall refer to any information 
processing system which has to respond to externally 
generated input stimuli within a finite and specified 
period, and provides instantaneous information 
to users. In the context of public transport lines, a 
real-time system shall be a system that provides 
timely information to users on usage and current 
volume of users utilizing public transport lines, so that 
transportation can be planned accordingly in the most 
efficient manner. The information provided should 
not only limited to users of a specific transport line, 
but be available to public to allow citizens to choose 
transportation modes. 


19.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on the percentage of public transport lines 
equipped with a real-time ICT-based system should be 
sourced command and control centre of the city. 


19.6 Percentage of the City Public Transport 
Network Covered by a Unified Payment System 


19.6.1 General 


An integrated payment system is one that allows 
for standardized payment across multiple public 
transportation operators. Such systems encourage 
multiple modal transportation across transportation 
modes such as bus, LRT, subway, and trains, etc., and 
reduces the need for public transport users to stop and 
pay at multiple transfer points during a single trip. A 
unified payment system for public transport users is not 
limited to a specific transport line or mode, but covers 
all types of public transportation modes. 


19.6.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city public transport network 
covered by a unified payment system shall be 
calculated as the number of kilometres of the city 
public transport network covered by a unified payment 
system (numerator) divided by the total kilometres of 
a city’s public transport network (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of the city public transport network 
covered by a unified payment system. 


A city’s public transport network shall cover the 
transportation infrastructure within the public 
right-of-way, including the public realm that provide 
public transportation services. Public transport refers to 
travel services provided locally by the city that allow 
a number of people to travel together along set routes, 
the most common public transport vehicles that form 
a public transport network can include transportation 
services provided and/or managed by the city, such as 
buses, boats, subways, trains, shared bicycles, shared 
vehicles, etc. 


A unified payment system shall refer to an integrated 
mobility payments system that allows transit users to 
plan, book, and pay for multiple modes of transit to 


IS 17738 : 2022 


get them from point A to point B. A unified payment 
system should include an ICT/technology-based user 
interface, such as smart cards or mobile ticketing, and 
unified pricing structures, such that a transit user need 
not pay at multiple points of transfer when making a 
single trip. 

The unified payment system shall be careful about how 
the generated data is used, taking all the privacy and 
security measures needed to ensure that this information 
will only be used for the benefit of citizen. 


19.6.3 Data Sources 


Data on the percentage of city public transport network 
covered by a unified payment system should be sourced 
transport department and banks. 


19.7 Percentage of Public Parking Spaces Equipped 
with E-Payment Systems 


19.7.1 General 


E-payment systems offer easier methods of payment 
for the public, as an e-payment system is not dependent 
on cash or cheques and lessens time in line ups to 
make payment. An e-payment system also creates the 
opportunity for smart pricing, depending on time of day 
or frequency of use. 


19.7.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public parking spaces equipped with 
e-payment systems shall be calculated as the number 
of public parking spaces equipped with an e-payment 
system as a payment method (numerator) divided by 
the total number of public parking spaces in the city 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of public parking 
spaces equipped with e-payment systems. 


Public parking lots shall be counted by their capacity, 
and street parking shall be counted by individual paid 
spaces. 


An e-payment system shall refer to a way of making 
transactions or paying for goods and services through 
an electronic medium without the use of check or cash, 
such as a credit card or online or mobile application. 


19.7.3 Data Sources 


The percentage of public parking spaces equipped with 
e-payment systems should be sourced from urban local 
body. 


19.8 Percentage of Public Parking Spaces Equipped 
with Real-Time Availability Systems 


19.8.1 General 


Real-time systems help to distribute information on 
parking space availability, hours of operation, fee 
guidelines and accessibility options. In addition, 


26 


real-time systems help people to more efficiently 
identify available public parking spaces, thus, helping 
to reduce fuel use and vehicle emissions that are 
associated with people looking for parking. 


19.8.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public parking spaces equipped with 
real-time availability systems shall be calculated as the 
number of public parking spaces that are equipped with 
real-time availability systems (numerator) divided by 
the total number of public parking spaces in the city 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of public parking 
spaces with real-time availability systems. 


Public parking lots shall be counted by their capacity 
(that is, number of public spaces), and street parking 
shall be counted by individual paid spaces. 


Real-time availability systems for public parking 
spaces shall include any form of technology that 
provides instantaneous information, such as through 
mobile and/or online applications, on the availability of 
public parking spaces (that is, number of public parking 
spaces available). 


19.8.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of public parking spaces with real- 
time availability systems should be sourced from urban 
local body and transport department. 


19.9 Percentage of Traffic Lights that are Intelligent/ 
Smart 


19.9.1 General 


Intelligent/smart traffic lights are defined as any traffic 
light systems that utilize a combination of traffic lights, 
sensors and algorithms to control both vehicle and 
pedestrian traffic in an optimal manner. They may also 
predict the path of emergency responders to reduce 
response time. 


19.9.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of traffic lights that are intelligent/smart 
shall be calculated as the number of traffic lights in the 
city that are intelligent/smart (numerator) divided by the 
total number of traffic lights in the city (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of traffic lights that are intelligent/smart. 


Intelligent/smart traffic lights shall be defined as 
any traffic light systems that utilize a combination 
of traffic lights, sensors and other information and 
communication technologies, and algorithms to control 
both vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 


Multiple traffic lights at the same intersection for traffic 
heading in the same direction shall be counted as a 
single traffic light. 


19.9.3 Data Sources 


Data on the percentage of traffic lights that are 
intelligent/smart should be sourced from transport 
department and command and control centre of the city. 


19.10 City Area Mapped by Real-Time Interactive 
Street Maps as a Percentage of City’s Total Land 
Area 


19.10.1 General 


Real-time interactive street maps provide people with 
up-to-date information when commuting throughout 
the city, or planning travels around the city, allowing 
people to more efficiently plan travel, as well as identify 
points of access that accommodate persons with special 
needs accessibility. 


19.10.2 Indicator Requirements 


City area mapped by real-time interactive street maps as 
a percentage of city’s total land area shall be calculated 
as the total city area mapped by real-time interactive 
street maps (numerator) divided by the city’s total land 
area (denominator). The result shall then be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as city area mapped by real-time 
interactive street maps as a percentage of city’s total 
land area. 


Real-time interactive street maps shall refer to street 
maps generated by a Geographic Information System 
(GIS) and contain locations on the map that respond 
when the mouse, web-cursor or touch pad moves over 
it, off of it, or clicks it. The locations may correspond 
to business locations or buildings that are accessible to 
persons with special needs. Real-time shall refer to the 
instantaneous updating of information on the interactive 
street map to reflect the most up-to-date changes to an 
area, such as road construction or a business location 
change. Street maps should cover the city’s pedestrian 
and sidewalk network and public transport network. 


19.10.3 Data Sources 


Data on the area mapped by real-time interactive street 
maps should be sourced from transport departments. 


19.11 Percentage of Vehicles Registered in the City 
that are Autonomous Vehicles 


19.11.1 General 


Autonomous vehicles could reduce traffic fatalities by 
eliminating accidents caused by human error, which 
could be the most significant advance in auto safety 
history by shifting the focus from minimization of 
post-crash injury to collision prevention altogether. 


19.11.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of vehicles registered in the city that 
are autonomous vehicles shall be calculated as the total 
number of autonomous vehicles registered in the city 
(numerator) divided by the total number of registered 


27 


IS 17738 : 2022 


vehicles in the city (denominator). The result shall 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as a percentage 
of vehicles registered in the city that are autonomous 
vehicles. 


Autonomous vehicles shall refer to vehicles that are 
self-driving (that is,, no need of a human driver). 


19.11.3 Data Sources 


The number of autonomous vehicles registered in the 
city should be sourced from transport department. 


19.12 Percentage of Public Transport Routes with 
Municipally provided and/or Managed Internet 
Connectivity for Commuters 


19.12.1 General 


A public internet connection allows people to connect 
to the internet that may not have mobile data plans or 
regular internet access-enabling them to take advantage 
of the enormous economic and social benefits the 
Internet can offer. In addition, publicly accessible 
internet can help enable municipalities to passively 
track users for future planning purposes. 


19.12.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of public transport routes with 
municipally provided and/or managed internet 
connectivity for commuters shall be calculated as the 
number of kilometres of public transport routes in the 
city with municipally provided and/or managed internet 
connectivity for commuters (numerator) divided by the 
total number of kilometres of public transport routes in 
the city (denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of public transport 
routes with municipally provided and/or managed 
internet connectivity for commuters. 


Municipally provided and/or managed internet 
connectivity shall refer to internet connectivity 
services provided and/or managed by the city or third 
party providers under license by the city to the public 
and shall be accessible by anyone within city limits 
regardless of if they are a resident or visitor of the city. 


19.12.3 Data Sources 


The data regarding the percentage of public transport 
routes with municipally provided and/or managed 
internet connectivity for commuters should be sourced 
urban local body and transport department. 


19.13 Percentage of Roads 
Autonomous Driving Systems 


Compliant with 


19.13.1 General 


Road compliance with automated driving system 
requires database that define accurately roads (type 
of road, number of lanes, traffic data) as well as 
infrastructures that ensuring a real time localization of 
the autonomous vehicles (for example, availability of 


IS 17738 : 2022 


communication network infrastructures (GNSS, wifi, 
5G, etc). 


19.13.2 Indicator Requirement 


The percentage of roads compliant with autonomous 
driving systems shall be calculated as the number of 
kilometres of road compliant with autonomous driving 
systems (numerator), divided by the total number of 
kilometres of road (denominator). The result shall then 
be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage 
of roads compliant with autonomous driving systems. 


19.13.3 Data Sources 


The data regarding the percentage of roads compliant 
with autonomous driving system should be sourced 
from transport department. 


19.14 Percentage of Vehicles Fined for Traffic 
Violations making a Payment through an Online 
E-Fine System 


19.14.1 General 


Providing citizens with a service to pay traffic violation 
fines online offers a convenient service for payment. 


19.14.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of vehicles fined for traffic violations 
making a payment through an online e-fine system shall 
be calculated the number of vehicles that make a traffic 
violation fine payment through an online e-fine system 
(numerator) divided by the total number of vehicles 
that have made traffic violation fine payments either 
through online and/or in-person/mail (denominator). 
The result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed 
as the percentage of vehicles fined for traffic violations 
making a payment through an online e-fine system. 


Traffic violations shall refer an offence that occurs when 
drivers violate laws that regulate vehicle operation on 
streets and highways (that is, speeding, overdue parking 
meters, etc). 


An online e-fine system shall refer to an online system 
that allows people who have received fines to make 
electronic payments of fines online and often without 
the need to go to court. 


19.14.3 Data Sources 
Data on vehicles fined for traffic violations making a 
payment through traffic police department. 


20 URBAN/LOCAL 
FOOD SECURITY 


AGRICULTURE AND 


20.1 Annual Percentage of Municipal Budget Spent 
on Urban Agriculture Initiatives 


20.1.1 General 


Urban agriculture can make an important contribution 
to household food security, especially in times of crisis 


28 


or food shortages. In addition, locally produced food 
requires less transportation and refrigeration, thus, can 
help conserve energy. 


20.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual percentage of municipal budget spent on 
urban agriculture initiatives shall be calculated as 
the total amount of the city budget spent on urban 
agriculture initiatives for a given year (numerator) 
divided by the city’s total municipal budget for the same 
year (denominator). The result shall then be multiplied 
by 100 and expressed as the annual percentage of 
municipal budget spent on urban agriculture initiatives. 


Urban agriculture (UA) shall be defined as the growing 
of plants and food products from different types of 
crops (grains, root crops, vegetables, mushrooms, 
fruits). UA may also include trees managed for 
producing fruit, and small-scale aquaculture. In many 
cities globally, the raising of animals (poultry, rabbits, 
goats, sheep, cattle, pigs, guinea pigs, etc.) within city 
limits is prohibited by law so will not be included in this 
indicator. UA initiatives or programmes shall refer to 
any activity connected to the above definition of UA or 
supporting UA activities, such as city grants available 
to UA producers and businesses that may support 
the development innovative technologies for urban 
agriculture (that is, mobile applications to monitor crop 
yield) or simply provide UA producers and businesses 
with resources to support operations in general. 


20.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on amount of municipal budget spent on urban 
agriculture initiatives should be sourced urban local 
body/agriculture department. 


20.1.4 Data interpretation 


Supporting urban agriculture enables local production 
with short supply chains in the cities, thus, playing a 
role in the future of environmental and socio-economic 
sustainability in smart cities. 


20.2 Annual Total Collected Municipal Food Waste 
Sent to a Processing Facility for Composting per 
Capita (In Tonnes) 


20.2.1 General 


Although food is essential for life and organic materials 
are critical for healthy soils, significant amounts of 
food waste and other organic materials end up going 
to disposal. There is growing recognition, both within 
cities and globally, that food and organic wastes are 
a growing problem and current waste management 
practices are not sustainable. The negative impact 
this waste has on a city’s economy and environment 
is significant. There are environmental consequences 
to sending food and organic materials to disposal. The 
environmental benefits of recycling and composting 
food waste can be significant. Composting transforms 


food waste into something usable: fertilizer, which 
can then be used in agriculture and food production, 
enhancing food productivity and promoting smart, 
sustainable growth. 


20.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual total collected municipal food waste sent 
to a processing facility for composting per capita (in 
tonnes) shall be calculated as the total amount of food 
waste (household and commercial) collected in tonnes 
(numerator) divided by the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
annual total collected municipal food waste sent to a 
processing facility for composting per capita in tonnes. 


Composting shall refer to a natural biological process, 
carried out under controlled aerobic conditions (requires 
oxygen). In this process, various microorganisms, 
including bacteria and fungi, break down organic 
matter into simpler substances and converts waste to a 
useable organic soil amendment or mulch by providing 
adequate aeration, moisture, particle size, fertilizers 
and lime. The effectiveness of the composting process 
is dependent upon the environmental conditions 
present within the composting system that is, oxygen, 
temperature, moisture, material disturbance, organic 
matter and the size and activity of microbial populations. 
Thus, a processing facility for composting shall refer to 
a facility that carries out composting. 


Food waste refers to discarding of unconsumed food 
that is safe and nutritious for human consumption along 
the entire food supply chain, from primary production 
to end user (residential and commercial) consumer. 
Food waste is recognized as a distinct part of food loss 
because the drivers that generate it and the solutions to 
it are different from those of food losses. Food waste 
shall refer to any food, and inedible parts of food, 
removed from the food supply chain to be recovered 
or disposed. 


20.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on municipal food waste collected should be 
sourced from urban local body/agencies. 


20.2.4 Data Interpretation 


Acity with a high annual total collected municipal food 
waste sent to a processing facility for composting per 
capita (in tonnes) is indicative of a city that is diverting 
and reducing the amount of waste that needs to be 
disposed of, and in turn, mitigating the environmental 
impacts associated with municipal solid waste. As well, 
the city is converting food waste into a product that is 
useful for agriculture and improving soil for greater 
food growth productivity. 


29 


IS 17738 : 2022 


21 URBAN PLANNING 


21.1 Annual number of Citizens Engaged in the 
Planning Process per 100 000 Population 


21.1.1 General 


Citizen engagement is considered a key attribute in 
the planning and policy process. Successful citizen 
engagement improves planning and policy. The 
community will feel more included in the greater plan 
of the municipality, since the community will have their 
input considered in the municipal government plan. 


21.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The annual number of citizens engaged in the planning 
process per 100 000 population shall be calculated as 
the total number of citizens participating, or engaged 
in the planning process on an annual basis (numerator) 
divided by one 100 000" of the city’s total population 
(denominator). The result shall be expressed as the 
annual number of citizens engaged in the planning 
process per 100 000 population. 


The planning process shall refer to the official plan and 
other city plans. 


The definition of citizen engagement includes in-person 
attendance or involvement at events such as, community 
consultations, public hearings, pop-up city hall sessions 
and other participatory practices, for example, online 
hearings and webinars, etc. Citizen engagement may 
also include virtual attendance or involvement through 
social media or formal engagement tools such as online 
or paper surveys. 


21.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on citizen engagement should be sourced from 
attendance records of planning process engagements, 
hearings, and events (both online and in-person) 
frequently noted within planning reports from plan 
making agency. 


21.2 Average Time for Building Permit Approval 
(Days) 


21.2.1 General 


The development application and building permit 
approval process can hinder development feasibility 
and profitability. This indicator allows municipalities 
to compare their development application and building 
permit approval times with other municipalities to 
improve their internal processes. 


21.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The average time for building permit approval shall be 
calculated as the sum in days of building permits from 


IS 17738 : 2022 


start to completion (numerator) divided by the total 
number of building permits (denominator). The result 
shall be expressed as the average time for building 
permit approval in days. 


Building permit approvals shall include permits for 
new commercial buildings, commercial building 
renovations and non-residential construction projects, 
as well as large residential projects and small residential 
projects in, for example, detached, semi-detached and 
townhouse construction and renovation projects. 


21.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the average time for building permit approval 
should be sourced from urban local body/agencies. 


21.2.4 Data Interpretation 


Cities with a relatively low average time for building 
permit approval may have a more efficient permit 
approval system in place. However, it should be noted 
that there may be difficulties in comparing cities 
directly when considering differences in regulatory 
environments in which building permit approvals 
take place and the potential for less stringent or more 
stringent building permit requirements. 


21.3 Percentage of Building Permits Submitted 
through an Electronic Submission System 


21.3.1 General 


The building permit application and building permit 
approval process can hinder development feasibility 
and profitability. Making available the option for a 
building permit application submission to be completed 
electronically may help to expedite the process of 
building permitting by eliminating the need for city staff 
to perform routine data entry and enabling applicants to 
submit building permits more quickly. 


21.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of building permits submitted through 
an electronic submission system shall be calculated as 
the number of building permits submitted through an 
electronic submission system (numerator) divided by 
the total number of building permits submitted through 
an electronic submission system and an in-person 
manual system (that is, paper application). The result 
shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as the 
percentage of building permits submitted through an 
electronic submission system. 


An electronic submission system shall refer to an 
online system that allows an applicant to fill out a web- 
based application form and submit a building permit 
electronically, which the electronic submission system 
also allows an applicant to upload any supporting 
documents directly online. 


30 


21.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on the number of building permits submitted 
through an electronic submission system should be 
sourced from urban local body/agencies. 


21.4 Percentage of the City Population Living in 
Medium-To-High Population Densities 


21.4.1 General 


Population density is the number of people living in 
a particular urban area and is an important aspect of 
how cities function. Urban planners advocate higher 
population densities because of the widely held theory 
that cities operate more efficiently when residents live 
in denser urban surroundings. A higher population 
density can contribute to smart growth, given that 
other aspects, such as automobile dependency is less 
of an issue. The growth is smart because it is meant 
to be sustainable and long-lasting, and not be solely 
dependent on automobile use. 


21.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city population living at 
medium-to-high urban densities shall be calculated as the 
number of people living in a medium-to-high population 
densityarea(numerator)dividedbythecity’stotalpopulation 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of the city population 
living at medium-to-high population densities. 


A medium-to-high population density shall be defined 
as a population density that is more than 4 800 persons 
per square kilometres. 


21.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on population density should be sourced from 
urban local body/statistics department. 


22 WASTEWATER 


22.1 Percentage of Treated Wastewater Being 
Reused 


22.1.1 General 


Wastewater reuse is a key point to save water in areas 
where scarcity is increasing and lack of water may occur 
during the year. It is a solution consistent with circular 
economy principles that help to face climate changes 
and adaptation challenges. It is also a way to prevent 
discharge of untreated wastewater in the environment. 


22.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of treated wastewater being reused 
shall be calculated as the total annual volume of 
treated wastewater that is reused (numerator) divided 
by the total annual volume of treated wastewater 


(denominator). The result shall be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of treated 
wastewater being reused. 


22.1.3 Data Sources 


Data on the percentage of wastewater being reused 
should be sourced from urban local body/agencies. 


22.2 Percentage of Biosolids that is Reused (Dry 
Matter Tonnes) 


22.2.1 General 


Biosolids might have significant content of minerals 
(that is, N, P), oligo-elements and organic matter that 
can be reused either for agricultural fertilizing and soil 
improving, or for calorific value in energy-from-waste 
plants or digestion facilities to produce biomethane that 
is reusable for gas injection or fuel production. Biosolids 
reuse is an important component of the circular 
economy, helping to reduce discharge or disposal of 
biosolids into the environment. Some types of biosolids 
reuse can help to mitigate expected decreases in mineral 
resources such as phosphorus. Production of new 
phosphorus resources, such as struvite, will therefore be 
needed in the future. 


22.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of biosolids that are reused shall be 
calculated as the total annual quantity of biosolids that 
are reused in dry matter mass (numerator) divided by 
the total annual quantity of biosolids produced and 
measured at site outlets in the city in dry matter mass 
(denominator). The result shall then be multiplied by 
100 and expressed as the percentage of biosolids that 
are reused in dry matter mass. 


Quantity of biosolids measured at site outlets is 
expressed in dry matter tonnes (including additives). 
The quantity reused per year includes all uses except 
landfilling and incineration without heat recovery. 


Biosolids shall refer to residues obtained after 
wastewater treatment or sanitation. Biosolids 
characteristics are different from one source to another, 
depending on the type of initial effluents and type of 
treatment applied. Solid waste and sand from screening 
are not included in this definition. 


Biosolids considered in the calculation of this indicator 
can originate from: 


a) stormwater handling; 
b) night soil; 

c) 
d) 
e) 


urban wastewater collecting systems; 
urban wastewater treatment plants; 


treating industrial wastewater similar to urban 
wastewater; and 


f) 


However, hazardous sludge from industry is excluded. 


water supply treatment plants. 


31 


IS 17738 : 2022 


22.2.3 Data Sources 


Data on the annual quantity of biosolids reused and 
the total annual quantity of biosolids produced in the 
city should be sourced from relevant city departments 
or institutions that are responsible for solid waste, 
wastewater and sewage system management. Data 
can also be sourced from local utility providers, if 
applicable. 


22.3 Energy Derived from Wastewater as a 
Percentage of Total Energy Consumption of the City 


22.3.1 General 


Wastewater which has significant organic matter 
content can be a source of energy either directly by 
recovering heat from wastewater within the wastewater 
network, or by producing energy from the digestion of 
wastewater or sludge or other new technologies using 
this energy for cogeneration, bio methane production 
for injection in the gas network, or for fuel production. 


In a context where energy consumption from fossil 
energy resources has to be decreased for sustainable 
development purposes, it is advantageous to use this 
source of heat, electricity, gas or fuel for other services 
across the city (that is, heating of swimming pools, fuels 
for city vehicle fleet, energy sales to local industries 
etc.). In case of disadvantages of fossil energy tariffs, 
it is also a way for the city to achieve a level of energy 
independence. 


22.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


Energy derived from wastewater as a percentage of 
total energy consumption of the city shall be calculated 
as the sum of the total annual quantity of energy derived 
from the network of wastewater and wastewater 
treatment plants (numerator) divided by the total 
energy consumption of the city (denominator). The 
result shall then be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
energy derived from wastewater as a percentage of total 
energy consumption of the city 


Energy derived from the wastewater network and 
wastewater treatment plants, and total energy 
consumption of the city shall be expressed in gigajoules 
(GJ) per year. 


22.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on a city’s total energy consumption can be 
derived from the ISO 37120 indicator ‘Energy use per 
capita’ multiplied by the population number of the city. 
Data on the amount of energy derived from wastewater 
should be sourced from urban local body/agencies. 


22.4 Percentage of Total Amount of Wastewater in 
the City that is Used to Generate Energy 


22.4.1 General 


Wastewater which has significant organic matter 
content can be a source of energy either directly by 


IS 17738 : 2022 


recovering heat from wastewater within the wastewater 
network, or by producing energy from the digestion of 
wastewater or sludge or other new technologies using 
this energy for cogeneration, bio methane production 
for injection in the gas network, or for fuel production. 


In a context where energy consumption from fossil 
energy resources has to be decreased for sustainable 
development purposes, it is advantageous to use this 
source of heat, electricity, gas or fuel for other services 
across the city (that is, heating of swimming pools, fuels 
for city vehicle fleet, energy sales to local industries 
etc.). In case of disadvantages of fossil energy tariffs, 
it is also a way for the city to achieve a level of energy 
independence. 


22.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


Percentage of total amount of wastewater in the city 
that is used to generate energy shall be calculated as the 
total amount of wastewater utilized to generate energy 
(numerator) divided by the total amount of wastewater 
in the city (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
total quantity of wastewater in the city that is used to 
generate energy. 


Energy generated from the wastewater network or 
treatment plant shall be expressed in gigajoules (GJ) 
per year. 


22.4.3 Data Sources 


Data on the quantity of wastewater in the city in total 
and the total amount of wastewater in the city that is 
used to generate energy should be sourced from urban 
local body/ agencies. 


22.5 Percentage of the Wastewater Pipeline Network 
Monitored by a Real-Time Data Tracking Sensor 
System 


22.5.1 General 


Equipping a city’s wastewater pipeline network with 
sensor-based technologies allows for the continuous 
measurement of the level of the effluents circulating 
in the network, the detection of discharges to storm 
spillways and the calculation of flow and volume 
of discharges into the environment and potential 
cost reductions. In addition, a wastewater pipeline 
network with a sensor-based system allows the remote 
management and operation of sewage networks 
and rainwater, detecting any kind of problem and 
proceeding with quick and efficient solutions. 


22.5.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the wastewater pipeline network 
monitored with a real-time data tracking sensor system 
shall be calculated as the length of the wastewater 
pipeline network monitored by a real-time data tracking 
sensor system in kilometres (numerator) divided by 


32 


the total length of the wastewater pipeline network 
in kilometres (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage 
of the wastewater pipeline network monitored with a 
real-time data tracking sensor system. 


A sensor system shall refer to a network of devices 
(that is, sensors) that detect and respond to some type 
of input from the physical environment. A real-time 
data tracking sensor system for the wastewater pipeline 
network shall refer to a sensor system that provides 
instantaneous data on the wastewater pipeline network. 


22.5.3 Data Sources 


Data on the wastewater pipeline network should be 
source from relevant urban local body. 


23 WATER 


23.1 Percentage of Drinking Water under Water 
Quality Monitoring by a Real-Time Water Quality 
Monitoring Station 


23.1.1 General 


A real-time ICT-based system for monitoring drinking 
water quality can help in informing city residents of 
drinking water quality and mitigate any health impacts 
that may occur due to poor drinking water quality. By 
using an ICT-based system in drinking water quality 
monitoring, this can provide real-time observation, 
such that the information is instantaneous at any given 
time, allowing for real-time data processing, analysis 
and giving people timely information on the safety of a 
city’s drinking water quality. 


23.1.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of drinking water under water quality 
monitoring by a real-time water quality monitoring 
station shall be calculated as the amount of drinking 
water that has undergone water quality monitoring 
by a real-time water quality monitoring station in 
the city (numerator) divided by the total amount of 
drinking water distributed in the city (denominator). 
The result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of drinking water under water quality 
monitoring by a real-time water quality monitoring 
station. 


A monitoring station shall refer to a physical structure 
or device that uses specialized equipment and analytical 
methods to track pollutant levels of the city’s drinking 
water. 


Areal-time system shall refer to any form of technology 
that provides instantaneous information, such as mobile 
applications. 


23.1.3 Data Sources 


The amount of drinking water under water quality 
monitoring by a real-time water quality monitoring 


station should be sourced from pollution control 
board/agencies 


23.2 Number of Real-Time ICT-Based 
Environmental Water Quality Monitoring Stations 
per 100 000 Population 


23.2.1 General 


A real-time ICT-based system for monitoring 
environmental water quality can help in reducing 
climate change impacts on the environment and 
water ecosystems. Using an ICT-based system in 
environmental water monitoring can provide real-time 
observation, such that the information is instantaneous 
at any given time, allowing for real-time data processing 
and analysis-giving the city and people timely 
information on the safety of a city’s environmental 
water quality. 


23.2.2 Indicator Requirements 


The number ofreal-time ICT-based environmental water 
quality monitoring stations per 100 000 population 
shall be calculated as the total number of real-time 
ICT-based environmental water quality monitoring 
stations in the city (numerator) divided by one 
100 000th of the city’s total population (denominator). 
The result shall be expressed as the number of real-time 
ICT-based environmental water quality monitoring 
stations per 100 000 population. 


Environmental water shall refer to any water in a river 
or wetland that benefits the environment, for instance, 
water that is set aside in storage such as reservoirs and 
dams which is managed for plants and animals. 


A monitoring station shall refer to a physical structure 
or device that uses specialized equipment and analytical 
methods to track pollutant levels of environmental 
water. 


A real-time ICT-based system shall refer to any form 
of technology that provides instantaneous information 
such as mobile applications. More specifically, an ICT 
system is a set-up consisting of hardware, software, 
data and the people who use them. An ICT system 
commonly includes communications technology, 
such as the internet. It should be noted that ICT and 
computers are not the same thing-computers are the 
hardware that is often part of an ICT system. 


23.2.3 Data Sources 


The number of real-time ICT-based environmental 
water quality monitoring stations should be sourced 
from pollution control board/agencies. 


23.3 Percentage of the City’s Water Distribution 
Network Monitored by a Smart Water System 


23.3.1 General 


Cities should consider residential as well as commercial 
and industrial demand strains on water supplies, to 


33 


IS 17738 : 2022 


efficiently and effectively manage the water supply 
of the city. In addition, cities should manage the 
consumption and distribution of water with greater 
efficiency. Cities, public water utilities and industrial 
water users manage many different water infrastructure 
components through a variety of methods, such as 
supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) 
systems, sensors and meters. A smart water system is 
an integrated approach to manage water use in cities, 
and composes of network of sensors and meters that 
provide cities, public water utilities and industrial 
water users with information on water consumption 
and water leakage in the water distribution network. 


23.3.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of the city’s water distribution network 
monitored by a smart water system shall be calculated as 
the length of the water distribution network covered by 
a smart water system in kilometres (numerator) divided 
by the total length of the water distribution network 
in kilometres (denominator). The result shall then be 
multiplied by 100 and expressed as the percentage of 
the city’s water distribution network monitored by a 
smart water system. 


A smart water system shall refer to a network of sensors 
and meters that that enables the city and utilities to 
remotely monitor and diagnose problems in the water 
system network. It also provides the capability to 
prioritize and manage maintenance issues, using data 
to optimize all aspects of the water system network of 
water pipes. 


23.3.3 Data Sources 


Data on water system network and smart water systems 
should be sourced from urban local body/agencies. 


23.4 Percentage of Buildings in the City with Smart 
Water Meters 


23.4.1 General 


Smart water meters record and display the consumption 
of water in real-time. Smart meter data can be sent to 
a central location wirelessly, thus providing water 
providers with the means to understand how and when 
water is being used to better plan and conserve water. 
Also, a smart water meter data helps consumers better 
understand and monitor water usage. 


23.4.2 Indicator Requirements 


The percentage of buildings in the city with smart water 
meters shall be calculated as the number of buildings in 
the city with smart water meters (numerator) divided by 
the total number of buildings in the city (denominator). 
The result shall be multiplied by 100 and expressed as 
the percentage of buildings in the city with smart water 
meters. 


Data for public and commercial and industrial buildings 
shall be included and listed individually. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


Number of buildings 


in 


the city with smart water 


Percentage of 
buildings in the city 


Total number of buildings 
in the city 


meters with smart water 
meters 
Public buildings 
Commercial and Industrial 
buildings 


Public buildings shall refer to government owned or 
leased buildings such as government offices, public 
hospitals and public schools. 


Commercial and industrial properties shall refer to 
those which have been designated by the city for 
commercial and industrial use. 


A smart water meter shall refer to a water meter that 
includes a real-time digital display or be available 
through a real-time online application, so a customer 
can better understand their water usage. Also, a smart 
water meter can digitally send meter readings to a water 


34 


supplier for more accurate water bills, and for better 
planning and conservation of water by providers. 
23.4.3 Data Sources 

Data on smart water meters should be sourced from 
urban local body/agencies. 


24 REPORTING 
MAINTENANCE 


AND RECORD 


Reports on city indicators should compile the data 
required in the individual test methods used. 


IS 17738 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.5 ) 


MAPPING OF SMART CITY INDICATORS TO UNITED NATIONS SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs) (2015) 


SI No. 


Sustainable Development Goal (2015) 


Indicators of this Standard 


Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms 
everywhere 


13.2 Percentage of municipal budget allocated for 
provision of mobility aids, devices, and assistive 
technologies to persons with disabilities (PwDs) and 
the elderlies 


13.4 Percentage of municipal budget allocated for 
provision of programmes designated for bridging 
the digital divide 


ii) 


Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security 
and improved nutrition and promote 
sustainable agriculture 


20.1 Annual percentage of municipal budget spent 
on urban agriculture initiatives 

20.2 Annual total collected municipal food waste 
sent to a processing facility for composting per 
capita (in tonnes) 


iii) 


Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and pro-mote 
well-being for all at all ages 


8.2 Number of real-time remote air quality 
monitoring stations per square kilometre (km?) 


8.3 Percentage of public buildings equipped for 
monitoring indoor air quality 

11.1 Percentage of the city’s population with online 
unified health file accessible to health care providers 


11.2 Annual number of medical appointments 
conducted remotely per 100 000 population 


11.3 Percentage of the city population registered 
with public alert systems for air and water quality 
advisories 

23.1 Percentage of drinking water under water 
quality monitoring by a real-time water quality 
monitoring station 

23.3 Percentage of the city’s water distribution 
network monitored by a smart water system 


iv) 


Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable 
quality education and promote lifelong 
learning opportunities for all 


6.2 Percentage of city population with professional 
proficiency in one or more foreign language 


6.3 Number of computers, laptops, tablets, 
or other digital learning devices available per 
1 000 secondary school students 

6.4 Number of science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics (STEM) higher education degrees per 
100 000 population 

13.4 Percentage of municipal budget allocated for 
provision of programmes designated for bridging 
the digital divide 

17.3 Number of public library book and e-book titles 
per 100 000 population 


17.4 Percentage of city population that are active 
public library users 


35 


IS 17738 : 2022 


SI No. 


Sustainable Development Goal (2015) 


Indicators of this Standard 


v) 


Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and 
empower all women and girls 


vi) 


Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable 
management of water and sanitation for all 


12.3 Percentage of households with smart water 
meters 

22.1 Percentage of treated wastewater being reused. 
22.2 Percentage of biosolids that are reused (dry 
matter mass Tonnes) 

22.5 Percentage of the wastewater pipeline network 
monitored by a real-time data-tracking sensor system 
23.1 Percentage of drinking water under water 
quality monitoring by a real-time water quality 
monitoring station 

23.2 Number of real-time ICT-based environmental 
water quality monitoring stations per 100 000 
population 

23.3 Percentage of the city’s water distribution 
network monitored by a smart water system 

23.4 Percentage of buildings in the city with smart 
water meters 


vii) 


Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, 
reliable, sustainable and modern energy 
for all 


7.1 Percentage of electrical and thermal energy 
produced from wastewater treatment, solid waste 
and other liquid waste treatment and other waste 
heat resources, as a share of the city’s total energy 
mix for a given year 


7.2 Electrical and thermal energy (GJ) produced 
from wastewater treatment per capita per year 


7.3 Electrical and thermal energy (GJ) produced 
from solid waste or other liquid waste treatment per 
capita per year 

7.4 Percentage of the city’s electricity that is 
produced using decentralized electricity production 
systems 

7.5 Storage capacity of the city’s energy grid per 
total city energy consumption 

7. 6 Percentage of street lighting managed by a light 
performance management system 

7.7 Percentage of street lighting that has been 
refurbished and newly installed 

7.8 Percentage of public buildings requiring 
renovation/refurbishment 

7.9 Percentage of buildings in the city with smart 
electricity/energy meters 

8.1 Percentage of buildings built or refurbished 
within the last 5 years in conformity with green 
building principles 

12.2 Percentage of households with smart energy 
meters 


36 


IS 17738 : 2022 


SI No. 


Sustainable Development Goal (2015) 


Indicators of this Standard 


16 .3 Percentage of total amount of waste in the city 
that is used to generate energy 

22.3 Energy derived from wastewater as a percentage 
of total energy consumption of the city 

22.4 Percentage of total amount of wastewater in the 
city that is used to generate energy 


viii) 


Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth, full and 
productive employment and decent work 
for all 


5.2 Survival rate of new businesses 


100 000 population 

5.3 Percentage of work force employed in 
occupations in the information and communications 
technology (ICT) sector 


per 


5.4 Percentage of the labour force employed in 
occupations in the education and research and 
development sectors 


6.2 Percentage of city population with professional 
proficiency in one or more foreign language 


6.4 Number of science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics (STEM) higher education degrees per 
100 000 population 

13.4 Percentage of municipal budget allocated for 


provision of programmes designated for bridging 
the digital divide 


ix) 


Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, 
promote inclusive and sustainable 
industrialization and foster innovation 


5.3 Percentage of work force employed in 
occupations in the information and communications 
technology (ICT) sector 


5.4 Percentage of the labour force employed in 
occupations in the education and research and 
development sectors 


6.4 Number of science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics (STEM) higher education degrees per 
100 000 population 

7.5 Storage capacity of the city’s energy grid per 
total city energy consumption 

10.4 Average downtime of the city’s IT infrastructure 
13.4 Percentage of municipal budget allocated for 
provision of programmes designated for bridging 
the digital divide 

18.1 Percentage of the city population with access to 
sufficient speed broadband 

18.2 Percentage of city area under a white zone/dead 
spot/not covered by telecommunication connectivity 
18.3 Percentage of city area covered by municipally 
provided Internet connectivity 

19.1 Percentage of city streets and thoroughfares 
covered by real-time online traffic alerts and 
information 

19.5 Percentage of public transport lines equipped 
with a real-time system 


37 


IS 17738 : 2022 


SI No. 


Sustainable Development Goal (2015) 


Indicators of this Standard 


x) 


Goal 10: Reduce inequality within and 
among countries 


19.8 Percentage of public parking spaces equipped 
with real-time availability systems 


19.9 Percentage of traffic lights that are 
intelligent/smart 


19.12 Percentage of public transport routes with 
municipally provided and/or managed Internet 
connectivity for commuters 


19.13 Percentage of roads compliant with 
autonomous driving systems 


22.5 Percentage of the wastewater pipeline network 
monitored by a real-time data-tracking sensor system 


23.1 Percentage of drinking water under water 
quality monitoring by a real-time water quality 
monitoring station 


23.2 Number of real-time [CT-based 
environmental water quality monitoring stations per 
100 000 population 


23.3 Percentage of the city’s water distribution 
network monitored by a smart water system 


13.2 Percentage of municipal budget allocated for 
provision of mobility aids, devices and assistive 
technologies to Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) 
and the Elderlies 


13.4 Percentage of municipal budget allocated for 
provision of programmes designated for bridging 
the digital divide 


xi) 


Goal 11: Make cities and human 
settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and 
sustainable 


7.10 Number of electric vehicle charging stations 
per registered electric vehicle 


8.1 Percentage of buildings built or refurbished 
within the last 5 years in conformity with green 
building principles 

8.2 Number of real-time remote air quality 
monitoring stations per square kilometer (km?) 


8.3 Percentage of public buildings equipped for 
monitoring indoor air quality 

10.2 Percentage of city services accessible and that 
can be requested online 


11.3 Percentage of the city population with public 
alert systems for air and water quality advisories 


12.2 Percentage of households with smart energy 
meters 


13.1 Percentage of public buildings that are 
accessible by Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) and 
the Elderlies 


13.2 Percentage of municipal budget allocated for 
provision of mobility aids, devices and assistive 
technologies to Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) 
and the Elderlies 


38 


IS 17738 : 2022 


SI No. 


Sustainable Development Goal (2015) 


Indicators of this Standard 


13.3 Percentage of marked pedestrian crosswalks 
equipped with accessible pedestrian signals 


14.1 Percentage of public recreation services that 
can be booked online 


15.1 Percentage of the city area covered by digital 
surveillance cameras 


16.1 Percentage of waste drop-off centres 
(containers) equipped with telemetering 


16.2 Percentage of the city population that has a 
door-to-door garbage collection with an individual 
monitoring of household waste quantities 

16.3 Percentage of total amount of waste in the city 
that is used to generate energy 

16.4 Percentage of total amount of plastic waste 
recycled in the city 

16.5 Percentage of public garbage bins that are 
sensor-enabled public garbage bins 

16.6 Percentage of the city’s electrical and electronic 
waste that is recycled 

17.1 Number of online bookings to cultural facilities 
per 100 000 population 

17.2 Percentage of the city’s cultural records that 
have been digitised 

17.3 Number of public library book and e-book titles 
per 100 000 population 

17.4 Percentage of city population that are active 
public library users 

19.1 Percentage of city streets and thoroughfares 
covered by real-time online traffic alerts and 
information 

19.3 Percentage of vehicles registered in the city that 
are low-emission vehicles 

19.4 Number of bicycles available through 
municipally provided bicycle-sharing services per 
100 000 population 

19.5 Percentage of public transport lines equipped 
with a real-time system 

19.6 Percentage of the city’s public transport network 
covered by a unified payment system 

19.9 Percentage of traffic lights that are 
intelligent/smart 

19.10 City area mapped by real-time interactive street 
maps as a percentage of the city’s total land area 
19.13 Percentage of roads compliant with autonomous 
driving systems 


39 


IS 17738 : 2022 


SI No. 


Sustainable Development Goal (2015) 


Indicators of this Standard 


19.14 Percentage of Vehicles Fined for Traffic 
Violations making a Payment through an Online 
E-Fine System 

20.1 Annual percentage of municipal budget spent on 
urban agriculture initiatives 

21.1 Annual number of citizens engaged in the 
planning process per 100 000 population 

21.4 Percentage of the city population living in 
medium-to-high population densities 


xii) 


Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption 
and production patterns 


7.1 Percentage of electrical and thermal energy 
produced from wastewater treatment, solid waste 
and other liquid waste treatment and other waste 
heat resources, as a share of the city’s total energy 
mix for a given year 

7.2 Electrical and thermal energy (GJ) produced 
from wastewater treatment per capita per year 

7.3 Electrical and thermal energy (GJ) produced 
from solid waste treatment per capita per year 

7.9 Percentage of buildings in the city with smart 
Electricity/energy meters 

7.10 Number of electric vehicle charging stations 
per registered electric vehicle 

16.1 Percentage of waste drop-off centres 
(containers) equipped with telemetering 

16.2 Percentage of the city population that has a 
door-to-door garbage collection with an individual 
monitoring of household waste quantities 

16.3 Percentage of total amount of waste in the city 
that is used to generate energy 

16.4 Percentage of total amount of plastic waste 
recycled in the city 

16.5 Percentage of public garbage bins that are 
sensor-enabled public garbage bins 

16.6 Percentage of the city’s electrical and electronic 
waste that is recycled 

19.3 Percentage of vehicles registered in the city that 
are low-emission vehicles 

20.1 Annual percentage of municipal budget spent 
on urban agriculture initiatives 

20.2 Annual total collected municipal food waste 
sent to a processing facility for composting per 
capita (in tonnes) 

22.1 Percentage of treated wastewater being reused 
22.2 Percentage of biosolids that is reused 
(dry matter Tonnes) 

22.3 Energy derived from wastewater as a percentage 
of total energy consumption of the city 

22.4 Percentage of total amount of wastewater in the 
city that is used to generate energy 


40 


IS 17738 : 2022 


SI No. 


Sustainable Development Goal (2015) 


Indicators of this Standard 


xiii) 


Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat 
climate change and its impacts 


— 74 Percentage of the city’s electricity that is 


produced using decentralized electricity production 
systems 


16.3 Percentage of total amount of waste in the city 
that is used to generate energy 


22.1 Percentage of treated wastewater being reused 


22.2 Percentage of biosolids that 
(dry matter Tonnes) 


is reused 


22.3 Energy derived from wastewater as a percentage 
of total energy consumption of the city 

22.4 Percentage of total amount of wastewater in the 
city that is used to generate energy 

23.3 Percentage of the city’s water distribution 
network monitored by a smart water system 


xiv) 


Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use 
the oceans, seas and marine resources for 
sustainable development 


16.4 Percentage of total amount of plastic waste 
recycled in the city 

22.5 Percentage of the wastewater pipeline network 
monitored by a real-time data-tracking sensor system 
23.2 Number of real-time ICT-based environmental 
water quality monitoring stations per 
100 000 population 


xv) 


Goal 15: Protect, restore and promote 
sustainable use of terrestrial ecosys-tems, 
sustainably manage forests, combat 
desertification, and halt and reverse land 
degradation and halt biodiversity loss 


21.4 Percentage of the city population living in 
medium-to-high population densities 


xvi) 


Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclu-sive 
societies for sustainable develop-ment, 
provide access to justice for all and build 
effective, accountable and inclusive 
institutions at all levels 


5.1 Percentage of service contracts providing city 
services which contain an open data policy 

9.1 Annual amount of revenues collected from the 
sharing economy as a percentage of own-source 
revenue 

9.2 Percentage of payments to the city that are paid 
electronically based on electronic invoices 

10.1 Annual number of online visits to the municipal 
open data portal per 100 000 population 

10.2 Percentage of city services accessible and that 
can be requested online 

10.3 Average response time to relevant inquiries 
made through the city’s non-emergency inquiry 
system (days) 

21.1 Annual number of citizens engaged in the 
planning process per 100 000 population 


21.2 Average time for building permit approval 
(days) 

21.3 Percentage of Building Permits Submitted 
through an Electronic Submission System 


xvii) 


Goal 17: Strengthen the means of 
implementation and revitalize the global 
partnership for sustainable development 


41 


IS 17738 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (G-/602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector-61, Gurugram 122 001) 


AECOM India Pvt Limited, Gurugram 


AFCONS infrastructure Limited, New Delhi 
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 
National Highway Authority of India, New Delhi 

All India Institute of Local Self Government, Mumbai 
Bhubaneshwar Smart City Limited, Bhubaneshwar 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Builders Association of India, Mumbai 


Central Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


Cochin Smart City Limited, Kochi 
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers’ Association 
of India, New Delhi 


Corporation of Chennai, Chennai 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development 
Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Department of Telecommunication, Ministry of 
Communications, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Greater Vishakhapatnam Smart City Corporation 
Limited, Vishakhapatnam 


Gujarat International Finance, Tec-City Company 
Limited, Ghandinagar 


Guwahati Municipal Corporation, Guwahati 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Green Building Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 
Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
DR SUDHIR KRISHNA (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI AJAY SABARWAL 
SHRI ADVAIT AUNDHKAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 

Suri J. K. PRASAD 


SHRI DHARMESH AWASTHI 
SHRI ARUN SAHAI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri B. V. BABU 
SHRI S. SUDHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI LEENU SEHGAL 
SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DIRECTOR (NT-IID) (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT KOHALE 
Ms DepasHisH Roy (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


REPRESENTATIVE 

Suri K. P. ABRAHAM 

Ms SHEETAL RAKHEJA 
REPRESENTATIVE 

PROF UTTAM K. BANERJEE 


Suri B. C. DATTA 
PROF S. K. KULSHRESHTHA (Alternate) 


42 


Organization 


Jabalpur Smart City Limited, Jabalpur 

Jammu Municipal Corporation, Jammu 

Karki Associates, New Delhi 

Ministry of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Panchayati Raj, New Delhi 
Ministry of Power, New Delhi 


Ministry of Rural Development, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Tourism, New Delhi 
Ministry of Transport, New Delhi 


Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 


National Association of Software and Services 
Companies, Noida 


National Real Estate Development Council, 
New Delhi 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


North East Space Application Centre, Umiam, 
Shillong 


Office of the Registrar General and Census 
Commissioner, New Delhi 


Ranchi Municipal Corporation, Ranchi 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Private Limited, 
Noida 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shillong Smart City Limited, Shillong 
Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Sulabh International Social Service Organization, 
New Delhi 


IS 17738 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI RAJNISH KARKI 
SHRI SUDHANSHU PANDEY 


Ms Kavita BHATIA 
SHRI MAYANK (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (BIS) 
UNDER SECRETARY (BIS) (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJSHEKHAR 
SHRI G. BALASUBRAMANIYAM (Alternate) 


Dr M. MOHAPATRA 
DR O. P. Misura (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 
SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. (Alternate) 


DR A. K. TRIPATHI 
Dr G. PRASAD (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY 


SECRETARY 
SHRI SAURABH DIDDI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI BRIJENDRA SINGH 
SHRI GOPAL SAHA (Alternate) 


DR Ravi KANT BHATNAGAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI R. K. JAIN 
SHRI G. C. Pati (Alternate) 


SHRI N. KISHORE NARANG 


SHRI MANOJIT BOSE 
Ms RAMA VEDASHREE (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVIN RAHEJA 
BRIG R. R. SINGH (Alternate) 


DR K. VENUGOPAL 
DR MURALIKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 


DR Vinay MAITRI 
DR SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


ProF K. J. NATH 
Dr N. B. MAZUMDaR (Alternate) 


43 


IS 17738 : 2022 


Organization 


Surat Smart City Development Limited, Surat 
Survey of India, Dehradun 


Svayam National Centre for Inclusive Environment, 
New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 


Udaipur Smart City Limited, Udaipur 


Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure 
(P & Engg) Centre, New Delhi 


Jniversity of Delhi, New Delhi 


rban Development Department, Town and Country 
Planning Branch, Kolkata 


GE 


Urban Governance, Administrative Staff College of 
India, Hyderabad 


V V Giri National Labour Institute, Noida 
WRI (India), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (B-399, 2™ Floor, Meera Bagh, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110 063) 


In Personal Capacity Usavasyam, TC 18/1023, B-8/2, 
Lakshmi Nagar, Kesavadasapuram, Pottam P. O. 
Thiruvananthapuram 695 004) 


In Personal Capacity (1/5 Shabd Pratap, Asharam, 
Lashkar, Gwalior 474 012) 


In Personal Capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida 201 301 


In Personal Capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi 
110 076) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI NAVIN KUMAR NAYAN 
SHRI J. M. Syav (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI NITIN KUMAR AZAD (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL 
SHRI MANISH VERMA (Alternate) 


Dr C. R. BABU 


SHRI SATANU PRASAD KAR 
Ms SANDHYATRA SAHA (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS CHARY VEDALA 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI AMIT BHATT 

Ms PRERNA V. MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 


SHRI V. SURESH 


SHRI S. P. BANSAL 


DR SANDEEP GARG 
SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 


SRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Working Group on Smart Cities, CED 59/WG1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (G-1602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector 61, Gurugram 122 001) 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Company 
Limited, Ghandinagar 


Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 
WRI India, New Delhi 

In Personal Capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida 201 301) 


Representative(s) 
DR SUDHIR KRISHNA (Convener) 
SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. 
DR SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI 
SHRI R. SRINIVAS 

Ms PRERNA MEHTA 


DR SANDEEP GARG 


44 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 59 (16966). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


f 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western s Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


