WaT HTI IS 15171 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


5-va aamun efaa aT 
aafaa mA of fag, mtag 
fag 


( Ye Fra ) 


Guidelines for Establishing and 
Implementing 5-S Concept 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 03.120.10 


© BIS 2017 


da AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM FO, 9 FIGS AHL AMT, ag feceit-110002 
Vesela” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2017 Price Group 3 


Quality Management Sectional Committee, MSD 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
Quality Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 2002. The standard has been revised to incorporate 5S implementation 
process and useful tools and techniques to achieve each of the 5S concepts. 


Increased global competition and enhanced customer expectations, has led to greater focus on best quality products 
and services at minimum possible cost, which should be delivered within optimum time. Thus Quality, Cost and 
Delivery (QCD) are the three most important parameters to be planned, monitored, managed and continuously 
improved by the organizations. 


QCD are adversely impacted by waste generated in processes. Waste is an outcome of any activity that consumes 
resources but adds no value for the customer. These wastes appear in the form of Over production, Un-necessary 
Waiting (delays), Transportation (movement/shifting), Processing, Inventory, Motion of people and Corrections 
(for non-conformities). Likewise unutilized, underutilized or abused resources also constitute waste or add to 
losses by failing to make full use of available potential. 5-S is one of the most effective and comprehensive 
concepts to minimize, if not eliminate waste. 


It is preferable to implement 5-S as a part of improving the value stream which would help to sustain it instead of 
treating 5-S as a standalone ‘program’. In the near term it helps to free up space, save time by reducing wastes of 
motion and transportation. In the long term it helps remove variability by standardizing where things can be found 
and avoid waiting, and making everything visual. It makes a positive impact on inventory. Added benefits are 
improved working conditions in clean, bright and safe work places. 


In case of daily operations of a work place that is chaotic, people and machines are over burdened and there is 
inconsistency in process and outputs. 5-S provides a systematic and rational approach for clutter free, healthy and 
safe workplace; lead to reducing waste and thus preparing ground for further improvement. It becomes a team 
based activity where everyone works together to improve the conditions in their own area as also ‘common’ areas. 


5-S is equally applicable for an office environment where information, documents and records are present, in 
physical condition or electronically apart from other infrastructure facilities. 


5-S originated and has been widely practiced in Japan since 1980s. Initially, this concept found its application in 
manufacturing industries, but now it has spread to service industries as well. Remarkable results in waste reduction 
through the application of 5-S have generated a lot of interest and has become one of the powerful means to 
improve productivity and quality. Therefore, today 5-S is being used world over to prepare the ground for better 
workplace organization and achieving improved performance from available resources. 


‘5-S’ thus can be defined as ‘A method of creating clean and orderly workplace that exposes waste and makes 
abnormalities immediately visible’. 


IS 15171 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR ESTABLISHING AND 
IMPLEMENTING 5-S CONCEPT 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard helps in understanding and implementing 
5-S philosophy, concept and practices to bring in 
excellence in all areas of an organization. The 
methodology has been illustrated with examples. 


2 WHAT IS 5-S? 


The 5-S is a concept, consisting of 5 Japanese words 
each starting with letter S as given in the table below 
which forms the basis of all activities being undertaken 
during daily operations in the workplace. The 5-S are: 


Typical Examples 


SI Components Meaning Process 

No. 

i) Seiri Sort Segregation 
(Say-re) 

ii) Seiton Set in order Systematic 
(Say-ton) arrangement 

iii) Seiso Shine Cleaning with 
(Say-so) inspection 

iv) Seiketsu Standardize Standardization 
(Say-ket-sue) 

v) Shitsuke Sustain Discipline 
(Shish-ukay) 

2.1 Seiri 


2.1.1 Seiri, refers to the act of identifying and disposing 
off all unwanted, unnecessary, and unrelated materials 
existing in the workplace. People involved in Seiri must 
not feel sorry about having to remove and dispose 
things. The idea is to ensure that everything left in the 
workplace is related to work. Even the number of 
necessary items in the workplace must be kept to its 
absolute minimum. Because of Seiri, simplification of 
tasks, effective use of space, and careful purchase of 
items follow. Theme of Seiri is ‘getting rid ofunwanted 
things’. 


2.1.2 Look around your work place and scrutinize each 
and every thing and ask the question, ‘Is this thing really 
needed?’. 


2.1.3 Segregate items, which are not necessary and 
dispose them off. 


2.1.4 Items, which are needed, should be clearly 
distinguished from those, which are not needed. The 


Throw away all rubbish and unwanted materials in the 
workplace 

Set everything in proper place for easy storage and 
quick retrieval. 30-second retrieval of any document 
Clean the workplace. Clean the almirah inside as also 
outside top, below and behind 

Standardize the way for maintaining cleanliness. 
Define cleaning and inspection methods for plant 
machines and office equipments 

Practice ‘Five S’ daily - make it a habit; Create current 
and future shine targets; this also means ‘commitment’ 


items, which are not required, should be immediately 
disposed of by following two ways: 


a) Notneeded— Dispose, sell, give away, throw 
away. 

b) Not useful for that area/purpose — Inform 
internally for a user to take it away. 


2.2 Seiton 


2.2.1 Seiton refers to orderliness and is all about 
efficiency. Purpose of this step is to eliminate time 
wasted in searching items for an operation. In this step 
all the items, which are necessary, are placed in an 
optimally determined sequence. Then they can be most 
conveniently accessed or retrieved quickly, as well as 
returned to that same place easily.. If everyone has quick 
access to an item or materials, workflow becomes 
efficient, and the user becomes productive. The correct 
place, position, or holder for every tool, item, or 
material must be chosen carefully in relation to how 
the work will be performed and who will use it. Every 


IS 15171 : 2017 


item must be allocated its own place for keeping safely, 
and each location must be labeled for easy identification 
of what it is for. Theme of Seiton is ‘a place for 
everything and everything in its place’. 


2.2.2 Decide where every necessary item is to be placed, 
so that they are easily accessible. The following points 
should be considered: 


a) Items frequently required should be kept at 
designated locations, nearest possible to and 
at a safe distance from actual work place; 

b) Items, which are not required frequently, 
should be kept at a distance from actual 
workplace; 

c) Heavy and large items should be kept as low 
as possible; 

d) All items should be easily identifiable, for 
example by labels, markings, boards etc; and 

e) Allinstructions and notice boards are easy to 
read. 


2.3 Seiso 


2.3.1 Seiso refers to cleaning up the workplace and 
giving it a ‘shine’. Everyone in the organization must 
be involved in cleaning. It would be a good idea to 
have every area of the workplace assigned to a person 
or group of persons for cleaning. No area should be 
left un-cleaned. Everyone should see the ‘workplace’ 
through the eyes of a visitor - always thinking if it is 
clean enough to make a good impression. Theme of 
Seiso is ‘cleaning with meaning’. In this step one is not 
just cleaning the workplace or item only, but also 
inspecting along with cleaning. Any abnormality can 
be detected in time and rectified before it causes failure. 


2.3.2 This means cleaning the work area including all 
the equipment/facilities thoroughly, and keeping the 
walls, ceilings, floors sparkling clean. While cleaning, 
inspection is done simultaneously; if something is 
unnecessary it is discarded (under 1S) and if during 
cleaning it is seen that any item is not kept in proper 
place, it is put them in order(doing 2S). Hence, doing 
‘3S’ means doing ‘1-S’ and ‘2-S’ simultaneously. In 
addition also check for the health of the machine, 
lubrication, electrical connections, etc. 


2.3.3 As a general rule, all the cleaning work should be 
done by those who work in that area. However, cleaning 
has meaning only, if Seiri and Seiton are strictly adhered 
to by all the concerned. Cleaning should be done not 
only in the shop floor but also in offices, toilets, canteen, 
etc (common areas). 


2.4 Seiketsu 


2.4.1 Seiketsu refers to ‘standardizing’ of previous 
three steps, that is Seiri, Seiso and Seiton. 


2.4.1.1 The following standards with respect to 1S for 
example may call for pronouncing unprocessed work 
in process and un-sold: 


a) Products which are not needed. 

b) Products that do not appear in current 
catalogue. 

c) Defunct design. 

d) Norms for excessive inventory. 

e) Rusty and deteriorated products and material. 

f) Similar way consider offices, hardware, 
furniture, documents, files, etc. 


2.4.1.2 Standards with respect to 2S for example may 
call for pronouncing, 


a) place items such that they are facing toward 
passage for easy access. 

b) always keep within allocated storage space so 
that any excess can be detected. 

c) order them by FIFO principle. 

d) place tools and instruction manuals close to 
the point of use. 

e) store similar items together. Different items 
in separate rows. 


2.4.1.3 Standards with respect to 3S for example may 
call for pronouncing, 


a) how personnel must measure and maintain 
encompassing both personal and 
environmental cleanliness. 

b) what is to be cleaned and in what order/ 
sequence and methods and tools for Cleaning 
(Brushing down a soft surface on which there 
is hard waste will scratch it). 

c) kits for protection for the person doing the 
cleaning, such as gloves, face-masks overalls. 

d) after cleaning to use 1S and 2S principles to 
put away the cleaning tools and materials. 

e) visual management is an important ingredient 
- Colour-coding and standardized coloration 
of surroundings for easier visual identification 
of anomalies in the surroundings. 

f) Training methods and aids to employees to 
detect abnormalities using one’s five senses 
and to correct such abnormalities immediately. 


2.4.1.3.1 Essence of ‘Seiketsu’ can be termed as: 


a) Itisa proof that 3 ‘S’ s (‘Seiri, Seiso, Seiton’) 
are being faithfully carried out. 


b) Itis the barometer which indicates the control 
level based on the *5-S’ of all employees. 


2.5 Shitsuke 


2.5.1 Shitsuke refers to ‘Discipline’ or developing 


‘5-S attitude’. It denotes a commitment to maintain 
orderliness and to practice the first 4 Ss as a way of 
life. The emphasis of Shitsuke is elimination of bad 
habits and constant practice of good ones. Once true 
Shitsuke is achieved, people voluntarily observe 
cleanliness and orderliness at all times, without having 
to be reminded by management/anyone else. Attaining 
Shitsuke means transforming the culture of company 
by empowering people and bringing self-discipline to 
follow the standards and taking initiative to keep and 
maintain workplace and equipment in best possible 
condition. It is said that ‘Things begin and end with 
Shitsuke’. 


2.5.2 Shitsuke is to install work practices that will 
ensure and enable the implementation of all the aspects 
of 5-S. Everyone should be self disciplined to strictly 
follow the rules and standards while working. All the 
set rules like punctuality should be strictly followed. 
In addition to these, simple things like submitting 
working reports and wearing proper uniform and safety 
gear should be strictly observed. 


2.5.3 One example attribute for becoming disciplined 
is to be punctual. Punctuality does not only mean 
reaching work place in time, but also following time 
schedules of the organization. What has been decided 
must be followed as per standard. 


2.5.4 Example - Attendance in a Manufacturing 
Organization 


2.5.4.1 Attendance should be made an important thrust 
point in any organization. Everyone should understand 
the importance of attendance. When the attendance is 
poor and there is a shortage of manpower, there will be 
many problems, such as, 


a) imbalance/line/work flow will stop; 

b) quality of product/service will be bad; 

c) other operators/employees will be 
overburdened; and 

d) because of slow work if employees are pushed 
hard, there may be accidents. 


2.5.4.2 If in place of skilled employees, apprentices 
or casual workers who are untrained are used, the 
quality and productivity will suffer. 


2.6 By thoroughly institutionalizing each of the 5-S s, 
the work place can be managed properly resulting in 
improved levels of safety, quality and productivity, that 
is, 


a) work/operations can be performed without 
error, proceeding in a well organized manner, 
resulting in fewer non-conformities. 


IS 15171 : 2017 


b) operations can be performed safely and 
comfortably reducing the chances of 
accidents. 


c) machinery and equipment can be maintained 
properly, reducing the number of breakdowns, 
thus increasing available productive time. 


d) operations can proceed effectively and 
efficiently, eliminating waste. 


e) customers using the service will be more 
satisfied leading to growth in revenue and 
profits. 


f) individuals managing the operations will be 
comfortable as the operational area is well 
organized. 


3 ADVANTAGES OF IMPLEMENTING 5-S 


3.1 To Individuals (Employees) 


a) Positive change in attitude. 

b) Improvement in effectiveness and efficiency. 
c) Stress reduction. 

d) Better time management. 

e) Prevention of mistakes. 


f) Developing ability to think and analyze 
effectively. 


g) Improvement in quality of work life. 
h) Easy access to things to reduce fatigue. 


3.2 To Organization (Employer) 
a) Avoidance of unproductive and non-value 
added activities. 


b) Availability and retrieval of important 
documents in time. 


c) Better utilization of space, equipment and 
other resources. 


d) Reduction of wastage of materials, time and 
money. 


e) Cost reduction. 
f) Improvement in safety and work environment. 
g) Improvement in quality and productivity. 


h) Improve awareness about standards and work 
culture. 


j) Improvement in punctuality, commitment and 
discipline. 


3.3 To Other Stake Holders 


a) Easy accessibility of supplier material. 
b) Better time management. 
c) Increased confidence. 


IS 15171 : 2017 


4 METHODOLOGY 


4.1 Seiri 
4.1.1 Objective 


To distinguish between necessary and unnecessary 
items/activities and get rid of unnecessary items/ 
activities. 


4.1.2 Planning 


a) Establish criteria for necessary and 
unnecessary. 


b) Establish criteria for classification of items/ 
activities on the basis of, for example, 
consumable/non-consumable, value adding/ 
non-value adding, and frequency of usage. 

c) Take photographs of the location (using the 
technique of fixed position photography) and 
display the same on a 5-S chart. The details 
of chart are given in Annex A. 


4.1.3 Activity 


a) Decide necessary and unnecessary items/ 
activities. 

b) Identify unnecessary items/activities by 
suitable means. 


c) Gift unnecessary items, if there are any takers. 
If no takers, dispose them as per regulatory 
norms 

d) Deal with the causes of unnecessary items/ 
activities to avoid regeneration of waste 


4.1.4 Useful Tools and Techniques 
a) Fixed position photo: 


1) To assess and show how does the work 
place look now; showing up obvious 
shortcomings/existing ‘poor’ areas. 

2) To clearly determine the position from 
which the photo is to be taken so that it 
will be possible to have before and after 
photographs for comparison. 


3) Preferable to do colour photos, date 
printed/appear on them. 

4) The series of photographs would point the 
way in which conditions changes and 
show improvement over time. 

5) Can display photographs on a board; 
mention the persons/photos who have 
contributed to the changes. 

b) Red tag: 

1) After identifying unwanted items red tags 
are placed on them. 

2) The tags would contain information on 
the nature of item, reference code, 


quantity or weight, reasons for declaring 
unwanted, date, department or section, 
proposed method of disposal action. 

3) Ared-tag holding area may be created for 
bringing and leaving such items. 

4) Evaluation and review of tagged items 
done by seniors to manage their flow and 
timely disposal actions completion. 

5) Documentation of results of red-tagging 
done to assess advantages/benefits. 

6) Items that are in good condition but not 
wanted in that work area can be identified 
with Yellow tags for decisions and actions 
instead of red tags; can use red tags for 
discard items only. 

4.1.5 Checklist 


The checklist for Seiri is given in Annex B. 


4.2 Seiton 
4.2.1 Objective 


To establish a neat layout so that one can always get 
what one needs and when one needs it, since a 
disorganized place would be a major source of 
variability/inconsistency and irritation 


4.2.2 Planning 


a) Establish criteria for classification of items 

into different groups: 

1) Frequency of usage, 

2) Type of item(s), 

3) Type of storage required, and 
4) Regulatory requirements. 

b) Decide storage location and type using 
concept of visual control, depending upon 
earlier classification. 

c) Decide for time for retrieval of items. 


4.2.3 Activity 


a) Create storage. 

b) Identify items. 

c) Identify storage area. 

d) Store items on the basis of decided storage 
location. 

e) Use the concept of visual control while 
designing and making storage location. 

f) All moving parts, components, items which 
are dust prone should be visible as far as 
possible. 

g) Storage space should be such that when items 
are removed, empty space is visible and 
different items cannot be put into the same 
place. Implement FIFO (First-in-first out) 


h) 


j) 


concept so as to ensure no item is stored for a 
longer duration of time. 

Display lists communicating what is stored in 
what quantity, where and by whom, when and 
how? 

Randomly check, if the items are retrievable 
within the preset time limit. 


4.2.4 Useful Tools and Techniques 


a) 


b) 


5-S Mapping: 

1) This is a map of the work area used to 
show current location of all types of 
wanted/needed items including 
equipment, spares, stationery, files, 
documents, records. 

2) To evaluate and decide best locations for 
these items based on the principles of time 
(motion, movement) wastes 

3) To review and map lay out keeping in 
mind convenience, safety, statutory and 
regulatory requirements for effective 
utilization of available space. 

Stratification: 

1) One level is by frequency of use 
[see 4.2.4 a] mapping. 

2) Items may be stratified and located based 
on product types, machine types, function 
types. 

3) Small items in small bins and bigger items 
in racks or shelves (quantity to be known). 

4) Heavy items at lower height and light 
items at higher height. 

5) Similar items together. Different items in 
separate rows or locations. 


4.2.5 Checklist 


The checklist for Seiton is given in Annex C. 


4.3 Seiso 
4.3.1 Objective 


To eliminate waste for a cleaner work place. 


4.3.2 Planning 


There are three broad levels of cleaning: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Overall cleaning of everything, everywhere 
including common areas, 

Cleaning of specific items, tools, machines 
workplaces and facilities. Work instructions 
to be displayed for any specific items, tools/ 
work place for special cleaning routine 
Cleaning at the detail level, getting to grime 
in screws, threads, corners and crevices. 


IS 15171 : 2017 


4.3.2.1 The perfect item can be cleaned in a single 
wipe? 


4.3.2.2 Or maybe it could clean itself? 
4.3.2.3 Or there is never a need to clean it? 


a) Identify various type of trash, filth and foreign 
matter around the machine and workplace. 

b) Brainstorm on causes of generation and 
presence of trash, filth and foreign matter at 
different locations. 

c) Identify special cleaning tools, material and 
processes, if required. 


4.3.3 Activity 


a) Clean trash, filth or foreign matter. 
b) Inspect while cleaning to validate potential 
causes identified by cause and effect analysis. 
Try and locate causes. Evolve and implement 
action plan in the following steps: 
1) Prevent dust, filth, trash and foreign 
material to reach the area; 
2) Prevent generation of the above in the 
first place; and 
3) Evolve an appropriate monitoring system 
to check the extent of trash, filth and 
foreign matter being generated/existing 
in the specified area. 
4.3.3.1 Useful tools and techniques 


a) Individual responsibility and rotational 
responsibility — It is expected that each 
employee takes responsibility for Seiso for his/ 
her own area. For the common areas or ‘no 
man’s land’ area to distribute among the 
employees by name which may be changed in 
rotation after defined intervals (for example 
Surrounding of the department, toilet, roof, 
water coolers, tank, entrance door, passages, 
windows, common storeroom, lawn, etc). 


b) Inspection, observations: action to be taken/ 
job to be done: 

1) Preferably identify around 30 check 
points in respective areas to improve upon 
shortcomings or problems. 

2) To note down actual conditions and 
causes for these and invite suggestions 
and ideas for improvements and try them 
out [For example, apart from making 
cleaning difficult, uneven floor may make 
transportation cumbersome, damage 
product(s) and cause(s) accident]. 

3) Where and What all actions have to be 
taken or jobs to be done by Who, When 
and How. 


IS 15171 : 2017 


4) Organising brainstorming sessions for 
generating ideas related to improving the 
area. 


4.3.3.2 Check list 


The checklist for Seiso is given in Annex D. 


4.4 Seiketsu 
4.4.1 Objective 


4.4.1.1 To ensure the transformation in terms of how 
well individuals create standard conditions in their 
areas. 


To maintain a state of readiness that ensures immediate 
use of required things or information and for 
identification of even minor variations or changes. 
Keeping things clean in work area, pollution prone area, 
and even in personal area. 


4.4.2 Planning 


a) Confirm all appropriate measurements have 
been identified while implementing third S, 
that is Seiso. 

b) Find out innovative ways to institutionalize 
visual management. 

c) Evolve checkpoints on the basis of specific 
storage process evolved at second S, that is, 
systematic arrangement or Seiton. 

d) Finalize checkpoints for measuring storage, 
cleaning points. These check points should be 
unique to specific area. Check points also need 
to be developed for common area like 
passages, toilets, canteen and reception. 

e) Decide a frequency for measuring different 
storage cleaning points. 

f) Evolve check sheets combining all points, 
which need to be measured simultaneously 
like hourly, daily, weekly, monthly check 
sheets. 

g) Check sheet should also describe, if a specific 
process or tool is to be adopted for measurement. 


4.4.3 Activity 


a) Decide a schedule for measurement and 
display the same in the work area. The chart 
displayed in the work area should be as given 
in Annex A. Photograph should be taken after 
periodic intervals and status also updated by 
team responsible for internal audit. 

b) Conduct audit periodically and write 
comments as well as give awards as per policy 
of the organization. 


4.4.4 Useful Tools and Techniques 


Developing standards and practicing them would call 


for actions on following by involving concerned 
departments and persons which may include: 


a) Lay-out and markings — Drawing outlines 
of items on floor or wall, use of shadow 
boards, etc. 


b) Visual control — Signboards and Painting 
using colour codes. 


c) Identification — Terms, Labels by letters or 
pictures, etc. 


d) Frequency for cleaning (see 4.3.2). 
e) Internal audits — Evaluation/Assessment 


Criteria. 

f) Daily 5-S routine — time, duration, 
abnormalities observations and decisions, 
actions/plans. 


g) 5-S Training system and methods for new and 
existing employees. 


List of standard practices may be circulated from time 
to time and check whether they are being followed or 
not. As and when needed standard operating practices 
can be changed/modified. Requirement of frequent 
audit can be reduced, when the standardized 5-S comes 
in to practice 


4.4.5 Checklist 


The checklist for Seiketsu is given in Annex E. 


4.5 Shitsuke 
4.5.1 Objective 


To internalize the practice of first four S of segregation, 
systematic arrangement, cleaning, and cleanliness. 
Internalization of habit should be to the extent that there 
is pro action and it becomes a ‘way of life’. 


4.5.2 Planning 


a) Evolve management policy to recognize, 
understand and spread the concept of 5-S. 


b) Develop training modules and recognition 
schemes. 


4.5.3 Activity 


a) Provide education on 5-S to all employees. 

b) Involve those who have internalized the concept 
of 5-S in all areas to conduct training session. 

c) Publish cases of 5-S success in all areas. 

d) Recognize those teams and individuals who 
have adopted the concept of 5-S for success 
of self and the organization. 

e) Recognize those who have helped each other 
to internalize 5-S. 

f) Recognize sustained contributions on 5-S to 
make it a habit. 


g) Display overall benefits in common areas so 
that others can see it 


4.5.4 Useful Tools and Techniques 


In an appropriate combination following can be made 
use of: 


a) One point lessons — to educate persons on 
change and bring in to practice, using visuals 

b) Role modelling by seniors — Set example by 
practice and demonstrate 

c) Museum room — Significant changes 
including photos of the past to share and revisit 

d) External audits — For unbiased assessment 
and feed back for further improvement 

e) Score boards — For trend monitoring and 


communication 
f) Ongoing actions, interactions and meetings 
— Could be a 10 min 5-S time daily for 
everyone to do; reviews and feedback sessions 
for small steps improvements 
Promotional activities — Recognition and 
rewards, posters, open forum, etc. 


g) 


Organize 5S Committee 


Formally announce & 
promote 5S 
Training & Education 
Every one practices 
Housekeeping & clean up 
Every one practices 
work- place organization 
Evaluation & 
Recognition 
Take Corrective 
Actions 


Develop a plan for the first 


IS 15171 : 2017 


4.5.4.1 Visual management and control 


5-S in practice over a period of time can include 
following visual information that can be easily 
understood by persons working in an area and persons 
coming to that area and spot deviations and act for 
restoration to standards or corrective actions: 


a) Safety related instructions, practices. 

b) Personal protective equipments and use. 

c) Operating equipments standards and performance. 
d) Customer reports/feedback. 

e) Products that are ok and non-conforming. 

f) Employees’ skills. 

g) Performance parameters and actual trend. 

h) Group/team activities and improvements. 


j) Stock levels and variations. 


5 PDCA APPROACH TO IMPLEMENT 5-S 


5.1 5-S can be successfully implemented following a 
generic PDCA (Plan > Do > Check > Act) procedure. 
The relationship between 5-S and PDCA can be 
depicted as below: 


aurljdrsig 


IS 15171 : 2017 


5.2 5-S Implementation Process 


5.2.1 Following steps are needed for implementing 


5-S: 
a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


Form a 5-S committee — Form an empowered 
committee of senior management personnel 
to plan, implement, monitor and promote 5-S 
in the organization. Committee should be 
empowered to provide resources needed for 
implementation of 5-S. 

Develop a promotion plan — Start with an 
awareness workshop to make the people have 
complete understanding of 5-S, its benefits, 
and methodology their role in implementation. 
Develop a plan for promotion and 
implementation of 5-S. 

Formally launch 5-S — Kick-off the 5-S 
initiative with big-bang ceremony on a 
preplanned date. It should be inaugurated by 
CEO of the company. Select an area to begin 
with, develop area map, and divide the area 
into different zones. Make 5-S Zonal teams. 
Train the people on 5-S steps, organize 
resources; manpower, handling equipment, 
transportation arrangements, cleaning devices 
and other relevant items to begin 5-S journey. 
5-S training — Provide training to people — 
Everyone must be trained on 5-S. Make a 5-S 
Training schedule to cover all levels and all 
departments. 


Initial assessment — Conduct initial 
assessment of selected areas for 5-S. Take 
‘before’ photographs to establish baseline 
performance. Assess the current level of 5-S 
and estimate the quantum of effort needed to 
make things better. Organize resources, make 
implementation schedule, assign the 
responsibilities to people. 

Implement seiri— Go through the workplace 
removing anything that is not needed for 
regular workflows as well as excess 
inventories. Start red tagging of unwanted 
items so that they are taken away from the shop 
floor. Remove all garbage and move items that 
you are unsure of to a red tag area for later 
evaluation. 


Implement seiton — Set in order-move tools 
and materials close to point of use. Organize 
everything, which is needed on shop floor. 
Make things easy to find and easy to access. 
Use indicators, such as visual boards, tape 
outlines, and min-max inventory levels to 
make status visible. 

Implement seiso — Clean the area, removing 
dirt, repairing damaged equipment, and 


j) 


k) 


2 


n) 


generally cleaning the workplace. Theme of 
activity is “Cleaning with meaning’. It is not 
just cleaning but trying to detect problems in 
machines and objects while cleaning. This will 
provide a good mindset and help avoid 
breakdown of equipments and prevent use of 
non conforming items. 

Implement seiketsu — Standardize-implement 
daily checklists to maintain 5-S. Create area 
owners for every part of shop floor and set 
rules to maintain the first three Ss as part of 
daily work. Train the people on standards. 


Conduct 5-S audit — Conduct the audit of 
the areas where 5-S has been implemented. 
Take ‘after’ photographs to see the difference 
made from the baseline level. Assess the 
improvements made through 5-S. Assess the 
improvements made by different teams, select 
the best teams. 

Reward and recognition — Appreciate the 
good work done by teams. Honor them with 
rewards and recognition as per a well designed 
company policy. 

Implement shitsuke — Sustain 5-S by changing 
the attitude of people to develop 5-S habit. 
Exhibit pre and post audit scores of 5-S 
activities and photographs on the 
communication boards. Track scores over time 
to show improvement. Encourage management 
to walk by the area and ask the team about its 
5-S efforts. Reward and recognize the efforts 
of teams for good 5-S activities. Make 5-S one 
of the most important activities of company 
culture. 


5.2.2 The advantages gained from systematic 
implementation are an outcome of individuals’ and 
collective efforts and habitual practices. They come 


about, 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


due to large amount/number of improvements 
made by employees at all levels. 

where employees have learned how to make 
the changes (kaizen) when problems become 
visible and apparent immediately, (for 
example a cleaned spot or item becomes dirty 
or dull quickly) asking why repeatedly to find 
root causes and appropriate solutions to try 
out. 

when learning would be a combination of an 
implementation success (we did something - 
put our idea into practice) and at times a failure 
to attain results. (there was a deficiency in our 
cause analysis and solution, so we have more 
information to work with now). 


when everyone understands that the check lists 


and audit-scores supports 5-S rather than the 
converse. 


e) audits are a way of measuring and assuring 
sustainment. Need not do audit so frequently 
that it leads to waste in manpower, but think 
of it as a necessary ‘non value added activity’ 
that creates value — 5-S audit and scores not 
to become an end in itself but audit 
observations are used for further 
improvements. 


6 EVALUATION 


6.1 The purpose of evaluation is to determine of the 
effectiveness of the 5-S programme with respect to the 
objectives set by 5-S committee. 


6.2 The following are evaluated. 
6.2.1 Promotional Activity 
a) Organization to drive the movement. 
b) Education and training. 
c) Promotional meeting. 
d) Continuous monitoring and supervision. 
e) Posters calling for participation. 
f) Monthly review. 
g) Awards. 
h) Allocation of funds. 
6.2.2 5-S Deployment 
a) Zone allocation. 
b) Finalization of checklist. 
c) Time bound plan. 


d) Target setting. 


oO 


) Tracking benefits. 
f) Responsibility identification. 

6.2.3 Kaizen (Improvement) Projects 
a) Awareness on how to identify problems. 
b) Awareness on how to deal with causes. 
c) Implementation of Kaizen projects. 


d) Interdepartmental and team participation. 


IS 15171 : 2017 


6.2.4 Technical Training 


a) Maintenance. 

b) Improvement. 

c) How to generate Kaizen ideas. 
6.2.5 Evaluation Plan 


a) Schedules. 

b) Defined criteria for level identification. 
c) Decide formats and grades. 

d) Trained evaluators. 


6.3 Levels of 5-S 


6.3.1 Level 1 
a) Macro level cleaning — Major house 
cleaning. 


b) Decision to throw away what is not required. 
c) Decision to implement ‘3 minute’ 5-S. 


6.3.2 Level 2 


a) Design appropriate storage method: 
1) Special shelves, and 
2) Special racks/stands. 

b) Have placement diagram. 

c) Have instructional labels. 


6.3.3 Level 3 


a) Preventive steps identified and implemented. 
b) Prevent leakage. 

c) Prevent spillage. 

d) Implement ‘Kaizens’. 


6.3.4 Level 4 


a) Repair/overhaul defective machinery. 
b) Change layout. 
c) Prevent causes of problems/dirt (through 
interaction with other departments). 
6.3.5 Level 5 
Equipment 5-S (Cleaning is inspecting) 


6.3.6 Evaluation criteria for each of the above five 
levels is given in Annex F. 


IS 15171 : 2017 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 4.1.2 and 4.4.3) 


AREA - 
5-S TEAM - 


PHOTOGRAPH PHOTOGRAPH PHOTOGRAPH PHOTOGRAPH 


CRITICAL FREQUENCY STATUS STATUS STATUS 
POINTS OF CHECK 


Remarks by 
Steering 
Committee 


IS 15171 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.1.5) 
CHECKLIST FOR SEIRI 
SI Check Points System Result Maximum Marks Remarks 
No. Marks Obtained 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Standardized frequency of 
segregation 
ii) Disposal and segregation, with 
respect to repairable, irreparable, 
potentially useful, special, done 
iii) Retention period for records 
iv) Scrap sorted/categorized 
v) Records of things thrown away 
(Quantified) 
vi) Out of date notices/calendars/ 
displays 
vil) Records available of specific 


benefits achieved 


IS 15171 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.2.5) 
CHECKLIST FOR SEITON 
SI Check Point System Result Maximum Marks Remarks 
No. Marks Obtained 
(1) (2) O @) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Prefixed number of items 
ii) Prefixed location for items 
iii) Items have location names: 
a) Accessibility of items 
b) Proper stacking systems 
c) Shelf stratification 
d) Categorization of files 
e) Storage based on frequency of 
use 
f) Storage of sensitive, delicate 
items 
g) Placement of posters/notices/ 
calendars/displays 
Boxes shelves filled to 80 percent 
capacity 
iv) Functional layout 
v) Visual management: 
1) Colour coding 
2) Arrow marks 
3) Visual displays 
4) Ear marked danger zone 
5) Inventory management 
vi) Space saved due to indigenous 
storage methods 
vii) Display of preventive maintenance 


steps, schedules 


IS 15171 : 2017 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.3.3.2) 
CHECKLIST FOR SEISO 
Sl Check Point System Result Maximum Marks Remarks 
No. Marks Obtained 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) All items covered under cleaning schedules 
ii) Cleaning responsibilities known 
iii) | System of proper drainage 
iv) | Equipment/Machinery cleanliness 
v) | Around/Behind machines 
vi) | Passageways clean 
vii) Aisle making 
viii) | Under the stairs 
ix) Against the wall 
x) Beside and behind pillars 
x1) | Nooks and corners 
xii) Scrap yards 
xiii) Under trolleys/stands/racks 
xiv) Floor cleanliness 
xv) Wall cleanliness 
xvi) Ceiling cleanliness 
xvii) Windows and door cleanliness 
xviii) Fan, A/C, Light, Notice boards 
xix) Drainage pipes (blockage, etc) 


IS 15171 : 2017 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 4.4.5) 
CHECKLIST FOR SEIKETSU 
Sl Check Point System Result Maximum Marks Remarks 
No. Marks Obtained 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Aisle marking 
ii) Straight line rules 
iii) Maximizing space utilization 
iv) Fire extinguishers: 
a) placement/location 
b) refilled/expiry date sticker 
c) training 
v) Cables and wires 
vi)  Trolleys/cranes/fork lifts, etc 
vii) Lawns and plants 
viii) | Entrance to department identified and visible 
ix) Parking areas for vehicles defined 
x) Recreation rooms 
xi) | Washrooms/Drinking water areas 
xii) Canteens: 
a) Noise 
b) Lighting 
c) Ventilation 
xiii) Existence of standard operating procedures 


14 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 6.3.6) 


5-S EVALUATION CRITERIA 


IS 15171 : 2017 


Sl Title Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 
No. 

(1) (2) G) (4) (5) (6) 0) 

i) |5-S promotion |Have 5-S 5-S Committee | Problems Results are visible to 
at the promotion chart | promotion plans explicated, plan |all, and all objectives 
workplace and plans, andis |committee implemented |drawn up for are being met 

working on 5-S__| meets with full making 

education regularly and |participation |improvements, 
is aware of and plan going 
problems according to 
(keeps schedule 
minutes) 

il) |Cleaning (of |Have cleaning Cleaning of |Cleaningof |Cleaning of main | Able to detect problems 
main plans with lubrication peripheral | equipment in the making as well as 
equipment) delineation of parts and equipment |completed abnormal noises, 

individual around completed temperature levels, 
responsibilities equipment vibrations, etc 

and layout, and —_| completed 

education has 

reached everyone 

iii) | Dealing with | Education Have Implementati|Implementation | Working to modify 

causes completed and checklist of |onplan50 [plan 80 percent or | (improve) equipment, 
everyone able to |causesand |percentor |more completed |and full plan 
identify causes of |plan for more implementation making 
problems dealing with completed it possible to do quick 
them cleaning 

iv) |Hard-to-clean | Education Have Implementati|Implementation | Able to improve 
places completed and checklist of jonplan50 [plan 80 percent or | cleaning equipment, 

everyone able to | causes and percent or |morecompleted |covers, etc, and full 

identify hard-to- | plan for more plan implementation 

clean places dealing with completed making it possible to do 
them quick cleaning 

v) |30-second put | Able to Have clearly | Storage Things put away |Can access and put 
away and get- | distinguish designated places for easy access _| away in 30 s for better 
out between necessary | places for clearly effectiveness and 

and unnecessary everything labelled efficiency 
items 

vi) | Safety Know where to | Able to make | Able to All safety plans | Educated on safety and 

check equipment |all safety identify implemented able to make safety 
and what to check | checks for all | problems improvements for a 
for equipment and safer workplace 
formulate 
plans 
vii) | Visual controls | Education 50-70 percent | 70-90 All pipes painted | Have equipment ledger 
(1): Showing |completed,and |of pipes percent of [and labelled and checklist. Regular 
flow directions |know how many |painted and | pipes painted inspections to ensure 
are needed labelled and labelled work is error-free and 
safety is assured 


IS 15171 : 2017 


tape identified 


Sl Title Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 

No. 

0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 

viii) | Visual controls | Education 50-70 percent | 70-90 All valves labeled | Have equipment ledger 
(2):Valve completed and of valves percentof |and check at least |and checklist. Regular 
instructions know how many | labelled valves twice daily inspections to ensure 

of what kinds of labelled work is error-free and 
labels are needed safety is assured 
ix) | Visual controls | Education, All wires and |All wires Have equipment |All wires and ropes 
(3):Wires and |including points |ropes colour |and ropes ledger and care __| taken care of so they 
ropes on safety, coded measured for wires and are in top shape all the 
completed and and cared for | ropes when time 
know how many returned to 
of what are there inventory as well 
as when in use 
x) | Visual controls | Education 70 percent 100 percent |Have equipment |Have checklist and 
(4): Fire- completed, and |clearly clearly ledger and do everyone knows how to 
fighting know how many |markedand |marked and |regular use equipment. Able to 
equipment of what are there | people people inspections relate responsibilities, 
responsible, _|responsible, change markers, and 
designated designated maintain things in to 
shape 

xi) | Visual controls | Education 50-70 percent | 70-99 All equipment Have equipment ledger 
(5): completed, and |of equipment |percentof  |labelled and and check for label 
Temperature [know how many _|labelled equipment [labels checked | discoloration, etc. 
labels of what are there labelled daily Improvements made 

and recorded 

xii) | Visual controls | Education 50-70 percent | 70-99 All equipment Have equipment ledger, 
(6): Okay completed, have |of equipment |percentof | labelled conduct regular 
marks action plan, and __| labelled equipment inspections, and prevent 

know what needs labelled problems 
attention 

xiii) | Visual controls | Education 50-70 percent | 70-99 All places taped | Have equipment ledger, 
(7): Cooling |completed,and |of places percent of check fans daily, and 
fans places needing taped places taped prevent problems 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 02 (0426). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


