IS 10386 (Part 1) : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IAA Ae 


q sl Raa s frat, waren 
ak tara al Grant sien 
AMT 1 WAT qeq 


(Ye FRAT) 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 


PART 1 GENERAL ASPECTS 


( First Revision ) 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


October 2013 Price Group 2 


Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


With large scale increase in construction activity of river valley projects, the number of major accidents has 
increased. The degree of safety achieved in project constructions has a direct bearing on the amount of effort 
expanded to avoid accidents by those who control the conditions and practices on the project. 


This standard was first published in 1983. In this revision, routine maintenance (8) and typical accident report 
(Annex A) have been incorporated. 


The recommendations made in this standard are for general guidance and may need modification depending 
upon individual site conditions. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 10386 (Part 1) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 


PART 1 GENERAL ASPECTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) lays down the requirements 
regarding safety programme, its enforcement, general 
qualifications of employees and training for safety and 
contractor’s/employer’s overall responsibility 
regarding safety. 


2 SAFETY PROGRAMME 


2.1 Each contractor, private or government agency, 
shall have facilities for conducting a safety programme, 
commensurate with the magnitude of work under 
contract. Details of safety programme to be adopted 
by the contractor shall be given by the Contracting 
Officer/Engineer-in-Charge, prior to the start of 
construction operation. The programme shall give 
details of the provisions proposed by the contractor, to 
provide for safety of the employees and for elimination 
of health hazards. In case the work is undertaken by a 
government agency itself, the chief executive or the 
chief authority shall constitute a unit/cell to prepare a 
detailed safety programme to be approved by the Chief 
Executive. 


2.2 Safety Personnel 


Each contractor/government agency shall designate a 
competent employee, as a supervisor, responsible for 
carrying out the safety programme. He shall create a 
safety cell/unit, commensurate with the project 
activities, consisting of other staff as required for 
suitable development. 


2.2.1 At least one number safety supervisor, directly 
responsible to Engineer-in-Charge, should be 
earmarked for worksite to supervise normal safety 
measures, that is, repair to ladders, platforms, 
scaffolding, leakages etc, for safe working environment. 


2.3 Pre-construction Safety Meetings 


Representatives of contractor shall meet the 
Contracting Officer/Engineer-in-Charge prior to start 
of construction activities for the purpose of discussing 
safety standards and requirements applicable to the 
work under contract. In case, government agency is 


executing the work, the manager of safety cell/unit shall 
discuss with construction executive the safety 
programme before the start of work. 


2.4 Joint Safety Policy Meetings 


2.4.1 The contractor or his representative shall 
participate in joint safety policy meetings, which shall 
be held once in two months, along with the contracting 
agent and contractor or his representatives. These 
meetings shall be utilized to review the effectiveness 
of safety measures/efforts, provided by the contractor 
and to improve and coordinate safety activities, as 
required. 


2.4.1.1 In case of departmental work, the manager of 
safety cell/unit shall hold meetings on safety 
programme to educate the workers about the necessity 
and meaningfulness of safety regulations, precautions 
and review the effectiveness of the efforts made by his 
safety cell/unit. 


2.4.2 The use of films on safety programmes shall be 
encouraged for education of the staff, contractors and 
workmen and their display shall be held at regular 
intervals at the project sites. 


2.5 Safety Meetings 


A minimum of one, ‘on the job or tool box’ safety 
meeting shall be conducted every month by all field 
supervisors or foremen and it shall be attended by all 
the mechanics and labourers at the work site. 


2.5.1 The contractor shall also regularly organize safety 
meetings for all job supervisors at least once a month. 


2.5.2 Regular safety meetings should be held at least 
once in a month at work site with workers by Engineer- 
in-Charge to create safety awareness amongst workmen 
with special reference to safety measures to be adopted 
for particular work site. 


3 ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS 


3.1 The Contracting Officer/Engineer-in-Charge shall 
ensure that the contractor is exercising at all times, 
reasonable and proper precautions for the safety of 


IS 10386 (Part 1) : 2013 


people at work and is complying with the provisions 
of current safety rules according to relevant Indian 
Standards, Central Electricity Authority (Measures 
relating to Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 
2010 and construction codes of State Governments. In 
case of any negligence or default, he shall be penalized 
suitably and a clause to this effect shall always be 
incorporated in the contract. A register may be 
maintained or OK cards may be introduced, duly signed 
by the Contracting Officer or his representative and 
the representative of contracting agency, before the start 
of any item of work. It may be reviewed monthly. 


3.2 The safety staff shall prepare safety posters, signs, 
displays, leaflets, bulletins, etc, and display them on 
neat attractive bulletin boards. Safety cartoons may also 
be displayed. Suggestions from the workers may also 
be obtained by means of suggestion boxes which may 
be kept at various places. 


3.3 Vehicular traffic on project roads should be 
regulated by setting of traffic check posts at important 
crossings and highway tunnels in the project area. 
Supervisor deputed in work area should ensure removal 
of nails, steel debris, sharpeners scattered on haul roads/ 
working areas with magnetic probes to avoid deflating 
of tyres of equipment/machinery. 


4 QUALIFICATIONS OF EMPLOYEES 


4.1 Requirement 


Throughout the course of contract, persons employed 
shall be physically fit and qualified to perform their 
assignments/duties. Employees shall not knowingly be 
permitted or required to work in a manner that their 
ability or alertness is impaired because of fatigue, 
illness or any other reason, that it may expose them 
and/or others to injury. 


4.1.1 In case of mechanical jobs, the operators shall 
not be less than 18 years of age and shall have a 
operator’ s/ driver’s licence or permit for the equipment 
being operated by them, issued by the competent 
authority, as per the requirement of Motor Vehicles 
Act. Marine divers shall be fully qualified with respect 
to training, experience and physical condition to 
perform the required type of diving and to perform the 
work involved. A current physical fitness certificate 
from project medical officer or any other medical 
officer authorized by project authority shall be required 
for all diving personnel. 


4.2 Minors and Women Workers 


Contractor/Government agency shall comply with all 
applicable state bye-laws and codes related to 
employment of minors and women. 


4.3 Physical Fitness 


Hoist operators, shovel/crane operators, tractor/bull 
dozer operators, vehicle drivers or any other hauling- 
heavy equipment operators, shall be examined and a 
physical fitness certificate shall be obtained once in a 
year during service from a project medical officer or 
any other medical officer authorized by project 
authority. A copy of such certificate shall be submitted 
to the Contracting Officer/Engineer-in-Charge by the 
contractor/government agency executing the work, if 
so required. 


5 TRAINING FOR SAFETY 


5.1 The contracting agency/contractor shall impart 
industrial safety courses to its officers, safety managers, 
safety supervisors, foremen, etc. In plants, training on 
industrial safety may be conducted for the construction 
supervisors. The engineering staff may impart training 
course to the artisans, operators, mechanics, foremen 
and other allied supervisors. 


5.1.1 Safety equipment shall be issued to the workers 
for use. There should be safety drill indicating do’s 
and dont’s. 


5.2 Each employee shall be provided with the initial 
indoctrination, including instructions related to 
pertinent job, reporting of accidents and availability 
of first-aid and medical facilities. 


5.2.1 Safety course may be organized at least once a 
year so that the safety cell/unit is abreast with the latest 
techniques and bye-laws. The foremen, safety 
supervisors may impart lectures to the workmen 
regularly and watch the effectiveness of the 
programme. 


5.3 Employees shall not leave naked fires unattended. 
Smoking shall not be permitted around fire prone areas 
and fire fighting equipment as per relevant Indian 
Standards shall be provided at crucial locations. 


5.4 Employees under the influence of any intoxicants 
shall not be permitted to remain at work. 


6 CONTRACTOR/CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S 
SPECIAL RESPONSIBILITIES 


6.1 It is the prime duty of the contractor/chief executive 
to ensure that the safety manager be given the status 
necessary to enable him to carry out his duties in 
collaboration with all grades of line management. He 
shall be specialized in accident prevention and general 
safety. He should try to ensure that basic safety 
principles are incorporated in the planning stage of 
operation of machines, equipment, process work, 
storage, distribution, etc. He should not only provide a 


safe working environment but also help to facilitate 
construction. 


6.1.1 Special safety techniques may be employed to 
remove causes of accidents. Broadly, these fall into 
two categories: (a) those which try to remove the 
physical causes by providing safe working 
environment; and (b) those try to create a correct 
personal attitude. 


6.2 A well defined rescue plan should be developed. 


7 REPORTS 


7.1 Each employer/contractor shall maintain an 
accurate record and shall report to the contracting 
officer in the manner and on forms prescribed by the 
contracting officer, all cases of injuries/deaths, 
occupational diseases, disabilities, etc, arising out of 
or in the course of employment on the work under 
contract. Monthly reports of all accidents shall 
promptly be submitted by the contractor to the 
Engineer-in-Charge giving such details as may be 


IS 10386 (Part 1) : 2013 


prescribed by the project authorities. A typical format 
for accident report has been given at Annex A. 


7.1.1 All accidents shall be reported by the contractor 
immediately to the Contracting Officer/Engineer-in- 
Charge on a prescribed proforma laid down by the 
project authorities and every assistance shall be given 
in the investigation of accident including submission 
of a comprehensive narrative report. Further, other 
accidental occurrences with serious accident potential 
such as equipment failures, slides, cave-ins, etc, shall 
likewise be reported by the contractor to the 
Contracting Officer/Engineer-in-Charge immediately. 


7.2 A well designed injury reporting system shall be 
introduced on each project. It will automatically bring 
out a lot of valuable information useful in accident 
prevention work. 


8 ROUTINE MAINTENANCE 


Routine maintenance should be done as per norms for 
all river valley projects. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 7.1) 


TYPICAL FORMAT FOR ACCIDENT REPORT 


A-1 FORMAT FOR REPORTING ACCIDENT AT PROJECT SITE 


Date and time of accident 
Date and time of reporting 


Pe ha 


lines or Consumer). Give details 
Name(s) of the casualty(ies) 
Age of casualty(ies) and sex 
Residence of casualty(ies) 


So: San ON EA 


Occupation of casualty(ies) 


a) Departmental or non-departmental 


Name, designation and address of the Party who reported the accident : 
Location of the accident (Premises of Licenses or Board or other 


b) If departmental, whether an authorized person 


9. Cause and manner of accident, give details 
a) Whether casualty is an employee 


b) Whether safety appliances such as gloves, belt rope were in use 
and earthing of lines etc, were there at the time of accident 


10. a) Whether line clearance (L.C.) was availed 


b) Whether safety appliances were used 


c) Whether all safety precautions were taken 


11. Classification 


Fatal/non-fatal serious/non-fatal major/minor 


IS 10386 (Part 1) : 2013 


. Whether police and concerned authorities informed 
. Voltage to earth 

. Other remarks 

. Action taken to prevent the recurrence 


Signature 
Name 


Designation/Occupation address of 
the person reporting 


A-2 FORMAT FOR REPORTING ELECTRICAL ACCIDENT 


1 
2. 
3. 
4 


Date: 
Time 


Date and time of accident: 
Place of accident and district: 
System and voltage of supply: 


Name and the licensee (or) person/persons (or) supplier use of energy whose premises (or) jurisdiction 
the accident occurred: 


a) Name of the person(s) injured: 
b) Address of such/each person: 


Occupation and designation of such person/persons (and in particular) whether employed in electrical 
works or working else where: 


Brief description of the job undertaken if any: 


Authority under which such person was/were allowed to work on the job site. Also whether he/they 
was/were authorized person/persons: 


Describe fully nature and extent of injuries, for example fatal, disablement of any portion of body or 
other injury, etc: 


. Detailed cause leading to the accident: 

. Action taken regarding first aid medical attendance, etc, immediately after the occurrence of the accident: 
. Whether appropriate Govt./District Magistrate and police station were informed (if so give details): 

. Steps taken to preserve the evidence in connection with the accident to the extent possible: 

. Name and designation of the person(s) assisting the person (or) injured: 


. What safety equipment were given to and used by the person(s) who met with the accident (Rubber 
gloves, rubber mats, safety belt and ladder, etc): 


. Whether isolating switches and other sectionalizing devices were employed to isolate the sections for 
working on the same. If so whether these were earthed: 


. Whether the work on the line was undertaken by an authorized person(s). If so the name and designation 
of such person(s) may be given: 


. Whether artificial respiration treatment was given to the person who met with electric accident if so how 
long was it continued before its abandonment: 


. Steps proposed to be taken to avoid recurrence: 
. Name and designation of person(s) present at the time of accident: 
. Any other remarks: 


Signature 
Name 


Designation/Occupation address of the 
person reporting 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 21(0507). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


