RAT Alte IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


cate cht VaTaat sik Yarra 
fia ate Hes At Teg ht 
amt 1 utero hl are waft 
( TEA JAGT ) 


Methods for Determination of 
Viscosity and Viscometric 
Fixed Points of Glass 


Part 1 Standard Test Methods 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 81.040.01 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2022 Price Group 8 


Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee, CHD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


The quality and the type of glass is very much dependent upon the relationship of viscosity of glass with 
temperature change. Important information of glass technology regarding the temperature required to produce 
a homogeneous melt for production of glass and the temperature range of formation of glass can be collected 
from this relationship. This standard, therefore, also provides guidance for determining viscosity/temperature 
relationship. 


This standard was originally published in 1989 based on ISO 7884-3 : 1987 ‘Glass — Viscosity and viscometric 
fixed points — Part 3 : Determination of viscosity by fibre elongation viscometer’. However, to keep it in line with 
the improved technology, the first revision of this standard has been undertaken. In this first revision, two new 
methods for determination of viscosity of glass have been added. The parallel plate viscometer method is based on 
ASTM C 1351M — 96 (2017) ‘Standard Test Method for Measurement of Viscosity of Glass between 10* Pa.s and 
108 Pa.s by Viscous Compression of a Solid Right Cylinder [Metric]’ and the Beam Bending Viscometer method 
is based on ASTM C 1350M — 96 (2019) ‘Standard Test Method for Measurement of Viscosity of Glass between 
Softening Point and Annealing Range (Approximately 10° Pa.s to Approximately 10" Pa.s) by Beam Bending 
[Metric]’ 


This standard forms Part 1 of Methods for determination of viscosity and viscometric fixed points of glass. Part 2 
of this standard deals with determination of softening points and Part 3 deals with determination of annealing and 
strain point by beam bending method. 


The departure from ISO document is given at Annex E. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF VISCOSITY AND 
VISCOMETRIC FIXED POINTS OF GLASS 


PART 1 STANDARD TEST METHODS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) prescribes the methods for 
determining the viscosity of glass. This standard 
includes following three methods: 


a) Fibre elongation method; 
b) Beam bending viscometer method; and 


c) Viscous compression of a solid right cylinder 
method. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards given below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


IS No. Title 


7358: 1984 Specification for 
(first revision) 


thermocouples 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Viscosity — It is defined as the proportion of the 
shear stress which is applied and the shear rate that 
is being generated. In case of a Newtonian liquid this 
connection is determined by the relation given as: 


Shear stress = Viscosity x Shear rate 
[N/m?] = [Ns/m?].[1/s] 


The unit of viscosity is Ns/m? or Pa.s (Pa = N/m”), in 
accordance with the Standard International System. The 
unit Poise was previously used. As the glass industry is 
still frequently using the unit Poise, it is imperative to 
give a correct description of the difference in between 
Pa.s and Poise. 

NOTE — In accordance with the materials science, a material 

is said to be “Newtonian” in case it exhibits a linear relationship 

between strain rate and stress. 


d 
1 dPa.s = aL =1P, 1 dPa.s = 0.1 Pa.s, 1 Pa.s = 10 P. 
m 


; ; dNs . f 
where dPa.s is deci pascal second, — is decinewton 
m 


second per square metre and P is poise. 


3.2 Range of Viscosity 


In regard to the practical application, three different 
ranges of viscosity measurement can be distinguished 
as: 


a) annealing range — from 10” to 10'° dPa.s; 
b) melting range — up to 10° dPa.s; and 
c) working range — from 10° to 108 dPa.s. 


3.3 Viscometric Fixed Points 


It is quite convenient to give preference to the following 
five temperatures in order to characterize the viscosity/ 
temperature behaviour of a glass. 


NOTE — The expression ‘fixed point’ does not denote any 
relation to thermodynamical fixed points. 


3.3.1 Working Point T,, 


The temperature that corresponds to a viscosity (7,,) of 
10* dPa.s. 


3.3.2 Liquidus Point T, 


The liquidus temperature T, is the temperature above 
the point where no crystallization is possible. This is the 
maximum temperature at which crystals can co-exist 
with the melt. This liquidus temperature corresponds to 
the viscosity (77,,) 10** dPa.s. However, the real liquidus 
temperature also depends on the composition (and the 
contaminants present) in the glass and is determined 
by the thermodynamics that can be derived from phase 
diagrams. 


3.3.3 Softening Point T, 


It is the temperature above that the glass is capable of 
most of the forming operations. The softening point is 
also known as Littleton temperature. The corresponding 
viscosity (7,,) is estimated by the following equation: 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


N, =2.1 x 10’ (p — of/520) 
where 


p= density of glass, in grams per cubic centimetre; 
and 


o = surface tension, in millinewton per metre. 


For p = 2.5 g/cm? and o = 300 mN/m, the viscosity is 
N, = 107° dPa.s 


3.3.4 Annealing Point T, 


It is the temperature at which internal stresses that are 
present in a glass are substantially relieved in just a 
matter of minutes. At this temperature the annealing 
point corresponds to a viscosity (7,,) from 10" to 
10'3? dPa.s. 


3.3.4.1 Annealing range 


It is the temperature range in which stresses present 
in glass articles can be relieved at a commercially 
desirable rate. 


3.3.5 Strain Point T; 


It is the temperature at which internal stresses present 
within a glass are substantially relieved in just a matter 
of hours. Temperature at the strain point corresponds to 
a viscosity (7,,) from 10'*° to 10'*” dPa.s. 


3.4 Fibre 

It is the cylindrical part of the specimen bearing a 
2 

constant cross-section S = 7 along its entire length 


where d is the uniform diameter of the fibre which is 
drawn from the molten glass. 


3.5 Fibre Ball 


A fibre that has two of its ends in the shape of spherical 
balls and is prepared carefully by fusing each end of 
the fibre on the burner flame into spherical ball shape 
enabling the suspension of the fibre vertically, the upper 
ball resting on a suitable slot in a fixed support while a 
loading devise with a suitable slot hangs supported on 
the lower ball. 


3.6 Load 


It comprises of all the parts of an apparatus on which 
gravity can act to produce a force on the fiber’s lower 
end. 


3.7 Loading Pieces 


It is a device for suspending the loading pieces 
(corresponding to a range of loads) below the specimen 
in an axial direction including the lower extension rod. 


3.8 Dead Weight 


It stems from the part of the fibre which is below the 
cross-section being under consideration. There is a 
linear variation for the force due to gravity from zero at 
the lower end to the upper end of the fibre. 


3.9 Surface Tension Effect 


This effect acts along the length of fibre thereby 
shortening the length. It thus, opposes the gravitational 
force because of the load. 


3.10 Beam Bending Viscometer 


It is a device that is used to find the viscosity of a glass 
from 108 Pa.s to 10"? Pa.s approximately by measuring 
the deflection rate of a simply supported beam. The 
equation for calculating viscosity by this method is: 


vb AL]| (+a TÝ 
n=- — £ yP || te, J 
1440 I. (dh/ dt) 1.6 (I+0 T) 
E 
where 
M = load (applied load + loading 
train), gm; 
n = viscosity, Pa.s; 
g = acceleration of gravity, 980 cm/s’; 
dh/dt = midpoint deflection rate of test 
beam, cm/s; 
p = density of glass, g/cm’; 
IC = cross-sectional moment of inertia, 
emt 
A = cross-sectional area of the beam, 
cm’; 
L = support span, cm; and 
asandag = mean coefficient of linear thermal 


expansion of support stand and 
glass, respectively, 25 °C to 
temperature of measurement, T, 
m/m/°C. See Note below. 


NOTE — The term (1 + aT / (1 + a,T)* corrects 
for thermal expansion changes of room temperature 
dimensions. It can be ignored when a, and a, are 
approximately equal. A fused silica support stand in 
combination with a high expansion glass can make this term 
3 percent in magnitude. Only an estimate of a, is required, since 
the correction is small. Use 1.5 times the room temperature 
coefficient if data are unavailable. 


3.11 Parallel Plate Viscometer 


It is a device which is used to determine the viscosity 
of glass between 10* Pa.s to 10° Pa.s approximately by 


the measurement of the rate of change in thickness of 
a cylindrical shaped specimen between parallel plates 
which is moving perpendicular to the common central 
axis. For calculating the viscosity by the parallel plate 
method, following equation can be used: 


Mgh’ 


n=20 3 
30V (dh/ dt)(2nh’ +V)1+aT) 
where 
n =~ viscosity, Pa.s; 
M = applied load, g; 
g = acceleration due to gravity, 980 cm/s’; 
t = time, s; 


dh/dt 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


= specimen volume, cm’; 


= specimen thickness at time t, cm; 


compression rate, cm/s; and 


= glass mean coefficient of thermal 
expansion, 25 °C to the measurement 
temperature, 7, m/m/°C. See Note below. 


NOTE — The term (1 + aT) corrects for the specimen 
dimensional changes due to thermal expansion. For low 
thermal expansion glasses, it can be ignored. However, for a 
glass with an a of 20 x 10°*/ °C at a measurement temperature 
of 1 000 °C, this term produces a correction of 2 percent. Only 
an estimate of a is necessary since the correction is small. 
Use twice the room temperature coefficient if data are 
unavailable. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 1) 
FIBRE ELONGATION METHOD 


A-1 OUTLINE 


This method prescribes the method for determining 
the viscosity of glass by (fibre elongation method, 
measuring the elongation ofa glass fibre under a defined 
uniaxial stress. In addition, the viscosity/temperature 
relationship (see Annex D) and the dependence of 
viscosity on thermal history can be determined. 
NOTE — The viscous flow by the glass fibre is assumed to 
be Newtonian. The glass is presumed to be homogeneous 
and isotropic and the effect of gravity on fibre is neglected. 
When the fibre shape and cross-sectional tolerance conform 
to sample specifications given in this standard, all parts of the 
fibre can be presumed to be subjected to the same mechanical 
stress leading to a pure elongation. 


A-1.1 The knowledge of equilibrium viscosities in 
the low temperature range with their dependence on 
temperature and thermal history will be extremely 
useful in predicting glass properties and behavior. 


A-2 FIELD OF APPLICATLON 


A-2.1 The methods are applicable mainly to glass 
viscosity range from 10° to 10'* dPa.s with possibilities 
for extending the range to 10'*° dPa.s with special 
devices. This corresponds to a temperature range of 
800 °C to 400 °C for normal commercial glass 
compositions being produced in bulk quantities. 
NOTE — In the viscosity ranges above 10" dPa.s the thermal 
equilibrium of the glass structure takes considerable time 
to readjust following a temperature change. If equilibrium 
measurements are envisaged, sufficient time must be allowed 
following the change of temperature for thermal equilibrium 
to be re-established before the elongation measurement is 
undertaken. Alternatively a dynamic measurement can be done 
involving measurements made during a well-defined time/ 
temperature programme. These measurements will correspond to 
a dynamical, non-equilibrium value for the viscosity Hos indicated 
by which may nevertheless be consistent and reproducible under 
defined time temperature programme. The symbol without index 
denotes always equilibrium viscosity. 


A-3 PRINCIPLE 


A-3.1 Basic Relation 


Consider the force F, of the load acting on a specimen 
prepared from a glass with Newtonian flow behaviour 
and with no defects. With surface tension and the dead 
weight of the fibre being neglected, equation (1) gives 


a good approximation for the extensional flow rate d 
at constant volume V. dt 
d 1 1 FP 
—=-X—xX z (T) 
dt 3 n V 


where 

n = viscosity, in decipascal second (dPa.s); 

V= volume of the fibre; 

F= mg 

where 

m= total mass contributing to F : 

g= acceleration due to gravity; and 

l= length of the fibre. 

From the measurement of length as a function of time 


for a given load, a straight line plot of a versus Ë, can 
be drawn. dt 


From the slope of the straight line 7 can be calculated. 
In practice, the initial length /, of the fibre is estimated 
independently and the elongation (increases in length) 
is measured by observing a fixed mark on the loading 
device by using a travelling microscope/cathetometer 
provided with a vernier scale or an eye piece micrometer. 


A-3.2 Order of Magnitudes of Elongation 


For an elongation from /, to /,; (L — /, = 6/) during the 
time Af an expression is obtained by integrating and 
rewriting (1) as: 


gy At xl, 
3 


n= m 
V l xl (2) 
2 iene) 
Vili, 3) 


Where, l, L, òl; are in millimetre, V is in cubic 
millimeters, m is in g, A ¢ is in seconds and y is in dPa.s. 


For a given diameter of the fibre at the start of experiment 
2 


d (presuming a constant volume V = x1) it is 


4 
possible to calculate the time interval for extension 


ratio = of say 0.02 at different loads for a given 
1 
viscosity. These values of ¢, are tabulated (see Table 1) 


for an initial diameter of the fibre at d = 0.737 mm and 


ôl _ 9 02. 


I 

From the Table 1, it is clear that for the same 
extension ratio, for a range of temperatures for which 
the viscosity increases by six orders of magnitude 
(108 to 10'*) the extension ratios have to be 
correspondingly reduced by almost similar orders 
of magnitude in order to keep reasonably convenient 
time intervals. This implies increasing the accuracy of 
measurement of 6/ by similar orders of magnitude. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 1 Time Interval ¢, for an Extension ôl = 0.02 under a Load of Mass m 
L 


(As Corrected for Dead Weight and Surface Tension), for a Fibre of Initial Diameter d, = 0.737 mm 
(Clauses A-3.2, A-4.4.2) 


SI No. Viscosity dPa.s Time Interval ź for in Seconds for Load m 
n— M 
lg 4g 16g 64g 256 g 
A) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 108 25.6 ~ - = - 
ii) 10° 256 64 - - - 
iii) 10" 2 560 640 160 40 - 
iv) 10" 25 600 6 400 1 600 400 100 
v) 10” 256 000 64 000 16 000 4 000 1 000 
vi) 10" ~ - 160 000 40 000 10 000 
vii) 104 - - - - 100 000 


A-4 APPARATUS 


A-4.1 Viscometer Furnace 


A vertical mounted muffle furnace with both ends open, 
being electrically heated and with a temperature range 
of up to 900°C is suitable. It must have provisions for 
measuring the temperature and its distribution along 
the length of the fibre specimen using thermo-couples. 
The temperature gradient in the region of the specimen 
shall not exceed 0.2°C/cm. 


A-4.1.1 The temperature control must be effected so 
as to ensure a consistency of temperature in respect of 
time at any point within the working space to within 
+ 1°C or better. Temperature variations must be effected 
with consistent and repeatable linear programmes. 


A-4.2 Temperature Measuring and Indicating 
Instruments 


A-4.2.1 Alumina insulated platinum — 10 percent 
rhodium/platinum (Type S of IS 7358 1984) 
thermocouples or nickel-chromium/nickel (Type K of 
IS 7358 : 1984) thermocouples shall be employed. They 
shall have low thermal inertia with wire diameters not 
more than 0.5 mm and sufficient immersion length of 
the hot junction inside the space where temperature is 
measured. 


A-4.2.2 Control thermocouple hot junctions should 
be located as close as possible to the furnace heating 
elements to ensure fast response between any 
temperature variation and the corrective action by the 
controls. The hot junctions of the thermocouples for 
measuring specimen temperatures should be close to 
specimens (see Fig. 1). The temperature distribution 
along the length of the fibre shall be monitored by 
suitable devices, for example: 


a) anickel block of high thermal mass surrounding the 
fibre in a cylindrical shape with a number of holes 
positioned at various points distributed evenly 
covering the length of the fibre thermocouples 
being inserted through the holes, and 


b) Alternatively, a mobile thermocouple of low 
thermal mass (see Fig. 1). 


A-4.2.2.1 The thermocouples shall be calibrated in 
accordance with the procedure given in IS 7358 : 1984. 


A-4.2.3 The electrical outputs of the thermocouples 
shall be measured potentiometrically, drawing nil 
currents or by a high resistance electronic amplifiers 
having a sensitivity of 1 microvolt for Type S 
US 7358 : 1984) and of 4 microvolt for Type K 
(IS 7358 : 1984) thermocouples. The cold junctions 
of the thermocouples shall be maintained at 0°C 
throughout; alternatively the measuring instrument 
shall be provided with automatic cold junction 
compensation device. 


A-4.3 Hanging Device for Specimen and Load 


The fibre is freely suspended from a connecting device 
by placing the upper ball of fibre in the lower groove of 
the device (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). A fused silica rod with ball 
ends is used as an upper extension for the suspension, 
the lower ball of this rod supports the connecting 
device at its upper groove. The upper ball of the silica 
rod rests centrally on a suitable groove of metal plate of 
ceramic plate placed on the top of the muffle tube. The 
loading linkage consists of a fused silica rod of about 
1 mm diameter with fused balls on both ends. The 
upper ball rests on the lower groove of the connector 
which is suspended from the fibre. A similar connector 
hanging from the lower end of this rod and extending 
outside the furnace, can be used for loading. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


HOT JUNCTION OF , 
THERMOCOUPLE A 


HOT JUNCTION OF, 
THERMOCOUPLE ‘B 


/ 
ff 
$ i ra 
Q Vy, 
7 
j V7 
0 ty 
y7 
e i 7 
N ! 4, 
H AS f Ss § N ; 19.9 A A Y 
ALA | WL 
ORY | AY 
TE 
N i 
1 Connector for the lower ball of the 5 Loading device (only the road is shown) 


test specimen and the and the loading ¢ 
device (for connectors offering different 
magnitudes of load, see Fig. 3) 


Support-stand : tube of fused silica 


2 Test specimen 7 Screening between working space and heaters 
3 Support plate 8 Chamber furnace with heaters 
4 Upper ball of the specimen 9 Cover ring below the furnace (fixed at the silica tube) 


Fic. 1 FIBRE ELONGATION METHOD: EXAMPLE OF A TESTING DEVICE (SCHEMATIC) 


EY, 
s 


? 


FIG. 2 CONNECTOR BLOCK (METAL) BORED To ACT Fic. 3 CONNECTOR Hooks (WIRE) To ACT AS A 
As A HANGING DEVICE HANGING DEVICE 


A-4.3.1 It is absolutely essential that the extension rods 
and the fibre hang vertically, coaxially and centrally 
with reference to the furnace muffle tube. While 
measuring viscosities in the range of 10° to 10° dPa.s, 
the loading may entirely consist of only the lower 
extension rod of fused silica of approximately 0.5 mm 
diameter and a total mass of about 1 g. No additional 
loading is necessary. 


A-4.4 Loading Pieces 


While measuring medium viscosity ranges 10!° to 10", 
the total load on fibre should be around 4 g. The lower 
silica extension rod should have a diameter around 
1 mm. 


A-4.4.1 For higher viscosities heavier loads will be 
necessary and the lower silica extension rod must have 
a larger diameter. 


A-4.4.2 A set of brass loading pieces with masses 
determined to an accuracy of 0.01 g may be used. 
The pieces shall be shaped suitably, to be hung 
symmetrically from a hook which can be connected to 
the lower extension fused silica rod by the connecting 
device. An idea of the masses for the brass pieces can 
be had from Table 1. 


A-4.5 Measurement of Elongation 


A-4.5.1 Use of Optical Devices 


A mark is made on the load carrying device outside 
the furnace. A cathetometer or travelling microscope 
fitted with scale and vernier can be used. The vernier 
must have a least count of at least 0.02 mm. The error 
arising from graduation of the scale and vernier shall 
be such as to ensure that the error in measurement of 
òl does not exceed 0.01 mm. The instrument (travelling 
microscope or cathetometer) shall be rigidly locked 
in position during any one series of determinations. It 
shall be conveniently positioned in advance so that the 
maximum extension of the fibre will still be within the 
range of its observation. 


A-4.5.2 Measurement of the Initial Length L, 


The length /, of the fibre between the two ball shaped 
ends is measured at the room temperature using a 
travelling microscope or cathetometer. The fibre is 
then suspended in position with the extension rods, 
connectors and loading device in the furnace at room 
temperature. The measuring instrument is then focused 
on to the moving mark and the scale readings noted. At 
any subsequent measurements at different temperatures 
and loads, increases in the length of the fibre can be 
measured by changes in scale readings on subsequent 
settings of the optical device. Calibration for initial 
fibre lengths / at any temperatures is possible using a 
pure platinum fibre (say T.C., wire of 0.5 mm) of similar 
dimensions and with fused spherical ball ends. The 
length of platinum fibre can be measured accurately 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


and its coefficient of expansion is also known. At any 
temperature a reading on the moving marker with the 
platinum fibre in position in place of the glass fibre will 
correspond to a known length of the fibre. 


A-4.5.3 Use of Linear 
Transformers (LVDT) 


Instead of an optical device for the measurement 
of òl, an extension rod from the loading device can 
be coupled to an LVDT (linear variable differential 
transformer) comprising a core and coil separated 
from each other. The relative movement between the 
core and the coil measures the displacement. This 
displacement is displayed or recorded as an electrical 
output. The possibility of adjustable amplifications 
for the signal is an added advantage enabling a wide 
range of sensitivities without disturbing the mechanical 
settings. LVDT’s with the required sensitivities and 
accuracies are easily available. 


Variable Differential 


A-4.5.4 Blast flame burner, two rods of stainless steel, 
ceramics or hard glass for flame working. 


A-4.5.5 Electrically heated crucible glass melting 
furnace with arrangement for fibre drawing, such as 
water coaled copper coils; pull rod of platinum, or 
stainless steel of fused silica. 


A-4.5.6 Timer Devices 


Timer devices are necessary covering a range of 20 s to 
2 000 s with a least count of 0.1 s. The accuracy of the 
time should be ensured to be better than 0.2 percent. 


A-4.5.6.1 Fibre diameter 


A micrometer screw gauge with a least count of at least 
0.005 mm is required. 


A-5 SAMPLE PREPARATION 


A-5.1 Preparation of Fibre by Flame Working 


This method can be used only when the glass is 
stable with heat treatment without any tendency for 
devitrification or phase separation. A piece of the glass 
about 2 to 3 cm? in volume is fused in the flame by 
holding it between the rods (of platinum, ceramics 
or harder glasses) and turning it around. When it is 
sufficiently soft it is suddenly withdrawn from the 
flame and drawn apart using the rods. The operation 
shall be completed quickly to prevent loss of volatiles 
in the flame working. Skill is required in this operation 
with respect to: 


a) choice of temperature (as judged by the softness 
of the work pieces) at which the drawing apart is 
undertaken, 


b) force and speed of drawing to ensure fibre of 
particular diameter, 


c) uniformity of drawing, and 
d) Stopping of drawing at the right time. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


A-5.2 Preparation of Fibre from the Melt 


About 100 g of the glass is melted in a platinum 
crucible in the electrically heated furnace. The glass 
can be fed in the form of cullet but the grains should 
not be finer than 3 mm to avoid bubbles. When the 
glass is completely melted and is free from bubbles a 
pull rod of platinum, ceramic or fused silica is dipped 
into the melt. The rod is pulled up quickly through a 
water cooled copper coil to the desired length. A similar 
degree of skill in the drawing is required as indicated 
for flame working (A-5.1). A mechanised device for 
pulling ensures repeatable and well controlled drawing 
speeds. 


A-5.3 Specimen Preparation for 
Experiment 


About 50 to 100 mm length of the fibre will be required 
for the elongation measurement. A length of about 20 to 
30 mm longer than the desired length of fibre is taken 
and the portion of uniform round diameter is chosen. 
By flame working the two ends are made into spherical 
balls of about 2 mm. The balls are properly centred on 
the fibre axis. 


Elongation 


A-5.3.1 After the fibre has cooled completely the 
length of the fibre is measured between the two balls, 
accurately to 0.2 mm. The diameter can be between 0.6 to 
0.8 mm for most measurements. At the high temperature 
(low viscosities of 108 to 10° dPa.s) the diameter could 
better be up to 1 mm. A number of measurements of the 
diameter are made equally distributed along the length 
of the fibre, and at each point in two directions at right 
angles to each other. The maximum and minimum 
diameters shall not differ by more than 2.5 percent 
of the mean diameter. The arithmetic mean value of 
the diameter shall be used for calculating the fibre 
volume V. 


A-5.3.2 The upper end of the fibre (when suspended for 
elongation measurements) shall be chosen to have the 
larger diameter ball. 


A-5.3.3 The test specimen shall be free from scratches, 
striae, devitrification, bubbles or other inhomogeneities. 
There shall be no neck formation of fibre at either end 
close to the balls. 


A-5.4 Etching of the Test Specimen 


An etching solution shall be prepared with 2 mol/litre 
aqueous solution of hydrochloric, sulphuric or nitric 
acid containing 3 percent of hydrofluoric acid. The 
glass fibre is placed in this solution at room temperature 
for 0.5 to 1 min. The fibre is taken out, rinsed with 
distilled water and dried. 


A-6 MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE 


A-6.1 Calibration 


The fibre elongation method based on equation (1) 
is an absolute method for determining the viscosity 
calibration involved only for thermocouples. The 
thermocouples must be calibrated against certified 
standard thermocouples at regular intervals. 


A-6.2 Determination of Viscosity at Constant 
Temperatures 


Heat the furnace to the lowest point in the temperature 
range within which the measurement is desired. 
When the furnace temperature is stable introduce the 
fibre with the support and extension rods. Wait for a 
few minutes for the temperature equilibrium to be 
re-established. Focus optical instrument on the moving 
marker and note the scale reading. In case LVDT is 
used, zero the chart on recorder at this point or note the 
reading if visual indicator only is used. 


A-6.2.1 The length /, of the fibre in this position is 
known (A-4.5.2). 


A-6.2.2 Load pieces may be added. The cathetometer/ 
travelling microscope is focused on the mark and the 
timer is started. In the case of LVDT the recorder is 
zeroed and the chart is started simultaneously. If 
visual recording of LVDT output is used, a timer is 
started simultaneously with zeroing of LVDT output. 
The vernier of travelling microscope/cathetometer is 
moved by a known increment of length and the time 
when the mark crosses the reference line in the eye 
piece is recorded. The scale is then shifted to the next 
selected increment. At least six positions of lengths and 
the corresponding times are recorded using travelling 
microscope/cathetometer or LVDT for a given 
temperature. 


A-6.2.3 Remove the loads and heat the furnace to 
the next higher temperature point. After stabilisation 
of temperature add the load pieces and repeat 
measurements. 


A-6.2.4 At high temperatures corresponding to 
viscosities 10° to 10° dPa.s, no load pieces will 
be required. The dead load is sufficient for the 
measurement. 


A-6.2.5 Smaller elongations with higher sensitivities 
for measurement of 8/ are preferred and the elongation 
during one test shall not exceed 2 percent of the starting 
length. 


A-6.2.6 At high viscosities 10'' dPa.s and above 
delayed elastic effects become important and sufficient 


time shall be allowed to elapse after the addition of the 
load, before the readings are taken. 


A-6.3 Finishing of Test Procedure 

The test shall be completed before any one fibre 
elongates by 10 percent of /,. Remove the test fibre from 
the furnace and allow it to cool to room temperature. 
Inspect the fibre for devitrification, striae, scratches and 
neckings. Again determine the length of the fibre as 
well as the mean diameter and note if the cross-section 
has deviated from circular geometry. The difference 
between the maximum and minimum diameter shall 
not exceed 4 percent of the mean. 


A-7 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 


A-7.1 Corrections for Load 


When the loading mass is 4 g or less, correction must 
be made to include the mass of the fibre and surface 
tension shall also be accounted for. These are taken 
care of by substituting for m, and m, given by: 
m,=m, + fp —fo 
where 
fp = 9.0005 x px V 
Jo = 0.000 18 x o x VV/L 

p= density of the glass, in g/cc; and 

the 


o= surface tension of glass, in 


millinewton/metre. 


When o is unknown, an idea of its effect can be had 
using the value o = 330 mN/m. 


A-7.2 Evaluation of Measurements 


A-7.2.1 A plot of length of fibre against time can be 


made from which, “ at different / can be evaluated. 
t 


A plot of against P must yield a straight line plot 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


[see equation (1), A-3.1] from the slope of which n can 
be calculated. At least six points shall be plotted for 
straight line. 


A-7.2.2 The expression given in equation (3), A-3.2 
can also be used with 6/ evaluated for a given /, and 
interval of time Aż. At least six different readings of ò 
shall be used to get average value for 7. 


A-7.2.3 Representation of Results 


The viscosity values at the different temperatures may 
be plotted with log 7 on the ordinate and temperature 
on the abscissa. This relationship between 7 and T is 
governed by the Vogel Fulcher Tammar (VFT) equation 
(see Annex D) 


logn = A+ 


T-C 


This enables interpolation of log n/temperature values 
at points other than those at which test were done. The 
constants A, B, C may be determined from any three 
sets of 7, T values from the log 7, T curves. 


A-8 TEST REPORT 


A-8.1 The test report shall include: 

a) Reference to this Indian Standard, 

b) Description of sample, 

c) Method of sampling, 

d) Number of test specimens, 

e) Method of preparation of specimen, 

f) Corrections applied, 

g) Plot of log versus reciprocal of temperature 
according to VFT equation, and 

h) Any change in glass, observed during and/or after 
the test. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 1) 
BEAM BENDING VISCOMETER METHOD 


B-1 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


This test method is quite suitable for the measurement 
of viscosity of glasses in the ranges that are higher than 
the ones which are covered by rotational viscometry 
and parallel plate methods. The test method is quite 
useful while providing an information that is related to 
the glass behavior. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 The apparatus shall comprise of a furnace, a 
mean for controlling its heating rate and temperature, 
loading rod and specimen holders, and a means in 
order to observe the rate of viscous deflection of glass 
specimen. 


B-2.2 Furnace 


It should electrically heated by means of resistance 
elements. The details and the dimensions of the 
construction of the furnace are not critical, its 
cross-section can either be square with sides of 75 mm 
or circular with 75 mm (3 in.) diameter. The furnace 
should be able to maintain a constant temperature zone 
which covers the geometry of a specimen, including 
the deflection range. Differences in the temperature of 
the constant temperature zone are unacceptable if it is 
greater than 2 °C. 


B-2.3 Temperature Measuring and Indicating 
Instruments 


In order to measure the temperature, a calibrated Type K, 
R, or S thermocouple shall be provided. A double bore 
alumina tube shall be used to house the thermocouple 
with its junction kept within 5 mm of the specimen 
near to the furnace axis. The thermocouple should be 
referenced to 0 °C by using an ice bath, and its emf 
should be calculated from calibrated potentiometer 
that can be read with an accuracy of 60.5 °C and a 
sensitivity of 0.1 °C. Precautions should be taken in 
order to ensure that the temperature of an ice bath is 
maintained at 0°C during the entire test. Alternately, 
the value of an output given by the thermocouple can 
be measured on a meter which is calibrated and can 
be read directly. The meter (electronic thermometer) 
should give the value that can be read with an accuracy 
of 60.5 °C and a sensitivity of 0.1 °C. 


B-2.4 Furnace Control 


In order to maintain the temperature of the furnace 
at a fixed control point and for controlling the 
cooling and heating rates, suitable means shall 


10 


be provided. Programming equipment that are 
commercially available can provide excellent control. 
A variable transformer having a manual control is 
quite inexpensive, but for accomplishing the required 
amount of control, it is quite a less adequate means. 


B-2.5 Specimen Holder and Loading Rod 


B-2.5.1 A support stand and a loading rod made of 
ceramic shall be provided so as to support the specimen 
and for applying the load to it. The characteristics of 
both the members that are related to thermal expansion 
must be very similar so as to decrease the motion of 
the loading rod that is due to expansion differences. A 
rectangular shaped muffle of alumina or circular shaped 
tube that can be notched to define the position of the 
specimen can be a suitable support stand (see Note). 
The surfaces of these notches that are supporting shall 
be flat and thus lies in a plane that is perpendicular to 
the furnace axis. The inner edges of notches define the 
span of the support once the beam of the specimen 
starts deflecting. A span of support being around 5 cm 
(2 in.) is recommended. An appropriate loading rod 
can be provided by a single-crystal sapphire rod flame 
which can be bent at one end into a shepherd’s crook 
form. The crook shall be able to make a contribution to 
the load on the specimen, thus its weight should be kept 
to a minimal value. 

NOTE — One of the most suitable material for both support 

stand and loading rod is vitreous silica. Thus, it is not suggested 

for temperatures higher than 900 °C. 


B-2.6 Extensometer for Measuring Midpoint 
Deflection 


The method for observing the deflection rate of the 
specimen shall permit an appropriate reading of total 
deflection of minimum 10 mm. Direct reading of 
0.010 mm and estimates of 0.001 0 mm shall be 
allowed by the specimen. It should have such an 
accuracy that the indication error will not exceed 
62 percent for any deflection value measured. This will 
limit the minimum value of deflection so that it can 
be used in the calculation. For this purpose, a linearly 
variable differential transformer (LVDT) is suitable 
just like is any other device (for example, optical or 
capacitive), provided that as specified, deflection is 
reliably measured. 


B-2.7 Weights 


Weighing sets spanning the range from 1 to 500 g and 
with an accuracy of 0.1 percent relative is required. 


ee 
s i 


3 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


A -— Alumina muffle support stand E — Linearly variable differential transformer (LVDT) 


B — Specimen Beam 
C — Thermocouple 
D — Loading rod 


F — Zero-adjust mechanism for LDT 
G — Weight 
H — Laboratory jack 


Fic. 4 Cutaway DRAWING OF BEAM-BENDING APPARATUS 


B-2.8 Micrometre Calipers 


Micrometre calipers that are readable to an accuracy 
of at least 0.01 mm are needed in order to measure the 
dimensions of the specimen. 


B-2.9 Analytical Balance 


An analytical balance that is capable of weighing the 
loading train and shepherd’s crook to an accuracy of 
0.1 percent relative. 


B-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 


B-3.1 Specimens may either be drawn by flame 
or center-less ground into cylindrical form or mill 
ground and diamond-saw cut into rectangular form. 
Non-uniformity in any dimension that is present 
along the length of the specimen shall not exceed by 
2 percent. An average value should be used in case the 
non-uniformity in case of dimension exists. 


11 


B-3.2 The ratio of the beam span to moment of inertia 
shall not be less than 60. The thickness or diameter to 
span ratio shall be less than 0.1. 


B-4 CALIBRATION 


B-4.1 Make a direct calibration of the apparatus by 
using standard glasses, having known temperature 
values over the particular range of viscosity covered 
by this practice. Any bias should be corrected by an 
overall instrument calibration. 


B-4.1.1 Find the viscosity by the use of test beams 
of SRM glass that covers a range of cross-sectional 
moments of inertia. Make the viscosity measurement 
over the viscosity range of 10° Pa.s to 10"! Pas 
by making use of the standard procedure given 
in B-5. Perform the tests by keeping the span and 
time-temperature function constant. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


B-4.1.2 Fit resulting data mathematically in a 
convenient form (for example, polynomial or Fulcher 
equation). After that fit the data supplied for the glass 
SRM in a Fulcher equation. 


B-4.1.3 From both equations, calculate the viscosities 
that are determined in B-4.1.2 at 20 °C with the 
minimum intervals over the range of measurement. 
Find out the viscosity ratio 7,,,, cil measure a fractional 
correction, and the draw a fractional correction versus 
log viscosity (measured fit) calibration curve. This can 
be used for the correction of the experimental viscosity 
data (see Note). Corrections that are greater than 
20 percent are the cause of concern and thus initiation 
of apparatus troubleshooting should be done. 
NOTE — In case under some heating or cooling rate 
time-temperature function, analyses are performed, the 
temperature of the thermocouple may lag or lead the 
actual temperature of the sample. In case lag or lead in the 
thermocouple occurs, the calibration curve described in 
B-4.1.3 would include the given temperature and viscosity bias. 
In order to find out if thermocouple lag or lead exists, measure 
the viscosities for a glass SRM keeping isothermal conditions 
at several temperatures. Make a comparison of temperatures at 
equivalent viscosity levels by analyzing the same glass SRM 
which is measured under the cooling or heating rate condition. 
Lag or lead in the thermocouple can be indicated from the 
differences in the temperature. This difference should be 
applied as a correction in the measured value of temperatures 
before drawing the calibration curve (see B-4.1.3) or applying 
the calibration correction to the data tested. 


B-5 PROCEDURE 


B-5.1 Take the deflection data under isothermal 
conditions or during cooling or heating at controlled 
rates so that it does not exceed 5 °C/min. 


B-5.2 Identify the function of time-temperature (for 
example, 5 °C/min heating rate) which is to be used 
in the test. Use an alumina or sapphire specimen 
so as to generate a background deflection against 
temperature curve, by making a use of the chosen 
time-temperature function intended for the measurement 
of the specimen. The deflection that took place in the 
test specimen is measured by the algebraic subtraction 
of the background curve from the curve obtained from 
measured values. 


B-5.3 Make the measurement of the dimensions of the 
test beam to the nearest 0.01 mm. The data is then used 
to calculate the cross-sectional moment of inertia. 


B-5.4 Place a thin platinum foil in each notch and 
after that place the specimen beam across the support 
stand at notch points so as to protect the support from 
reacting with the specimen and reducing the friction 
between the specimen and support. Place a thin foil of 
platinum in between the specimen and the loading rod. 
All the foils of platinum must be of similar thickness, 


12 


and are suitably thin (preferably 25 um thick) so that 
it can allow the seating of the components in their 
appropriate position. 


B-5.5 Engage the loading rod to the specimen carefully 
and center it. Now on the end of the extensometer, apply 
a weight to the hook by adjusting the total, applied 
load (that consists of the specimen, hooks, loading rod 
fixtures, and weight) such that a usable rate of deflection 
is obtained. Adjust the extensometer position to the 
lower end of its measuring range. Start the heating of 
the furnace, by making the use of the time-temperature 
function that is chosen for measurements. 


B-5.6 When a usable rate of deflection is achieved, begin 
the recording of extensometer, time, and temperature 
data. This data can be used for data reduction. The time 
duration for the collection interval should not exceed 
more than 1 min. Suitable ways of accumulating the 
data include computer controlled data acquisition 
or by plotting the deflection and temperature of the 
specimen by using a two pen recorder that operates on a 
convenient time base. (If such kind of recording device 
is not available then data should be manually taken, the 
temperature and deflection may be recorded by taking 
the readings of both the temperature and extensometer 
alternately at an interval of 30 s such that each one is 
read at | min intervals. As it has less accuracy than 
the other available methods, the user is generally 
discouraged from using this method in order to acquire 
data). In case the extensometer goes off range while 
performing the test, it is desirable to reset it. Total beam 
deflections that are greater than 10 mm are excessive. 


B-6 CALCULATION 


Make the use of the changes (that are corrected) in 
extensometer readings, dh, in the time interval that has 
been given, dt, as the rate of deflection of the midpoint, 
dh/dt, at the temperature that corresponds to the middle 
of that interval. Substitute these data points into 
equation (1) so as to calculate the viscosity, A. Correct 
the viscosity with the help of the calibration curve by 
multiplying it with the fractional correction factor that 
corresponds to that viscosity. 


B-7 TEST REPORT 


The test report shall include: 

Reference to this Indian Standard; 
Identification of the glass piece that is tested; 
Source of manufacture and date; 

Reference for calibration; 

Viscosity points and temperature; 

Date of the test; and 


Other observations (for example, sample that is 
crystallized during measurement). 


B-8 PRECISION AND BIAS 


B-8.1 Precision 


In case the round robin testing is absent, it is not 
possible to make a particular precision statement. It 
is possible to estimate a precision from data scatter in 
mathematical curve fitting. 


B-8.2 Bias 


The given procedure should yield viscosity data to 
6-10 percent of referenced SRM values. Systematic 
departures can be seen for the values that are obtained 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


near the starting and at the end of the determination, 
the points where the respective rates of deflection 
are extremely small or large. A rigid apparatus test is 
done by caliberating with one NIST SRM glass and 
then make the measurement for another NIST SRM 
glasses based on the calibration. In case the values of 
the other standard glasses are within 6-10 percent of 
certification, satisfactory performance is established. In 
case the errors that arises increases or decreases with 
viscosity, a problem in the measurement of temperature 
may exist or large thermal gradients may be observed 
in the furnace. These should be corrected. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 1) 
VISCOUS COMPRESSION OF A SOLID RIGHT CYLINDER 


C-1 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


This test method is suitable for measuring the viscosity 
of glasses in between the range under which rotational 
viscometry is beneficial and the range under which 
beam bending viscometry is beneficial. This is useful 
in order to determine the viscosity/temperature curve in 
the region which is near to the point of softening. The 
given test method is beneficial in giving the information 
which relates to the glass behavior. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


The apparatus comprises of a furnace as a means 
of controlling and measuring its heating rate and 
temperature, loading rod and specimen holders, and a 
means so as to measure the rate of viscous compression 
of the glass specimen. 


C-2.1 Furnace 


The furnace should be heated electrically by resistance 
elements. The details and the dimensions of the 
construction of furnace are not critical; it can have a 
circular cross section of 75 mm (=~ 3 in.) diameter or can 
also have square of sides of 75 mm. The temperature 
zone of the furnace shall be constant that it covers the 
specimen geometry, including the compression range. 
Differences in temperature of greater than 2 °C within 
the constant temperature zone are unacceptable. 


C-2.2 Temperature Measuring and Indicating 
Instruments 


In order to measure the temperature, a calibrated Type K, 
R, or S thermocouple shall be provided. A double bore 
alumina tube shall be used to house the thermocouple 
with its junction kept within 5 mm of the specimen near 
to the furnace axis. It is desirable that the thermocouple 


13 


should be referenced to 0°C by using an ice bath, and its 
emf should be calculated from calibrated potentiometer 
that can be read with an accuracy of 60.5°C and a 
sensitivity of 60.1°C. Precautions need to be taken in 
order to ensure that the ice bath is maintained at 0°C 
during the test. Alternatively, the output value from 
the thermocouple can be measured on a direct reading 
meter (electronic thermometer) which is calibrated 
and can be read with + 0.1°C sensitivity and + 0.5°C 
accuracy. 


See Note below B-4.1.3 for temperature lag-lead 
corrections. 


C-2.3 Furnace Control 


In order to maintain the temperature of the furnace 
at a fixed control point and for controlling the 
cooling and heating rates, suitable means shall be 
provided. Programming equipment that are available 
commercially provides excellent control. A variable 
transformer having a manual control is inexpensive, 
but is relatively less adequate means to accomplish the 
required control. 


C-2.4 Specimen Holder and Loading Rod 


A typical type of configuration is shown Fig. 1. On 
top of the support stand is a stationary plate (see Note) 
positioned, which is 6 mm (1/4 in.) thick by diameter 
of the support stand. A movable plate which is 6 mm 
thick by 44 mm minimum diameter and is parallel and 
concentrically placed above the fixed plate (see parallel 
plates in Fig. 5). To the center of the movable plate at 
the top, in a shrink fit configuration is a 9 mm (3/8 in.) 
diameter ground alumina rod which is center less and 
is of length which is sufficient to reach approximately 
150 mm (6 in) beyond the furnace top or its supporting 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


Fic. 5 A TYPICAL PARALLEL PLATE VISCOMETER 


structure, or both. The assembly thus provides a mean 
so as to load a specimen while measurement. Bushings 
that are attached to the outer frame guide the shaft with 
a minimum amount of friction. 
NOTE — Suitable materials for the assembly components are 
vitreous alumina and silica, as they are noble or low expansion 
metals which used in pairs. The temperature limitations for 
these alternate materials must be observed by the user. 
C-2.5 Extensometer for Measuring Thickness 
Change 


The way of observing the rate of change in thickness of 
the specimen should allow the reading of total change 
of at least 6 mm. The direct reading of 0.010 mm shall 
be allowed by the extensometer with an estimate of 
0.001 mm. The accuracy shall be such that the indication 
error shall not exceed 62 percent for any translation 
being measured. This will limit the rate of translation 
such that it may be used in calculation. For this purpose, 
a linearly variable differential transformer (LVDT) is 


14 


suitable just like any other device (for example, optical 
or capacitive) with a condition that the changes in the 
length measured reliably as specified. 


C-2.6 Micrometer Calipers 


Micrometer calipers, readable to an accuracy of at least 
0.01 mm are needed in order to measure the dimensions 
of the dimensions. 


C-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 


Specimens that are needed for this test method are right, 
circular cylinders and small. Generally, the dimensions 
are 6 mm (1/4 in.) to 12 mm (1/2 in.) diameter and are 
3 to 6 mm thick. Specimens can either be sliced from a 
rod or can be core-drilled from flat stock. In both cases, 
surfaces that are flat must be polished and ground to be 
plane-parallel to 60.001 mm. Cylinders that are made 
at high pressure by dry pressing of frit can provide 


meaningful data. 
C-4 CALIBRATION 


C-4.1 Calibration of the apparatus can be done directly 
by using standard glasses, having known temperature 
and viscosity values. Bias is required to be corrected by 
overall calibration of an instrument. 


C-4.1.1 Find the viscosity by using the test cylinders 
of calibrating glasses that cover a wide cross-sections 
range expected for use in routine testing. Procedure 
given in C-5 and C-6 shall be used to measure the 
viscosity. 


C-4.1.2 Fit resulting data mathematically to a 
convenient form. 


C-4.1.3 By using both the equations, calculate the 
viscosity as determined in C-4.1.2 at 20 °C with the 
minimum intervals over the range that is measured. 
Find the viscosity ratio, N sriid N measured Pi fractional 
correction, and plot a calibration curve between 
fractional correction versus log viscosity (measured 
fit). This can be used to correct the experimental data 
for viscosity (see Note). Corrections which are greater 
than 20 percent are the reason for concern and therefore 
the troubleshooting of the apparatus is recommended. 
NOTE — Incase the analysis are performed under some cooling 
or heating rate time-temperature function, the temperature of 
the thermocouple may lag or lead the actual temperature of 
the sample. In case the lag or lead in the thermocouple does 
not occur, the calibration curve being described in C-4.1.3 
would include this temperature and viscosity bias. In order to 
find if thermocouple lag or lead exists, it is recommended that 
the viscosities for a glass SRM are measured under isothermal 
conditions at several temperatures. Make a comparison of the 
temperatures at equivalent viscosity levels from the analysis 
of the same glass SRM being measured under the cooling 
or heating rate condition. The differences in the temperature 
indicate the lag or lead in the thermocouple. The difference 
should be applied to the correction in the temperature being 
measured prior to generating the calibration curve (see C-4.1.3) 
or applying the calibration correction to the data being tested. 


C-5 PROCEDURE 


C-5.1 Take the deflection data under isothermal 
conditions or during cooling or by heating at controlled 
rates so that it does not exceed 5 °C/min. 


C-5.2 Identify the function of time-temperature (for 
instance, heating rate of 5 °C/min) that is to be used in 
the test. Plot a curve of background deflection against 
temperature by measuring with the upper loading plate 
which is in contact with the lower support plate (pieces 
of platinum foil may be used for separation) during 
the operation of the furnace under time-temperature 
function being chosen. The change in thickness of the 
test specimen is determined by making the algebraic 
subtraction of the curve at the background from curve 
value being measured. 


15 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


C-5.3 Measure the diameter of the specimen and its 
thickness by using a micrometer to within 0.01 mm 
and carefully record the obtained results. 


C-5.4 In order to protect the parallel plates from 
being reacted with the specimen, keep the specimen 
between the pieces of two platinum foil and place the 
sandwiched specimen in between the parallel plates 
concentrically. All the foils of platinum must be of 
similar thickness, and are suitably thin (preferably 
25 um thick) so that it can allow the seating of the 
components in their appropriate position. 


C-5.5 Make an adjustment of the position of an 
extensometer to the lower end of its measuring range. 
Keep the furnace at its position and then initiate the 
chosen time-temperature function. 


C-5.6 When a deflection rate that is usable is attained, 
begin the recording of extensometer, temperature and 
time data that can be used in reduction of data. The 
interval of collection should not increase by more 
than 1 min. Suitable means in order to gather the data 
include computer controlled data acquisition or making 
the plot of the change in thickness and temperature of 
the specimen by using a two pen recorder that operates 
on a convenient time base. (If such kind of recording 
device is not available then data should be manually 
taken, the temperature and change in thickness may be 
recorded by taking the readings of both the temperature 
and extensometer alternatively at an interval of 30 s 
such that each one is read at an interval of | min. As it 
has less accuracy than the other available methods, the 
user is generally discouraged from using this method 
in order to acquire data. In case the extensometer goes 
off range while performing the test, it is desirable to 
reset it. Compression of the sample to a thickness less 
than 1 mm is excessive. 


C-6 CALCULATION 


Make the use of the changes (that are corrected) in 
extensometer readings, dh, in the time interval that 
has been given, dt, as the rate of change of thickness, 
dh/dt, at the temperature that corresponds to the 
middle of that interval. Also measure the change in 
thickness of the specimen, d, at the middle of the time 
interval; making its use to calculate the thickness of 
the specimen. 


where 
h, = the initial specimen thickness. 


Substitute the data in the equation (1) in order to 
calculate the viscosity, 7. Correct the viscosity with the 
help of the calibration curve (see C-4) by multiplying 
it with the fractional correction factor that corresponds 
to that viscosity. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


C-7 TEST REPORT 


The test report shall include: 
a) Reference to this Indian Standard, 
b) Identification of the glass that has been tested, 
c) Source and date of manufacturing, 
d) Reference of calibration, 
e) Viscosity and temperature points, 
f) Date of the test, and 


g) Other observations like sample crystallized during 
measurement. 


C-8 PRECISION AND BIAS 


C-8.1 Precision 


In case the round robin testing is absent, it is not 
possible to make a particular precision statement. It is 
possible to estimate the precision from the data scatter 
in mathematical curve fitting of data. 


C-8.2 Bias 


The given procedure should yield the values of the 
viscosity points to + 10 percent of referenced SRM 
values. It is possible that systematic departures may 
occur in case of the values which are obtained near the 
start and towards the end of the determination where 
the rate of change of thickness is small. A rigid test 
for an apparatus is the one that requires the calibration 
with NIST SRM glass and then measure other NIST 
SRM glasses based on the calibration. In case the other 
standard values of glass are within 4 °C of certification, 
satisfactory performance can be established. If errors 
that increases or decreases with viscosity arises, a 
problem due to measurement of temperature may exist 
or there is a possibility that the thermal gradients in the 
furnace are too large. These should be corrected. 


ANNEX D 
(Clauses A-1 and A-7.2.3) 
VISCOSITY - TEMPERATURE RELATIONSHIP 


D-1 THE VFT-EQUATION 


D-1.1 For the purpose of interpolation the 
viscosity/temperature relationship is conveniently 
described by the equation of Vogel Fulcher and 
Tammann (the VFT-equation): 


a) 


logn =A+t+ 
8n T-C 
The value of the dynamic viscosity 77,,, shall be inserted 
in decipascal per second (dPa.s), and the temperature 
T in degree celsius (°C). 
The constants A, B and C are characteristics for the 
glass under test. 


NOTE — The order of magnitude of the constants for technical 
glasses is as follows: 


A = 10(decadic logarithm of viscosity in decipascal 


second); 
B= 10°°C; and 
C= 10°C. 


D-2 DETERMINATION OF THE CONSTANTS 


Three pairs of measured temperatures and equilibrium 
viscosities is equal to 1, 2, 3, covering the range of the 
measurement and separated sufficiently from each 


16 


other, are chosen to calculate the constants of the 
VFT-equation by means of equations (2) to (4). 


D-3 TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT OF 
VISCOSITY 


The temperature coefficient of the viscosity of a glass is 
defined by equation (5): 


U saa 


"7 dt .. (5) 


Using the VFT-equation, the temperature coefficient U, 
is given by equation (6): 


_ 2.303xB 


"=T -0F .. (6) 


D-4 ERROR CHARACTERIZATION 


The deviation of a measured point from a fitted 
temperature/viscosity curve (for example found 
by regression analysis) can be expressed either by 
a viscosity difference Alog n or by a temperature 
difference AT. These differences are related to one 
another by equation (7): 


Alog 7 = 0.434 3 x U, x AT iD 


Where U, is the mean temperature coefficient of 
viscosity in the corresponding range of temperature. 


D-5 VISCOSITY/TEMPERATURE PLOT 


The graphical representation of the viscosity/ 
temperature relationship is usually performed by 
plotting the logarithm of viscosity as ordinate against 
the linear temperature axis as abscissa. 


_@%-T)@, -7,) x (log n, —logn,) m 


(T, -1 Gog n, —logn,) T, -T,) 
(log n, -log n,) 


. (2) 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


A= log n, (T, — C)- log n x (T, -C) 
(T,-T) 


ats) 
(4) 


As a proof of the evaluation, calculate the constant B 
once more, using equilibrium viscosity is equal to 2 or 
3, respectively. 


B= (I, —C)x (logn, — A) 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
DEPARTURE FROM ISO DOCUMENT 


E-1 The departure from ISO document is as follows. 


E-2 ELONGATION RATE 


While describing the procedure for determination of 
elongation of the fibre, the ISO document prescribes 
that after loading the fibre, one should wait ‘for nearly 
constant elongation rate’, before proceeding to record 
elongation as a function of time. It is apparent from 
the basic expression relating elongation rate to at a 
given temperature that the elongation rate is directly 
proportional to ?. Hence elongation rate will never be 
constant. This has been taken into account. 


E-3 INITIAL LENGTH OF FIBRE 


A cathetometer or telemicroscope focussed on a 
well-defined mark on the extension rod or loading 
device for the fibre enables measurement of increments 
in length of the fibre. However, the initial length of 
the fibre inside the furnace at the test temperature 
must be known for correlating the elongation rate to 
the viscosity at the temperature. This is normally 
taken care of by measuring the length of fibre at 
room temperature using vernier calipers or travelling 
microscopes. The measuring device is focussed on the 
mark after suspending the fibre at room temperature 
inside the furnace. As the furnace temperature is raised, 
increments in length are monitored by following the 
moving mark on the optical measuring device. However, 
this procedure makes it imperative that the optical 
measuring instrument must be absolutely stationary 
with rigid fixing devices throughout the measurement 
procedure for the entire range of temperatures 
and hence the entire measurement must be completed 
in a day. 


17 


The use of a pure platinum wire (T. C. grade) of 
about 0.5 mm diameter or more will provide a very 
convenient standard length with reference to which 
positions of initial readings of optical measuring 
devices can be related to specific initial lengths in 
the furnace. The platinum wire must have spherical 
ends by flame fusion, in an oxy-acetylene flame or 
electric arc and suspended inside the furnace at any 
desired temperature in the same manner as the glass 
fibre. The coefficient of linear thermal expansion of 
pure platinum (T. C. grade) is well defined and thus 
an accurate initial length position can be known 
corresponding to the reading of the optical devices on 
the standard mark when the platinum wire is suspended 
at any temperature and even after an interruption in 
the procedure entailing disturbance of the optical 
measuring devices. The use of the platinum wire has, 
therefore, been incorporated. 


E-4 MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE 


E-4.1 Recording of increment in length as a function 
of time at any given temperature enables a plot of 
di/dt versus P. This must be a straight line yielding 
an elegant method for calculating 7 from the slope. 
This procedure has been incorporated in preference to 
calculating 7 from individual values of /,, Z, and the 
corresponding time interval. 


E-4.2 The dynamic methods for measurement 
involving determination of elongation rates while the 
furnace temperature is programmed for linear rise 
and fall has not been included since it is felt that the 
precision of rate control and exact repeatability of 
programmes may be very difficult to achieve. 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee, CHD 10 


Organization 


CSIR-Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, 
Kolkata 


AGI Glaspac, Gurugram 

Asahi India Glass Ltd, New Delhi 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Borosil Ltd, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, 
Kolkata 


Centre for the Development of Glass Industry, 
Firozabad 


Confederation of Construction Products and Services 
(CCPS), New Delhi 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Materials), 
New Delhi 


Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade, New Delhi 
Federation of Safety Glass, Faridabad 


Glazing Society of India, New Delhi 
Gold Plus Glass Industry Ltd, New Delhi 


Govt College of Engineering and Ceramic 
Technology, Kolkata 

Hindustan Glass Works Ltd, New Delhi 

Hindustan National Glass and Industries Ltd, Kolkata 

Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
DR SUMAN Kumari MISHRA (Chairman) 


SHRI RAJESH KHOSLA 
SHRI VISHWANATH AMBADIPUDI (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI NAVIN Ral (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) MADHUMITA GOSWAMI 
Dr P. N. Nanni (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRIKANT GANGAN 
SHRI SATISH CHITRIV (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TIWARI 
Dr AMIT Rat (Alternate) 


DR NAVJEEV SAXENA 
SHRI AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


DR K. ANNAPURNA 
SHRI SITENDU MANDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV CHINMALLI 
SHRI DEVENDRA SAH (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRIMATI SARITA BALODHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR 
SHRI BRIJESH SINGH TOMAR (Alternate) 


Suri T. S. G. NARAYANNEN 
SHRI UDAY SINGH Mina (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARANJIT SINGH 
SHRI GURMEET SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. N. GOHUL DEEPAK 


SHRI VIVEK DUBEY 
SHRI PREM DUTT (Alternate) 


DR RITUPARNO SEN 
Dr (Ms) Kasert Das (Alternate) 


SHRI VARUN GUPTA 
SHRI K. ARVIN (Alternate) 


SHRI PAWAN BHARADWAJ 
SHRI PRASANTA AsH (Alternate) 


DR TANWEER ALAM 
SHRI BIDHAN Das (Alternate) 


DR S. K. KULSHRESTHA 
Suri D. V. S. PRASAD (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. BHARTI 
SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Organization 
Saint-Gobain Glass India Ltd, Chennai 
Schott Glass India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Shree Labware and Process Systems, Bengaluru 
SISECAM Flat Glass India Pvt Ltd, Halol 


The All India Glass Manufacturers Federation, 
New Delhi 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity, (D 60/23 Chhote Gaivi 
Varanasi, U.P. 221010) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 12869 (Part 1) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. R. UNNIKRISHNAN 
SHRI CHIRANJIT Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND BAKSHI 
SHRI HANSRAJ GOUD (Alternate) 


SHRI ANEESH KUMAR 
SHRI JOY BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI A. N. S. KUMAR 
SHRI PARAG SHAH 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI VINIT KAPUR (Alternate) 


Suri B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


DR DEVENDRA KUMAR 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI MOHIT GARG 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


Terminology, Code of practice, Methods of Sampling and Tests Subcommittee, CHD 10:1 


Organization 


CSIR-Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, 


Kolkata 


All India Glass Manufacturers Federation, New Delhi 


Asahi India Glass Ltd 
Borosil Ltd 


Federation of Safety Glass 


Glazing Society of India 
Gold Plus Glass Industry, New Delhi 


Gujarat Guardian Ltd 
Saint-Gobain Glass India Ltd 


Representative(s) 
Dr K. ANNAPURNA (Convener) 


SHRI VINIT KAPUR 
SHRI SOURABH KANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGENDRA KUMAR 


SHRI SHRIKANT GANGAN 
Suri M. V. RAMANA (Alternate) 


SHRI FARHAT KAMIL 
SHRI TARIQ KACHWALA (Alternate) 


SHRI G. N. GOHUL DEEPAK 


SHRI VIVEK DUBEY 
SHRI PREM Dutt (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP SINGH 


SHRI CHIRANJIT ROY 


19 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 10 (18010). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


