ТТ ராக IS 16185 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


Яң fuferex — எனை என்‌ 
ணா ta என்னை mafa 
fao че чего സ «ет 


Periodic Inspection and 
Testing — Welded Carbon Steel 
Gas Cylinders — Code of Practice 


ICS 23.020.30 


© BIS 2014 


ada Aah ஸர்‌ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM чая, 9 етте 9795 At, ൯ feeei-110002 
E am МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2014 Price Group 6 


Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard has been formulated as a guide to cylinder fillers for establishing their own cylinder inspection 
procedures and standards. It should be distinctly understood that it shall not cover all circumstances for each 
individual cylinder type. Rejection or acceptance for continued use in accordance with their cylinders are or are 
not dangerous or subject to impending failure, but represents practice which has been satisfactory to a cross- 
section of the industry. 


Experience in the inspection of cylinders is an important factor in determining the acceptability of a given cylinder 
for continued service. Users lacking this experience and having doubtful cylinders should return them to a 
manufacturer of the same type of cylinders for re-inspection. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been taken from ISO 10460 : 2005 ‘Gas cylinders — 
Refillable welded steel cylinders — Period inspection and testing’. 


While implementing this standard compliance with statutory regulations shall be ensured. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16185 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


PERIODIC INSPECTION AND TESTING — WELDED 
CARBON STEEL GAS CYLINDERS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements for periodic 
inspection and testing of refillable welded carbon steel 
gas cylinders intended for compressed, liquefied 
(excluding DA) under pressure, of water capacity from 
5 litre up to and including 250 litre to verify the 
integrity for further service. It also applies, as far as 
practicable, to cylinders of less than 5 litre water 
capacity. 


This standard does not apply to the periodic inspection 
and testing of acetylene cylinders or composite 
cylinders. 


This standard is primarily for industrial gases other 
than liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). For specific LPG 
applications (see IS 16054). 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revisions 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of apply the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


2 : 1960 Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised) 

Valve fittings for compressed gas 
cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders — 
Specification (third revision) 
Recommendations for hydrostatic 
stretch testing of compressed gas 
cylinders 

Glossary terms used in gas cylinder 
technology 

Periodical inspection interval of gas 
cylinders in use 

Periodic inspection and testing 
welded low carbon steel cylinders 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity for 
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) — 
Code of practice. 


3224 : 2002 


5844 : 1970 


7241 : 1981 
8668 : 1988 


16054 : 2012 


3 TERMINOLOGY 
For the purpose of this standard, the following 


definitions in addition to those given in IS 7241 shall 
apply. 


3.1 Competent Authority — Any national body or 
authority designated or otherwise recognized as such 
for any purpose in connection with this standard. 


3.2 Competent Person — Person who by a 
combination of training, experience and supervision 
is able to make objective judgments on a subject, 
authorized by the Competent/Statutory Authority. 


3.3 Periodic Inspection — Activities carried out at 
defined intervals or earlier when necessary, including 
but not limited to examining, measuring, testing or 
gauging the characteristics of a cylinder and comparing 
these with specified requirements as defined in the 
cylinder design, standard and marking to attest 
conformity with the standard. 


3.4 Periodic Inspection Test Station — Place where 
cylinders are tested and periodically inspected, 
approved by the competent authority. 


3.5 Tare Weight — Sum of the empty weight, the 
weight of the valve including a dip tube where fitted 
and the weight of all other parts that are permanently 
attached to the cylinder when it is being filled, for 
example the fixed valve protection ring/guard/foot- 
ring, etc. 


4 LIST OF PROCEDURES FOR PERIODIC 
INSPECTION AND TESTS 


Each cylinder shall be submitted to periodic inspections 
and testing. The following procedures form the basic 
requirements for such inspection and testing: 


a) Identification of cylinder and preparation for 
inspection and test (see 6); 


b) External visual inspection (see 7); 

c) Internal visual inspection (see 8); 

d) Supplementary tests (see 9); 

e) Verification of tare weight (see 10); 

f) Inspection of cylinder neck/shoulder (see 11); 
g) Hydraulic test (see 12); 

h) Final operations (see 13); and 


j) Rejection and rendering 
unserviceable (see 14); 


cylinders 


IS 16185 : 2014 


When the condition of the cylinder remains in doubt 
after these inspections and tests have been carried out, 
additional tests shall be necessary. 


5 INTERVALS BETWEEN 
INSPECTION AND TESTS 


PERIODIC 


The interval between periodic inspection and tests is 
specified in IS 8868 or as specified by the competent 
authority. 


6 IDENTIFICATION OF THE CYLINDER AND 
PREPARATION FOR THE INSPECTION AND 
TEST 


Before any work is carried out, the cylinder and its 
contents and ownership shall be identified with respect 
to design standard, 51 No., manufacturer's name, tare 
weight and mark of inspecting authority and record 
shall be maintained. All cylinders whose identity 
cannot be established shall be rendered un-serviceable 
and scrapped as per established procedure. Cylinders 
with unknown gas contents or those which cannot be 
safely emptied of gas shall be duly identified and shall 
be set aside for special handling. 


The cylinder shall be firstly depressurized and emptied 
in a safe controlled manner in an area intended for the 
purpose and approved by statutory authority. Particular 
attention shall be given to cylinders containing toxic, 
irritating or flammable gases to eliminate risk at the 
internal inspection stage. 


Before removing any pressure-retaining accessory 
(valve, flange, etc), a positive check shall be performed 
to ensure that the cylinder does not contain any gas 
under pressure. This can be performed as described in 
Annex A using a device such as shown in Fig. 1. 


Cylinders with in-operative or blocked valves can be 
treated as outlined in Annex A. 


Provided the requirements above have been complied 
with, and the cylinder has been de-pressurized safely, 
the valve shall be removed. 


7 EXTERNAL CLEANING OF CYLINDERS 


7.1 The cylinder shall be cleaned and have all loose 
coatings, corrosion products, tar, oil or other foreign 
matter, as well as any labels or transfers, removed from 
its external surface by a suitable method, for example, 
by steel wire brushing, shot blasting, water-jet abrasive 
cleaning, chemical cleaning or other suitable method. 
Care shall be taken to avoid damage to the cylinder 
(see Annex B). 


7.2 External Visual Inspection 


The external surface of each cylinder shall then be 
inspected for, 


a) dents, cuts, gouges, bulges, cracks, laminations 
or excessive base wear (see Table 1); 


b) heat damage, torch or electric arc burns (see 
Table 1); 


C) corrosion (as defined in Table 2); 

d) other defects such as illegible or unauthorized 
stamp markings, unauthorized additions or 
modifications; 

e) integrity of all permanent attachments; and 


f) vertical stability (if relevant) (as defined in 
Table 1). 


For rejection criteria, shall be as per Annex B. Cylinders 
no longer suitable for future service shall be rendered 
unserviceable (see 14). 


8 INTERNAL VISUAL INSPECTION 


Purge the cylinder before starting the internal visual 
inspection. After removing any residual liquid from 
the de-pressurized cylinder, the whole of its internal 
surface shall be inspected using an appropriate 
illuminated explosion free device (for example, a low 
voltage lamp) to identify any defects similar to those 
listed in 7.2 (a) and 7.2 (c) that may affect its integrity. 
Any cylinder showing presence of foreign matter or 
signs of more than minor surface corrosion shall be 
cleaned internally mechanically to free it from loose 
scale or foreign matter without damaging the cylinder 
walls. Controlled shot blasting, water-jet abrasive 
cleaning, flail, steam-jet cleaning, hot-water-jet 
cleaning, rumbling, chemical cleaning or other suitable 
method may be adopted. The cleaned cylinder shall be 
again inspected. 


9 SUPPLEMENTARY TESTS 


Where there is doubt concerning the type and/or 
severity of a defect found on visual inspection, 
additional tests or methods of examination may be 
applied, for example, ultrasonic or radiographic 
techniques, hydrostatic stretch test or other non- 
destructive tests. Alternatively the cylinder shall be 
scrapped. The reason of scrapping of cylinder shall be 
recorded. 


10 VERIFICATION OF THE CYLINDER TARE 
WEIGHT 


The stamps marked on the cylinder shall be scrutinized 
to determine its initial tare weight when manufactured. 
In absence of the same the cylinder shall be scrapped 
unless the competent authority specifies a floor/ 
minimum value for the type of cylinders being 
inspected. 


After external and internal cleaning, the cylinder shall 
be checked for tare weight. Cylinder having lost its 


weight more than 5 percent of original tare weight shall 
be rejected. 


11 INSPECTION 
THREADS 


OF THE CYLINDER 


11.1 Suitable thread cleaning devices shall be used to 
clean the threads. 


11.2 The internal neck threads of the cylinder and other 
internal threaded openings, for example, for safety 
devices, shall be examined to ensure that they are of 
full form, clean and free from burrs, cracks and other 
imperfections. Appropriate thread plug gauges shall 
be used to check the neck threads. 


11.3 External neck threads and other external threads 
shall be examined for integrity and for thread damage. 


11.4 Where necessary, and where design permits, 
damaged threads may be rectified by a suitable method 
and checked with the appropriate gauge after 
rectification. Record of such cylinder shall be maintained. 


12 HYDRAULIC TEST 


Each cylinder shall be submitted to a hydraulic pressure 
test using a suitable fluid, normally water, as the test 
medium. The test pressure shall be established from 
the marking on the cylinder. 


12.1 Hydrostatic Test 
12.1.1 Preparation of Cylinders 


The external surface of the cylinder shall be clean and 
completely dry so that any leak can be detected during 
the test. 


12.1.2 Test Equipments 


All pipework, flexible tubing, valves, fittings and other 
components forming the pressure system of the test 
equipment shall be designed to withstand a pressure 
of 1.5 times the maximum test pressure of cylinder to 
be tested. The design and the installation of the 
equipment and the cylinders connected to it shall ensure 
that no air is trapped in the system. 


Equipment shall be either rotary type or invertible type 
to facilitate examination of complete surface of the 
cylinder. Equipment shall be provided with isolation 
valve to isolate the system once the test pressure is 
reached. 


Dedicated pressure gauges for each cylinder to read 
the cylinder test pressure in accordance to relevant 
Indian Standard shall be provided. In addition to these 
two numbers of main gauges shall also be provided on 
the inlet line of the equipment after the isolation valve. 
The gauges shall be as per Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004. 


The gauges shall be calibrated for accuracy against a 


IS 16185 : 2014 


master gauge at regular interval of minimum once in a 
month. The master gauge shall be recalibrated in 
accordance with Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004. 


A device shall be fitted in the test equipment to ensure 
that no cylinder is subjected to pressure in excess of 
its test pressure by more than 10 percent. 


12.1.3 Procedure 
The cylinder shall be tested at the test pressure. 


Before applying pressure, the external surface of the 
cylinder shall be dry and in such a condition that any 
leak can be detected. Cylinder shall be positioned so 
the welds are visible during the test. During test the 
pressure shall be increased gradually till the required 
test pressure is reached. Then the cylinder shall be 
isolated from the pumping system and the pressure 
shall be retained for a period of not less than 30 s. 
During the test, the cylinder shall be gently tapped with 
wooden/nylon hammer near the weld joints. 


The cylinder shall be thoroughly examined externally 
for any leak. Any reduction in pressure noticed during 
this retention period or leakage, visible bulge of 
deformation, sweating on cylinder body shall be treated 
as a case of failure in the test. 


In case of a leakage in the pressure system, it shall be 
corrected and the cylinder re-tested. 


12.1.4 Cylinder that do not leak or show any visible 
permanent distortion/deformation shall be deemed to 
have satisfied the requirement of hydrostatic test. Any 
cylinder that fails shall be rejected, no repair shall be 
allowed. 


12.2 Hydrostatic Stretch Test 


When the condition of the cylinder remains in doubt 
after inspections as per 4 (b) then additional tests are 
necessary, such cylinders shall be subjected to 
hydrostatic stretch test as per IS 5844. Permanent 
stretch suffered by cylinder due to application of the 
test pressure shall not exceed the following limits: 


a) Inthe case of cylinders below 20 litre water 
capacity, 10 percent of the total stretch 
suffered during test; and 


b) In other cases, 10 percent of the total stretch 
suffered during the test or 1/5 000 of the original 
volume of the cylinder, whichever is less. 


13 FINAL OPERATIONS 


13.1 Drying, Cleaning, Painting and Coating 
13.1.1 Drying and Cleaning 


The interior of each cylinder shall be thoroughly dried 
by dry/hot compressed air. The interior of the cylinder 


IS 16185 : 2014 


shall be inspected immediately to ensure that it is dry 
and free from contamination. Any contamination shall 
be removed using a suitable method. 


13.1.2 Painting and Coating 


Cylinders are sometimes repainted using paints that 
require stoving. Plastic coats may also be reapplied. 
Painting or coating shall be applied so that all the 
markings stamped on the cylinder remain legible. 


In no case the temperature of the cylinder shall 
notexceed 300°C, since overheating could change the 
mechanical properties of the cylinder. 


13.2 Re-Valving of the Cylinder 


Before re-valving the cylinder, the thread type shall 
be identified. The appropriate valve shall be fitted. 


The valve shall be fitted to the cylinder using a suitable 
jointing medium and the optimum torque necessary to 
ensure a seal between the valve and the cylinder. 


The torque applied shall be determined on the basis of 
the size, form and taper of the threads, the material of 
the valve and the type of jointing material used. 


A torque wrench may be used to establish the torque 
required for proper thread engagement. Torque shall 
be sufficient to obtain the required number of thread 
engagements. The torque specified in IS 3224 shall be 
adhered to. 


13.3 Tare Weighment 


The cylinder fitted with valve shall be weighed for tare. 
The weighing scale used shall have a least count of 
not more than 10 g and the value of tare weight may 
be rounded to the nearest 100 g as per IS 2. The 
weighing scale shall be of adequate weighing capacity. 


13.4 Reference to Next Test Date 


The next test date may be indicated using an 
appropriate method. A standard indicating the month 
and year of the next re-test shall be permanently marked 
on a disc fitted between the valve and the cylinder or 
at any other non-detachable part as per IS 8868. 


13.5 Marking 


After satisfactory completion of the periodic inspection 
and test and the re-valving of the cylinder, each 
cylinder shall be permanently marked as per the 
statutory requirement, with: 


a) Symbol of the inspection body or test station; 

b) Present test date (indicated by the month and 
year); and 

c) New tare weight of cylinder according to 13.3 
shall be punched on cylinder at appropriate 
place. 


The markings should preferably be not less than 6 mm 
in height but in any case shall not be less than 3 mm in 
height. 


When a marking collar is fitted it shall be used. When 
there is no space available, markings may be stamped 
on the shoulder, if its thickness is greater than the 
cylinder wall thickness. 


13.6 Records 


An inspection/test record shall be retained by the testing 
station for not less than the period between tests or as 
specified by the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004. It shall 
record sufficient information to identify positively the 
cylinder and the results of the test/inspection. The test 
record shall include the following information: 


a) Owner; 

b) Serial number; 

c) Date of the previous test; 

d) Manufacturer; 

e) Manufacturing specifications; 
f) Water capacity; 

g) Cylinder tare weight as tested; 
h) Test pressure; 

j)  Inspection/test date; 

k) Results of the inspection/test; 

m) Inspection performed; and 


n) Details of any modification or repair made to 
the cylinder. 


14 REJECTION AND DESTRUCTION OF 
UNSERVICEABLE CYLINDERS 


The decision to reject a cylinder may be taken at any 
stage during the inspection and test procedure. A 
rejected cylinder shall not under any circumstances be 
re-issued into service. It shall be destroyed by the 
testing station, under intimation to the owner. Complete 
record of such cylinders shall be maintained. In case 
of any disagreement, ensure that the legal implications 
of contemplated action are fully understood. 


The markings on the cylinder shall be obliterated. 


Prior to taking any of the following actions, ensure the 
cylinder is empty (see 6). 


The following destruction methods may be employed: 


a) Crushing the cylinder by mechanical means; 

b) Burning an irregular hole in the shoulder 
equivalent in area to approximately 10 percent 
of the area of the shoulder; 

c) Irregular cutting of the cylinder into three or 
more pieces; and 

d) Hydraulic bursting using a safe method. 


IS 16185 : 2014 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6) 


PROCEDURE TO BE ADOPTED WHEN A CYLINDER VALVE 
IS SUSPECTED TO BE OBSTRUCTED 


A-1 If there is any doubt when the valve of a gas 
cylinder is opened, that gas is not being released and 
the cylinder may still contain residual gas under 
pressure, a check shall be made to establish that the 
free passage through the valve is not obstructed. 


The method adopted shall be a recognized procedure 
such as one of the following or one that provides 
equivalent safeguards: 


a) For cylinders of liquefied gases, first check 
to establish that the weight of the cylinder is 
the same as the tare weight stamped on the 
cylinder. If there is a positive difference, the 
cylinder may contain either liquefied gas 
under pressure or contaminants; 


b) Introduce inert gas at a pressure of up to 5 bar 
and check its discharge; and 


c) Use the device shown in Fig.1, to pump air 
into the cylinder, by hand. 


A-2 When it is established that there is no obstruction 
to gas flow in the cylinder valve, the valve may be 
removed. 


A-3 When a cylinder is found to have an obstructed 
gas passage in the valve, the cylinder shall be set aside 
for special attention as follows: 


a) Saw or drill the valve body until interception 
is made with the gas passage between the 
valve body stem and valve spindle seat; 


Key 


1) Rubber Tube (Internal Diametre 8 mm, External Diametre 13 mm) Ground to Olive Shape and Bonded 
2) Copper Tube (Internal Diametre 3 mm, External Diametre 8 mm) 


3) Bonded 
4) Rubber Bulb 
5) Hand Pressure 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL DEVICE FOR DETECTING OBSTRUCTED CYLINDER VALVE 


IS 16185 : 2014 


Cooling shall be provided, especially if toxic 
gases are involved; and 

b) Loosen or pierce the safety device in a 
controlled manner. 


These methods are applicable to cylinders of non-toxic, 
non-flammable, non-oxidizing and non-CFC gases. 
Appropriate safety precautions shall be taken to ensure 
that no hazard results from the uncontrolled discharge 
of any residual gas. 


Where the contents are toxic, flammable, oxidizing or 


@ 
WAS 


YN 
A 
4532 


ЖУУ 
> уу) 
டட 


ху 
С 
си 


Кеу 

1) Drive for De — Valving Machine 
3) Gas Tight Seal 

5) Pressure Gauge 

7) Direction of Rotation 


NOTE — Operate Remotely Using DE Velving Machine 


553 

“2% Д №7 

У 0 
NNNSNNV ZZ 


ZA 
1 2 
ай 
Nl 


cu 
ல 


Й 
Poot) 


CFC, the preferred method is to unscrew partially the 
valve within a glanded cap, secured and joined to the 
cylinder and vented to a safe discharge. The principles 
of a suitable device are illustrated in Fig. 2. 


These procedures shall be carried out only by trained 
personnel. When the gas, if any, has been released and 
the pressure within the cylinder reduced to atmospheric 
pressure, and, in the case of liquefied gases, when there 
is no frost or dew on the outside of the cylinder, the 
valve may be removed. 


2) Gas Tight Gland 

4) Cylinder Frame and Clamping Device 
6) Vent Valve 

8) Gas Disposal System 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL DEVICE FOR THE REMOVAL OF A DAMAGED GAS CYLINDER VALVE 


IS 16185 : 2014 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.2) 


DESCRIPTION AND EVALUATION OF DEFECTS, AND CONDITIONS FOR REJECTION OF 
WELDED CARBON STEEL GAS CYLINDERS AT THE TIME OF VISUAL INSPECTION 


B-1 GENERAL 


Gas cylinder defects may be physical, material or due 
to corrosion as a result of environmental or service 
conditions to which the cylinder has been subjected 
during its life. 


The object of this annex is to provide general guidelines 
for gas cylinder users on the application of rejection 
criteria. It is intended, in particular, for gas cylinder 
users with limited practical experience. 


This annex applies to all cylinders, but those which 
have contained gases having special characteristics may 
require modified controls. 


Any defect presenting a sharp notch may be removed 
by grinding, machining or other approved methods. 


After such a repair, the wall thickness shall be checked, 
for example ultrasonically, to ensure that the minimum 
design wall thickness has been maintained. 


B-2 PHYSICAL OR MATERIAL DEFECTS 


Evaluation of physical and material defects in the 
cylinder shall be in accordance with Table 1. 


Permanent attachments (for example, foot-rings or 
shrouds) shall be inspected and shall be suitable for 
these intended purposes. 


B-3 CORROSION 


B-3.1 General 


The cylinder get subjected to environmental conditions 


Table 1 Rejection Limits Relating to Physical and Material Defects in the Cylinder Shell 
(Clauses 7.2 and B-2) 


SI Type of Definition Rejection Criteria 
No. Defect 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
i) Bulge Visible swelling of the cylinder All cylinders with such a defect 
ii) Dent A depression in the cylinder that has neither When the depth of the dent exceeds 3 percent of the external 


penetrated nor removed metal and is greater in depth 


than 1 percent of the outside diameter 


diameter of the cylinder 
or 
when the diameter of the dent is less than 15 times its depth 


iii) Cut or gouge А sharp impression where metal has been removed or When the depth of the cut or gouge exceeds 20 percent of the 


redistributed (see Fig. 3) and whose depth exceeds 5 


percent of the cylinder wall thickness 


iv) Crack 
v) Fire damage 


A split or rift in the metal (see Fig. 4) 


usually indicated by, 

a) chaming or burning of paint 
b) distortion of cylinder 

c) partial melting of cylinder 


Excessive general or localized heating of cylinder 


wall thickness 

or 

when the length exceeds 25 percent of the outside diameter 
of the cylinder 

or 

when the wall thickness is less than the design minimum wall 
thickness 

All cylinders with such defects 

All cylinders in categories 51 No. (v) b), с) or d) 

If only a) is evident, the cylinder may be accepted by a 
competent person if a satisfactory result is obtained on 
hardness check or the cylinder passes the volumetric 
expansion test 


d) fire damage to valve, melting of plastic guard of 


date ring 
vi) Plug or neck 
inserts wall 


vii) Stamping 
viii) Arc or torch 


Marking by means of a metal punch 


Additional inserts fitted in the cylinder neck, base or 


Partial melting of the cylinder, the addition of weld 


All cylinders that has had a plug or neck insert fitted unless. 
It can be ascertained that the plug or neck insert is part of the 
approved design of the cylinder 

All cylinders with illegible, modified or incorrect marking 
All cylinders with such defects 


burns metal or the removal of metal by scarfing or cratering 


ix) Suspicious Marks introduced other than by the cylinder 
marks manufacturing process and approved repair 
x) Vertical -- 
stability 


Repair, if possible or render unserviceable. 


All cylinders with such defects 


Deviation from verticality which could present a risk during 
service (especially if fitted with foot-ring)” 


NOTE — When applying the rejection criteria given in Table 1, the conditions of use of the cylinder, the severity of the defect and 


safety factors in the design shall be taken into consideration. 


IS 16185 : 2014 


that could cause external corrosion of the metal. 
Internal corrosion of the metal can also occur owing 
to service conditions. 


There is difficulty in presenting definite rejection limits 
in tabular form for all sizes and types of cylinders and 
their service conditions. The limits of rejection have been 
established following considerable field experience. 


Extensive experience and judgment are required in 


evaluating whether cylinders that have corroded 
internally are safe and suitable for return to service. It 
is important that the surface of the metal is cleaned of 
corrosion products prior to the inspection of the 
cylinder. 


B.3.2 Types of Corrosion 


The types of corrosion may generally be classified as 
in Table 2. 


SI Type of 
No. Corrosion 
(1) 2) 


i) General corrosion 


ii) Local corrosion 


iii) Chain pitting or 
line corrosion 


iv) Isolated pits 


v) Crevice corrosion 


Table 2 Rejection Criteria for Corrosion of the Cylinder Wall 
(Clauses 7.2 and B-3.2) 


Definition 


(3) 


Loss of wall thickness over an area of more 
than 20 percent of either the interior or exterior 
total surface area of the cylinder (see Fig. 5) 


Loss of wall thickness over an area of less than 
20 percent of either the interior or exterior total 
surface area of the cylinder, except for the other 
types of local corrosion described below in 51 
No. iii), iv) and v) 

Corrosion forming a narrow longitudinal or 
circumferential line or strip, or isolated craters 
or pits which are almost connected (see Fig. 6) 


Corrosion forming isolated craters, without 
significant alignment (see Fig. 7) 


Corrosion associated with taking place in, or 
immediately around, an aperture 


Rejection Criteria 


(4) 


If the original surface of the metal is no longer recognizable 

or 

if the depth of penetration exceeds 10 percent of the original 
wall thickness 

or 

if the wall thickness is less than minimum design wall 
thickness 

If the depth of penetration exceeds 20 percent of the original 
thickness of the cylinder wall 

or 

if the wall thickness is less than minimum design wall 
thickness 

If a total length of corrosion in any direction exceeds the 
diameter of the cylinder and the depth exceeds 10 percent of 
the original wall thickness 

or 

if the wall thickness is less than minimum design wall 
thickness 

If the diameter of the pits is greater than 5 mm, refer to the 
local corrosion at 51 No. ii) 

If the diameter of the pits is less than 5 mm, the latter should be 
assessed as carefully as possible in order to check that the 
remaining thickness of the wall or base is adequate for the 
intended use of the cylinder 

If, after thorough cleaning, the depth of penetration exceeds 20 
percent of the original wall thickness 


Fic. 3 Сот ов GOUGE 


IS 16185 : 2014 


Fic. 4 CRAKE 


Fic. 5 GENERAL CORROSION 


IS 16185 : 2014 


Fic. 6 LINE CORROSION 


Fic. 7 ISOLATED PITS 


10 


IS 16185 : 2014 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


BOC India Limited, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Limited, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Limited, Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Limited, Bangalore 


Research and Development Establishment (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (АКАР, New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri T. К. Tuomas (Chairman) 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET നയ 
SuniMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI J. VEDAGIRI 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri Р. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI К. MANOHARAN 
SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. К. Кнамкав (Alternate) 


SHRI М. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
Suri Олуг. ВнАмрлв (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA К. GARG 
Suni NIKHILESh К. Сакс (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri S. GoraLAIN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. BomaL (Alternate) 


Suri U.V. MANNUR 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri А. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Tiwari 
SHRI К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
SHRI ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. Кони 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri К. К. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 


SHRI M. PRABAKARAN 
Suri №. К. VuavavanaiA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


SHRI M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
Suni AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


IS 16185 : 2014 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 

The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Trans Valves (India) Private Limited, Hyderabad 

Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 

In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, 


Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows Lane 
Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri К. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RAmikan (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. Jain 
Suri Амо) JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri S. К. SARVATE 
Suri S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Suri L. D. THAKKAR 


Suri J. A. $றுறாபொ, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Composition of Low Pressure Gas Cylinders Sub-Committee, ME 16:2 


Organization 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Private Limited, New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ideal Engineers Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


J. R. Fabricators Limited, Halol 


Jindal Stainless Limited, Hisser 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Sahuwala Cylinders (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 
Shri Shakti Cylinders Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Shiv Energy India Limited, Hyderabad 
Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited, Jamshedpur 


In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, 
Faridabad) 


12 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Convener) 


ӛнкі SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri J. VEDAGIRI 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH Снорва (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri S. Devaposs (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
ӛнкі DEEPAK KABRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


Suri AsuwiN Н. MEHTA 
Suri S. Sesu Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri L. C. JAN 
SHRI PRAVAIN GOEL (Alternate) 


Suri U. V. MANNUR 


SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Suri К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri Т. R. THOMAS 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. S. KRISHNA REEDY 


Suri D. V. RAJA SEKHAR 
ӛнкі Younus GEELANI (Alternate) 


Suri К. К. Ras 


Suni M. PRABAKARAN 
Suri М. К. VuayavarGiA (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI SUDIPTO SARKAR 
Dn А. М. Buaaar (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1160). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : 0.1.1. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


