NAT 97% IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 
Indian Standard Superseding IS 1476 (Part 1) and IS 15750 


ater чуйя+ч тета — Terra 327 
чаго гат 
STT 3 Bat UIA va UAT 


Household Refrigerating 
Appliances — Characteristics and 
Test Methods 


Part 3 Energy Consumption and Volume 


ICS 97.030; 97.040.30 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM 5210 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, 45 fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2021 Price Group 19 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Refrigeration 
and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


These household refrigerating appliances, which are factory-assembled and cooled by internal natural convection 
including mechanical and absorption type (direct cool) or forced air circulation (frost-free) was earlier covered in 
two separate standards that is, IS 1476 (Part 1) and IS 15750 respectively. 


The standard on direct cool refrigerator that is, IS 1476 (Part 1) was first published in 1959 followed by the 
revisions in the years 1971, 1979, and 2000. The standard on frost-free refrigerator that is, IS 15750 was published 
in 2006. 


This standard supersedes IS 1476 (Part 1) : 2000 ‘Performance of household refrigerating appliance — 
Refrigerators with or without low temperature compartment: Part 1 Energy consumption and performance’ and 
IS 15750 : 2006 ‘Household frost-free refrigerating appliances — Refrigerators cooled by internal forced air 
circulation- Characteristics and test methods — Specification'. 


In the light of the development taken place at the international level, the technical committee decided to make a 
composite standard on refrigerator to cover the requirements of both direct cool and frost-free refrigerators. 


This Indian Standard is published in three parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part 1 General requirements 
Part 2 Performance requirements 


For more efficient analysis and to better characterise the key product characteristics under different operating 
conditions, the test data from many of the energy tests in Part 3 (this part) is split into components (such as 
steady state operation and defrost and recovery). The approach to determination of energy consumption has been 
completely revised, with many internal checks now included to ensure that data complying with the requirements 
of the standard is as accurate as possible and of high quality. 


For energy consumption measurements in Part 3 (this part), no thermal mass (test packages) is included in any 
compartment and compartment temperatures are based on the average of air temperature sensors (compared to 
the temperature in the warmest test package). There are also significant differences in the position of temperature 
sensors in unfrozen compartments. 


Shelf area and storage volume measurement methods are no longer included for the measurement of volume. 
In this standard (Part 3), the volume measurement has been modified to be the total internal volume with only 
components necessary for the satisfactory operation of the refrigeration system considered as being in place. 


This standard is based on IEC 62552-3 : 2015 ‘Household refrigerating appliances — Characteristics and test 
methods — Part 3: Energy consumption and volume’ issued by International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 
except for the following major modification: 


a) Energy consumption test is carried out only at 32 °C ambient temperature instead of both 16 °C and 
32 °C specified in IEC standard. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex N. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


N 


N 


N 


N 


N 


2 


2 


N 


N 


>> > > > > > > > > > 


N 


AN 


AN 


AN 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


CONTENTS 
Page No. 

SCOPE Е 1 

REFERENCES КЕ 1 

TERMS, DEFINITIONS AND SYMBOLS ET 1 

APPLICABLE TEST STEPS FOR DETERMINATION OF ENERGY 

AND VOLUME s 2 

TARGET TEMPERATURES FOR ENERGY DETERMINATION m 2 

DETERMINATION OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION a 3 

CIRCUMVENTION DEVICES m 6 

UNCERTAINTY OF MEASUREMENT es 6 

TEST REPORT 5 6 
МЕХА SETUP FOR ENERGY TESTING 5 7 
NEXB DETERMINATION OF STEADY STATE POWER AND TEMPERATURE m 9 
NEXC DEFROST AND RECOVERY ENERGY AND TEMPERATURE CHANGE te 16 
NEXD DEFROST INTERVAL "T 
NEXE INTERPOLATION OF RESULTS . 24 
NEXF ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF SPECIFIED AUXILIARIES . 36 
МЕХ G DETERMINATION OF LOAD PROCESSING EFFICIENCY . 043 
NEXH DETERMINATION OF VOLUME we 39 
NEXJ WORKED EXAMPLES OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION CALCULATIONS < 58 
NEXK DEVELOPMENT OF THE IEC GLOBAL TEST METHOD 

FOR REFRIGERATING APPLIANCES we. 93 
NEXL ANALYSIS OF A REFRIGERATING APPLIANCE WITHOUT 
STEADY STATE BETWEEN DEFROSTS e 95 

МЕХ М DERIVATION OF AMBIENT TEMPERATURE CORRECTION FORMULA .. 97 
NEXN COMMITTEE COMPOSITION .. 100 


Hi 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig.1 Illustration of a Test Period Made of Blocks of 5 Temperature Control 
Cycles — Temperatures For Case 551 
Fig. 2 Illustration of A Test Period Made of Blocks of 5 Temperature 
Control Cycles — Power For Case SS1 
Fig.3 Case SS2 - Typical Operation of a Refrigerating Appliance with a 
Defrost Control Cycle 
Fig.4 Conceptual Illustration of The AdditionalEnergy Associated With A 
Defrost and Recovery Period 
Fig.5 Case DF1 with Steady State Operation Before and After a Defrost 
Fig.6  Interpolation Where Temperatures Change 
in Multiple Compartments (Compartment D Critical) 
Fig.7  Interpolation with Valid Results in Both Compartment A and B 
Fig.8  Interpolation with No Valid Results 
Fig.9 | Schematic Representation of Interpolation by Triangulation 
Fig. 10 Conceptual Illustration of the Load Processing Efficiency Test 
Fig. 11 Shelf locations and Loading Sequence (Example Showing 10 PET Bottles) 
Fig. 12 Ice Cube tray Locations and Clearances 
Fig. 13 Representation of The Additional Energy to Process the Added Load 
Fig. 14 Case Where a Defrost and Recovery Period Occurs During Load Processing 
Fig. 15 Basic View of Top Mounted Freezer Appliance 
Fig. 16 Automatic Ice-Maker Dispenser and Chute 
Fig. 17 Automatic Ice-Making Compartment 
Fig. 18 Кап Of Drawer Type Shelves or Baskets 
Fig. 19 Rotary Divider of Fresh Food Compartment for French Doors 
Fig. 20 Example Linear Interpolation Two Compartments (Compartment B Critical) 
Fig. 21 Example Linear Interpolation Two Compartments (Compartment B Critical) 
Fig. 22 Example Interpolation Where Both Test Points Have Both Compartments 
Below Target (Two Valid Results) 
Fig. 23 Example Interpolation Where Both Test Points Have Both Compartments 
Below Target (Two Valid Results) 
Fig. 24 Example Interpolation Where Neither Test Point Has Both Compartments 
Below Target (No Valid Results) 
Fig. 25 Example Interpolation Where Neither Test Point Has Both Compartments 
Below Target (No Valid Results) 
Fig. 26 Example Interpolation For 4 Compartments 
Fig.27 Example of Triangulation (Temperatures) 
Fig. 28 Example of Triangulation (Temperature and Energy) 
Fig.29 Ап Example of Power and Temperature Data 
Fig. 30 Example of Finding A Test Period With Minimum Spread In Power 
Fig. 31 Special Case SS2 — Where Steady State Operation is Never Reached 


Between Defrost and Recovery Periods and Annex C Stability may not be 
Established 


Page No. 


95 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Page No. 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Target Temperature for Energy Determination by Compartment Type ҚТ 3 
Table 2 Assumed ACOP Adjustment 5 16 
Table3 Format for Temperature and Humidity Data —Ambient Controlled 
Anti-Condensation Heaters ue 4 
Table 4 Example of Linear Interpolation, Single Compartment . 859 
Table 5 — Exampl 1 of Linear Interpolation, Two Compartments .. 60 
Table 6 Example 2 of Linear Interpolation, Two Compartment .. 60 
Table 7 Example 3 of Linear Interpolation, Two Compartments .. 63 
Table 8 Example of Linear Interpolation, Test Data for Four Compartments .. 64 
Table 9 Example of Linear Interpolation, Results for Four Compartments s 65 
Table 10 Example of Triangulation, Two Compartments . 65 
Table 11 Example of Triangulation, Three Compartments . 69 
Table 12 Example of Population- Weighted Humidity Probabilities and 
Heater Wattages at 32 °C = 72 
Table13 Ап Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and Temperature 
for Each Temperature Control Cycle (TCC) 42276 
Table 14 Ап Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and Temperature for 
All Possible Blocks (size = 3 TCC) m 77 
Table15 An Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and Temperature for 
All Possible Test Periods (3 blocks each of 3 TCC) ss 79 
Table 16 Ап Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and Temperature for 
All Possible Blocks (size = 5 TCC) . 81 
Table 17 An Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and | Temperature for 
all Possible Blocks (size = 9 TCC) .. 83 
Table 18 An Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and Temperature for 
All Possible Test Periods (3 blocks each of 5 TCC) 9% 85 
Table 19 Ап Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and Temperature for 
all Possible Test Periods (3 blocks each of 9 TCC) wi 87 
Table 20 Determination of Defrost Validity DF1 s 89 
Table 21 Determination of Steady State Values Using 552 .. 90 
Table 22 Assumed Relative Insulation Value for Multi-Compartment Products .. 99 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


HOUSEHOLD REFRIGERATING 
APPLIANCES — CHARACTERISTICS 
AND TEST METHODS 


PART 3 ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND VOLUME 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 3) specifies the essential 
characteristics of household and similar refrigerating 
appliances cooled by internal natural convection or 
forced air circulation, and establishes test methods for 
checking these characteristics. 


1.2 This standard describes the methods for the 
determination of energy consumption characteristics 
and defines how these can be assembled to estimate 
energy consumption under different usage and climate 
conditions. This standard also defines the determination 
of volume. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 
17550 Household refrigerating 
(Part 1) : 2021 appliances: Characteristics апа 
test methods: Part 1 General 
requirements 
17550 Household refrigerating 
(Part 2): 2021 appliances: Characteristics апа 


test methods: Part 2 Performance 
requirements 


3 TERMS, DEFINITIONS AND SYMBOLS 


3.1 Terms and Definitions 


For the purposes of this document, the terms and 
definitions given in Part 1 of this standard, as well as 
the following apply. 


3.1.1 Specified Auxiliaries 


Functions or features that affect the energy consumption 
of a refrigerating appliance and where their actual 


energy consumption depends on the conditions of use 
or operation. 


NOTES 


1 This standard makes optional provision for determining the 
energy consumption impacts of these functions or features in 
accordance with regional requirements. 

2 Test requirements for specified auxiliaries, where applicable, 
are set out in Annex F and their application specified in 6.8.4. 
The only specified auxiliaries in this edition of the standard 
are ambient controlled anti-condensation heaters and tank type 
automatic icemakers. 


3.1.2 Defrost Interval 


The measured or estimated length of a defrost control 
cycle, starting from the point of initiation of one defrost 
control cycle to the point of initiation of the subsequent 
defrost control cycle, expressed in hours of elapsed 
(clock) time. 


3.2 Symbols 


For the purposes of this document, the following 
symbols apply. 


E electrical energy consumption over a 
specified period (day, year, etc.) in Wh 
or kWh 

P average steady power consumption over 
a defined period in W 

T compartment temperature average over a 


specified period in degrees Celsius (°C) 


TMP. temperature measurement position of a 
specific temperature sensor 

t time at a specific moment 

At time interval in hours between two 
defined times or for a defined period 

AE, additional energy associated with a 
defrost and recovery period, over and 
above the relevant steady state power 
consumption at the same temperature 
control settings, in Wh 

ATh е accumulated temperature difference 


over time (relative to the steady state 
temperature) during a defrost and 
recovery period in Kh for compartment i 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


R actual compressor run time in hours for 
a defined period (actual compressor on 
period) 

CR, percentage of compressor run time for 


a defined period (Rt/total time interval 
as percent) 


P average heater power associated with 
an ambient controlled anti-condensation 
heater at a specified temperature and 
humidity in W (Annex F) 

M mass of water used for a processing load 
(Annex G) or the mass of water or ice 
during an ice making test (Annex F) 


4 APPLICABLE TEST 
DETERMINATION OF 
VOLUME 


STEPS FOR 
ENERGY AND 


4.1 Setup for Energy Testing 


Prior to the measurement of energy consumption for a 
refrigerating appliance, it shall be set up in a test room 
as specified in Annex A. 


4.2 Steady State Power Consumption 


The steady state power consumption of the refrigerating 
appliance shall be determined in accordance with 
Annex B. 


4.3 Defrost and Recovery Energy and Temperature 
Change 


For products with one or more defrost systems 
(each with its own defrost control cycle), the incremental 
defrost and recovery energy for a representative number 
of defrost and recovery periods shall be determined 
in accordance with Annex C for each system. The 
temperature change associated with defrost and 
recovery shall also be determined in accordance with 
Annex C for each system. 


4.4 Defrost Frequency 


For products with one or more defrost systems 
(each with its own defrost control cycle), the defrost 
interval for each system shall be determined in 
accordance with Annex D, depending on the control 


type. 
4.5 Number of Test Points and Interpolation 


Where the energy consumption of a refrigerating 
appliance is interpolated in accordance with 6, one of 
the methods specified in Annex E shall be used. 


4.6 Load Processing Efficiency 


Where the load processing efficiency of a refrigerating 
appliance is claimed or determined, it shall be measured 
in accordance with the method specified in Annex G. 


4.7 Specified Auxiliaries 


Where a refrigerating appliance contains a specified 
auxiliary, the energy impact of this auxiliary shall be 
determined in accordance with Annex F. 


4.8 Volume Determination 


The volume of each compartment of the refrigerating 
appliance shall be determined in accordance with 
Annex H. 


4.8.1 Rated Total Volume 


The measured total volume shall not be less than the 
rated total volume by more than 3 percent of the latter 
or | 1, whichever is the greater value. 


5 TARGET TEMPERATURES FOR ENERGY 
DETERMINATION 


5.1 General 


The energy consumption of an appliance is determined 
from measurements taken when tested as specified in 
6 in an ambient temperature of 32 °C. The value for 
energy consumption determined in accordance with 
this standard shall be for a temperature control setting 
(or equivalent point) where all average compartment 
temperatures are at or below the target temperatures 
specified in Table 1 for each compartment type 
claimed by the supplier. Values above and below target 
temperatures shall be used to estimate the energy 
consumption at the target temperature for each relevant 
compartment by interpolation, as specified in 6. 


NOTES 

1 Refer to the requirements in IS 17550 (Part 1) Annex B for 
variable temperature compartments. For energy testing, these 
are operated on the function (continuous temperature operating 
range) that uses the most energy. 

2 Testing at ambient temperature of 16°C is under 
consideration. 


5.2 Temperature Control Settings for Energy 
Consumption Test 


When tested for energy consumption in accordance 
with 6, the refrigerating appliance shall have at least 
one temperature control setting (or combination of 
temperature control settings) at which the average 
temperatures of each compartment is concurrently at 
or below the energy consumption target temperatures 
specified in Table 1. The data points used for energy 
consumption determination should demonstrate that 
the product is capable of meeting this requirement, but 
this specific point need not be measured directly. 


Where an appliance has no user-adjustable temperature 
controls, energy consumption shall be determined from 
the results of one measurement test run of the appliance 
as supplied. 


Table 1 Target Temperature for Energy 
Determination by Compartment Type 


( Clause 5.1 ) 


SI No. Compartment Target Average Air 
Type Temperature 
°С 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Pantry 17 
ii) Wine storage 12 
iii) Cellar 12 
iv) Fresh food 4 
v) Chill 2 
vi) Zero-star 0 
vii) One-star -6 
УШ) Two-star -12 
іх) Three-star апа -18 
four-star 


For energy testing, each compartment shall be operated as 
the claimed compartment type, except as set out below. 


If a compartment operating range spans none of the 
target temperatures for the defined compartment types in 
Table 1 at an ambient temperature of 32 °C (because it has 
no user-adjustable temperature control or a limited range of 
active control), then it shall be classified as the compartment 
type with the next warmest target temperature (based on the 
warmest test result for ambient temperatures) and operated 
at its warmest setting while still staying at or below the target 
temperature of the next warmest target temperature (where 
adjustable) for the energy test at ambient temperatures. The 
test report shall note that the claimed compartment type and 
the compartment type assumed for energy testing. 


Where the compartment is a variable temperature 
compartment type (that spans the operating range of several 
compartment types), the primary configuration for energy 
testing shall be the compartment type that has the highest 
energy consumption. A variable temperature compartment 
can be set and tested as other compartment types, if required, 
in addition to the primary configuration for energy testing. 
The test report shall note that the compartment is the variable 
temperature compartment type and the compartment type 
selected for each energy test. 


6 DETERMINATION OF ENERGY 


CONSUMPTION 


6.1 General 


The key energy consumption components as specified 
in 6 shall be determined for each refrigerating appliance 
tested in accordance with this standard. This shall be 
based on data measured in accordance with Annex B to 
H, as applicable. 


Clause 6 also specifies the method to be used to 
determine the components of energy consumption for a 
refrigerating appliance when tested in accordance with 
this standard. 


The main components of energy consumption 
determined in accordance with this standard are: 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


a) Steady state power consumption — This 
is determined at ambient temperatures of 
32 °C (see Annex B); 


b) Defrost and recovery energy and temperature 
change — For products with one or more defrost 
systems (each with its own defrost control cycle), 
the defrost and recovery energy for a representative 
number of defrost and recovery periods for each 
system shall be determined (see Annex C); 


c) Defrost frequency — For products with one 
or more defrost systems (each with its own 
defrost control cycle), the defrost interval shall 
be determined for each system under a range of 
conditions (see Annex D); 


d) Specified auxiliaries — Where a refrigerating 
appliance contains a specified auxiliary, the 
energy impact of this auxiliary shall be determined 
(see Annex F); and 


e) Load processing efficiency — Where a load 
processing efficiency is measured or claimed, the 
specified method shall be used (see Annex G). 


The lowest conceivable value of energy consumption 
for a refrigerating appliance under this standard 
(that is, the theoretical optimum), is the value where 
the temperature of every compartment is exactly 
equal to its target temperature for energy consumption 
(see 5). Not every appliance is capable of operating 
at this condition, nor is it practicable for a laboratory 
to continue testing in an attempt to precisely obtain 
this condition during a specific set of tests. Under this 
standard there is the option of undertaking several 
tests with different temperature control settings 
(where available). This is to facilitate interpolation to 
estimate the energy consumption for a point where all 
compartments are at or below their relevant target for 
energy consumption (see 6.3). 


6.2 Objective 


In order to determine the characteristics of a household 
refrigerating appliance in accordance with this 
standard, it is necessary to measure the temperature 
and energy consumption for a representative period of 
steady state operation that complies with the relevant 
requirements (that is, compartment temperatures at or 
below their target for energy consumption). Several test 
points at different temperature control settings may be 
required to obtain the most favourable (optimal) result 
for energy consumption. 


In the case of products with automatic defrost functions 
that affect the power consumption of the product 
(that is, has a defrost control cycle), the incremental 
energy during defrost and recovery (that is, the 
additional energy АЕ, over and above the underlying 
steady state power) shall be determined for a specified 
number of representative and valid defrost and recovery 
periods. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


These values are measured at specified ambient 
temperature (32 °C) for energy determination. 


To assess whether a proposed period of test data is 
acceptable for the determination of energy consumption, 
the data are analysed and examined to assess whether 
changes in internal temperatures and power consumption 
are within acceptable limits. In terms of energy 
assessments, there are two alternative approaches to the 
determination of steady state power consumption: 


a) SS1: Steady state power and internal temperature 
determination where there is no defrost control 
cycle or where steady state conditions according 
to Annex B can be established between defrost and 
recovery periods (generally where defrost events are 
widely spaced); and 


b) SS2: Steady state power and internal temperature 
determination where steady state conditions 
according to Annex B cannot be established 
between defrosts and recovery periods (generally 
where defrost events are more closely spaced). 


The incremental energy consumption and temperature 
change during a defrost and recovery period also needs 
to be assessed (relative to the steady state power and 
internal temperatures before and after the defrost and 
recovery period). 


In each case, criteria are established to determine whether 
the periods are representative of the operation of the 
appliance. 


6.3 Number of Test Runs 


The energy consumption shall be determined at ambient 
temperatures of 32 °C either: 


a) directly from the results of a single test run during 
which the temperatures of all compartments of the 
appliance are at or below the target temperatures 
specified in Table 1; or 


b) by interpolation between the results of two or more 
test runs, conducted at different settings of one 
or more user-adjustable temperature controls, as 
follows: 


1) Where results have been measured at two 
temperature control settings, interpolation in 
accordance with E-3; 


2) Where the appliance has at least two independent 
user-adjustable temperature controls and results 
have been measured at three temperature 
control setting combinations, interpolation in 
accordance with E-4; and 


3) Options for interpolating using three or more 
independent ^ user-adjustable temperature 
controls are also set out in E-4. 


In the case of b) above, test results shall demonstrate that 
the temperatures of all compartments in the refrigerating 
appliance are at or below the target temperatures specified 
in Table 1 at the point of interpolation. There are several 


requirements associated with interpolation to ensure that 
this has been achieved. 


6.4 Steady State Power Consumption 


For a refrigerating appliance that does not have a defrost 
control cycle, the steady state power consumption at each 
temperature control setting selected and for each ambient 
temperature shall be determined in accordance with 
Annex B. 


For a refrigerating appliance with one or more defrost 
control cycles, the steady state power consumption 
between defrost and recovery periods at each temperature 
control setting selected and for each ambient temperature 
shall be determined in accordance with Annex B. 


The steady state power consumption is reported in watt 
(W). 


6.5 Defrost and Recovery Energy and Temperature 
Change 


For a refrigerating appliance with one or more defrost 
systems (each with its own defrost control cycle), the 
additional energy and temperature change associated 
with defrost and recovery shall be determined for each 
system for a representative number of defrost and 
recovery periods in accordance with Annex C, at ambient 
temperatures of 32 °C. 


Where there is more than one defrost system (each with 
its own defrost control cycle), the characteristics of each 
system shall be documented. 


The additional energy associated with defrost and 
recovery is reported in watt-hour (Wh). 


The temperature change associated with defrost and 
recovery is reported in degree Kelvin-hour (Kh). 


6.6 Defrost Interval 


For a refrigerating appliance with one or more defrost 
systems (each with its own defrost control cycle), 
the estimated defrost interval shall be determined in 
accordance with Annex D at an ambient temperature of 
32 °С. 


Where there is more than one defrost systems (each with 
its own defrost control cycle), the defrost interval for each 
system shall be documented. 


The defrost interval shall be expressed in hours, rounded 
to the nearest 0.1 h. Depending on the defrost control 
type, the defrost interval may be a function of a number 
of parameters. 


6.7 Specified Auxiliaries 


Where the refrigerating appliance contains a specified 
auxiliary, the impact of this device shall be determined in 
accordance with Annex F. 


The impact of specified auxiliaries is expressed in 
watt or watt-hour for a range of ambient conditions. 


These values are then weighted in accordance with 
regional requirements and conditions in order to 
provide a relevant estimate of energy associated with 
the auxiliary. 
NOTE — For the specified auxiliaries, if any, in the absence 
of regional weather data, the regional values/requirements are 


under consideration. Till such time the regional values (R) 
provided in Table 12 may be used. 


6.8 Calculation of Energy Consumption 


6.8.1 General 


The individual components of energy consumption and 
steady state power measured in accordance with this 
standard shall be combined using the following rules. 


6.8.2 Daily Energy Consumption 


All values of energy consumption and power shall 
be converted to daily energy consumption values in 
accordance with the following equations for each 
temperature control setting and ambient temperature. 


For refrigerating appliances without a defrost control 
cycle, the daily energy consumption for each ambient 
temperature and each temperature control setting is 
given by: 


Ej P x 24 E 
aily 
where 
Кашу" energy in Wh over a period of 24 h; 
24 = h/d; and 
P= steady state power in watt for the selected 
temperature control setting as per 
Annex B 


The measured steady state temperature for each 
compartment shall be recorded with this value 
(for the test report and/or for interpolation). 


For refrigerating appliances with one defrost system 
(with its own defrost control cycle), the daily energy 
consumption for each ambient temperature and each 
temperature control setting is based on the steady state 
power consumption as determined in accordance with 
Annex B, the incremental defrost and recovery energy 
determined in accordance with Annex C and the defrost 
interval determined in accordance with Annex D as 
follows: 


" AE, x24 


daily 


= Px24+ 
Аш К 


where 


Е. = energy in Wh, over a period of 24 h; 


daily 
24 = h/d; and 
P= steady state power in watt for the selected 
temperature control setting as per Annex B; 


AE ¿= representative incremental energy for 
defrost and recovery, in Wh in accordance 
with Annex C (see C-5); and 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


At = estimated defrost interval, in hours in 
accordance with Annex D. 


Where there are additional defrost systems (each with 
its own defrost control cycle), the value of term based 
on AE, and At, is also added in equation 2 for each 
additional defrost system. 


The average temperature for each compartment for this 
temperature control setting and energy consumption is 
given by: 

АТһ, 


Ағ, 


average 7 ss 


where 


= average temperature for the compartment 
over a complete defrost control cycle; 


average 


Т = average steady state temperature in the 
compartment for the temperature control 
setting in °C in accordance with Annex B; 


ATh,,= representative accumulated temperature 
difference over timefor defrost and recovery 
(relative to the steady state temperature) in 
degree Kelvin-hour (Kh) for the relevant 
compartment in accordance with Annex C 
(see C-5) ; and 


At = estimated defrost interval 


m in hours in 
accordance with Annex D. 


The value of ATh may be positive (if the temperature 
is warmer during defrost and recovery) or negative 
(if it is cooler, due to a pre-cool and low heat leakage 
during defrost). 


Where there are additional defrost systems (each with 
its own defrost control cycle), the value of term based 
on АТП, and At, is also added in equation 3 for each 
additional defrost system. 


6.8.3 Interpolation 


Where interpolation is performed in order to obtain a 
more optimum estimate of the daily energy consumption 
for a given ambient temperature, the calculations for 
each compartment temperature and energy consumption 
determined in accordance with 6.8.2 shall be used as set 
out in Annex E. 


6.8.4 Specified Auxiliaries 


Where the refrigerating appliance contains specified 
auxiliaries, the increase in energy consumption associated 
with these auxiliaries is calculated according to the 
operating schedule specified and using the parameters set 
out in Annex F. The impact of these auxiliaries is typically 
estimated over a year, so care is required when attempting 
to add these to other energy values calculated in this 
standard — annual values need to be determined for the 
other energy values before these figures can be added. 


NOTE — For the specified auxiliaries, if any, in the absence 
of regional weather data, the regional values/requirements are 
under consideration. Till such time the regional values (R) 
provided in Table 12 may be used. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


6.8.5 Total Energy Consumption 


The total energy consumption of an appliance can be 
estimated from the following values: 
E о 


ану cat an ambient temperature of 32 °C 

The value of Ебу at ambient temperature of 32 °C 
may be calculated by interpolation in accordance with 
Annex E. Annex J provides some examples of how 


these values can provide an annual energy estimate. 


E expressed as an integrated energy value over a year. 


aux 
NOTE — The ice-making test is performed at ambient 
temperatures of 32 °C so Еау is a regional function of 


" VE x32) 
The total annual energy consumption of a refrigerating 
appliance can be given by: 


Elotal = fx UE iy bc TÉ 4 


X 


Where 


f isaregional function to give the annual energy 
based on daily energy at 32 ?C. See Annex J 
for examples. 


NOTE — Till such time regional function is established, the 
function f may not be considered. 


6.8.6 Rated Energy Consumption 


Ifthe energy consumption is stated by the manufacturer, 
the value measured in the energy consumption test on 
the first appliance tested shall not be greater than the 
rated energy consumption by more than 10 percent of 
the latter. 


If the result of the test carried out on the first appliance 
is greater than the declared value plus 10 percent, the 
test shall be carried out on a further three appliances. 


The arithmetical mean of the energy consumption 
values of these three appliances shall be equal to or less 
than the declared value plus 10 percent. 


7 CIRCUMVENTION DEVICES 


A circumvention device is any control device, 
software, component or part that alters the refrigerating 
characteristics during any test procedure, resulting 
in measurements that are unrepresentative of the 
appliance's true characteristics that may occur during 
normal use under comparable conditions. Generally, 
circumvention devices save energy during an 
energy test but not during normal use. Examples of 
circumvention may include, without limitation, any 
variation to normal operation when the appliance is 
subjected to testing, and includes devices that: 


a) alter compartment temperature set points during 
the test; or 


b) activate ог  de-activate heaters or other 
energy-consuming devices during the test; or 

c) manipulate compressor cycle time or other operating 
parameters during the test; or 


d) manipulate the defrost interval. 


Devices that operate over a restricted range of conditions 
and which are: 


1) required for the maintenance of satisfactory food 
preservation temperatures within compartments 
(for example, temperature compensation heaters 
in fresh food compartments that operate at low 
ambient conditions); or 


2) intended to reduce energy consumption during 
normal use 


will generally not be treated as circumvention devices 
where the legitimate basis for their operation during 
normal use and under the test procedure for energy 
consumption is declared and can be demonstrated by the 
supplier. 


Where the operation of a circumvention device is 
suspected, a laboratory should subject the appliance to 
measures, such as door openings or other appropriate 
actions in an attempt to detect presence and operation 
of any such devices. Details of any such action and 
their effect shall be included in the test report. Where 
a circumvention device is suspected or detected during 
testing, a laboratory shall report that information to the 
client. 


Such devices may be prohibited in some jurisdictions. 
Other jurisdictions may require the circumvention 
device to be defeated for energy tests or the product to 
be tested in such a way to obtain an assessment of the 
energy impact of the circumvention device operation. 
Any additional energy consumption associated with the 
circumvention device may be added to the measured 
energy consumption and there may be penalty factors 
associated with the additional energy associated with the 
circumvention device. 


8 UNCERTAINTY OF MEASUREMENT 


For all energy measurements, the uncertainty of 
measurement ofthe measured value should be determined 
and stated with the measured result. 


Where less stringent validity criteria have been applied 
to obtain an approximate result in a shorter time, the 
resulting increase in uncertainty shall be taken into 
account in any statement of uncertainty. 


Verification tests should take into consideration the 
measurement uncertainty when assessing the energy 
result against any relevant validity criteria. 
NOTE — The calculation of uncertainty of measurement is not 
specified in this standard. Further guidance on this issue can be 
obtained from the ISO/IEC Guide 98-3: 2008, Uncertainty of 
measurement — Part 3: Guide to the expression of uncertainty 
in measurement (GUM: 1995). 


9 TEST REPORT 


A test report that includes all ofthe relevant information 
listed in IS 17550 (Part 1) Annex F for tests undertaken 
in accordance with this standard should be prepared. 


NOTE — The schedule of type, acceptance, and routine tests 
are given in 20 of Part 1 of this standard 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX А 
( Clause 4.1 ) 


( Normative ) 


SET UP FOR ENERGY TESTING 


A-1 GENERAL 


For the purposes of energy determination in accordance 
with this standard, the refrigerating appliance shall be 
set up as specified below. 


The refrigerating appliance shall be installed in a test 
room and with instrumentation as specified in Annex A 
of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


The refrigerating appliance shall be prepared and set 
up in accordance with the requirements of Annex B of 
IS 17550 (Part 1). 


The refrigerating appliance shall have air temperature 
sensors installed at the positions specified in Annex D 
of IS 17550 (Part 1). The determination of compartment 
air temperature during energy testing shall be as 
specified in Annex D of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


A-2 ADDITIONAL SET UP REQUIREMENTS 
FOR ENERGY TESTING 


A-2.1 Ice Making Trays 


Any ice cube trays with a dedicated position, as 
specified in the instructions, shall remain in place but 
shall be empty for energy tests (except as specified in 
Annex G). 


A-2.2 User Adjustable Controls 


User-adjustable temperature control(s) that are not 
used for energy interpolations in accordance with 
Annex E shall be set in a single position that meets the 
relevant compartment temperature requirements set 
out in 5 (target temperatures) for all test runs. Where 
interpolation between the results of two or more test 
runs is to be performed in accordance with Annex E, 
the only setting(s) to be changed between test runs shall 
be the relevant user-adjustable temperature control(s) 
used for interpolation. The position of all baffles and 
user-adjustable temperature control(s) not used for 
interpolation shall be recorded in the test report. 


Where a wine storage compartment has setting options 
for uniform temperature and multiple temperature 
zones, the uniform temperature setting shall be selected 
for testing. 


A-2.3 Ambient Temperature 


For energy consumption determination, the nominal 
test room temperature is 32 °C. The operational 
requirements for test room ambient temperatures are 
specified in IS 17550 (Part 1). 


A-2.4 Accessories and Shelves 


Any accessories, loose trays, bins or containers that 
have no dedicated position or essential function during 
normal use, as specified in the instructions, shall be 
removed. 


Any thermal storage devices (for example, ice-bricks 
or similar) that are removable without the use of a 
tool shall be removed for all tests, irrespective of 
instructions. 


A-2.5 Anti-condensation Heaters 


Anti-condensation heaters which are permanently on 
during normal use shall be tested with the heater(s) 
operating for all energy tests. 


Anti-condensation heaters that can be switched ‘on’ or 
‘off’ by the user shall be tested at both the ‘on’ and ‘off’ 
setting. 


Anti-condensation heaters that have a number of 
possible settings that can be selected by the user shall 
be tested at both the ‘highest energy’ and the ‘lowest 
energy’ setting. 


Sufficient data shall be collected so that the 
additional power consumption associated with the 
anti-condensation heater(s) at each specified setting 
can be estimated with the compartment(s) operating 
at the same temperature(s). The additional power 
consumed by the refrigerating appliance when the 
anti-condensation heater(s) are operating at each 
ambient temperature shall be determined. Energy test 
values shall be separately reported for each specified 
setting. 
NOTE — A number of possible approaches can be used 
to determine the incremental impact of manually switched 
anti-condensation heater(s) as set out in Annex F (for example, 
measure energy without heaters then add calculated energy, 
measure energy with heaters then subtract actual energy before 
adding calculated energy). If there is any doubt about the most 
expedient method, the optimum energy in accordance with 
Annex B (using interpolation where necessary) should be 
determined with and without the anti-condensation heater(s) 
operating in order to determine this value (noting that 
their operation may have a small impact on compartment 
temperatures). 
Anti-condensation heaters which are automatically 
controlled and vary in response to ambient conditions 
(for example, temperature and/or humidity) are 
classified as specified auxiliaries and shall be tested in 
accordance with Annex F. 


Anti-condensation heaters which are automatically 
controlled and vary in response to ambient conditions 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


but are configured so that the user can select the 
underlying or base level of heater power shall be tested 
at highest and lowest user setting in accordance with 
Annex F (refer F-2.8). 


A-2.6 Automatic Icemakers — Ice Storage Bins 


A-2.6.1 General 


Where an appliance includes an automatic ice-making 
feature that produces, harvests and stores ice, the space 
that the ice storage bin occupies shall be specifically 
treated as a separate sub-compartment for the purposes 
of energy testing. 


Any automatic ice-making bin shall be separately 
declared under ‘Compartment Details’ in the test report. 


For all energy tests, the ice delivery mechanism shall 
remain functional, i.e. all chutes and throats required 
for the delivery of ice shall be free of packing, covers or 
other blockages that may be fitted for shipping or when 
the ice-maker is not in use. 


Where the ice storage space occupies a complete 
compartment, the temperature sensor placements shall 
be in accordance with Annex D of IS 17550 (Part 1) 
(not A-2.6.5 of this part). 


A-2.6.2 Intent and Overview for Energy Testing 


The intent is to make sure that during an energy 
consumption test to this standard the automatic 
ice-maker and its associated equipment behaves in a 
manner that is consistent with a value that would be 
obtained while the system is running but is not making 
new ice. 


In order to achieve this condition during an energy test, 
automatic ice-makers shall function normally but shall 
not produce any new ice (but should be in a state that 
would automatically produce new ice on demand without 
any user intervention if some ice were removed). Only 
devices or components directly associated with the 
production or harvesting of new ice shall be inoperative 
during the energy test. All components not explicitly 
associated with the production or harvesting of new ice 
shall operate normally during the energy test and shall 
be energized in a manner consistent with the duty cycle 
necessary to perform their respective functions. The 
cooling of the icemaker area(s) shall remain unchanged 
from normal ice-storage conditions. 


Other than for verification tests as specified in A-2.6.4, 
connection to a water supply may be omitted if it can 
be demonstrated that the absence or presence of a 
connection to a water supply will make no difference to 
the measured energy consumption. 


A-2.6.3 Ice Storage Bin Configuration 


The ice storage bin shall remain in place and empty 
for all energy testing, except where otherwise specified 
in A-2.6.4. The automatic ice-making bin shall be 


treated as a sub-compartment and shall be fitted with a 
temperature sensor as specified in A-2.6.5. 


Any action taken by the test laboratory (including 
settings or configuration) during the energy test to 
make the automatic ice-maker operative but to cease 
production of ice due to an ice-bin-full condition in 
accordance with A-2.6 shall be included in the test 
report. 


A-2.6.4 Verification of Energy Consumption with an 
Automatic Ice-Maker 


For the purposes of verification of energy consumption 
of an appliance, the setup of the automatic icemaker 
should be configured in accordance with the setup 
specified by the manufacturer. 


In order to detect whether there are any undeclared 
circumvention devices in operation during an energy 
test, irrespective of instructions, a test laboratory may 
undertake tests, including the test as set out below to 
assess the normal operation of the automatic ice-maker 
and its associated controls against the requirements of 
7 and the intent of A-2.6.2. 


The purpose of this test, where undertaken, is to assess 
the normal operation of the automatic ice-maker against 
the configuration used for energy testing as set out in 
A-2.6.4. The ice-maker is connected to a water supply, 
the ice-making function is operated until the bin is full 
and ice production has automatically stopped under its 
own control prior to commencing an energy test. To 
shorten the test time, pre-made ice cubes may be used 
to partially fill the ice storage bin before the start of 
the test, but only to a level that allows the icemaker to 
continue producing ice to fill the bin. 


The automatic ice-making bin shall be fitted with a 
temperature sensor as specified in A-2.6.5. 


The temperature in the ice-making storage bin should 
remain well below freezing during all stages of 
operation. As a guide, the energy consumption with the 
ice storage bin full of ice under this clause should not 
exceed by 2 percent the energy consumption measured 
during energy testing for the same (or equivalent) 
temperature control settings and internal temperatures 
but with the ice storage bin empty. 


A-2.6.5 Position of the Temperature Sensor in 
Automatic Ice-Makers 


An automatic ice-maker bin shall have a single 
additional temperature sensor located in the position 
specified as follows for all energy tests: 


a) Vertical placement: Approximately 50 mm below 
the top of the estimated maximum ice storage 
level while maintaining at least 20 mm clearance 
from the base of the bin; 


b) Horizontal placement: Approximately 20 mm 
clearance from the vertical centre line of the side 


of the bin that is closest to an external surface 
or warmer sub-compartment (e.g. door or wall 
or gasket or sub-compartment) or, where the bin 
is more than 50 mm from an external surface, 
approximately 20 mm clearance from the vertical 
centre line of the largest side of the bin (that is, 
where the bin is wholly within the compartment); 
and 


с 


ме 


Where the position specified іп Б) is affected by 
a direct air stream, it shall, as far as possible, 
be relocated to an alternative position that has 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


20 mm clearance from the side of the bin but away 
from a direct atr stream that is colder than the bin 
contents. 


If the position of the temperature sensor is moved so 
that it is away from the preferred positions specified 
in a) and b) above, the position of the sensor shall be 
noted in the test report. 
NOTE — In a verification test in accordance with A-2.6.4, ice 
will usually touch the temperature sensor in the storage bin. 


See A-2.6.1 regarding the placement of temperature sensors in 
separate compartments that are dedicated to ice storage. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.2 ) 


( Normative ) 


DETERMINATION OF STEADY STATE POWER AND TEMPERATURE 


B-1 GENERAL 


This Annex specifies the method to be used to 
determine the power consumption and temperature for 
a refrigerating appliance during stable operation that is 
tested in accordance with this standard. 


B-2 SETUP FOR TESTING AND DATA 
COLLECTION 


The objective is to select a representative period of 
operation in order to determine the average power 
and average internal temperatures (for all relevant 
compartments) for the selected temperature control 
setting and test ambient temperature. 


The refrigerating appliance under test shall be set up 
and operated in accordance with Annex A. 


There are two possible cases with respect to the 
determination of steady state power consumption: 


a) Case SSI (see B-3) applies to products without a 
defrost control cycle and products with a defrost 
system (with its own defrost control cycle) where 
the defrost control cycle is long and the steady 
state test period of interest may not be bounded 
by defrost and recovery periods. Quite stringent 
internal validity criteria are applied to the data to 
ensure that a representative period of operation is 
selected. 


b 


x 


Case SS2 (see B.4) applies to products with a 
defrost system (with its own defrost control cycle) 
where the steady state test period of interest 
commences with a valid defrost and recovery 
period. Case SS2 shall be used where stability 
between defrosts cannot be established using Case 
SS1. In Case 552 the whole period from defrost to 


defrost is used to determine the steady state power 
consumption by deduction of initial incremental 
defrost and recovery energy (see DFl in 
Annex C). In Case SS2, the steady state operation 
before the initial defrost and before the following 
defrost are compared and they shall meet the 
relevant stability criteria. The initial defrost shall 
also meet the validity requirement of DF1 as 
specified in Annex C. 


B-3 CASE 551: NO DEFROST CONTROL 
CYCLE OR WHERE STABILITY IS 
ESTABLISHED FOR A PERIOD BETWEEN 
DEFROSTS 


B-3.1 Case SS1 Approach 


Case 551 applies to all products without a defrost 
control cycle. It also can apply to products with a 
defrost system (with its own defrost control cycle) 
where the defrost control cycle is long and the steady 
state test period of interest is not bounded by defrost 
and recovery periods. In this case, no defrost and 
recovery period (or part thereof) shall occur during the 
selected test period under Case SS1. 


Where the steady state power is determined under 
Case 551, a steady state test period that is made up 
of 3 internal blocks of test data is selected that are 
adjacent but not overlapping. Each block of test data 
shall contain an equal number (n) of whole temperature 
control cycles. The minimum number of temperature 
control cycles per block is 1. A test period is selected 
where all relevant criteria for internal spread and slope 
for temperature and power can be established. 


A block size of 1 temperature control cycle will have 
a total test period of 3 temperature control cycles, a 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


block size of 2 temperature control cycles will have 
a test period of 6 temperature control cycles, and so 
on. The definition of the temperature control cycle in 
IS 17550 (Part 1) should be considered carefully. It 
is generally recommended that for more complex 
refrigeration systems alternative temperature 
control cycles based on temperature maxima in each 
compartment be examined in addition to compressor 
cycles (where present) to see which one provides the 
most stable estimate of power over time. Selecting the 
most stable temperature control cycle can shorten the 
required testing time to achieve a valid result. 


Where there are no discernible changes in temperature 
or power consumption over time, a test period that is 
made up of 3 internal blocks of test data is selected. 
Each block of test data shall be equal in length, adjacent 
and no less than 4 h in duration. 


As an alternative to using temperature control cycles, 
fixed-length periods may be used (referred to as fixed 
time slices) to make up each block. 


A trial test period shall be made up of 3 blocks of data 
called A, B, and C. 
NOTE — There is no maximum number of temperature 
control cycles per block, but a value of 10 is considered to be 
unusually long. 
An example test period made up of blocks of 
5 temperature control cycles is illustrated in Fig. 1. 


For each block of data (A, B, and C), calculate the 
average power and the average temperature in each 
relevant compartment. 


Calculate the following characteristics across the test 
Blocks A, B, and C: 


a) Spread of temperature for each compartment: 
Calculated as the difference between the average 
temperature of the warmest Block (A, B, or C) and 
the average temperature of the coldest Block (A, 
B, or C). All temperature differences (spread) are 
in K. Refer to Equation (5); 


b) Slope of temperatures from Block A to Block C: 
Calculated as [the absolute value of the difference 
between the average temperature of Block A and 
the average temperature of Block C] divided by 
[the test time at the middle of Block C minus the 
test time at the middle of Block A]. All temperature 
slopes are in K/h. Refer to Equation (6); 


c) Spread of power (watt): Calculated as the 
difference between the average power of the 
highest power Block (A, B, or C) and the average 
power of the lowest power Block (A, B, or C) 
divided by [the average power for the whole test 
period (A, B, and C)], expressed as a percentage. 
Refer to Equation (7); and 


SPREAD ABC 


AVERAGE NS 
AVERAGEA — _ ln. 
RH 
x 
x PAN EINE D D ыы ы 
5 
ш 
О 
= 
ш 
н 
| TEMPERATURE CONTROL CYCLE NUMBER 
W 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
es 
Ë 
m 
ш 
oO 
= 
ш 
= 


Fic. 1 ILLUSTRATION OF A TEST PERIOD MADE OF BLOCKS OF 5 TEMPERATURE 
CONTROL CYCLES — TEMPERATURES FOR CASE 551 


10 


AVERAGE B 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


SPREAD ABC 


x | 
ш 
= AVERAGE B 
Жасы | ООо О L u eri === 
AVERAGEA |  BLOCKA |_____ ___| ____ ___________- 
ДУЕВАСЕС___________ ЕЕЕ 
{ авс 
ТІМЕ 
Fic. 2 ILLUSTRATION OF A TEST PERIOD МАРЕ OF BLOCKS OF 5 TEMPERATURE 
CONTROL CYCLES — POWER For СА5Е 551 
d) Slope of power from Block A to Block C: Calculated В-3.2 Case SS1 Acceptance Criteria 


as [the absolute value of the difference between the 
average power of Block C and the average power 
of Block A] divided by [the test time at the middle 
of Block C minus the test time at the middle of 
Block A] and divided by [the average power for the 
whole test period (A, B, and C)]. All power slopes 
are expressed as a percentage per hour (%/h). Refer 
to Equation (8). 
Spread of temperature = 


Tk (A,B,C) | To (А,В,С) (K) 5 
Slope of temperature = 
ABS |T. -T 
ABS [Te T] / h) 
[кс -t] ...6 
Spread of power = 
Ta (A,B,C) ` В. лс) (%) 
P 
av(A,B,C) SAT 
Slope of power = 
ABS|P. — P. 
[ C | (%/h) 
[tc E КЕ яа 8 
Where for each block A, B, and C: 
T= temperature; 
t= test time (the centre point of the block); 
P = power; and 
% = result of the quotient (expressed as a 


percentage, where 1.0 — 100 percent). 


Based on the characteristics calculated in B-3.1, 
assess the validity of the whole test period (made up 
of 3 blocks, each consisting of n temperature control 
cycles). The test period shall be valid if all of the 
following criteria are met: 


a) Total test period ¢,,, (sum of length of Blocks 
A, B, and C) is no less than 6 h where there are 
temperature control cycles and no less than 12 h 
where there are no temperature control cycles 


(or where fixed time slices are used); 


b) Spread of temperature (across Blocks A, B, C) is 
less than 0.25 K for each compartment; 


c) Slope of temperature (from Block A to Block C) is 
less than 0.025 K/h for each compartment; 


Spread of power (across Blocks A, B, C) where 
temperature control cycles are present is less than: 
for a total test period 7, pc Of 12 h or less, a spread 
of not more than 1 percent; for a total test period 
from 12 to 36 h, a spread of not more than 
anc 12)/1 200; for a total test period 
1 вс Of 36 h ог more, a spread of not more than 
3 percent; 


d 


— 


Anc 
] percent + (t 


e 


wm 


Spread of power (across Blocks A, B, C) where 
no temperature control cycles are present or 
where fixed time periods are selected is less than 
1 percent, irrespective of the total test period; 


Slope of power (from Block A to Block C) is less 
than 0.25 percent/h; 


Where temperature control cycles are present, the 
two comparable test periods that start one and two 
temperature control cycles earlier than the period 
selected also meet all of the above criteria (that is, 
the selected test period is the third possible period 
that meets all other validity criteria); and 


wa 


g 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


h) Where temperature control cycles are not present 
(or where fixed time slices are used), the two 
comparable test periods that start one hour and 
two hours earlier than the period selected also 
meet all of the above criteria. 


Therequirement for the test period to remain valid when 
moved along for 3 consecutive temperature control 
cycles ensures that compliance with all criteria for the 
selected period is not a chance or random occurrence. 
In the example illustrated in Fig. 1, if the test period 
starting at temperature control cycle 5 and ending at 
temperature control cycle 20 was the first period to 
meet the above criteria | to 5, the test period from 6 to 
21 and 7 to 22 would also have to meet all criteria. In 
this case the test period from 7 to 22 is the first valid 
test period. 

NOTE — The full set of criteria above were developed on the 

basis of extensive testing and review of data for more than 

100 refrigerating appliances. 
The temperature control setting(s) shall remain 
unchanged for all the test period used to determine the 
value for SS1 (Blocks A, B, and C). 


Where there are more than two compartments, 
assessment of temperature stability as set out above is 
required for: 


1) The largest unfrozen compartment and largest 
frozen compartment (where applicable); or 


2) The largest two compartments (where all 
compartments are frozen or unfrozen). 


In addition, temperature stability shall be achieved as 
specified above for all compartments that are used for 
interpolation for energy consumption in accordance 
with Annex E. 


If the above criteria cannot be met, the size of n is 
increased (and therefore the length of the test period 
is increased) and/or more test data is collected until all 
criteria can be met simultaneously. 


The recommended approach during the collection of 
test data 1s to continually look (backwards) at all of 
the data collected to that moment in order to assess 
all possible test periods for all possible block sizes 
(n) to establish the earliest possible point in the test 
data that can meet the above validity criteria. While it 
is not generally recommended that data from a warm 
start (pull-down when the power is first connected) be 
included in these assessments, these criteria should 
ensure that any pull-down prior to the establishment of 
stable operation is automatically excluded from a valid 
test period. 


Where there are a number of possible test periods 
that meet the above criteria, the test period with the 
minimum spread of power from the available test data 
should be selected. 


Where the criteria of power spread cannot be met 
by extending the total test period (with or without 


12 


temperature control cycles), a valid result may be 
obtained by using 3 blocks of data with each block no 
less than 36 h in length (total test period no less than 
108 h). 


NOTE — A worked example to select the optimum test period 
characteristics is included in Annex J. 


B-3.3 Case SS1 Calculation of Values 


Where a test period, made up of Blocks A, B, and C, 
meets the relevant acceptance criteria in B-3.2, then the 
temperature T; for each compartment ; and the average 
power P... is determined as the average of all measured 
values included in the time period covered by Blocks 
A, B, and C. 


The steady state power used for subsequent energy 
calculations Р. is determined by modifying the value 
of Ре using equation (15) in B-5 where the measured 
ambient temperature is not equal to the nominal 


ambient temperature during the test. 


The total test time for Blocks A, B, and C shall be 
reported. 


The steady state compressor run time СХА, is calculated 
as the percentage of time that the compressor is on 
during the total time for all temperature control cycles 
in Blocks A, B, and C. 


B-3.3.1 Alternative Methodology for Stable Condition 


The temperature of each measuring point shall be 
kept constant within +5 K of the nominal ambient 
temperature both during the periods required for 
obtaining stable operating conditions and during the 
tests for determination of power consumption and 
temperature. 


B-4 CASE 552: STEADY STATE DETERMINED 
BETWEEN DEFROSTS 


B-4.1 Case SS2 Approach 


Case SS2 applies to products with one or more defrost 
systems (each with its own defrost control cycle) where 
the steady state test period of interest is bounded by 
defrost and recovery periods. While it may be used for 
all products with one or more defrost systems, Case 
SS2 shall be used if stability cannot be established 
using Case 551. 


For products with long defrost intervals, the use of Case 
SS1 may considerably shorten the required test time. 


Case SS2 uses all data between the start of two defrost 
and recovery periods to calculate the steady state power 
(see equation 12). Checks are undertaken to compare the 
characteristics of the steady state operation prior to each 
defrost and recovery period (Periods X and Y in Fig. 3) 
to ensure that they meet the relevant stability 
requirements before undertaking any further analysis. 
The initial defrost and recovery period with in the test 
period SS2 shall comply with the validity requirements 


of Annex C and the incremental energy associated with 
this defrost and recovery period shall be determined in 
accordance with Annex C (DF1) in order to determine 
the value for P,., (which is the whole test period less 
the value for DF1). 


A period of steady state operation (called Period X), 
ending at the start of a defrost and recovery period and 
made up of no less than 4 whole temperature control 
cycles (where temperature control cycles are present) 
and no less than 4 hin length, is selected. A second period 
of steady state operation (called Period Y), ending at the 
start of the next defrost and recovery period and made 
up of no less than 4 whole temperature control cycles 
(where temperature control cycles are present) and no 
less than 4 h in length, is selected. Periods X and Y 
shall always consist of the same number of temperature 
control cycles (where temperature control cycles are 
present) and should be approximately the same length. 
Periods X and Y shall be exactly the same length where 
no temperature control cycles are present. 


Where no subsequent defrost and recovery period has 
been initiated within 48 h, Period Y may be selected at 
a point during steady state operation where the elapsed 
time from the end of Period X to the end of Period Y 
exceeds 48 h but where Period Y is not adjacent to a 
subsequent defrost and recovery period. Where Period 
Y is selected in this manner, it shall be noted in the test 
report. 


The temperature in each compartment and power for 
Period X are then compared to the temperature in each 
compartment and power for Period Y. 


Calculate the following characteristics across the 
Periods X and Y: 


a) Spread of temperature for each compartment: 
calculated as the difference between the average 
temperature of the warmer period (X or Y) minus 
the average temperature of the colder period 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


(X or Y). All temperature differences (spread) are 
in degrees K. Refer to equation 9; and 


b 


wm 


Spread of power: calculated as the difference 
between the average power of the higher power 
period (X or Y) minus the average power of 
the lower power period (X or Y) divided by the 
average power for the Periods X and Y. The spread 
of power is expressed as both a percentage and 
as an absolute spread (W). Refer to equations 10 
and 11. 


Spread of temperature = 


T max (X,Y) | Tu (X,Y) (K) 2,9 
Spread of power = 
Pos (X,Y) = тіп(Х,У) (%) 
Р 
ка, ...10 
Spread of power = 
max (X,Y) | P min (X,Y) (W) ...11 


where for each period X and Y: 
T= temperature; 
P= power, in W; and 


%- result of the quotient (expressed as a 
percentage, where 1.0 = 100 percent). 


B-4.2 Case SS2 Acceptance Criteria 


For the period selected for determination of P,., steady 
state power to be valid, the following criteria shall be 
met: 


a) Period X and Y shall be made up of no less 
than 4 whole temperature control cycles (where 
temperature control cycles are present) and shall 
have the same number of temperature control 
cycles. Where no temperature control cycles are 
present (or where fixed time slices are used), X 
and Y shall be the same length; 


DEFROST & RECOVERY 


| ENERGY (ОЕ1) - 
© SEE ANNEX C © 
TEMPERATURE TEMPERATURE 
CONTROL STEADY STATE CONTROL 
CHANGE POWER CHANGE 


PERIOD 


POWER 


DEFROST & 
| RECOVERY | 


STEADY STATE ——-| 
WHOLE TEST PERIOD USED FOR SS2 


PERIOD 


Y 


TIME 


Fic. 3 CASE SS2 — TYPICAL OPERATION OF A REFRIGERATING APPLIANCE WITH A DEFROST CONTROL CYCLE 


13 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


b) Period X and Y shall not be less than 4 h in length; 


c) The ratio of the total length of Period X (in hours) 
to the total length of Period Y (in hours) shall be 
in the range 0.8 to 1.25 where temperature control 
cycles are present; 


d) The spread of temperature of the two selected 
Periods X and Y shall be less than 0.5 K for each 
compartment; 


e) The spread of power of the two selected Periods 
X and Y shall be less than 2 percent or less than 
1 W, whichever is the greater value; 


The initial defrost and recovery period which is 
included in period SS2 shall qualify as a valid 
defrost and recovery period in accordance with 
Annex C; and 

The value of АЁ + for the initial defrost and 
recovery period which is included in period SS2 
shall be determined in accordance with Annex C. 


a 


g 


The temperature control setting shall remain unchanged 
for all the test period used to determine the value for SS2, 
including the period used to determine the incremental 
defrost and recovery energy (AE, for DF 1) specified in 
Annex C (including all of Periods X and Y). 


Where the initially selected Period X and Period Y 
do not comply with the acceptance criteria specified 
above, the minimum length of time for Period X and Y 
shall both be increased in steps of | temperature control 
cycle (in 1 h steps where there are no temperature 
control cycles or where fixed time slices are used) to 
see if there are any possible complying periods. Where 
the size of X and Y are increased, the first valid value 
using the sequence specified above shall be used. The 
length of X and Y shall not exceed 50 percent of the 
defrost interval or 8 h, whichever is the longer. 


Where there are more than two compartments, 
assessment of temperature stability as set out above is 
required for: 


1) The largest unfrozen compartment and largest 
frozen compartment (where applicable); or 


2) The largest two compartments (where all 
compartments are frozen or unfrozen). 


In addition, temperature stability shall be achieved as 
specified above for all compartments that are used for 
interpolation for energy consumption in accordance 
with Annex E. 


In rare cases where there is no steady state operation 
between defrosts, it may not be possible to ever confirm 
the validity of the initial defrost and recovery period 
at the start of SS2 in accordance with Annex C. An 
alternative approach to deal with such cases is outlined 
in Annex L, but this should only be used if compliance 
with Annex C can never normally be achieved. 


14 


B-4.3 Case SS2 Calculation of Values 


Where the acceptance criteria in B-4.2 have been met, 
the determination of steady state power and steady state 
temperature in each compartment are calculated from 
the whole test period used for SS2 (including the initial 
defrost and recovery period) as set out in equation 
12 and 13 below. The calculation determines the energy 
consumption over whole defrost control cycle and 
subtracts the incremental defrost and recovery energy 
in accordance with Annex C in order to determine 
the steady state power consumption Р... Similarly, 
each compartment temperature is determined over 
the whole defrost control cycle and the accumulated 
temperature difference during the defrost and recovery 
period in each compartment (in accordance with Annex 
C) is subtracted in order to determine the steady state 


temperature in each compartment Т); 


The average power during the steady state period shall 
be calculated from the whole test period used for SS2 
as follows: 


P. e (E.a-v -E ах) AE 
SS2 
(Lay = лах ) ...(12) 
where 

Pœ - steady state power for the selected 
defrost control cycle, in W; 

dB ~ accumulated energy reading at the 
end of Period X, in Wh; 

E a ^ accumulated energy reading at the 
end of Period Y, in Wh; 

eaux testtime at the end of Period X, in h; 

„ay 151 time at the end of Period Y, in h; 
and 

AE je = incremental defrost and recovery 


energy, in Wh in accordance with 
Annex C for the defrost and recovery 
period commencing at the end of 
Period X. 


The length of the test period used (t... ѓу) shall be 
separately reported. Where applicable, it shall be noted 
whether Period Y was adjacent to a subsequent defrost. 


The steady state power used for subsequent energy 
calculations Р, is determined by modifying the value 
of Ре using the formula in B-5 where the measured 
ambient temperature is not equal to the nominal 
ambient temperature during the test. 


The average temperature during the steady state period 
shall be calculated from the whole test period used for 
SS2 as follows: 


ATh ; 
Тоз = Шанс ) = | (t = ; 
end-Y end-X ...(13) 
where 
sss — steady state temperature in 


compartment i that occurs in 
the whole test period used for 
SS2 in degrees C; 


average temperature in 
compartment i over the period 
from the end of Period X to the 
end of Period Y in degrees C; 


— MÀ 


ATh accumulated temperature 
difference over time in each 
compartment i in Kh as 
determined in accordance with 
Annex C for the defrost and 
recovery period commencing 


at the end of Period X; 

test time at the end of Period X, 
in h; and 

test time at the end of Period Y, 
in h. 


ES 


E 


For products with a compressor run time defrost 
controller, the steady state compressor run time CRt, is 
calculated as the percentage of time that the compressor 
is on for the whole defrost control cycle less the value 
for At, determined in Annex C as set out in equation 


14. 
[NET At, 


[i aos -taa x) 


end- X — 


СК» = 


..14 


where 


CRt average percentage | compressor 
run time that occurs in steady state, 


in percent; 


SS2 


Rt 


total accumulated compressor run 
end-X 


time (on period) at the end of period 
X,inh; 

total accumulated compressor run 
time (on period) at the end of period 
Y,inh; 

additional compressor run time 
associated with a defrost and recovery, 
in h in accordance with Annex C; 


test time at the end of the Period X, 
in h; and 

is the test time at the end of the Period 
Y,inh 


Rt 


end-Y 


At 


dr 


six 


E 


15 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Care is required not to count defrost heater on time as 
compressor on time in these calculations (although it is 
possible that some controllers include the defrost heater 
operation as run time — each product should be checked 
to see how it is configured). 


B-5 CORRECTION OF STEADY STATE 
POWER 


The steady state power used for subsequent energy 

calculations Р. is based on the measured steady state 

power (B-3 or B-4 as applicable) after adjustment 

using equation 15 below. This adjustment takes into 

account the difference between the measured ambient 

temperature during the test and the nominal ambient 
у, 


test temperature. 
Ej x(18+ x» 


xj Vix) | 


с Х(18+Т )+«,) 
1 
15) 


Р. 


SSM 


Bg = Вы x | 1+[T, – Та |х 


i [1+ (T, -Tm xA COP) | 


measured steady state power for 
the period in W as specified in B-3 
(P...) or B-4 (P...) as applicable; 


target test 
temperature; 


551 552 


room ambient 


at 


measured test room ambient 
temperature during the test period; 


am 


rated volume of compartment i (for 
compartments 1 to 71); 


measured temperature in 
compartment i to n during the test 
period; 


im 


target temperature for energy 
consumption in compartment i to n 
(refer Table 1); 


с constant given as 0.011 364; 


1 


^ constant given as 1.25; and 


ACOP 


adjustment given in Table 2 for the 
product type and test condition. 


All temperatures are in degrees Celsius (°C). 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 2 Assumed ACOP Adjustment 
( Clause B-2 ) 


This formula is not valid for corrections that are outside 
the permitted ambient test temperature range specified 
in IS 17550 (Part 1) (nominally+0.5 K). This correction 


SI. No. Product Type ACOP Adjustment at is only applied to the steady state power. No correction 
32 °C is applied to measured temperatures or any defrost 
(1) (2) (3) and recovery calculations in Annex C. The value(s) 
D Two or more compartments 0.014 per K increase of volume that are used in the correction equation are 
p : the rated values in accordance with this standard as 
ii) One compartment — 0.019 per K increase : " ; В p 
specified in the instructions or other product literature. 
More information on the derivation of this equation is 
included in Annex M. 
ANNEX C 
( Clause 4.3 ) 
( Normative ) 
DEFROST AND RECOVERY ENERGY AND TEMPERATURE CHANGE 
C-1 GENERAL cumulative time that the refrigerating appliance under 


This Annex specifies the method to be used to determine 
the additional energy associated with defrost and 
recovery periods that occur in refrigerating appliances 
with one or more defrost control cycles. It also 
specifies the determination of the temperature change 
by compartment that is associated with those defrost 
and recovery periods. Normally, test data for these 
calculations is collected as part of the testing for steady 
state power consumption in Annex B. Individual defrost 
and recovery periods that occur at any time during the 
normal testing program can be used as long as these 
meet the relevant validity criteria. Where there is more 
than one defrost system (with its own defrost control 
cycle), the characteristics of each shall be separately 
determined (or in combination, where appropriate). 
NOTE — As cyclic defrost systems do not have a defrost 
control cycle, Annex C is only applicable to compartments or 


refrigerating appliances with automatic defrost systems other 
than cyclic defrost. 


C-2 SETUP FOR TESTING AND DATA 
COLLECTION 


The objective is to measure and select a number of 
representative defrost and recovery periods in order 
to determine a representative value for the additional 
(incremental) energy associated with defrost and 
recovery (over and above the steady state power 
consumption) and the change in average internal 
temperatures (for each relevant compartment) 
associated with defrost and recovery (relative to 
the steady state temperature) for each test ambient 
temperature. 


The refrigerating appliance under test shall be set up 
and operated in accordance with Annex A. Where the 


16 


test has been disconnected from power exceeds 6 h 
during the 24 h prior to the occurrence of a defrost 
and recovery period, then data from that defrost and 
recovery period shall be deemed invalid and shall not be 
used to determine representative values for incremental 
defrost and recovery energy and temperature change in 
accordance with Annex C. 


To characterise the additional energy required, and 
the average temperature change, during a defrost and 
recovery period (relative to steady state conditions) at 
each test ambient temperature, a specified number of 
representative defrost and recovery periods need to be 
measured. In order to be considered representative, the 
steady state power and temperature before and after 
the defrost and recovery period shall meet the relevant 
stability or acceptance criteria. The number of defrost 
and recovery periods to be measured at each ambient 
temperature is specified in this Annex. A minimum of 
one defrost and recovery period is required for each test 
point used for energy determination for each ambient 
temperature condition. Alternatively, at least four 
defrost and recovery periods are required and at least 
half of all defrost and recovery periods have to have the 
coldest compartment at or below target temperature for 
each ambient temperature. 


Conceptually, the additional energy associated with 
defrost and recovery, over and above the underlying 
steady state power consumption, is determined as 
illustrated in Fig. 4. 


The main case considered is called Case DF1, where 
the refrigerating appliance can demonstrate steady state 
operation before and after the defrost and recovery 
period. 


POWER 
DEFROST AND 
RECOVERY START 


STEADY STATE 
UNDERLYING POWER 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ADDITIONAL ENERGY 
FOR A DEFROST AND 
RECOVERY EVENT 


TIME / TEMPERATURE CONTROL CYCLE 


Fic. 4 CONCEPTUAL ILLUSTRATION OF THE ADDITIONALENERGY ASSOCIATED 
WITH A DEFROST AND RECOVERY PERIOD 


In rare cases (called DF2) it may not be possible to 
reliably demonstrate steady state operation before and 
after the defrost and recovery period for any defrost. 
Only in this case, may the methodology set out in 
Annex L be used. 


C-3 CASE DF1: WHERE STEADY STATE 
OPERATION CAN NORMALLY BE 
ESTABLISHED BEFORE AND AFTER 
DEFROSTS 


C-3.1 Case DF1 Approach 


Case DF | is where the refrigerating appliance normally 
operates in a steady state condition prior to defrost 
and returns to steady state operation sometime after 
the defrost. Effectively, steady state operation occurs 
on either side of a defrost and recovery period. Each 
defrost and recovery period is examined in isolation. 
This approach is used for all types of refrigerating 
appliances that have one or more compartments with 
a defrost system (with its own defrost control cycle). 


A period of steady state operation (called Period D), 
ending well before the start of a defrost and recovery 
period is selected to be the minimum possible size that 
meets the criteria set out in C-3.2. A period of steady 
state operation (called Period F), starting well after the 
end of the same defrost and recovery period is selected 
to be the minimum possible size that meets the criteria 
set out in C-3.2. 


For the purposes of validity assessment in C-3.2, the 
nominal centre of the defrost and recovery period 


17 


is defined as 2 h after the initiation of the defrost 
heater or, in the case where there is no defrost heater, 
after the interruption of the refrigeration system 
related to the automatic defrost. This is illustrated in 
Fig. 5 — time interval Аг, and time interval Лі, shall 
be approximately the same, but will vary depending on 
the exact time of the selected temperature control cycle 
(where applicable) at the end of Period D and the start 
of Period F. 


NOTE — C-3.2 sets out cases where the length of Periods D 
and F and time for Az), and Ал, can be adjusted in order to 
find complying values. 
The temperature in each compartment and the power 
for Period D are then compared to the temperature in 
each compartment and power for Period F and assessed 
in accordance with C-3.2. 


It is important to note that the average power for Period 
D will never be exactly equal to the average power for 
Period F (as illustrated above in Fig. 5). By spacing 
Periods D and F evenly around the nominal centre of 
the defrost and recovery period, the average power for 
Periods D and F provides a reasonable estimate of the 
underlying steady state power during the defrost and 
recovery period. This methodology allows individual 
defrost and recovery periods to be examined in isolation, 
which makes testing faster and more convenient. 


Strict validity limits on the differences between 
Periods D and F are required to ensure that there are 
no significant changes in product behaviour during the 
assessment period (set out in C-3.2). Such differences 
may be due to a range of causes such as: user-adjustable 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


> 


КЕСОУЕКҮ START 


DEFROST AND 


PERIOD 
D 


TEMPERATURE / POWER 


= 


NOMINAL CENTRE OF 
DEFROST AND 
RECOVERY PERIOD 


ATh y 
(TEMPERATURE) 
OR AE ғ (ENERGY) 


PERIOD 


START OF DEFROST 
HEATER OPERATION 


Ato: 


Ate: 


At D1 & At, ARE 


APPROXMATELY EQUALLY AND 
NOT LESS THAN 3 HOURS 


2 HOURS AFTER START OF 
DEFROST HEATER 


TIME 


Fic. 5 Case DF1 WITH STEADY STATE OPERATION BEFORE AND AFTER A DEFROST 


temperature control change just before Period D or 
before Period F, inclusion of some residual pull down 
(from a warm start), some residual processing load 
in the defrost and recovery period (and in Period D) 
or automatic changes in the operation of the product 
( for example, step changes in inverter speed, change 
in heater operation, significant temperature or power 
drift etc. that may give significantly different values 
in Period D and F). In all of these cases, the validity 
criteria should correctly reject the selected defrost, 
so it cannot be used for energy calculations. In this 
case testing has to continue until another defrost and 
recovery period is recorded. 


Calculate the following characteristics across the 
Periods D and F: 


a) Spread of temperature for each compartment: 
calculated as the difference between the average 
temperature of the warmer period (D or F) minus 
the average temperature of the colder period 
(D or F). All temperature differences (spread) are 
in degrees K. Refer to equation 16; and 


b 


~ 


Spread of power: calculated as the difference 
between the average power of the higher power 
period (D or F) minus the average power of the 
lower power period (D or F) divided by the average 
power for the Periods D and F. The spread of power 
Is expressed as both a percentage and as an absolute 
spread (W). Refer to equation 17 and 18. 


18 


Spread of temperature = 


Ton laipa КӘ) .16 
Spread of power = 
Боже) ~  uin(p.F) (%) 
ux .17 
Spread of power = 
тым 118 


Where for periods D and F: 
Т = temperature; 
Р = power; and 
% 


result of the quotient (expressed as a 
percentage, where 1.0 = 100 94). 


C-3.2 Case DF1 Acceptance Criteria 


For the defrost and recovery period to be valid, the 
following criteria shall be met: 


a) Period D and F shall be made up of no less than 
3 whole number of temperature control cycles 
(where temperature control cycles are present) 
and shall have the same number of temperature 
control cycles. Where no temperature control 
cycles are present or where fixed time slices are 
used, Periods D and F shall be the same length; 


b) Period D and F shall not be less than 3 h in length; 


c) Period D shall finish no less than 3 h before the 
nominal centre of the current defrost and recovery 
period (A£,, > 3 h); 

Period F shall start no less than 3 h after the 
nominal centre of the defrost and recovery period 
(At. > 3 h); 

The spread of temperature for Periods D and F 
shall be less than 0.5 K for each compartment; 


d) 


e) 


The spread of power for Periods D and F shall be 
less than 2 percent or less than 1W, whichever is 
the greater value; 


The ratio of the total length of Period D (in hours) 
to the total length of Period F (in hours) shall be 
in the range 0.8 to 1.25 where temperature control 
cycles are present; 


The start of any selected Period D shall be no less 
than 5 h after the initiation of the previous defrost 
heater on or, in the case where there is no defrost 
heater, no less than 5 h after the interruption of 
the refrigeration system related to the automatic 
defrost; and 


The end of any selected Period F shall not be 
after the initiation of the subsequent defrost and 
recovery period. 


g) 


h) 


j 


NOTE — In this case, spread is the difference between the 
average values for Period D and F. Refer to B-3.1 for more 
information on the term spread. 


Where the initially selected Period D and Period F 
do not comply with the acceptance criteria specified 
above, the minimum length for Periods D and F shall 
both be increased in steps of 1 temperature control cycle 
(in 1 h steps where there are no temperature control 
cycles or where fixed time slices are used) to see if 
there are any possible complying periods with Az,, and 
At,, set to a minimum of 3 h. 


Where it is not possible to find complying periods D 
and F (for example, because the defrost and recovery 
period is long), the minimum size of interval Аг, and 
At,, [see points c) and d) above] shall be increased in 
30 min steps and validity for varying sizes of Periods D 
and F reassessed for each increase. 


Where the size of Periods D and F are increased or the 
length of Аг, and At. increased, the first valid value 
using the sequence specified above shall be used. 


Where no complying selections for Periods D and F can 
be found using the above sequence, the distance from 
the initiation of the defrost heater or, in the case where 
there is no defrost heater, after the interruption of the 
refrigerating system related to the automatic defrost, to 
the nominal centre of the defrost and recovery period 
may be adjusted from the default value of 2 h. The 
adjusted value shall not be less than 1 h and not more 
than 4 h and shall be a multiple of 30 min. 


19 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


EXAMPLE : If the distance from the start of the defrost 
and recovery period to the nominal centre of the defrost and 
recovery period was set to 3 h in order to obtain complying 
data (because the defrost and recovery period was long), 
the defrost and recovery period is considered to start at the 
same time as before but the nominal centre of the defrost and 
recovery period is set at 1 h later. 
Where any non-standard parameters are used to select 
Periods D and F (that is, they vary from the requirements 
specified in C-3.1), then this shall be noted in the test 
report. 


Where there are more than two compartments, 
assessment of temperature stability as set out above is 
required for the following: 


a) The largest unfrozen compartment and largest 
frozen compartment (where applicable); or 


b) The largest two compartments (where all 
compartments are frozen or unfrozen). 


In cases where there is no steady state operation 
between defrosts, it may not be possible to ever confirm 
the validity of the defrost and recovery period by 
examining symmetrically placed Periods D and F. An 
alternative approach (DF2) to deal with such cases is 
outlined in Annex K, but this should only be used if 
compliance with C-3 cannot normally be achieved. 


C-3.3 Case DF1 Calculation of Values 


Where the acceptance criteria in C-3.2 have been met, 
the determination of additional energy associated with 
each defrost and recovery period is calculated as set 
out below. 


(Pss. + Ps.) 
АЕ = (E os Емар) Р 2 : x 
(taar z biin ) . 19 
where 
Al = additional energy consumed by the 
refrigerating appliance for defrost 
and recovery period j, in Wh; 
m = accumulated energy reading at the 
start of Period D, in Wh; 
Dog S accumulated energy reading at the 
end of Period F, in Wh; 
Ras = average power consumption for 
Period D, in W; 
Pea = average power consumption for 
Period F, in W; 
tanp Z test time at the start of Period D, in 
h; and 
fau ^7 test time at the end of Period F, in h. 


NOTE — In the above equation, the power for Period D and 
the power for Period F are averaged. A time weighted average 
for both periods is not used. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


The determination of the temperature change in each 
compartment i associated with the defrost and recovery 
period is calculated as follows: 


A Tha. ; T DNE m Lan D ) x 
) (T. p * T, 


av-D-i ау-Е-і 
2 


) 


T 


av—startD—endF—i 


..20 


accumulated temperature 
difference over time in 
compartment i (for 1 to m 
compartments) associated 
with defrost and recovery in 
Kh (note that this term may 
be positive or negative) for 
defrost and recovery period j; 


time weighted ^ average 
temperature in compartment ; 
over the period from the start 
of Period D to the end of Period 
F in degrees C (including 
the defrost and recovery 
temperature impacts); 


av-startD-endF-i 


average temperature in 
compartment i that occurs 
during Period D in degrees C; 


av-D-i 


average temperature in 
compartment i that occurs 
during Period F, in degrees C; 
test time at the start of Period, 
D in h; and 


test time at the end of Period 
F inh. 


av-F-i 


— 


"T 


For products with a compressor run time defrost 
controller, the additional compressor run-time 
associated with defrost and recovery period j (over and 
above the steady state run time) (in hours) is calculated 
as follows: 


Rt 


end-F | 


Alyy = (Rt 


start- D ) = 
(ае = Rhea ) + [sun 7 КЕ ьар )] 
pe 7 Гай ) + Ее Е ÍD ) 


x (igs 2” l ан ) 


EA 


additional compressor run time 
associated with defrost and 
recovery period j in h (over and 
above the steady state compressor 
run time that would have occurred); 


20 


total accumulated compressor run 
time (on period) at the start of 
period, D in h; 


Les 


total accumulated compressor run 
time (on period) at the start of 
Period, F in h; 

total accumulated compressor 
run time (on period) at the end of 
Period, D in h; 

total accumulated compressor 
run time (on period) at the end of 
Period, F in h; 

test time at the start of the Period, 
D inh; 

test time at the start of the Period, 
F inh; 

test time at the end of the Period, D 
in h; and 

test time at the end of the Period, 
F inh. 


Care is required not to count defrost heater on time as 
compressor on time in these calculations (although it is 
possible that some controllers include the defrost heater 
operation as run time — each product should be checked 
to see how it is configured). The value of At, could be 
zero or negative for continuously running products. 


— F 


Rt 


end-D 


Rt 


end-F 


Lian 


C-4 NUMBER OF VALID DEFROST AND 


RECOVERY PERIODS 


For Case DF1 and Case DF2 the minimum number 
of valid defrost and recovery periods required for 
each ambient test temperature in order to calculate a 
representative value for defrost and recovery energy 
and temperature change is specified below: 


Option 1: A valid value of AE, shall be determined for 
each temperature control setting used for an energy 
determination on a single appliance in accordance with 
6.8.2 and 6.8.3. The defrost and recovery period selected 
for each temperature control setting shall be adjacent to 
the steady state period used for energy determination in 
Annex B (this may occur before or after the steady state 
period for Case 551; it shall be before the steady state 
period for Case 552). The representative value for ЛЕ, 
for the appliance shall be the average of all valid values 
for test points used for energy determination. 


Option 2: Where there is more extensive data available 
for a particular model (either through longer tests or 
tests on several units of the same model), then the 
representative value for AE, for the appliance shall 
be the average of at least 4 valid values. In this case 
at least 50 percent of all values of AZ, shall have the 
coldest compartment at or below target temperature. 
A separate value for ЛЕ, shall be determined for each 
ambient temperature. 


Option 1 or 2 may be used. 


C-5 CALCULATION OF REPRESENTATIVE 
DEFROST ENERGY AND TEMPERATURE 


Calculations of a representative value for defrost and 
recovery energy and defrost and recovery temperature 
changes are given as follows: 


ЛЕ 
AE, = = - 
m 22 
where, 
АЕ „= representative incremental energy for defrost 


and recovery for the test ambient temperature; 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


m = number of defrost and recovery 
periods specified in C-4; and 
АТ = accumulated temperature difference 


over time for each defrost and 
recovery period / (from 1 to m) in 
compartment i (from 1 to n). 


For products with a compressor run time defrost 
controller, the representative additional compressor 
run-time associated with a defrost and recovery period 
is calculated as follows: 


m — number of valid defrost and recovery periods m ET 
; s А Аһ = 
specified in C-4; and m 24 
AE = incremental energy for each defrost and 
У oak where 
recovery period j (from 1 to m). 
if Лі „= representative additional compressor run-time 
ATh. = m Thy, , associated with a defrost and recovery period 
di m 23 for the test ambient temperature; 
didi m — number of valid defrost and recovery periods 
specified in C-4; and 
ATh,, = representative temperature At = additional compressor run-time associated 
difference for defrost and recovery with defrost and recovery period j (from 1 
in compartment i (from 1 to n) for to m). 
the test ambient temperature; 
ANNEX D 
( Clause 4.4 ) 
( Normative ) 
DEFROST INTERVAL 
D-1 GENERAL c) Variable — the defrost interval is adjusted under 


This Annex specifies the method to be used to determine 
the defrost interval for refrigerating appliances where 
there are one or more defrost control cycles. 


The three main types of defrost controllers are as 
follows: 


a) Elapsed time — The defrost interval is largely 
independent of ambient conditions or the load 
on the refrigeration system. These types are 
less common and the controls for them may be 
mechanical or electronic; 

b) Compressor run time — The defrost interval 

is dependent on the hours of operation of the 

compressor (that is, a proxy for the load in 
the refrigeration system). These are relatively 
common and controllers for these are usually 

mechanical and only operate effectively where a 

single speed compressor is used; and 


21 


normal use by an automatic process that uses an 
operating condition variable (or variables) other 
than, or in addition to, elapsed time or compressor 
run time in order to better match the frost load on 
the evaporator arising from normal use. These types 
are now common and controls for these are usually 
electronic. 
NOTE — A defrost controller that directly measures the 
frost load on the evaporator is classified as a variable defrost 
controller. 
The intent of this Annex is to establish the basis for 
operation of the defrost control and to then determine 
a representative defrost interval for each ambient 
temperature. In the case of compressor run time 
controllers, the defrost interval will also be partly 
affected by the temperature control setting when testing 
at a specified ambient temperature. The value determined 
in accordance with this Annex is then used for 
the determination of energy consumption in accordance 
with 6. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


D-2 COMPRESSOR RUN TIME DEFROST 
CONTROLLERS 


For these controllers, the defrost Interval is defined 
by the compressor run time alone (or in some cases 
compressor run time plus time for defrost heater 
operation). For these controllers, a single speed 
compressor is used. The defrost interval is therefore 
approximately inversely proportional to the total heat 
load on the refrigeration system (ambient temperature 
and user loads). The most common defrost run time 
defrost controllers range from 6 h to 12 h of compressor 
run time (typically this would result in defrost intervals 
of the order of 12 to 30 h (elapsed time) at elevated 
ambient temperatures and somewhat longer at lower 
ambient temperatures). 


If the run time controller is accessible, direct 
measurements may be undertaken in order to determine 
the actual run-time value of the controller. Acceptable 
tests to directly determine the run time defrost controller 
period include: 


a) Direct measurement of the operation of the 
controller in the product (e.g. measurement of 
time that voltage is present); and 


b) Operating the run time controller on the bench 
when removed from the product. 


The value marked on a compressor run time controller 
may not be relevant, for example if a controller is rated 
at 60 Hz and the product operates on 50 Hz. Run time 
controllers of the same rated value can vary, but as 
they are generally a synchronous motor that operates 
on mains frequency, each controller should be very 
consistent once the interval has been determined. 

NOTE — The same timers could be used as used as compressor 

run time controllers or as elapsed time controllers, depending 

on how they are configured in the refrigerating appliance. 
If the run time controller is not accessible (or where it is 
not clear whether the controller is a run time controller) 
or where the laboratory is not able to directly measure 
the controller operation, the value shall be estimated by 
testing as set out below. 


D-2.1 Tests shall be undertaken over a whole defrost 
control cycle, at least one at each ambient temperature, 
in order to verify that it is a run time controller and 
estimate the value of Аг. The period selected shall 
comply with the following requirements: 


a) The first defrost shall qualify as a valid defrost as 
specified in C-3; 
b) The test period shall include at least part of the 


subsequent defrost and recovery period that is 
initiated automatically without any intervention; 


c) The temperature control settings are not changed 
during the test period; and 

d) The appliance is not subjected to any processing 
load or door openings during the test period. 


22 


The estimated run time of the compressor run time 
defrost controller for a given set of test data that 
complies with these requirements is given by: 


At Ағу + At те 2:29 
where 
At = 


7 estimated run time of the compressor run time 


defrost controller for the test period starting 
with defrost and recovery period j in h; 


Ат „= 


measured compressor run time in h from the 


initiation of defrost and recovery period / to 
the initiation of the subsequent defrost and 
recovery period j + 1; and 


if the timer advances during defrost and 
recovery period j, the time in h from when the 
compressor stops until it restarts during that 
defrost and recovery period; otherwise if the 
timer does not advance during the defrost and 
recovery period, a value of zero. 


dhj 


Care is required to determine whether or not the 
compressor run time controller advances while the 
defrost heaterisactivated — this can depend on individual 
product design. If the controller is accessible, this can 
be checked by measuring the voltage at the run time 
controller motor while the defrost heater is activated. 


Irrespective of whether the run time of the compressor 
run time defrost controller is directly measured or 
determined via a whole product test, some additional 
testing should be undertaken at other ambient 
temperatures and/or temperature control settings. 
During these tests the refrigerating appliance may 
be subjected to some user-related loads such as door 
openings and small processing loads during these tests. 
The observed defrost interval should be consistent with 
the measured run time, otherwise, it shall be classified 
as a variable defrost controller. 

NOTE — These tests are to detect whether the run time 

controller is over-ridden by some other control mechanism 

during normal use conditions. 
Where the value of the run time of the compressor 
run time defrost controller is directly measured, the 
measured value of At, shall be used in subsequent 
calculations. 


Otherwise, to qualify as a compressor run time defrost 
controller, the coefficient of variation (standard 
deviation divided by the mean) of the estimated 
values for compressor run time Aż shall be less than 
10 percent for the defrost intervals examined. Where 
the product does not comply with this requirement, 
it shall be classified as a variable defrost controller. 
Where the run time is estimated, the value of Az, used 
in subsequent calculations shall be the average of all 
measured values. 


Once confirmed, this value can be used to calculate 
the actual defrost interval for any temperature control 


setting, ambient temperature and load processing 
condition, as a function of the compressor run time. For 
all refrigerating appliances with compressor run time 
defrost controllers, the percentage run time shall be 
reported for steady state conditions in Annex B and the 
extra compressor run time (in hours) shall be calculated 
for defrost and recovery periods (in Annex O). 


The defrost interval for each test condition and 
temperature control setting is given by: 


_ At, Аі Atn 


At 
ш СЁ 


+At 


dxy 


..26 


where 


At 


i estimated defrost interval (elapsed 


time) for each temperature control 
setting and ambient temperature under 
test in hours, including the impact of 
defrost and recovery; 


At. stated, measured or estimated run time 
of the compressor run time defrost 


controller (in hours); 


CRt compressor run time (as a percentage) 
during the steady state operation for 
each temperature control setting and 
ambient temperature under test as 


determined in B-3.3 or B-4.3; 


representative incremental compressor 
run time (in hours) for defrost and 
recovery in accordance with Annex C 
(see C-5); 


representative defrost heater on time in 
h during a defrost and recovery period 
where the timer advances when the 
defrost heater is operating, otherwise 
a value of zero; and 


SS 


At 


dr 


At 


dh 


At 


d equal to Az, where this is greater 


than zero, otherwise a representative 
compressor off time during a defrost 
and recovery period. 


D-3 VARIABLE DEFROST CONTROLLERS 


D-3.1 General 


For this type of controller, the defrost interval is varied 
in proportion to the frost load on the evaporator. 
Most systems do not measure the frost load on the 
evaporator directly (but this is possible), so these types 
of systems are usually controlled by software which 
uses a number of parameters to indirectly estimate the 
frost load and adjust the defrost interval progressively. 
After the operation of the defrost heater, the system 
looks backwards at the relevant parameters during 
the previous usage period and adjusts the next defrost 
interval, if required, to optimise it and hence minimise 


23 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


the extra energy associated with defrosting. The product 
therefore may go through a learning sequence during 
test which progressively adjusts the defrost interval. 


The intent of D-3 is to estimate a representative 
defrost interval during normal use based on a range of 
parameters declared by the supplier. 


Variable defrost controls should have available a 
range of possible defrost intervals that reflect the frost 
build up on the evaporator. If the defrost interval is 
consistently too short, energy is wasted. If the defrost 
interval is too long, the system may have increased 
energy consumption due to the poor heat transfer on 
the frosted-up evaporator and may even have problems 
removing all frost from the evaporator, leading to long 
term ice accumulation and performance degradation. 


For a product to qualify as variable defrost under 
this standard, the defrost interval shall vary over a 
continuum of values (or a significant number of steps, 
appropriately spaced) that reflect the frost load on 
the evaporator when subjected to a range of actions 
associated with normal use, subject to any learning 
period for the variable defrost controller. 


Variable defrost is a defined term in this standard. 
Products with defrost controls that exhibit significantly 
different characteristics during normal use from those 
exhibited under comparable test conditions may be 
considered to have circumvention devices. 


D-3.2 Variable Defrost Controllers — Declared 
Defrost Intervals 


For the purposes of this standard, the defrost interval 
for these types of controllers is based on a calculation, 
which is a function of the declared shortest possible 
defrost interval and the declared longest possible 
defrost interval at an ambient temperature of 32 ?C. 


The defrost interval for a variable defrost system is 
given by: 


A Í sax ~ A Ta. min 


Айы = 
0.2x(At — Af, „у АЁ oni 
[ ( d—max а-тіп ) d-min ] : (27) 
where 
Alis; = defrost interval for an ambient 
temperature of 32 °C; 
tim Z maximum possible defrost interval 
at an ambient temperature of 32 °C 
as specified by the manufacturer, in 
hours of elapsed time; and 
Li, Z minimum possible defrost interval 


at an ambient temperature of 32 °C 
as specified by the manufacturer, in 
hours of elapsed time. 


The following limits are placed on the input variable 
At, and At irrespective of instructions: 


d-max d-min? 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


1) Atu 15 normally greater than 6 h and shall 
not exceed 12 h at an ambient temperature of 
32 °C (elapsed time); and 

2) At, a Shall not exceed 96 h at an ambient 
temperature of 32 ?C (elapsed time). 


Af,,, Shall be greater than Af 
temperature of 32 ?C. 


at an ambient 


d-min 


The basis for the claim of the minimum possible defrost 
interval At... shall be the shortest conceivable defrost 
interval under heavy usage conditions (i.e. heavy 
use, frequent door openings and high humidity) at 
an ambient temperature of 32 °C. Tests under heavy 
usage conditions to verify the claimed value may be 
undertaken. The value claimed for the maximum 
possible defrost interval Ar, shall be achievable under 
test conditions with all compartment temperatures at 
or below target temperatures in steady state 
(see Annex B) at an ambient temperature of 32 ?C. 
Manufacturers shall specify any special conditions 
required to achieve the claimed value. 


D-3.3 Variable Defrost Controllers — No Declared 
Defrost Intervals (Demand Defrost) 


Where a system is variable defrost but where no values 
for АТ капа А? „сап be declared by the manufacturer 
because the defrost controller has a form of demand 
defrost that directly measures the frost thickness on the 
evaporator, the default values are: 


а) Af mn = 6 h at an ambient temperature of 32 °C 
(elapsed time); and 


b) At... 96 h at an ambient temperature of 32 °C 
(elapsed time). 


This gives a default value for Az... of 24 h in equation 
27 and D-4.2 for variable defrost controllers that are of 
the demand defrost type. 

NOTE — This calculation procedure is used even though the 

system initiates a defrost solely on the amount of frost built up 

on the evaporator (rather than the use of a timing algorithm). 
To qualify as a demand, defrost system, the defrost 
controller shall operate over a continuum of defrost 
intervals in response to changes in the frost load. To 
qualify for the use of these values, suppliers may be 
asked to supply technical information on how the 
demand defrost system operates. 


D-3.4 Variable Defrost Controllers - Non-Compliant 


Where a system is nominally variable defrost but 
where: 


a) no values for Az, and Af mn have been 
provided/stated by the manufacturer and there is 
no evidence that the controller is demand defrost; 

b) a product does not comply with the requirements 

for a variable defrost controller because it does 

not operate over a continuum of defrost intervals 

(or does not have a significant number of steps, 

appropriately spaced); or 

the declared values are found to be inconsistent 

with tested values. 


c) 


In this case the value for Ага; shall be as follows: 


At ao 15 the average of 3 observed defrost intervals at an 
ambient temperature of 32 °C with not more than one 


door opening per hour, but not exceeding 10.0 h. 


ANNEX E 
( Clauses 4.5, 6.8.3, and 6.8.5 ) 


( Normative ) 


INTERPOLATION OF RESULTS 


E-1 GENERAL 


This Annex specifies the methods that shall be used 
where two or more results are interpolated in order to 
estimate a more optimum value of energy consumption 
that would occur if all the compartments had been at or 
below the target temperatures specified in 6. 
NOTE — Interpolation is optional under this standard. A valid 
value for energy consumption can be determined from a single 
test run with all compartments at or below the specified target 
temperatures as specified in 6.3 a). 
Two cases for interpolation are permitted in this 
standard: 


24 


a) Case 1: linear interpolation between two test 
points, generally where опе user-adjustable 
temperature control is adjusted (more than one 
control may be adjusted, but in this case there are 
special checks as set out in E-3); and 

b) Case 2: triangulation using three (or more) test 
points, where two (or more) user-adjustable 
temperature controls are adjusted. 


Both Case 1 and Case 2 have validity requirements 
associated with them. 


The objective of interpolation is to estimate the most 
optimum energy consumption using the information 


from the test points selected for analysis (the measured 
energy and compartment temperatures). Where there are 
additional controls that are not used for interpolation, 
then it may be possible that the resulting estimate of 
energy consumption may not be the most optimum 
possible. As a general recommendation, user-adjustable 
temperature controls that affect the compartments with 
the largest volume or the compartment that is the coldest 
should be used for interpolation in order to obtain the 
most optimum value for energy consumption (the 
temperature of the largest or coldest compartment tends 
to dominate the energy consumption). Where there are 
two or more user-adjustable temperature controls that 
affect two or more compartments, triangulation under 
Case 2 will generally provide a more optimum estimate 
of energy consumption than linear interpolation under 
Case 1. 


Special conditions apply to the use of both Case 1 and 
Case 2. These are specified in E-3 and E-4 respectively. 
Extrapolation to estimate energy values at the target 
temperature where that point does not lie between or 
enclose the test points selected is not permitted. 


Where interpolation is used, the following additional 
information shall be reported: 


a) Where results have been measured at two 
temperature control settings for interpolation in 
accordance with E-3, the compartment that is 
used for interpolation (where interpolation gives 
a valid result) and the energy-temperature slope of 
that compartment S; as defined in E-3.3; 

b) Where results ofa product with two user-adjustable 

temperature controls have been measured at three 

temperature control setting combinations for 
interpolation in accordance with E-4, the value of 
the coefficients Е, A and В (or equivalent); and 


Where results of а product with three 
user-adjustable temperature controls have been 
measured at four temperature control setting 
combinations for interpolation in accordance 
with E-4, the value of the coefficients E, 4, В 
and C. 


с) 


Е-2 TEMPERATURE ADJUSTMENT PRIOR 
TO INTERPOLATION 


Where a refrigerating appliance has one or more defrost 
systems (each with its own defrost control cycle), the 
average compartment temperature shall be determined 
in accordance with equation 3 taking into account the 
impact of all defrost systems, prior to interpolation. 


Calculate the daily energy consumption and average 
temperature in each compartment as set out in 6.8.2 for 
each test point. These resulting values are then used in 
the interpolation between test points. 


25 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


E-3 CASE 1: LINEAR INTERPOLATION - 
TWO TEST POINTS 


E-3.1 General 


This clause sets out the method for determining a value 
of energy consumption of a refrigerating appliance by 
interpolation between the results of two test runs where 
the setting of one or more user-adjustable temperature 
controls are adjusted. The controls adjusted may affect 
the temperatures of several compartments at the same 
time, so each possible combination shall be checked for 
validity. Interpolation is performed mathematically. 


The value determined by this method is an 
approximation of the value that would be obtained 
when the control(s) concerned is (are) adjusted to a 
setting that brings the temperatures of the compartments 
affected as close as possible to, while not above, the 
specified target temperatures for the compartment types 
for all compartments. Where the temperature in several 
compartments change together, the point selected for 
interpolation is where the first one reaches its target 
temperature (moving from colder to warmer settings). 


E-3.2 Requirements 


Linear interpolation using results for only two test runs 
may be undertaken where at least one compartment has 
one test point with a measured temperature that lies 
above the relevant target temperature while the other 
test point lies below the relevant target temperature. 
During the process of interpolation for two test runs, the 
temperature in all compartments is calculated as each 
compartment, in turn, is set to its target temperature. 
For interpolation to be valid, all compartments shall 
be at or below the target temperature at the point of 
interpolation. 


For linear interpolation to be valid, the temperature 
difference between test runs in each compartment used 
for interpolation shall not exceed 4 K. 


For linear interpolation, there are in principle no 
specific requirements to the relative position of the 
test points used for interpolation. In all cases, the point 
of interpolation shall lie between the two measured 
values for all parameters (energy and temperature). 
Extrapolation is not permitted under any circumstances. 
This means that not all combinations of two test points 
may provide a valid interpolation result. It is therefore 
good and prudent practice to select one test point with 
all compartments below their target temperature. This 
will ensure a valid result for linear interpolation where a 
second point is selected with at least some compartments 
temperatures above their target temperature. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


E-3.3 Calculations 


The general approach used for this method of 
interpolation is to interpolate each compartment at its 
target temperature and then to calculate the temperature 
at that point in all the remaining compartments. This 
process is then applied in turn to each additional 
compartment. The results when each compartment 
is at its target temperature are then reviewed and 
valid interpolation points can be selected where all 
compartments are at or below the target temperature 
for the particular interpolation point. 


It is useful to plot the interpolation procedure to better 
understand the calculation approach. An example is 
shown in Fig. 6 for a cabinet with four compartments 
with a single result. Fig. 7 illustrates an example with 
two valid values for interpolation while Fig. 8 illustrates 
an example with no valid values for interpolation. 


The following calculation process shall be performed 
for each compartment i, where i runs from letter A, B, 
C etc. to n and n is the number of compartments for test 
Points | and 2: 


a) Check that ABS(7,, — T.) is 4 K or less. Where 
this condition is not met, linear interpolation is not 
permitted on this compartment (points may still 
be used if both 7, and 7, are below their target 
temperature); 

b) Calculate the compartment interpolation factor 
f, for each compartment as follows: 


f = (Т =i) 
(7, =) ...28 
where 
T = measured temperature at test Point 1 in 
compartment i; 
T,= measured temperature at test Point 2 in 


compartment i; and 


— target temperature for compartment type i as 
set out in Table 1. 


i-tar 


In the case f; is less than 0 or where f; greater than 1, 
no valid interpolation on compartment i is possible 
with the combination of test Point 1 and 2. Another 
combination of test points may be required if 7, and 7, 
are not both below their target temperature. 


c) Calculate for each of the other compartments 
1 to j (from letter A, B, C to n) the interpolated 
temperature 7, where compartment i is at its target 
temperature by: 


poT AXES 10 ...29 
уућеге 
T = interpolated temperature in compartment j 
when compartment i is at target; 
T. — measured temperature at test Point 1 in 


compartment /; 


26 


Tu measured temperature at test Point 2 in 
compartment /; and 
J= for 


compartment factor 


compartment ; 


d) If all T values (from letter A, B, C to n) are 
at or below their respective target values 
(T < T...) then calculate the interpolated energy 
consumption where compartment i is at its target 
temperature by: 


E. SE +f (E,- E) ...30 


i-tar 


interpolation 


where 


= interpolated energy consumption from test 
Points 1 and 2 when compartment 2 is at its 
target temperature; 


measured energy consumption at test Point 1 
(temperature control setting combination 1); 


measured energy consumption at test Point 2 
(temperature control setting combination 2); 
and 


compartment factor for 


compartment 7. 


Í = interpolation 
After completion of the previous procedure for each 
compartment i there are three possibilities: 


1) For none of the compartments, a valid 
interpolated energy consumption has been 
calculated. This means that Point 1 and 2 do 
not form a valid combination for interpolation 
and another combination of test points needs 
to be measured; 


2) There is one valid interpolated energy 
consumption value found. This value represents 
the interpolated energy consumption; and 


3) There are two or more valid interpolated energy 
consumption values found. The minimum 
value of these represents the interpolated 
energy consumption: 


= min[E,,, ] 


m 2.31 


Е 


linear 


= energy consumption determined by linear 
interpolation; and 


= interpolated energy consumption for 
compartment і as given above (invalid 
values are ignored) 


NOTE 1 — Where one point has all compartments below their 
target temperature and the second point has all compartments 
above their target temperature, there can only be a single 
solution (possibility (b) above). Two solutions can occur, for 
example, when one point has compartment A below its target 
temperature and compartment B is above its target temperature, 
and where the second point has compartment A above its 
target and compartment B is below its target. The case of two 
(or more) valid solutions for linear interpolation of two points 
is relatively unusual. See examples in Annex J for a range of 
cases. 


Where a valid value for interpolation Ё „18 found 
using the above method, the following additional 
information shall be reported with the interpolated 
energy value: 


i) The compartment ; that is used to give a 
valid value for £, and E... ; and 

ii) The energy-temperature slope S, of that 
compartment as given below. 
5 = (E, -E) 


2-1 232 


NOTE — The value of S; is normally negative, but this depends 


on the arrangement of test Points 1 and 2. 


E-4 CASE 2: TRIANGULATION - THREE (OR 
MORE) TEST POINTS 


E-4.1 General 


This clause sets out the method for determining a more 
optimum value of energy consumption ofa refrigerating 
appliance by interpolation using triangulation of three 


= T 
z 5 
т D - tar 
20 
ЕБ 
55 
5а Tc -tar 
z 
== 
Ф 
< < 
a 
ез 
DO ТВ -tar 
F a 
ga 
ш < 
n. 
= ТА tar 
к 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


(or more) test runs where the setting of two or more 
user-adjustable temperature controls are adjusted. 
The controls adjusted may affect the temperatures of 
several compartments, so each possible combination 
shall be checked for validity. Interpolation is performed 
mathematically. 


The principle is that the three test points selected shall 
surround the intersection of the target temperature 
locus for both compartments being examined, called 
Point Q, which is the point where the optimum 
energy consumption will be obtained (for the two 
compartments in question). An estimate of the energy 
consumption at Point Q is obtained by a series of linear 
interpolations. 


The value determined by this method is an 
approximation of the value that would be obtained 
when the two compartments concerned are adjusted to a 
setting that brings the temperatures of the compartments 
affected as close as possible to, while not above, the 
specified target temperatures for the compartment types 
(at Point Q). 


E, E благ E b -tar E A -tar E D -tar E; 


MEASURED ENERGY CONSUMPTION 


FIG. 6 INTERPOLATION WHERE TEMPERATURES CHANGE 
IN MULTIPLE COMPARTMENTS (COMPARTMENT D CRITICAL) 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


TEMPERATURE IN 
COMPARTMENTS А,В AS INDICATED 


Тв 


-tar 


TA 


-tar 


E 2 E B-tar E A-tar E 1 
MEASURED ENERGY CONSUMPTION 


Fic. 7 INTERPOLATION WITH VALID RESULTS IN BOTH COMPARTMENT A AND B 


B-tar 


A-tar 


TEMPERATURE IN COMPARTMENTS 
A, B, AS INDICATED 


E> Ea tar E B.tar E: 


MEASURED ENERGY CONSUMPTION 


Fic. 8 INTERPOLATION WITH NO VALID RESULTS 


28 


Multi-dimensional triangulation can be performed on 
three or more compartments in a similar fashion, but 
the mathematics using manual interpolation (as set 
out in E-4.3) is complicated and is not documented in 
this standard. However, three or more compartments 
can be interpolated using matrices as set out in E-4.6. 
Generally, the improvement of the estimate of optimum 
energy is only small where three or four compartments 
are interpolated as the energy impact of smaller 
compartments usually becomes very small. The likely 
small improvements in optimum energy have to be 
weighed against the significant marginal cost obtaining 
4 or 5 complying and suitable energy test points (which 
are required for interpolation on 3 and 4 compartments 
with independent user-adjustable temperature controls 
respectively). 


E-4.2 Requirements for Two (or More) Compartment 
Triangulation 


E-4.2.1 General Requirements 


The temperature in each compartment used in 
interpolation shall Пе within the range Т +4 K for all 


temperature control setting combinations selected. 


E-4.2.2 Triangulation for a Refrigerating Appliance 
with Two Compartments 


The requirements for interpolation using triangulation 
on arefrigerating appliance with only two compartments 
(Case 2-0) are as follows: 


a) The refrigerating appliance shall have two 
user-adjustable temperature controls that affect the 
temperature in two compartments; 

b) There shall be a minimum of three energy 

consumption measurements (test points) at three 

combinations of the temperature control settings 
being adjusted; and 

c) The test points selected for analysis shall form 

a triangle which encloses the intersection of the 

target temperatures for those two compartments 

(see Fig. 9, Point Q, equation 33). 

Where these conditions are met, triangulation in 

accordance with E-4.3 or E-4.4 shall be undertaken. 


To verify that Point Q lies inside the triangle enclose by 
the three test points, the following values Check/ and 
Check2 are calculated: 


Check] = — = Ta )* (Та MN 
(Пе -Tu )x (Toz — Ta) 
| и -1,)х(Т,, 2. 
(Ты -Tya )* (Tos zt 


29 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ЕН = Па Ја ha 
Check2 = x 
(T. a EL p EU 
[ou -Т,)х(Т,, -Т,)- 
(T. -Т,,)х(Т, -T,;) 
Where 
T,,= measured temperature at test Point 1 in 
Compartment A; 
T,,= measured temperature at test Point 2 in 
Compartment A; 
T = measured temperature at test Point 3 in 
Compartment A; 
‘tar target temperature for Compartment А; 
Та = measured temperature at test Point 1 in 
Compartment B; 
Т,,- measured temperature at test Point 2 in 
Compartment B; 
Т,,- measured temperature at test Point 3 in 
Compartment B; and 
vaa target temperature for Compartment В. 


Point Q lies within the triangle formed by Points 1, 2 
and 3 if the following inequality is true: 


IF ([Check1 > 0] AND [Check2 > 0]} = TRUE 
..33 


NOTE — This verification procedure is based on the 
Barycentric coordinate system. It is recommended that these 
equations be entered into a spreadsheet for regular use to avoid 
errors. A value of 0 for Check] or Check2 indicates that the 
Point Q lies exactly on one of the triangle sides and that linear 
interpolation could yield the same result with less data. 
Plotting the test values with the two compartment 
temperatures on the orthogonal axes is recommended 
and is a useful way of quickly checking that the target 
temperature (Point Q) is within the triangle formed 
by the three test points. Where any doubt exists, the 
mathematical validity set out in equation 33 takes 
precedence over any graphical verification procedure. 


NOTE — Calculation of values for Point 4 is only required in 
the case of manual interpolation on 2 compartments. 


E-4.2.3 Triangulation for a Refrigerating Appliance 
with more than Two Compartments 


Where there are more than two compartments in a 
refrigerating appliance, there are several possible cases 
that may apply, depending on the product configuration, 
the temperature control setting combinations selected 
and the data available. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ENERGY CONSUMPTION RATE 


COMPARTMENT B TEMPERATURE 


COMPARTMENT A TEMPERATURE 


NOTE — Calculation of values for point 4 is only required in the case of manual interpolation on 2 compartments. 


Fic. 9 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF INTERPOLATION BY TRIANGULATION 


Case 2-0: Three test points, triangulation on two 
compartments 


See E-4.2.2. 


Case 2-1: Three test points, triangulation on two 
compartments, additional compartments always below 
target temperature 


Where three test points have been selected such that two 
of the compartments meet the requirements of E-4.2.2 
and the temperature of all additional compartments 
remain at or below target temperature for all three test 
points, then triangulation in accordance with E-4.2.2 
shall be used and no further checks are required. 


30 


Case 2-2: Three test points, triangulation on two 
compartments, additional compartments not always 
below target temperature 


Where three test points have been selected such that 
two of the compartments meet the requirements of 
E-4.2.2 but the temperature of one or more additional 
compartments does not remain below target temperature 
for all three test points, then the following procedure 
shall be undertaken: 


a) There shall be three energy consumption 
measurements (test points) at three combinations 
of the temperature control settings being adjusted; 
and 


b) The test points for the compartments selected 
for triangulation shall form a triangle which 
encloses the intersection of the target temperatures 
(see Fig. 9, Point Q, equation 33); and 

c) Triangulation of the compartments selected shall 

be in accordance with E-4.4; and 

d) The calculated temperature of all additional 

compartments at Point Q are at or below their 

relevant target temperature as specified in E-4.5 

(the temperature in Compartment C, D etc is 

calculated at Point Q and checked). 


Where the above requirements are not met, the 
following options may yield complying results from 
the available data: 


e) Select different compartment combinations 
for triangulation and check that the calculated 
temperature of all additional compartments at 
Point Q are at or below target temperature in 
accordance with a) to d) above; or 


Undertake additional testing to obtain more 
test data that complies with the requirements of 
Case 2-1 or Case 2-2; or 


Undertake linear interpolation in accordance 
with E-3 for each pair of test points. Where more 
than one valid result can be obtained using this 
approach, the minimum value may be selected. 
While linear interpolation may yield a valid result, 
this may not be close to the optimum energy 
(depending on the available data). 


g) 


Case 2-3: Four test points, triangulation on three 
compartments, no additional compartment(s) or 
additional compartment(s) always below target. 


Where four test points have been selected such that 
three compartments meet the following requirements: 


h) The refrigerating appliance shall have three 
user-adjustable temperature controls that affect the 
temperature in three or more compartments; and 


There shall be four energy consumption 
measurements (test points) at four combinations 
of the temperature control settings being adjusted; 
and 


j 


k) The test points selected for analysis shall form 
a three dimensional triangular pyramid which 
encloses the intersection of the target temperatures 
for those three compartments); and 

m) Triangulation shall be performed using matrices 
as set out in E-4.6. 


Case 2-4: Four test points, triangulation on three 
compartments, additional compartment(s) not always 
below target 


Where four test points have been selected such that 
three compartments meet the following requirements: 


31 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


n) The refrigerating appliance shall have three 
user-adjustable temperature controls that affect the 
temperature in three or more compartments; and 


There shall be four energy consumption 
measurements (test points) at four combinations 
of the temperature control settings being adjusted; 
and 


p) 


The test points selected for analysis shall form 
a three-dimensional triangular pyramid which 
encloses the intersection ofthe target temperatures 
for those three compartments; and 


q) 


The calculated temperature of all additional 
compartments at Point Q are at or below their 
relevant target temperature as specified in E-4.6 
(the temperature in Compartment D, E etc. is 
calculated at Point Q and checked); and 
Triangulation shall be performed using matrices 
as set out in E-4.6. 


E-4.3 Calculations for Two Compartment 
Triangulation — Manual Interpolation 


s) 


The approach used for this method is to undertake a 
series of linear interpolations to estimate the energy 
consumption at Point Q, where both compartments are 
at their target temperatures for energy consumption 
(Т) as specified in Table 1. Test Points 1, 2 and 3 used 
for these calculations shall surround the intersection 
of the target temperatures (T) for each compartment, 
called Point Q. 


An alternative approach using matrices is set out in 
E-4.4. This does not require the calculation of values 
for Point 4. 


ar 


Three steps are manually undertaken in this process: 


a) Step 1: Calculate the temperature of a new Point 
4, which lies at the intersection of the line through 
Point 2 and Point Q and the line from Point 1 and 
Point 3; 


Step 2: Calculate the energy consumption at Point 
4 by linear interpolation of energy between Point 
1 and Point 3 (temperatures in compartment A or 
B may be used — compartment A has been used in 
the equations below); and 


b) 


Step 3: Calculate the energy consumption at Point 
Q by linear interpolation of energy between Point 
4 and Point 2 (temperatures in compartment A or 
B may be used — compartment A has been used in 
the equations below). 


The calculations for these three steps are set out below. 


The terms used in the following formulae are: 


T. 


tar target temperature in compartment ; 


(temperature at Point Q) 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


temperature of Point 1 in compartment ; 
(measured value) 


T. temperature of Point 2 in compartment i 
(measured value) 


T. temperature of Point 3 in compartment ; 
(measured value) 


Т. temperature of Point 4 in compartment ; 
(calculated value) 


E energy consumption measures at Point 1 
(measured value) 


Е, energy consumption measures at Point 2 
(measured value) 


E. energy consumption measures at Point 3 
(measured value) 


E energy consumption measures at Point 4 
(calculated value) 


Step 1 


For two compartments A and B, the calculated 
temperature at Point 4 in compartment A is: 


T, _Х(ћ, –1, 
EE 
Ta X(Ta - T5) 
(£714) 
(=) (7, 
(=) (T, 


Тат 


Т 


А a) 


Ta ) 


2- 
= 
...34 


Care is required if undertaking this calculation by 
hand. It is recommended to enter these equations into 
a spreadsheet. The spreadsheet can then be checked 
using the examples in Annex J before use on test data. 
Normally, equation 33 or a graphical approach is used 
to check that Point Q lies within the triangle formed by 
Points 1,2 and 3. An alternative for manual interpolation 
check is to ensure that the target temperature T4 tar lies 
between T,, and Т, plus Т,, lies between Т, and 7,.. 
Mathematically, this is represented by: 


Ta > T ge = Ta or 
Ta i ven = To 
and 
Ta Е Т,, = Т,, ог 
Ta а Ta > Т,, 
Step 2 


The calculated energy consumption at Point 4 using 
temperature data for Point 4 calculated in Step 1 and test 
Points 1 and 3 is determined as follows (compartment 
A temperatures are used): 


(Га - T4) 35 
Step 3 


The calculated energy consumption at the target 
temperature using temperature and energy data for 
Point 4 (calculated in Steps 1 and 2) and test Point 2 
is determined as follows (compartment A temperatures 
are used): 


T, 


A-tar | 


TaT) _ 36 


E pa IS the energy consumption at the target temperature 


of compartments A and B using triangulation. 


Eg te = E, +(Е, ку 


Тһе order of compartments А and В does not affect (һе 
calculations. Examples are set out in Annex J. 


E-4.4 Calculations for 
Triangulation — Matrices 


Two Compartment 


A more efficient mathematical approach to determine 
the optimum energy consumption using interpolation 
for 3 test points in E-4.3 (manual triangulation) is 
by the use of matrices. This allows a fast solution 
and the approach automatically determines the 
energy — temperature coefficients for each compartment 
(that is, the energy impact per degree K internal 
temperature change for each compartment, yielding 
more useful information). This approach can also be 
used to solve multi-dimensional interpolation for three 
or more compartments as set out in E-4.6. 


The first step is to confirm that the data meets 
the validity requirements for triangulation ie. the 
intersection of target temperatures for Compartment A 
and Compartment B (Point Q) lies within the triangle 
formed by test Points 1, 2 and 3. This is done using 
equation 33 as set out in E-4.2.2. 


The basic premise for using matrices for triangulation 
on two compartments is to assume that we have 3 
simultaneous equations to describe the 3 test points as 
follows: 

Е,тахт, S HT E, 
E, 4 % T, ! Вх Та E, 


E,+tAXT,,+ BX T, = Е, 


where 
Т, = temperature in compartment A for test point k 
(1 to 3); 
T, = temperature in compartment B for test point k 
(1 to 3); 
E = energy consumption for test point К (1 to 3); 
E = a constant value for the refrigerating appliance 


at the ambient test temperature (in theory 
this is the energy consumption when both 


compartments are at 0 °C, but in practice this is 
not normally possible to achieve nor accurate) 
— variable to be solved; 


a constant value for the refrigerating appliance 
at the ambient test temperature that provides 
an estimate of the influence of the temperature 
in compartment À on the energy consumption 
— variable to be solved; and 


a constant value for the refrigerating appliance 
at the ambient test temperature that provides 
an estimate of the influence of the temperature 
in compartment B on the energy consumption 
— variable to be solved. 


These values can be organised into a matrices as 
follows: 


[M,,] x [C,,] = [E] Жоо, 
where 
[M,,] = a 3 x 3 matrix of value of “1” (constant), 
T, and T, for each test point; 
[C,,] = a3 x 1 matrix of E,, А and B (constants to 


be solved); and 
[E,,]= a3 x 1 matrix of E, E, and E, 
In longhand this is set out as follows: 


1 Ta Т, E, E, 
1 T, T, |x| А|=|Е, 
1 Ta T| |B| LED 


To solve for the unknown constants matrix [C,,], find 
the solution to the matrix multiplication 


[Ms] * [E,] = [C] 


The inverse ofa 3 x 3 matrix can be readily programmed 
into most spreadsheets. Solving for constants A, B and 
Ep allows the energy consumption to be estimated for 
any compartment temperatures (with the proviso that 
the temperature combination lies inside the triangle). 
For the target temperature in compartment A and 
compartment B the energy consumption is given as: 


Egas Eo AX Та + BX T, 


AB-tar B-tar 


E-4.5 Checking Temperature Validity where there 
are more than Two Compartments for Triangulation 


Where a refrigerating appliance has more than two 
compartments as specified in E-4.2.3 Case 2-2 (where 
the temperature of at least one of the additional 
compartments is above its target temperature for at 
least one of the 3 test points), the temperature of these 
additional compartments at the point of interpolation 
shall be checked for validity prior to the calculation of 
energy consumption. 


The validity of the points selected for Compartments 
A and B selected for triangulation shall be checked as 
specified in E-4.2.2 equation 33 (that is, that points 
surround Q). 


33 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


The approach shall use matrices for triangulation on 
the primary two Compartments A and B to estimate 
the temperature in each additional compartment at the 
point of interpolation (Point Q). For the first additional 
compartment (Compartment C) the 3 simultaneous 
equations to describe the 3 test points are as follows: 


Ке + Lex Tat M, ^5 Tol = Toi 


K, = Le ^ Ta * Ме x T, Е То 
K, B Le ^ Ta Ж M. x Ts = То 
where 
T temperature in Compartment A for test point k 
(1 to 3); 
T, = temperature in Compartment B for test point k 
(1 to 3); and 
T. = temperature in Compartment C for test point k 
(1 to 3). 


К, L. and M, are constants to be estimated for 
Compartment C. 


[M,,] IO ]= IT 2139 


C3 il 
where 


[M,,] is a3 x 3 matrix of value of “1” (constant), 
Т, and Т, for each test point; 


[Ca] is a 3 x 1 matrix of constants for 
Compartment C — К, Lo and M, (constants 
to be solved); and 

[Те] isa3 x 1 matrix of Т, Т, and 7... 

In longhand this is set out as follows: 
1 Т, Т, Ke Ta 
1 T, Тр» x Le m Tez 
1 Та Т, M. То; 


То solve Юг the unknown constants matrix [С 
the solution to the matrix multiplication: 


Ш.Л [To] = [C 


231 сз] 


1, find 


The temperature in Compartment C is calculated 
when Compartment A and Compartment B are at their 
respective target temperatures as follows: 

Tox = Ке + Le ^ Tyas + М; 2 T 


B-tar 
For triangulation on Compartment A and Compartment 
B to be valid, the following requirement shall be met: 


Tog Теа 
Where there are more than 3 compartments 


(Compartments A, B, and C), the values for each 
additional compartment (Compartment D, E, F etc. as 
applicable) are substituted for Compartment C in the 
above equations and specific values for K, L, and M for 
each additional compartment are calculated. 


For triangulation on Compartment A and Compartment 
B to be valid, the temperature in each additional 
compartment (Compartment C, D, E, F etc.) shall be 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


at or below their respective target temperatures when 
Compartment A and Compartment B are at their 
respective target temperatures. 
NOTE — It is only necessary to perform checks on 
compartments that have a measured temperature that is above 
its target temperature for one or two of the three test points. 
Compartments that are above their target temperature for all 
three test points will never give a valid result. 


E-4.6 Calculations for Three 
Triangulation — Matrices 


Compartment 


The approach with matrices can be readily expanded to 
cover three-dimensional triangulation as well. Where 
temperatures in n compartments are simultaneously 
interpolated, there shall be п + 1 test points that surround 
the intersection of all relevant target temperatures for 
each compartment in n dimensional space. 


Where arefrigerating appliance has three compartments 
and four test points obtained from four temperature 
control setting combinations as specified in E-4.2.3 
Case 2-3, analysis shall be undertaken using matrices. 
This approach also applies where all additional 
compartments are at or below their target temperature 
for all four test points (additional compartments can be 
ignored in this case). 


For three compartments, the test data required would 
be: 


ЕРИКА ВЕЛ Са“ 
лар ығы ағыл аты” 
E TAx Ta “акы CRT. 5E, 
E TAxX T, T Bx Ta UST = E, 


temperature in compartment A for test point k 
(1 to 4); 


temperature in compartment B for test point k 
(1 to 4); 


temperature in compartment C for test point k 
(1 to 4); and 


energy consumption for test point k (1 to 4); 


a constant value for the refrigerating appliance 
at the ambient test temperature (in theory 
this is the energy consumption when all three 
compartments are at 0 °C, but in practice this is 
not normally possible to achieve nor accurate) 
— variable to be solved; 


A= a constant value for the refrigerating 
appliance at the ambient test temperature that 
provides an estimate of the influence of the 
temperature in compartment A on the energy 
consumption — variable to be solved; 


B= a constant value for the refrigerating 
appliance at the ambient test temperature that 
provides an estimate of the influence of the 
temperature in compartment B on the energy 
consumption — variable to be solved; and 


С= a constant value for the  refrigerating 
appliance at the ambient test temperature that 
provides an estimate of the influence of the 
temperature in compartment C on the energy 
consumption — variable to be solved. 


These values can be organised into matrices as follows: 
[M] * [C = TE] ...39 


[M,,] is a 4 x 4 matrix of 1 (constant), 7,, Т, and Т. for 
each test point 


[C,,] isa 4 x 1 matrix of Eo, А, B and C (constants to be 
solved) 

[E] isa 4 x 1 matrix of Ej, E», Es and Ец. 

Solving for constants 4, B, C and Е, allows the energy 
consumption to be estimated for any compartment 
temperatures (with the proviso that the temperature 
combination lies inside the triangular prism). For the 
target temperature in compartment A, compartment B 
and compartment C the energy consumption is given 
as: 


E =E AX Т, BIg CSI 


ABC-tar C-tar 
Checks are required to ensure that all 4 points fully 
surround the Point Q in three-dimensional space. The 
approach below sets out a mathematical way to confirm 
that the data is valid. 


Firstly, we define the 4 vertices of the tetrahedron in 


three-dimensional space as a function of the 4 sets of 


temperature measurements as follows: 
Уепех1-7,,7,,7, 


Уегех2-7,,7,,17,, 
Уепех3-17,,7,,7,, 


АЗ? > ВЗ? 
Vertex 4= Т, Тар Te, 


We want to check that Point О (in this case, T, о» 
Тр дар TC-tar) 15 inside the tetrahedron. 


To do this, calculate the determinant of each of the 
following five matrices: 
D, for |7, Ла Та 1 | 
Tuta 
Totus 
Ta Tua T 1 | 
D ог |T „Т Сели | | 
Date 
Та Т, Тез 1 | 
Па ee ere | 
[Т Т Те, Ш 
Т Tau Tau 1 | 
T ads Tos Ll 
Т.Т.,Т.1| 


A4 ВА C4 


D, for 


D for |T,,7,,T., 1 | 


DoD I. 


A2 B2 C2 


Т, ТТ 


A-tar ~ B-tar С-аг 


T fa fa. 1 


А4 ^ ВА ^ СА 
IP Ts Та 1 | 
T T ТО 1 


А2 Ва C2 


Td 1l 


A3 B3 C3 


ҮДЕТЕ d 


A-tar B-tar ~ C-tar 


D, for 


1| 


NOTE — The Determinant of a matrix can be readily 
programmed into most spreadsheets (for example the function 
MDETERM in Excel calculates this value). 


As a check D, - D, +D, +D, +D, 


If D, and D, and D, and D, are the same sign as D,, then 
Point Q is inside of the tetrahedron. 


If D, = 0 then the points are a plane (not a tetrahedron) 


If D , D,, D, or D, = 0 then Q lies on that face of the 
tetrahedron (this is still a valid result). 


The general approach can be expanded to apply to five 
points for four compartments. 


The approach can also be contracted to assess three 
points for two compartments as follows (this is 
technically the same approach as set out in E-4.2.2, but 
in a long hand form): 


To do this, calculate the determinant of each of the 
following four matrices: 


D, for T dard 
Ja D 1 


A2 B2 


Т,,1,,1 
IT 


A-tar i 


D 


A2 B2 


T,,T,, 1 


АЗ 2 B3 
I7, 7,1] 
T 


A-tar Ti 


P T 


АЗ B3 
Hat t 
pw || 


A2 B2 


Do 


A-tar ~ B-tar 


D for 1 


D, for 
1| 


D, for 


1| 


35 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Asa check D, = D, +D,+D, 


If D, and D, and D, are the same sign as D,, then Point 
Q is inside of the triangle. 


If D, = 0 then the points are a line (not a triangle). 


If D,, D, or D, = 0 then Point Q lies on that side of the 
triangle. 


Where a refrigerating appliance has more than three 
compartments and these are not always at or below their 
target temperature as specified in E-4.2.3 Case 2-4, the 
temperature of these additional compartments at the 
point of interpolation shall be checked for validity prior 
to the calculation of energy consumption. The general 
approach is similar to that set out in E-4.5. 


The approach shall use matrices for triangulation on the 
primary three Compartments A, B and C to estimate 
the temperature in each additional compartment at the 
point of interpolation (Point Q). For the first additional 
compartment to be checked (Compartment D) the 
4 simultaneous equations to describe the 4 test points 
are as follows: 

Ky ЕЕ L, ~ Ta ш Му ^ Tus = N, T = Ton 

K, e L, ^ Tu 2 M, * T Li N, d То = T 

K, i L, а Ts = М, * T, Lj N, 2% То Ж Т 

Ky Ба L, Ж Ta u Му 2 1 Ш N, di T = T 
Matrices are then used to solve for constants K,, Lp 
M, and N,,. The temperature of Compartment D is then 
checked when Compartments A, B and C are at their 
target temperatures. Compartment D must be at or below 
target temperature at this point for the triangulation 
to be valid. This process is then undertaken on any 
additional Compartments E, F etc. that are not always 
below their target temperature for all test points. 


In theory, the general approach of using matrices could 
be expanded to cover 4 or 5 dimension interpolations 
(requiring 5 or 6 suitable test points). In practical 
terms, there is likely to be little additional value beyond 
interpolation for 2, or sometimes 3, compartments. 


Examples of calculations for triangulation are set out 
in Annex J. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX F 
( Clauses 4.7, 6.1, 6.7, 6.8.4, and A-2.5 ) 


( Normative ) 


ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF SPECIFIED AUXILIARIES 


F-1 PURPOSE 


This Annex sets out the requirements for the 
determination of energy consumption of specified 
auxiliaries. The auxiliaries that are specified in this 
standard are ambient controlled anti-condensation 
heaters and tank-type automatic icemakers. 
NOTE — Other types of specified auxiliaries may be included 
in future. 
Where a refrigerating appliance does not contain 
specified auxiliaries, no testing in accordance with this 
Annex is required. 


F-2 AMBIENT CONTROLLED 
CONDENSATION HEATERS 


F-2.1 Outline of the Method 


The power consumption of the appliance is measured 
as specified in this Annex with any automatically 
controlled electric anti-condensation heaters switched 
off or otherwise disabled, where possible. 


ANTI- 


The supplier declares that an ambient controlled 
anti-condensation heater is included in the refrigerating 
appliance and provides data regarding the heater 
operation as a function of a wide range of ambient 
humidity and ambient temperature conditions, as 
applicable, as set out in Table 3. Where a product has a 
user-adjustable setting that can change the power of the 
automatic ambient controlled anti-condensation heater, 
values at the highest and lowest power shall be reported 
as set out in F-2.8. 


If a product has any ambient controlled anti- 
condensation heater which is not declared by the 
manufacturer, these may be treated as circumvention 
devices. 


For declared auxiliaries, the power that the heater 
would use under local regional operating conditions 
can be synthesized using the distribution of these 
ambient conditions over a year (share of time at 
each combination of conditions, based on analysis of 
regional climate data). The resulting average annual 
power consumption is multiplied by a system loss factor 
to compensate for the extra refrigeration power that 
would be required to remove a portion of the heat from 
the heater that leaks into the refrigerating appliance. 
The total energy (corrected by the system loss factor) is 
then added to the estimated annual energy consumption 
for the region. The assumed system loss factor in this 
standard is 1.3. 


NOTE — The system loss factor is based on empirical 
measurements. 


36 


The operation of the anti-condensation heater can be 
verified through specific tests in a range of conditions 
to ensure that the manufacturer declaration is accurate. 


Laboratories should check that the measured or implied 
values of heater power for different temperatures and 
humidity levels are consistent with the claimed heater 
power provided by the manufacturer in Table 3. 


F-2.2 Measurement Procedure 


Where specific measurements are required to 
confirm or check the operation of ambient controlled 
anti-condensation heater, these shall generally be 
conducted in accordance with Annex A and Annex B. 


F-2.3 Data Requirements 


For products with an ambient controlled anti- 
condensation heater, the manufacturer is required to 
hold documentation on the operation of the heater 
power as a continuous or step function of ambient 
temperature and ambient humidity. 


In order to calculate the energy impact of ambient 
controlled anti-condensation heaters in accordance 
with this standard, the data on the operation of the 
heater power has to be converted into power data for 
a range of ambient humidity and temperature values. 
Typically, this is in the format of a table of average 
power of the anti-condensation heater for each of the 
specified 10 humidity bands and the specified ambient 
temperatures. If other factors in addition to humidity 
and/or temperature can affect the operation of the 
ambient controlled anti-condensation heater(s), these 
parameters are also required. 


The ambient temperature value for calculation of 
anti-condensation heater energy in this standard is 
3206; 


While the specified core ambient conditionis considered 
adequate to accurately estimate the energy consumption 
of such heaters under most conditions, some regions 
may wish to specify additional temperatures. The core 
temperatures are of most interest because at 32 °C they 
are energy test temperatures (and represent range of 
typical usage in many regions) and 22 ?C is a typical 
indoor temperature for conditioned spaces. 


An example of the format of the product heater data to 
be provided for the core ambient temperatures is set out 
in the last columns of Table 3. 


F-2.4 Regional Weather Data 


In order to undertake the required calculations 
for the operation of the ambient controlled 
anti-condensation heater(s), regions are required to 
preparea map of probability of temperature and humidity 
data which is relevant for their local indoor conditions. 
Population-weighted probabilities should be used 
where possible. The intent is to provide a distribution 
that is most representative of annual indoor operating 
conditions that the refrigerating appliance is likely to 
encounter during normal use. 
NOTE — Obtaining representative indoor temperature and 
humidity data for a region can be onerous. The temperature 
distribution depends on the climate and the extent of indoor 
climate control used (heating and/or cooling). Some analysis 
has shown that indoor absolute humidity levels are broadly 
equivalent to outdoor absolute humidity levels (noting that 
these need to be corrected for temperature differences when 
calculating relative humidity levels). 
An example of the format of the indoor data to be 
provided is set out in column four of Table 3. 


Additional ambient temperatures 
specified in Table 3 may be used. 


beyond those 


F-2.5 Calculation of Power Consumption 


The data as set out in Table 3 should be supplied. 


NOTES 


1 Regional values (R ,, to R,,) are normally defined by the 
relevant regional authority. Power values that are specific 
to these regional values (P,,,, to Ра, for bins R, to R.) are 
normally provided by the product supplier or manufacturer. 

2 For the specified auxiliaries, if any, in the absence of regional 
weather data, the regional values/requirements are under 
consideration. Till such time the regional values (R) provided 
in Table 12 may be used. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


It is generally recommended that the values of all 
humidity bins across all indoor ambient temperatures 
sum to a value of | (100 percent) to assist in checking 
of data (i.e. sum of R, to R, = 1). This requires 
the humidity bins at each ambient temperature to 
be weighted by the share of time at each ambient 
temperature. 


The heater power can be calculated as follows: 


W eaters = зе (К, х 25 x 1.3 40 


where 


W, 


heaters 


annual average additional power 
consumption associated with the 
ambient controlled anti-condensation 
heater; 


a regional factor to indicate the 
probability of the ith temperature and 
humidity bin in Table ; 


the average heater power associated 
with the ¿th temperature and humidity 
bin in Table; 


total number of temperature and 
humidity bins used ( = 10 if all bins 
in Table are used); and 


1.3 the assumed loss factor (is the energy 
used by the heater (1.0) plus a loss 
component of 0.3 to account for 
heat leakage into the compartment 
and its subsequent removal by the 


refrigeration system). 


Table 3 Format for Temperature and Humidity Data -Ambient Controlled Anti-Condensation Heaters 
( Clause F-2.5 ) 


SI No. Relative Humidity (in Percent) RH Band Mid-point (in Percent) Probability at32°C Heater W at 32 °C 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 0 to 10 5 R51 Рн21 
ii) 10 to 20 15 Ко Рә? 
iii) 20 to 30 25 R23 Рнэз 
іу) 30 to 40 35 Код Py 
v) 40 to 50 45 Ros Рн>5 
уі) 50 to 60 55 Коб Рн>6 
vii) 60 to 70 65 Кот Pup; 
viii) 70 to 80 75 Rog Pug 
ix) 80 to 90 85 R39 Pu29 
x) 90 to 100 95 Кар Ризо 


37 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


F-2.6 Where Anti-Condensation Heater(s) Cannot 
Be Disabled But Their Power Consumption Can Be 
Measured Directly 


The measured power of the automatically controlled 
anti-condensation heater(s) from the test run(s) when 
the compartment temperatures were closest to target 
shall be multiplied by 1.3 (the system loss factor) and 
shall be deducted from the interpolated energy test 
result. The power that the heater(s) would use at the 
required ambient temperatures and humidity levels is 
then synthesized and added to the test result in exactly 
the same way as for models where the heater(s) have 
been disabled. 


Laboratories should check that the measured values of 
heater power for different temperatures and humidity 
levels are consistent with the claimed heater power 
provided by the manufacturer in Table 3. 


F-2.7 Where Anti-Condensation Heater(s) Cannot 
Be Disabled And Their Power Consumption Cannot 
Be Measured Directly 


The relative humidity of the test room shall be measured 
during an energy test. The claimed wattage of the 
automatically controlled anti-condensation heater(s) 
at that ambient and humidity shall be multiplied by 
1.3 (the system loss factor) and shall be deducted from 
the interpolated energy test result. The power that the 
heater(s) would use at 32 °C and ten humidity band 
mid-points is then synthesized and added to the test 
result in exactly the same way as for models where the 
heater(s) have been disabled. 


Laboratories should check that the implied values of 
heater power for different temperatures and humidity 
levels are consistent with the claimed heater power 
provided by the manufacturer in Table 3. 


F-2.8 Where Anti-Condensation Heater(s) Has A 
User-Adjustable Setting 


Where the product has a user-adjustable setting that 
affects the power used by the anti-condensation heaters, 
whichare otherwiseautomatically controlled in response 
to ambient conditions, the energy consumption at the 
highest and lowest energy value selectable by the user 
(in accordance with the rules for a manually switched 
heater) shall be calculated and separately reported. The 
approach set out in F-2.5, F-2.6 or F-2.7, as applicable, 
shall be used to determine the highest and lowest values 
for the anti-condensation heaters. 


F-3 AUTOMATIC ICEMAKERS — ENERGY TO 
MAKE ICE 


F-3.1 General 


Automatic icemakers are split into two different types: 


a) Mains water connected — Where fresh water from 
an external source is connected to the refrigerating 
appliance; and 


38 


b) Tank type — where fresh water is used from an 
internal tank which is filled by the user when it is 
empty. 

NOTE — Test methods for mains water connected ice makers 
are under consideration. 


F-3.2 Tank Type Automatic Icemakers 
F-3.2.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this test is to quantify the incremental 
energy required to make a defined quantity of ice in 
a tank type automatic icemaker. This subclause F-3.2 
sets out: 


a) A description of the procedure; 


b) Defines the preparation set up and starting 
conditions; 


c) Assessment of when the test is completed; 


d) Measurements and calculations to be performed; 
and 


e) Values to be reported. 


Conceptually this test is similar to the load processing 
efficiency test defined in Annex G, but it only covers 
the ice making component for products that have an 
automatic ice maker and that use a tank water supply. 


Where the energy consumption to make ice is stated 
or claimed for a tank type automatic ice maker in 
accordance with this standard, the procedure specified 
in this Annex shall be used. 


F-3.2.2 General Description 


Tank type icemakers have a water storage tank in 
an unfrozen compartment. The icemaker continues 
to make ice until either the ice making bin (often 
configured as a separate external drawer) is full or 
the tank reaches its minimum water level (no more 
water can be pumped out beyond this level). For 
the ice making test, the ice making bin is emptied 
and a small amount of water is added to the tank 
so it makes ice and the water falls to the minimum 
water level of its own accord. The appliance is then 
operated under steady state conditions. At the start 
of the test, a specified amount of water at ambient 
temperature is added (default is 300 g or 0.300 kg). 
The appliance makes ice automatically until the 
minimum water level is again reached of its own 
accord. Measurements during this test are used to 
determine the additional energy used to make 1ce. 


F-3.2.3 Test Conditions 


This test is undertaken in accordance with the 
requirements for a normal energy test, except that the 
product is configured to permit the making of ice in 
its automatic icemaker. This test is usually undertaken 
adjacent to (following or prior to) a normal energy 
consumption test. The test is conducted at ambient 
temperature of 32 °C. 


F-3.2.4 Set-Up, Equipment and Preparation 


Where a tank type automatic ice making test is used 
as the basis for a manufacturer claim, the average 
temperature of all compartments that are used to store 
water and make/store ice shall be at or below the 
relevant target temperatures specified in 5.1. 

NOTE — All temperatures specified in this subclause are for 

steady state conditions and do not include the temperature 

impact of any defrost and recovery period (where applicable). 
For verification tests, the temperatures of the ice 
making bin and the fresh food compartments (the 
compartment where the tank is stored) shall be within 
tl K of the relevant target temperature. Alternatively, 
the results of two ice making tests can be interpolated 
to the target temperature of the fresh food compartment 
while controls for other compartments are not adjusted. 


NOTE — Typically, this test is conducted after an energy test 
under the same general conditions. 
A set of scales is required to measure the mass of the 
water tank at the start and the end of the test. 


The ice storage bin shall be emptied and largely free of 
ice. The automatic sensor that controls whether ice is 
made is allowed to operate normally. 


While the appliance is operating, add water (about 
100 g more than the minimum water level — sufficient 
to ensure that some ice can be made). The tank is put in 
its normal position and it is allowed to operate normally 
and make ice until the tank reaches its minimum water 
level and no more ice can be made. The appliance is 
then allowed to operate under steady state conditions 
for at least 6 h. 


No short-term settings, controls, or functions may be 
initiated or changed during preparation or during the 
making of ice for the test. 


If not limited by the volume of the tank or the capacity 
of the ice storage bin, the mass of ice to be made is 
300 g (0.300 kg), unless otherwise specified. 


Water to be inserted into the tank at the start of the test 
shall be measured out into a 500 g PET bottle and shall 
be stored in the test room, which is operating at the 
relevant ambient temperature, for a period of no less 
than 15 h prior to the commencement of the ice making 
test. Refer to Annex G for a PET bottle specification. 


F-3.2.5 Start of the Test 


For refrigerating appliances without any defrost control 
cycle, the ice making test shall be preceded by a period 
of operation, at the temperature control setting used for 
the ice making test, that could qualify as a valid energy 
test period in accordance with B-3. 


For a refrigerating appliance with one or more defrost 
systems (each with its own defrost control cycle) the 
ice making test shall be preceded by: 


a) An energy test period that complies with B-3 at 
the temperature control setting used for the ice 
making test; 


39 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


b) An energy test period that complies with B-4 at 
the temperature control setting used for the ice 
making test; or 


c) A defrost and recovery period that complies with 
C-3 at the temperature control setting used for the 
ice making test (as applicable). 


For all product types, the temperature control settings 
shall remain unchanged for the duration of the ice 
making test. 


For simple products with regular compressor cycles, a 
compressor on event can be taken as the start of the ice 
making test. For more complex products, a temperature 
maximum in the compartment that dominates the 
energy consumption can be taken as the start of the ice 
making test (see Annex B for more guidance). Where 
the tank is inserted during the defrost and recovery 
period, the start of the test is defined as the start of that 
defrost and recovery period. 

NOTE — Filling the water tank during the defrost and recovery 

period (prior to establishment of steady state conditions) is 

generally not recommended. 
The door to the compartment where the tank is stored is 
opened at the relevant point as defined above in order to 
fill the tank. The door shall be left open at an angle of at 
least 90 degrees from the closed position for a duration 
that is as close as possible to one minute (+5 s). Where 
there are two doors provided to access the compartment 
where the tank is stored, both doors shall be opened 
together. During this one minute period: 


a) Where the tank is removable: 


1) 


Measure and record the total mass of the tank 
and residual water; 


Add the water from the PET bottles at ambient 
temperature to the tank; 


2) 
3) Measure and record the total mass of the tank 
and water again; and 


4) Put the tank back into its normal position. 
b) Where the tank is not removable: 

1) Measure the mass of water added to the tank; 
c) Close the door; and 
d) Allow the appliance to start making ice normally. 


F-3.2.6 End of the Test 


The ice making test is concluded when a period of 
stable operation has been reached after the ice has been 
made and the tank is down to its minimum water level. 
The test period concludes at the end of a complete 
temperature control cycle. The temperature control 
settings shall remain unchanged for the duration of the 
ice making test. 


The testing for the ice making test for a refrigerating 
appliance without any defrost system (each with its 
own defrost control cycle) shall be completed with an 
energy test period that complies with B-3. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


The testing for the ice making test for a refrigerating 
appliance with one or more defrost systems (with its 
own defrost control cycle) is completed with an energy 
test period that complies with: 
a) B-3 (including validity requirements); or 
b) B-4 (including validity requirements) which 
terminates with a defrost and recovery period that 
complies with the validity requirements of C-3 
(as applicable). 


For refrigerating appliances with one or more defrost 
control cycles, any defrost and recovery period that 
occurs during the ice making test (that is, before all ice 
has been made and steady state conditions established) 
shall be allowed to continue to completion. The end of 
the ice making test is when steady state conditions are 
reached and after the completion of a valid defrost and 
recovery period as specified above. 


Once the above conditions have been established, the 
door is opened and the tank is removed and weighed. 
The final mass of the tank and the residual water is 
recorded. The approximate mass of ice at the end of the 
test and quality of the ice cubes should be noted. Where 
the tank cannot be removed, the mass of additional ice 
made during the test shall be recorded. 


The following additional validity criterion applies to 
the measured parameters at the start (prior to insertion 
of the water) and the stability period at the end of the 
automatic ice making test: 


The difference of the steady state power Рем shall 
not exceed 5 percent or 2 W, whichever is the 
greater value. 


In the case where the initial validity is determined using 
a defrost under C-3 (refer F-3.2.5) because the validity 
to B-3 or B-4 cannot be established ( for example, due 
to insufficient test time), the initial steady state power 
Рем above is taken as the average power of Period D 
and Period F (Case DF1 in C-3). 


In the case of a refrigerating appliance with one or 
more defrost systems (each with its own defrost control 
cycle), where the above conditions are not met, the 
appliance shall be operated until the next defrost and 
recovery period has been completed and a new steady 
state condition established and assessed against this 
criterion. 


If this validity criterion cannot be met after a 
subsequent defrost, the test shall be repeated. The result 
of the repeated test is used to determine the energy 
consumption for the ice making test. Remove the ice 
made from the previous test after steady state operation 
is established and weigh the ice. The door opening 


40 


time should not exceed 20 s. Start the ice making test 
again, commencing with the temperature control cycle 
after the temperature control cycle where the ice was 
taken out. For refrigerating appliances with one or 
more defrost control cycles, any defrost and recovery 
period that occurs during the automatic ice making test 
(that is, before the ice has been fully completed and 
steady state conditions established) shall be allowed to 
continue to completion. 


The end of the automatic ice making test is when steady 
state conditions are reached and after the completion of 
a valid defrost and recovery period as specified above. 


For this type of icemaker, it is assumed that all of the 
water pumped out of the tank is turned into ice in the ice 
making bin. The bin should be inspected to ensure that 
suitable ice cubes have been formed. It is recommended 
that the mass of ice formed be measured approximately 
(noting that some small shards and pieces of ice may 
be hard to remove). If there appears to be a significant 
discrepancy in the amount of ice formed (remembering 
that some ice will be made prior to the start of the 
test), the product should be examined closely ensure 
that there are no leaks or other paths for the water from 
the tank. The main factor that can influence the power 
before and after automatic ice making is a change of 
heater operation associated with ice making equipment. 
Analysis has shown that, within the validity limits set 
out below, these effects are small and can usually be 
ignored. 


F-3.2.7 Calculations 
The mass of ice formed during the test is determined as: 
=M +M. M 2.41 


ice-test — ^^ water-added initial-tank — ^'^ final-tank 

The principle used to quantify the additional energy 
used to make ice is to establish a period of steady state 
operation after all the ice has been made. The additional 
energy is then calculated as the difference between the 
actual energy consumption from the start of the ice 
making test (at the point of tank input) to the end of the 
steady state period (P rą) completion minus the power 
that would have been consumed over the same period 
if the power consumption had been at the steady state 
power (P...) for the same period. 


If one (or more) defrost and recovery period(s) has 
occurred during the ice making test, the energy 
associated with representative defrost and recovery at 
the test temperature as determined in accordance with 
Annex D is subtracted from the additional energy. 


The additional energy to make the specific quantity of 
ice made during the test is given by: 


ice-test | 


where 


ice-test 


start 


I start 


end 


AE 


df 


The normalised additional energy consumption to make 


end 


LE * (taa -ш)-2х ЛЕ, 
2.42 


additional energy consumed by the 
refrigerating appliance to make the 
specific quantity of ice made during 
the test, in Wh; 


accumulated energy reading at 
the start of the ice making test as 
defined In F-3.2.5, in Wh; 


accumulated energy reading at 
the ice making test as defined m 
F-3.2.5, in Wh; 

steady state power consumption that 
occurs after all ice has been made 
during the valid energy test period 
(B-3 or B-4) as defined in F-3.2.6, 
in W; 

is the test time at the start of the ice 
making test as defined in F-3.2.5 in 
hours; 


test time at the end of ice making 
test as defined in F-3.2.6, in hours; 


additional energy consumption 
associated with a defrost and 
recovery period as determined in 
accordance with Annex C (C-5); 
and 


a factor that equals the number 
of defrost and recovery periods 
that occur during and prior to 
the completion of the ice making 
load test. This value is zero for 
refrigerating appliances without a 
defrost system (with its own defrost 
control cycle) or where no defrost 
and recovery period occur during 
the ice making test. 


1 kg is then calculated from the test data as follows: 


ice-test 


AE, 


A E = ice—test 


kg-ice 


ice—test " .43 


additional energy consumed by the 
refrigerating appliance to make 
1 kg of ice in Wh; 


additional energy consumed by the 
refrigerating appliance to make 
the specific quantity of ice made 
during the test, in Wh; and 


41 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


mass of water turned into ice 
during the test in kg. 


ice-test 


The following calculations are optional and can be used 
to provide a common benchmark of the ice making 
efficiency of the appliance. 


The energy to change the water added to ice for the 
specific quantity of ice made during the test can be 
calculated as follows: 


М ы A (4. 1 86 Е Т, 


amb 


+333.6—T., x 2.05) | 


E ice—enthalpy = 3 6 


...44 


уућеге 


= energy removed from the water 
load to make the specific quantity 
of ice made during the test in Wh 
(as defined by physics); 


ice-enthalpy 


= mass of water turned into ice 
during the test, in kg; 


ice-test 


= average temperature of ice making 
bin after the ice making test is 
completed in °C (this shall be less 
than 0 °C); 

T — average ambient air temperature 

for the 6 h period before water 

is added to the tank (initial water 

temperature), in °C; 


ice 


4.186 = factor for enthalpy change of water 
in kJ/(kg-K) (while unfrozen); 
2.05 — factor for enthalpy change of 
water in kJ/(kg-K) (while frozen); 
333.6 factor for enthalpy water phase 
= change in kJ/kg (water to ice); and 
3.6 — factor to convert kJ to Wh (s/h x 
103). 


NOTE — The units of mass above are kg, whereas g are used 
in many places in this Annex, so care is required to ensure the 
correct units are used. 
The overall efficiency of the ice making process can be 
determined as follows: 


E, 
Efficiency; = во 
"о 2245 


where 


Efficiency ice making efficiency for the 
specified ambient temperature 
and mass of ice made 


(unitless - Wh/Wh); 


ice 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


= energy removed from the water 
load to make to make the specific 
quantity of ice made during the 
test in Wh; and 


ice-enthalpy 


= additional energy consumed by 
the refrigerating appliance to 
make the specific quantity of ice 
made during the test, in Wh. 


ice-test 


NOTE — The measured value of Efficiency se 
than one. 


F-3.2.8 Data to be Recorded and Calculations 


The following values shall be included in the test 
report for each ambient temperature where the energy 
consumption for making ice for a tank type ice maker 
is measured and reported: 


may be greater 


a) Initial mass of the tank and residual water, in kg; 
b) Final mass of the tank and residual water in kg; 
c) Mass of water load added to the tank in kg; 

d) Nominal ambient temperature in ?C; 

е) Mass of ice made in kg; 


f) Ambient temperature measured for the 6 h prior to 
the start of the test in ?C; 


g) Duration of the ice making test in h; 
h) Steady state power at the end of the test in W; 


j) Number of defrosts that occurred during the ice 
making test (z); 


k) Value of ЛЕ, used іп calculations 
(where applicable); 
m) Additional energy used to make ice ДЕ; сер as 


defined in F-3.2.7; and 
n) Additional energy consumed per kg of ice made 
AEkg-ice (Wh/kg) as defined in F-3.2.7. 
The following parameters are recommended for 
inclusion in the test report: 


1) Energy removed from the water to make ice 


Ejce-enthalpy as defined in F-3.2.7 in Wh; and 


42 


2) Efficiency,,, ice making efficiency for each 
specified ambient test temperature as defined 
in F-3.2.7. 


F-3.2.9 Addition of Automatic Ice Making into Daily 
Energy 


This Annex provides an estimate of the incremental 
energy consumption required to make ice automatically. 
The user demand for ice is highly variable at a regional 
level as this depends on climate, season and indoor 
conditions, as well as user habits. Therefore, the 
measured incremental energy to make ice in this Annex 
is normally scaled so that the ice consumption more 
closely matches regional requirements. 


Where a regional estimate of the consumed quantity 
of ice is given in kg/d, the impact on the daily energy 
consumption at a given ambient temperature can be 
estimated as follows: 


АЕ 


ice—making 


=AE 


kg-ice 


x M. 


ice- making 46 
where 


— additional 


ice-making 


energy consumed 
by the refrigerating appliance 
to make Mice-making kg of 
ice per day at the specified 
ambient temperature in 


Wh/day; 


estimated additional energy 

consumed by the refrigerating 

appliance to make 1kg of ice in 
Wh as set out in F-3.2.7; and 


= mass of water turned into ice per 
day in kg/day - this is a regional 
factor. 


kg-ice 


ice-making 


The value for Ё aI Í can be added to the daily energy 
consumption value to estimate a value for this user 
related usage element. If the values at an ambient 
temperature of 32 °C is used, the annual factor could 


be expressed as: 
2.47 


ice-making-annual E f eni še! 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX G 
( Clauses 4.6, 6.1, 6.8.5, A-2.1, F-3.2.1, F-3.2.4, and J-6 ) 


( Normative ) 


DETERMINATION OF LOAD PROCESSING EFFICIENCY 


G-1 PURPOSE 


This test quantifies the additional energy consumed by 
the refrigerating appliance to remove a known amount 
of energy which is contained in warm water, which is 
placed into unfrozen and/or frozen compartments in a 
defined way. The ratio of the energy in the water (which 
is removed) to the additional energy consumed by the 
refrigerating appliance is used to determine the load 
processing efficiency. 


The purpose of the load processing efficiency test 
is to quantify the incremental energy impact of 
user-related aspects of refrigerating appliance use such 
as door openings and cooling of warm food and drinks. 
This data can be used in conjunction with closed door 
tests to produce a total energy consumption estimate 
that more closely represents actual use in different 
regions. To use the load processing efficiency value, an 
estimate of typical user related processing load needs 
to be made. This is usually best done through end use 
measurement programs. The impact of the estimated 
regional processing load on the energy for the particular 
refrigerating appliance can then be estimated from the 
load processing efficiency value determined in this 
Annex. 


If labelling requirements do not incorporate this 
component in their calculations (that is, set the 
processing load to zero), then this test is not required. 


Where a supplier provides data or makes a claim of load 
processing efficiency, it shall be based on measurements 
undertaken in accordance with this Annex. 


VALID DEFROST AND 
RECOVERY PERIOD 


POWER 


PERIOD 
F 


PERIOD 


D 


NOTE — For refrigerating appliances with unfrozen and 
frozen compartments, this Annex sets out a method to 
measure the combined load processing efficiency of both 
compartments. The procedure could, in principle, be used to 
separately measure the load processing efficiency of just the 
unfrozen compartment or just the frozen compartment. 


G-2 GENERAL DESCRIPTION 


A refrigerating appliance is operated in a steady 
state condition with temperature control settings 
that are close to the relevant target temperature for 
energy consumption as specified in Table 1 for each 
compartment (see 5.1). The temperature control 
settings shall remain unchanged for the duration of the 
load processing efficiency test. 


A specified mass of water (which is a function of the 
volume of the unfrozen compartments and/or frozen 
compartments) is placed in the test chamber with 
the refrigerating appliance and allowed to reach the 
ambient test temperature. 


Once specified conditions are met, the door of 
the largest unfrozen compartment is opened for a 
specified time and the water containers placed in their 
specified positions. Then the door of the largest frozen 
compartment is opened for a specified time and the 
water-filled ice cube trays placed in specified positions. 


The refrigerating appliance is allowed to operate until it 
reaches a steady state condition in terms of temperature 
and power consumption. The data collected is used to 
determine the load processing efficiency at the specified 
ambient temperature. The load processing efficiency is 
determined as the ratio of the processed heat load in 


LOAD PROCESSING 


P AFTER 


STEADY STATE 
PERIOD B-3 OR 
B-4 


TIME 


Fic. 10 CONCEPTUAL ILLUSTRATION OF THE LOAD PROCESSING EFFICIENCY TEST 


43 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


the water (removed) divided by the additional energy 
consumption (over and above the steady state power) 
used by the refrigerating appliance to cool it down. 


The general approach to measurements and the 
subsequent analysis is similar in concept to the 
determination of defrost and recovery energy as 
specified in Annex C. 


NOTE — An illustration of a defrost occurring prior to the 
completion of load processing is included in Fig. 14. Worked 
examples are provided in Annex J. 


G-3 SETUP, EQUIPMENT AND PREPARATION 


G-3.1 General 


The test is carried out at ambient test temperature of 
32 °C. 


Where a load processing efficiency test is used as the 
basis for a manufacturer claim, the average temperature 
of all compartments that are used to process test load 
shall be at or below the relevant target temperatures 
specified in 5.1 during the steady state operation prior 
to the start of the load processing efficiency test. 

NOTE — All temperatures specified in this Annex are for 

steady state conditions and do not include the temperature 

impact of any defrost and recovery period (where applicable). 
For verification tests, the temperatures of all 
compartments that are used to process the test load 
shall be within +1 K of the relevant target temperature 
during the steady state operation prior to load 
processing efficiency test. Alternatively, the results of 
two load processing efficiency tests can be interpolated 
to the value at the compartment target temperature of 
the coldest compartment, but one of the test points shall 
have all compartments that are used to process test load 
at or below target temperatures. 


The principle included in this clause is that a 
manufacturer is permitted to make a claim of load 
processing efficiency that is less than the optimum value 
possible (i.e. at a condition which may be somewhat 
colder than target temperature). This principle is set out 
for energy consumption tests in 6 for a single energy 
test point. 


Wherever possible, 3 shelves shall be used to hold 
the processing load in an unfrozen compartment 
(see Fig. 11) and shall be configured so that: 


a) Sensor TMP; is above shelf 3 (bottom)and below 
shelf 2; 


b) Sensor TMP, is above shelf 2 and below shelf 1; 
and 


c) Sensor TMP, is above shelf 1. 


NOTE — Shelf 3 may be the bottom of the appliance or it 
may be the top of a convenience feature, such as a crisper. 


G-3.2 Equipment 


The type of container used in unfrozen compartments is 
a thin walled plastic bottle made of PET (or equivalent 


44 


material) with a nominal volume of 500 ml. The 
dimensions of the PET bottle shall be < 220 mm in 
height and < 90 mm in width/or diameter. All bottles 
shall be the same size and shape. Each bottle is filled 
with still water as specified below. 
NOTE — PET is polyethylene terephthalate. PET bottles can 
be any commercially available bottles with a nominal 500 ml 
capacity. They each contain a specified mass of drinking water. 
PET bottles that have a square cross section are preferred as 
they do not roll around when lying on their side. 
The type of container used in frozen compartments is a 
plastic ice cube tray with a nominal working volume of 
about 200 ml per tray. 


Ice cube trays are often supplied with a new product. 
For this test the ice cube trays used need to be able 
to comfortably hold 200 ml of water without risk 
of spillage. Nominal dimensions of approximately 
120 mm x 275 mm x 40 mm are recommended. Ice cube 
trays that are smaller may be used if the recommended 
size does not fit. 


Water used for all processing loads shall be potable, 
still water suitable for human consumption without 
added gas (that is, un carbonated), colour or additives. 


Potable water from a tap is acceptable. Pure distilled 
water should be avoided in the ice cube trays as this can 
be difficult to freeze in some circumstances. 


G-3.3 Quantity of Water to be Processed 


G-3.3.1 Unfrozen Compartments 


The total volume of all unfrozen compartments and 
sub-compartments is summed. The water mass added to 
the largest unfrozen compartment shall be 12 g of water 
for each litre of total summed unfrozen compartment 
volumes. This equates to one PET bottle per 41.7 | or 
part thereof of unfrozen volume. 


Where the total unfrozen volume is less than 41.7 1, 
all water is placed in one PET bottle. Where the total 
unfrozen volume is greater than 41.7 | but less than 
83.4 1, all water is placed equally in two PET bottles. 
Where the unfrozen volume is greater than 83.4 1, 
500 g +1 g of water is placed in each PET bottle until 
the remaining water mass is less than 1 000 g. The 
remaining mass shall be divided evenly between the 
two remaining PET bottles. 


The total mass of water placed in the largest unfrozen 
compartment and the number of 500 ml PET bottles 
shall be included in the test report. 


G-3.3.2 Frozen Compartments 


The total volume of all frozen compartments and 
sub-compartments is summed. The water mass added 
to the largest frozen compartment shall be 4 g of water 
for each litre of frozen compartment volume. This 
equates to one ice cube tray per 50 | or part thereof of 
frozen volume. 


Where the frozen volume is less than or equal to 
50 1, all water is placed in one ice cube tray. Where 
the frozen volume is greater than 50 | but less than or 
equal to 100 1, all water shall be approximately divided 
evenly between the two ice cube trays. Where the frozen 
volume is greater than 100 1, approximately 200 g of 
water is placed in each ice cube tray until the remaining 
water mass is less than 400 g. The remaining quantity 
shall be approximately divided evenly between the two 
remaining ice cube trays. 


The total volume of water placed in the largest frozen 
compartment and the number of ice cube trays shall be 
included in the test report. 


G-3.4 Position of the Water Load in Compartments 


G-3.4.1 Position in Unfrozen compartments 


The PET bottles specified in G-3.3 shall be positioned 
in the largest unfrozen compartment as illustrated in 
Fig. 11. 


| w = | 


w/2 


C1 (BEHIND) 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Where there is 250 mm or more vertical clearance above 
the nominated shelf, PET bottles shall be placed standing 
in the following positions: 


a) The first bottle on each shelf on each side shall be 
placed as close as possible to the compartment liner 
while maintaining approximately 25 mm clearance 
from the side liner; 


b) Additional bottles in this position may be placed 
two or three deep while maintaining approximately 
25 mm clearance between bottles and the front 
and rear of the shelf or load limit; 


c) Where more bottles are required in this position, 
additional rows of bottles (as required) are placed 
closer to the compartment centre while maintaining 
approximately 25 mm clearance between rows; 

d) All bottles shall be centred from front to back at 
even intervals on the shelf in their rows (taking 
account of the shelf edge and any load limits that 
may affect the depth); and 


CLEARANCE IS SATISFIED - 
SEE FRONT VIEW 


h/4 


A1 (BEHIND) 


D1 (BEHIND) 


B2 (BEHIND) 
E1 (BEHIND) 


TMP 
WP Еу 
50 50 D1 


Dimensions in millimetres 


NOTE — Additional shelves may be present in the refrigerating appliance but are not shown in the figure. 


Fic. 11 SHELF LOCATIONS AND LOADING SEQUENCE (EXAMPLE SHOWING 10 PET BOTTLES) 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


e) All bottles shall maintain at least 25 mm 
clearance in all directions from any compartment 
temperature sensor. 


Where there is less than 250 mm vertical clearance 
above the nominated shelf, PET bottles shall be laid flat 
on the specified shelf with lids (caps) facing towards the 
compartment door (front) in the following positions: 


1) The first bottle on each shelf on each side 
shall be placed as close as possible to 
the compartment liner while maintaining 
approximately 25 mm clearance from the side 
liner; 

2) Where more bottles are required in this 
position, additional bottles are placed closer 
to the compartment centre while maintaining 
approximately 25 mm clearance between 
bottles; 


3) Nostacking or touching of bottles is permitted; 


4) All bottles shall maintain at least 25 mm 
clearance from any compartment temperature 
sensor; and 


5) All bottles are aligned so that the top (cap) is 
at the front of the shelf or the shelf load limit. 
In the case of shallow shelves, the orientation 
of the bottle may be adjusted to ensure that 
no part protrudes past the front of the shelf 
or load limit, while maintaining 25 mm 
clearance from any temperature sensors. 


All bottles should be placed in a position that 
minimises restriction of air flow from any ducts or 
vents. When it is not possible to place the PET bottles 
in the positions specified, equivalent positions are 
to be selected. Where equivalent positions are used, 
these shall be recorded in the test report. Where 
PET bottles have to be arranged differently because 
of space restrictions, they shall remain on the same 
shelf and shall be as close as possible to the specified 
position. 


The PET bottles shall only be placed on shelves that 
are immediately below temperature sensor positions 
TMP,, TMP,, and TMP,. Additional shelves that 
may be present are ignored. The PET bottles shall be 
placed in the following shelf positions in sequence 
until all bottles have been placed: 
1) One bottle in the sequence of positions 
ABCDEF; 
ii) Repeat the placement sequence until all 
bottles are placed; 
iii) The two partially filled PET bottles 
(where applicable) are placed at the last 
two positions; and 
iv) All positions shall be noted in the test 
report. 


46 


NOTE — The sequence above is to define the position or 
location of each bottle. The bottles may be loaded in any order 
into these specified positions when they are being placed into 
the unfrozen compartment in G-4.2. In the example illustrated 
in Fig. 11, 10 PET bottles would results in two bottles in 
positions A to D and one bottle in position E and F. 


G-3.4.2 Position in Frozen Compartments 


The ice cube trays specified in G-3.3 shall be positioned 
in the largest frozen compartment as illustrated in 
Fig. 12. Where the largest frozen compartment has a 
combination of shelves and drawers, the ice cube trays 
shall be placed on shelves in preference to drawers 
(or baskets) as far as possible. 


a) The first ice cube tray on the lower level is placed 
on the opposite side to sensors TMP, and TMP, 
and as close as possible to the compartment 
liner while maintaining approximately 25 mm 
clearance. Additional ice cube trays are added next 
to the previous ice cube tray while maintaining 
approximately 25 mm clearance between ice 
cube trays. Ice cube trays may be oriented in any 
way that maximises the number of trays on each 
level while maintaining all necessary clearances; 


b) Where no more ice cube trays can be fitted onto 
the lower level (i.e. the number required results in 
the clearance to the temperature sensor positions 
of less than 25 mm in all directions), then ice 
cube trays are placed progressively on the next 
available level(s), as required; 


c) Where it is necessary to place ice cube trays on 
a shelf which sits below a central temperature 
sensor position (e.g. TMP,, TMP, or TMP, 
as applicable), the first ice cube tray is placed 
adjacent to the left side liner, the second ice 
cube tray is placed adjacent to the right-side 
liner. Additional ice cube trays on this level (if 
required) are placed progressively closer to the 
centre while maintaining approximately 25 mm 
clearance from each other and at least 25 mm 
from any temperature sensor position in all 
directions; 


d) Where it is necessary to place ice cube trays on 
a shelf which sits below the upper temperature 
sensor positions (e.g. TMP, and TMP ,), the first 
ice cube tray is placed on the opposite side to 
sensors TMP „and TMP |, and as close as possible 
to the compartment liner while maintaining 
approximately 25 mm clearance. Additional ice 
cube trays (if required) are added next to the 
previous ice cube tray while maintaining 25 mm 
clearance between ice cube trays; 

e) All ice cube trays are spaced approximately 
25 mm from the compartment liner and each 
other on each level; 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


50 


— 50 —— 


CENTRED ON LOAD LIMIT 


h > 1000 


ku 7 


CENTRED ON LOAD LIMIT 
Om 


50 


50 CLEARANCE IS SATISFIED 
- SEE FRONT VIEW 


с CLEARANCE IS SATISFIED 
° - SEE FRONT VIEW 


(2 MUST MAINTAIN 2 25 CLEARANCE IN ALL DIMENSIONS 


Dimensions in millimetres 


NOTE — Additional shelves may be present in the refrigerating appliance but are not shown in the figure. Ice cube trays are always 
placed on shelves in preference to drawers or baskets. 


Fic. 12 ТСЕ CUBE TRAY LOCATIONS AND CLEARANCES 


47 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


f) The two partially filled ice cube trays (where 
applicable) are placed at the last two (upper most) 
positions required; 

g) No stacking or touching of ice cube trays is 
permitted; 


h) All ice cube trays shall maintain at least 25 mm 
clearance from any compartment temperature 
sensor position in all directions; 


j) Allice cube trays are centred from front to back of 
the shelf (taking account of the shelf edge and any 
load limits that may affect the depth) and shall not 
protrude beyond the front of the shelf; and 


k) When ice cube trays are located inside a drawer or 
bin, the inside of the drawer or bin shall be treated 
as the inside of the liner with respect to placement. 

NOTE — As a practical example, a large freezer in a 

refrigerator-freezer with a volume of 180 | requires a total water 

mass of 720 g in 4 ice cube trays. The internal clearance of the 
freezer is 600 mm wide. Sensor positions TMP,, and TMP; 
are 50 mm from the right hand lower wall. This leaves a space 
of 500 mm with clearances at each end for the placement of 
ice cube trays. Some 3 ice cube trays can be fitted at the lower 
level (120 mm + 25 mm minimum each, parallel to the sides), 
so one ice cube tray has to be placed on the upper level. If the 
freezer was deeper than say 460 mm, it would be possible to fit 
all 4 trays on the lower level (3 deep at right angles to the sides 
and one parallel to the sides) while maintaining clearances. 

See G-3.2 regarding the recommended size of ice cube trays. 

All ice cube trays should be placed in a position that 
minimises restriction of air flow from any ducts or 
vents. When it is not possible to place the ice cube trays 
in the positions specified, equivalent positions are to 
be selected. Where equivalent positions are used, these 
shall be recorded in the test report. Where ice cube 
trays have to be arranged differently because of space 
restrictions, they shall remain on the same shelf and 
shall be as close as possible to the specified position. 
All ice cube tray positions shall be noted in the test 
report. 


The sequence above is to define the position or location 
of each 1ce cube tray. The ice cube trays may be loaded 
in any order into these specified positions when they 
are being placed into the frozen compartment in G-4.2. 


G-3.5 Temperature of the Water to be Processed 


PET bottles with less than 500 g water should have the 
specified amount of water measured into the PET bottles 
prior to storage and temperature stabilization in the test 
room. Separate PET bottles containing sufficient water 
for all the ice cube trays (where applicable) shall be 
stored in the test room and (to avoid evaporation) shall 
only be decanted into the ice cube trays within 30 min 
of placement into the frozen compartment. 


All PET bottles and ice cube trays shall be placed in 
the test room that is operating at the relevant ambient 
temperature in a position that is representative of the 
test room temperature. All PET bottles shall be placed 


48 


vertically on a bench or the wooden test platform (floor) 
with no less than 50 mm clearance between them to 
allow free air circulation. This equipment shall remain 
in the test room for a period of no less than 15 h prior 
to the commencement of the load processing efficiency 
test. 


NOTE — The nominal ambient test temperatures for energy 
testing is 32 °C. 


G-4 LOAD PROCESSING EFFICIENCY TEST 
METHOD 


G-4.1 Commencement of the Load Processing 
Efficiency Test 


For refrigerating appliances without any defrost control 
cycle, the load processing efficiency test shall be 
preceded by a period of operation, at the temperature 
control setting used for the load processing efficiency 
test. The settings shall be such that it could qualify as a 
valid energy test period in accordance with B-3. 


For a refrigerating appliance with one or more defrost 
systems (with its own defrost control cycle) the load 
processing efficiency test shall be preceded by: 


a) An energy test period that complies with B-3 at 
the temperature control setting used for the load 
processing efficiency test (including validity 
requirements); or 


b) An energy test period that complies with B-4 at 
the temperature control setting used for the load 
processing efficiency test (including validity 
requirements); or 


с) A defrost and recovery period that complies with 
C-3 at the temperature control setting used for the 
load processing efficiency test (as applicable). 

NOTE — Where stability is determined by DF1 (C-3), the 
load can only be inserted after confirmation of the defrost 
validity (that is, after the end of Period F, which is at least 
8 h after the operation of the defrost heater) Where stability 
has been established using steady state conditions or an earlier 
defrost, the load should be inserted as soon as practicable 
after the defrost and recovery period has been completed to 
minimise the chance of another defrost occurring prior to 
completion of the load processing test. As a guide, more than 
5 h after the defrost heater operates (which could normally qualify 
as the start of Period F under C-3.1) is recommended (laboratories 
should use their experience of previous valid defrost and recovery 
periods to make an accurate judgment). In this case the previous 
defrost and recovery period, which is immediately prior to load 
insertion, is not included in the load processing test period. 


For all product types, the temperature control settings 
shall remain unchanged for the duration of the load 
processing efficiency test. 


For simple products with regular compressor cycles, a 
compressor on event can be taken as the start of the 
load processing efficiency test. For more complex 
products, a temperature maximum in the compartment 
that dominates the energy consumption can be taken 


as the start of the load processing efficiency test 
(see Annex B for more guidance). Where the processing 
load is inserted during the defrost and recovery period, 
the start of the test is defined as the start of that defrost 
and recovery period. 


Insertion of the load during the defrost and recovery 
period (prior to establishment of steady state conditions) 
is generally not recommended. 


G-4.2 Placement of the Load 


The load shall be prepared in accordance with G-3. 
The load shall be placed in the refrigerating appliance 
as specified in G-3 as soon as practicable after the 
start of a temperature control cycle as specified in 
G-4.1, but while the compressor is still operating (for 
simple products) or before a compartment temperature 
minimum is reached (for more complex products). The 
loading of each compartment shall be undertaken with 
one door opening and closing for that compartment. 
The door shall be left open at an angle of at least 
90 degrees from the closed position for a duration that is 
as close as possible to one minute (+5 s) for each storage 
compartment being loaded, irrespective of the time 
taken to load the compartment (usually considerably less 
than one minute). Where there are two doors provided 
to access the compartment to which the processing 
load is added, both doors shall be opened together. 
Where a refrigerating appliance has both frozen and 
unfrozen compartment types to be loaded, the unfrozen 
compartment shall be loaded first. 


A recommended time for door opening and for door 
closing is 2.5 s, leaving 55 s to load each compartment. 
Adding the processing load near the start of a temperature 
control cycle is recommended as the load will then begin 
to be processed near the start of the load processing 
efficiency test period. Probable start times for future 
temperature control cycles can be readily predicted for 
products with regular behaviour, allowing load placement 
to be organised in advance. Care is required to meet the 
requirements of G-4.2 in cases where compressor runs 
are short. The exact number of load elements and their 
position should be planned out well before the door is 
opened and the load is placed. 


G-4.3 Measurements to be Taken 


Prior to and for the duration of the load processing 
efficiency test, temperature and energy measurements 
shall be recorded as specified in accordance with Annex 
A as for an energy consumption test. 


G-4.4 Conclusion of Load Processing Efficiency Test 


The load processing efficiency test is concluded when 
stable operating conditions have been reached after the 
load has been fully processed (i.e. the water or ice has 
been brought to approximately the temperature in each 
compartment). The test period concludes at the end of 
a complete temperature control cycle. The temperature 
control settings shall remain unchanged for the duration 
of the load processing efficiency test. 


49 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


The testing for the load processing efficiency test for a 
refrigerating appliance without a defrost control cycle 
shall be completed with an energy test period that 
complies with B-3 (including validity requirements). 


The testing for the load processing efficiency test for a 
refrigerating appliance with one or more defrost systems 
(each with its own defrost control cycle) is completed 
with an energy test period that complies with: 


a) B-3 (including validity requirements); or 

b) B-4 (including validity requirements) which 
terminates with a defrost and recovery period that 
complies with the validity requirements of C-3 
(as applicable). 


The end criteria for the load processing efficiency test 
are quite stringent as it is possible that the compartment 
temperature(s) may appear to have reached steady state 
values without the loads themselves being fully cooled 
down or frozen. Thus it is necessary to demonstrate 
that the refrigerating appliance has returned to steady 
state operation by checking both the compartment 
temperatures and the power consumption over a specified 
minimum period. 


It is common for the compartment temperature(s) and 
the power consumption to stabilise after the addition and 
complete processing of the load to a value that is slightly 
different from the conditions prior to the addition of 
the load. Usually these changes are quite small, but in 
some cases these can be significant. This can occur when 
the load added affects the air flow in the compartment 
or there is an indirect effect on the internal temperature 
sensor of the refrigerating appliance. In some cases, 
the load can trigger the operation of a variable output 
compressor onto a higher step value, for example, which 
may result in higher power and lower compartment 
temperatures. To reduce these impacts, laboratories have 
the option of placing an initial processing load into the 
refrigerating appliance and replacing this with a new 
processing load once this initial load is fully stabilised 
(see details below). Data from the second processing 
load is used to determine the load processing efficiency. 


Differences in internal temperature conditions and 
power before and after the addition of the load have 
little impact as the analysis only considers the energy 
consumption from the temperature control cycle that 
the load is added (therefore little, if any, operation in the 
condition prior to the insertion of the load is included in 
the load processing efficiency test period). 
NOTE — The main energy effect from changes in internal 
compartment temperatures before and after the load has 
been processed is the associated change in thermal mass 
(or capacitance) of the refrigerating appliance. Analysis has 
shown that within the validity limits set out below, these effects 
are small and can be ignored. 
The following additional two validity criteria apply to 
the measured parameters at the start (prior to insertion 
of the load) compared with their values during the 
stability period at the end of the load processing 
efficiency test: 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


1) The difference of the steady state power Рем 
shall not exceed 5 percent or 2 W, whichever is 
the greater value; and 


2) The difference of the steady state temperature 
in each compartment shall not exceed | K. 


In the case where the initial validity is determined 
using a defrost under C-3 (refer G-4.1) because the 
validity to B-3 or B-4 cannot be established (e.g. due 
to insufficient test time), the initial steady state power 
Ро, and steady state temperature above is taken as the 


average power of Period D and Period F (Case DF1 in 
C-3). 


In the case of a refrigerating appliance with one or 
more defrost systems (each with its own defrost control 
cycle), where the above conditions are not met, the 
appliance shall be operated until the next defrost and 
recovery period has been completed and a new steady 
state condition established and assessed against these 
criteria. 


If both of these validity criteria cannot be met after 
a subsequent defrost, the test shall be repeated by 
replacing the existing load (already processed to the 
compartment temperature) with new load under the 
same control conditions (as set out in G-3, G-4.1 and 
G-4.2).As set out above, placing an initial processing 
load into the refrigerating appliance and (on completion 
of the processing of the load) replacing this with a new 
processing load is optional for all load processing 
efficiency tests. 


For refrigerating appliances with one or more defrost 
control cycles, any defrost and recovery period that 
occurs during the load processing efficiency test (i.e. 
before the load has been fully processed and steady 
state conditions established) shall be allowed to 
continue to completion (see Fig. 14). The end of the 
load processing efficiency test is when steady state 


ADDITIONAL ENERGY TO 
PROCESS THE LOAD 


TEST START 


POWER 


[z P 
BEFORE AFTER (1) 


STEADY 


LOAD INPUT B-3 


TEST END » 
B-3 K 


STATE PERIOD 


conditions are reached after the completion of a valid 
defrost and recovery period as specified above. 
NOTE 2 — The additional energy associated with defrost 


and recovery periods that occur during the load processing 
efficiency test is taken into account in G-5.3. 


G-5 DETERMINATION 
PROCESSING EFFICIENCY 


OF LOAD 


G-5.1 General 


Once the load processing efficiency test has concluded, 
the data is then analysed in order to determine the load 
processing efficiency. The objective is to determine 
the additional energy consumption required by the 
refrigerating appliance to process the added load back 
to a steady state condition. This is illustrated in Fig. 13. 
This is then compared to the calculated energy change 
in the added water load (volume of water times the 
enthalpy change) in order to quantify the heat energy 
that has been removed from the refrigerating appliance 
during processing. 


The additional energy to process the load is always 
calculated from the value of P, as illustrated іп 
Fig back to the point where the load was added 
(test start). 


In some cases the power before the load is added 
(Petore) can be higher or lower than the power after the 
load is added (P ta). This difference does not affect the 
calculations as the power difference is considered only 


back to the point where the load is added. 


G-5.2 Quantification of Input Energy 


The input energy is calculated by estimating the energy 
change in the water load, starting at the test room 
ambient temperature and finishing at the measured 
compartment temperature. 


DEFROSTED 
RECOVERY 
PERIOD 


TEST END / 
B-4 


P 
AFTER (2) 


| 


STEADY 
STATE PERIOD 
B-3 OR B-4 


TIME 


Fic. 13 REPRESENTATION OF THE ADDITIONAL ENERGY TO PROCESS THE ADDED LOAD 


50 


Simplified equations to estimate the energy change in the 
water are provided in G-5.2, based on standard enthalpy 
data. While these equations will give quite accurate 
results, test laboratories may find it more convenient to 
use software or add-ins that can automatically calculate 
the enthalpy change for water. Care is required for any 
compartments that operate close to freezing (0 °C) as 
the energy required for the phase change from liquid 
to ice is substantial. If the nominal final compartment 
temperature is below freezing, ice cube trays should be 
inspected to ensure that they are fully frozen. 


The energy change of water in unfrozen compartments 
(where the final temperature is above freezing) is given 
by: 


T,)+M, x 


(Та 


3.6 


M, x (Таљ E 


i x4.186 
dq amb -T,) ь-1) 


+ М. 


unfrozen —test 


...48 
where 
energy removed from the water 


load in the unfrozen compartment 
during the test in Wh; 


unfrozen-test 


mass of water located adjacent to 
TMP, (positions C, F) in kg; 


average temperature of the 
temperature sensor at position 
TMP, during the valid energy 
test period (B-3 or B-4) after load 
processing in ?C; 

mass of water located adjacent to 
TMP, (positions E, B), in kg; 


average temperature of the 
temperature sensor at position 
TMP, during the valid energy 
test period (B-3 or B-4) after load 
processing in ?C; 

mass of water located adjacent to 
TMP, (positions A, D), in kg; 


average temperature of the 
temperature sensor at position 
TMP, during the valid energy 
test period (B-3 or B-4) after load 
processing in ?C; 

measured average ambient 
temperature for 6h prior to 
the placement of the water 
load into the refrigerating 
appliance (nominal initial water 
temperature); and 


amb 


51 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


4.186 = a factor for enthalpy change 
of water, in kJ/(kg.K) (while 
unfrozen) 

3.6 = a factor to convert kJ to Wh 


(s/h x 10-3). 


The units of mass above are kg, whereas g are used in 
many places in this Annex, so care is required to ensure 
the correct units are used. 


The energy change of water in frozen compartments 
(where the final temperature is below freezing) is given 


by: 
M tot—fz ( J 


frozen-test — 
energy removed from the water 
load in the frozen compartment, 
in Wh; 
total mass of water placed in the 
frozen compartment, in kg; 


4.186xT + 


amb 
333.6-T,,,, x 2.05 
3.6 


...49 
уућеге 


frozen-test 


tot-fz 


average temperature of all sensors 
in the compartment during the 
valid energy test period (B-3 or 
B-4) after load processing in °C; 


fz-av 


measured average ambient 
temperature for 6 h prior to 
the placement of the water 
load into the refrigerating 
appliance (nominal initial water 
temperature); 


amb 


4.186 a factor for enthalpy change 
of water in kJ/(kg.K) (while 


unfrozen) 


a factor for enthalpy change of 
water in kJ/(kg.K) (while frozen) 


a factor for enthalpy water phase 
change in kJ/ kg (water to ice) 


333.6 


3.6 a factor to convert kJ to Wh 


(s/h x 10-3). 


The value of temperature 7, shall be negative, 
which gives a greater energy change for a colder 
temperature. The above equation assumes a uniform 
average temperature in the frozen compartment, which 
Is considered to be a sufficiently accurate estimate. The 
units of mass above are kg, whereas g are used in many 
places in this Annex, so care is required to ensure the 
correct units are used. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


The total test input energy at a given ambient test room 
temperature is given as: 


2.50 


- + 
input-test unfrozen-test frozen-test 


G-5.3 Quantification of Additional Energy used to 
Process the Load 


The principle used to quantify the additional energy 
used to process the load is to establish a period of 
steady state operation after the load has been fully 
processed. The additional energy is then calculated as 
the difference between the actual energy consumption 
from the start of the load processing efficiency test 
(at the point of load input) to the end of the steady state 
period (P...) completion minus the power that would 
have been consumed over the same period if the power 
consumption had been at the steady state power (P 
for the same period. 


ба 


If one (or more) defrost and recovery period(s) 
has occurred while the load is being processed, the 
representative defrosts and recovery energy at the test 
temperature as determined in accordance with Annex 
C is subtracted from the additional energy. This is 
illustrated in Fig. 14. 


The additional energy to process the added load is 
given by: 
E 


= x 2X 
additional-test ( E Pan (t ) z ДЕ в 


saol 


end | sua) m end-t | Ган 


where 


AE Wu, Z additional energy consumed 
by the refrigerating appliance 
during the test to fully 
process the loaded added as 
specified in G-3; 


— accumulated energy reading 
at the start of load processing 
efficiency test as defined in 
G-4.1 in Wh; 


start 


TEST START 


POWER 


FBEFORE 


LOAD INPUT 


TIME 


ADDITIONAL ENERGY TO 
PROCESS THE LOAD 


after 


Lian 


end 


AE 


df 


STEADY STATE 
PERIOD B-3 OR B-4 


accumulated energy reading 
at the end of load processing 
efficiency test as defined in 
G-4.4 in Wh; 


steady state power 
consumption that occurs 
after the load has been fully 
processed during the valid 
energy test period (B-3 or 
B-4) as defined in G-4.4 in 
W; 


test time at the start of load 
processing efficiency test as 
defined in G-4.1 in hours; 


test time at the end of load 
processing efficiency test as 
defined in G-4.4 in hours; 


additional energy 
consumption associated 
with defrost and recovery 
as determined in accordance 
with Annex C (C-5); and 


an integer that equals the 
number of defrost and 
recovery periods that 
occur during and prior to 
the completion of the load 
processing efficiency test 
(see Fig. 14). This value 
is zero for refrigerating 
appliances without a defrost 
system or where no defrost 
and recovery period occurs 
during the load processing 
efficiency test (see Fig. 13). 


ADDITIONAL ENERGY FOR 
DEFROST AND RECOVERY 
DURING PROCESSING 


TEST END 


AFTER 


Fic. 14 CASE WHERE A DEFROST AND RECOVERY PERIOD OCCURS DURING LOAD PROCESSING 


52 


G-5.4 Load Processing Efficiency 


The load processing efficiency is given by: 


. ee 
Efficiency oad ambient = 
A E aditional test mE 52 
where 

Efficiency, austin measured load 
processing efficiency 
for the specified ambient 
temperature (unit less, 

Wh/Wh); 

Spin — heat energy removed 
from the processing 
load during the test as 
defined in G-5.2; and 

АЁ ары = additional energy 
consumed by the 


refrigerating appliance 
to fully process the 
load during the test as 
defined in G-5.3. 


The measured value of Efficiency ,,, ambien Шау be 
greater than one. 


For a load processing efficiency value to be used to 
estimate the impact on the energy consumption of a 
refrigerating appliance, an estimate of the user related 
input load is required (in Wh). 


G-5.5 Load Processing Multiplier 


се 29 


Alternatively, а processing load multiplier “a” may 
be used as a multiplier of the input load specified in 
this standard (based on 12 g/l of unfrozen and 4 g/l of 
frozen compartment volume). A value of “a” = 1 for 
example would mean that the user related load would 
be equal to Е ьи every 24 h (see 6.8 where all values 
are converted to a daily energy consumption). The load 
multiplier “a” is likely to be larger in hotter tropical 
climates and smaller in cooler temperate climates. 
Under this approach the value of E t is different for 
every different refrigerating appliance as the volume 
of unfrozen and frozen compartments is different and 
this approach assumes usage (user related processing 
load) is directly proportion to volume. Other factors 
(such as the number of householders) may also have an 
impact on the assumed user related load. It is also likely 
that the multiplier may need to be different for some 
product configurations (for example, separate freezers), 
as these may have significantly different usage in some 
regions. 


Where a load multiplier is used to estimate the 
additional energy associated with a processing load, 
it is important to calculate a normalised value for 

input-nominal 12 Order to correct for small variations in 


compartment temperatures and ambient temperature 
conditions that occur during a test. This is calculated 


53 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


by assuming the input processing load starts exactly at 
the nominal ambient temperature and ends up exactly 
at the compartment target temperature. 


M T -Т 


tot—unfz x ( amb-tar unfz—tar 


3.6 


)x 4.186 


unfrozen nominal 


2.293 
where 


energy removed from the 
water load in the unfrozen 
compartment for nominal 
conditions in Wh; 


unfrozen-nominal 


total mass of water in the 
unfrozen compartment, in kg; 


tot-unfz 


target temperature for 
energy consumption of the 
unfrozen compartment in °C 
(see Table 1); 


nominal ambient temperature 
for the test (16 °C or 32 °C as 
applicable); and 


unfz-tar 


amb-tar 


4.186 a factor for enthalpy change 
of water in kJ/(kg.K) (while 


unfrozen) 


is a factor to convert kJ to Wh 
(s/h x 10-3). 
Ms x | J 


energy removed from the water 
load in the frozen compartment 
at nominal conditions, in Wh; 


3.6 


4.186xT_ op + 333.6 
V. T HN 2% 2.05 


3.6 


frozen —nominal 


...54 


уућеге 


frozen-nominal 


total mass of water placed in the 
frozen compartment, in kg; 


target temperature for 
energy consumption of the 
frozen compartment in °C 
(see Table 1); 


nominal ambient temperature 
for the test (32 °C as applicable); 
a factor for enthalpy change 
of water, in kJ/(kg.K) (while 
unfrozen); 


fz-tar 


amb-tar 


4.186 


a factor for enthalpy change 
of water in kJ/(kg.K) (while 
frozen); 


333.6 a factor for enthalpy water 
phase change in kJ/kg (water to 
ice); and 

a factor to convert kJ to Wh 
(s/h x 10 2). 


3.6 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


The total nominal input energy at a given ambient test 
room temperature is given as: 


| NL 495 
input-nominal 
The following values shall be included in the test report 
where this value is measured and reported: 


unfrozen-nominal frozen-nominal 


a) Volume of all unfrozen compartments in 1; 

b) Volume of all frozen compartments in I; 

c) Mass of water load added to  unfrozen 
compartments in g; 

d) Mass of water load added to frozen compartments 
in g; 

€) Е 4,101 each specified ambient test temperature 
in Wh; 

f) AE wii, (ОГ each specified ambient test 
temperature in Wh; 

g) Efficiency я, ambient for each specified ambient 
test temperature; and 

h) E for each specified ambient test 


input-nominal : 

temperature in Wh. 
All values used to determine the load processing 
efficiency shall be reported. 


G-5.6 Addition of User Related Loads into Daily 
Energy 


The impact of user related loads can be included in 
the daily energy consumption. User related loads arise 
from normal actions such as door openings (and the 
associated air exchange), the insertion of warm food 
and drink loads that are subsequently cooled (and 
sometimes frozen) and the production of ice. 


The method of determining the load processing 
efficiency for the refrigerating appliance is set out in 
this Annex. This value provides an estimate of the 
incremental energy consumption required to remove 
each unit of user related heat load equivalent that arises 
from normal use. The magnitude of user related loads 
is highly variable at a regional level as they depend 
on climate, season and indoor conditions, as well as 
user habits. User related loads are also likely to vary 
to some extent depending on the size and type of the 
refrigerating appliance and some demographic factors, 
such as the number of householders accessing the 
refrigerating appliance and occupancy (time of day 
people are at home). Average daily user related loads 
can vary from an average of 50 Wh/d to 500 Wh/d, 
depending on season, climate, product type, product 
size and demographics. 
NOTE — Heavy usage can result in shorter defrost intervals. 
Defrost intervals are primarily a function of ambient conditions 
and door openings (and to a lesser extent uncovered liquid loads 
as well as fruit and vegetables) thus the relatively large loads 
added here with only a single door opening per compartment 
are not likely to simulate the usage that would prompt short 
defrost intervals. The impact of changes in defrost interval is 
not directly measured in the load processing efficiency test but 
is estimated through an adjustment to Лі. This is somewhat 


54 


complicated as the defrost interval affects the steady state 
power consumption and the average temperature of the test 
points, so the exact impact cannot be directly calculated. 
Unless there is a large change in the defrost interval in response 
to user related loads (which may be a form of circumvention), 
the effect on energy consumption should be small and has been 
ignored in this calculation. 


Where an estimate of user related loads is known in 
Wh/d, the impact on the daily energy consumption at a 
given ambient temperature can be estimated as follows: 


E 


user 


Efficiency, „ambient 


processing 


..56 


where 


additional daily energy 
consumption of the 
refrigerating appliance in 
Wh/d to process the user 
related load Е 


user; 


processing 


the user related heat load 
equivalent entering the 
refrigerating appliance 
in Wh/d arising from 
normal usage (specified 
by region); and 

load processing 
efficiency at the specified 
ambient temperature 
in accordance with 
this Annex in. Wh/Wh 
(dimensionless). 


user 


Efficiency, u ambient 


NOTE — The impact of user related loads are generally much 

lower at a lower ambient temperature for the same tasks. To 

obtain a good estimate of the impact of user related loads over 

a whole year, an estimate of monthly average user related heat 

load equivalents (input) values is recommended. 
Alternatively, the specified processing load in this 
Annex (which is dependent on volume) shall be used as 
basis for scaling the processing load by region. 


input —nominal 


Effi сі ency, load,ambient 


xa 


processing 


ori 


where 


additional daily energy 
consumption of the 
refrigerating appliance 
in Wh/d to process the 
specified load; 


processing 


nominal processing load 
for the specified water 
load at nominal ambient 
and compartment target 
temperatures in Wh/d 
(see G-5.4); 


input-nominal 


a =  aregional factor to scale 
the processing load 
(=1); and 

Efficiency а ambien = Ше load processing 


efficiency at thespecified 
ambient temperature 
in accordance with 
this Annex in Wh/Wh 
(dimensionless). 


NOTE — The preferred value for “a” is 1, in the absence of 
local data. The value of “a” should not exceed 2. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


The value for AE rocessing СОП be added to the daily energy 
consumption value to estimate a value user related 
usage elements. The annual factor could be expressed 
as: 


DNE = 7 ОТЕРА: ... 5 8 


In accordance with regional requirements, the total 
annual energy consumption of a refrigerating appliance 
[equation (4), 6.8.5] can be expanded to include 
processing load as follows: 


E aid mi Eina) TE at + AE š 59 


processing-annual `` 


See Annex J for worked examples. 


ANNEX H 
( Clause 4.8 ) 


( Normative ) 


DETERMINATION OF VOLUME 


H-1 SCOPE 


This Annex describes methods for computing total 
volume of refrigerating appliances. This Annex is 
intended to provide a uniform means of determining 
the size, taking into consideration the special features 
and/or functional components which are located within 
the refrigerated compartment(s). It is not intended to 
provide a means of measuring the food-storage capacity, 
the usable volume or the usability of the volume. 


The method set out in this Annex is based on the 
logic that anything not necessary for the control of 
temperature in the internal space has been removed and 
the space that it did occupy becomes part of the volume. 
Thus, for example, the light together with its housing 
is not necessary for the appliance to maintain internal 
conditions so is considered to be removed, while any 
user-adjustable temperature control and its housing as 
well as ductwork to distribute air is considered to be in 
place. 


H-2 TOTAL VOLUME 


H-2.1 Volume Measurements 


All measured compartment volumes shall be rounded 
to the nearest 0.1 l. The total volume shall be the sum of 
these rounded compartment volumes and the declared 
value for total volume shall be rounded to the nearest 
whole litre. 


H-2.2 Determination of Volume 


The volume shall take into account the exact shapes of 
the walls including all depressions or projections. For 
through the door ice and water dispensers, the ice chute 


55 


shall be included in the volume up to the dispensing 
function. 


When the volume is determined, internal fittings such 
as shelves, removable partitions, containers and interior 
light housings shall be considered as not being in place. 


The items below shall be considered as being in place 
and their volumes deducted: 


a) The volume of control housings; 


b) The volume of the evaporator space (which 
includes any space made inaccessible by the 
evaporator) (see H.2.3); 


c) The volume of air ducts required for proper 
cooling and operation of the unit; and 


d) Space occupied by shelves moulded into the inner 
door panel. 


For clarification, through the door ice and water 
dispensers and the insulating hump are not included 
in the volume. No part of the dispenser unit shall be 
included as volume. 


H-2.3 Volume of Evaporator Space 


The volume of the evaporator space shall be the product 
of the depth, width and height. 


The total volume to be deducted shall comprise the 
following: 


a) In the case of a forced air evaporator, the total 
volume of the evaporator cover and behind the 
evaporator cover shall be deducted, including the 
volume occupied by the evaporator fan and the fan 
scroll; 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


b) In the case of plate style (for example, roll-bond) 
evaporators, the volume behind vertically installed 
plate-style evaporators and the volume above 
horizontally installed plate-style evaporators if 
the distance between the horizontal plate-style 
evaporator and the nearest liner surface above is 
less than 50 mm. Removable drip trays/troughs 
shall be considered as not being present; and 


c) In the case of refrigerant filled shelving, the 
volume above the uppermost shelf and below the 
lowermost shelf, if the distance between the shelf 
and the nearest horizontal plane of the cabinet 
inner wall is less than or equal to 50 mm. All other 
refrigerated shelves are considered as not present. 


H-2.4 Two-Star Sections and/or Compartments 


Two-star sections and/or compartments are permitted 
both in the door and in the remaining volume of 
a refrigerating appliance when all the following 
conditions are met: 


a) The two-star section or compartment is marked 
with the appropriate identification symbol 
[see 5.2 IS 17550 (Part 1)]; 


b) The two-star section and/or compartment 15 
separated from the three-star of four-star volume 
by a partition, container, or similar construction; 


c) The rated total two-star section volume does 
not exceed 20 percent of the total volume of the 
compartment; 


d) The instructions give clear guidance regarding the 
two-star section and/or compartment; and 


e) The volume of the two-star section and/or 
compartment is stated separately and is not 
included in the three-star or four-star volume. 


H-3 KEY FOR FIGURES 15 THROUGH 19 


Figure 15 through 19 show typical configurations 
and are not intended to cover all design variations. A 
combination of components from the various figures 
may be used for other designs. The key to the drawings 
in this Annex is set out below: 


INTERNAL COMPONENTS 
DEDUCTED FROM VOLUME 


INCLUDED VOLUME 


CABINET LINER 
(NOT INCLUDED) 


INTERNAL COMPONENTS 
INCLUDED IN THE VOLUME 


These figures graphically support procedures for 
determination of volume described in H-2.2 and H-2.3. 


DEDUCT THE VOLUME BEHIND 
THE EVAP COVER 


DEDUCT THE VOLUME OF 
THE EVAP COVER 


DEDUCT THE VOLUME OF 
AIR DUCT 


DEDUCT THE VOLUME 
OCCUPIED BY CONTROL 
HOUSING 


NOTE — This diagram also applies to all side by side, bottom mounted freezers and separate single compartment refrigerating 
appliances. All deductions are the same. See the next figures for dispenser unit clarification. 


Fic. 15 Basic VIEW oF Top MOUNTED FREEZER APPLIANCE 


56 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


INCLUDE ICE CHUTE VOLUME 
UP TO DISPENSER FLAP 
Ж 


NOTE — For automatic ice-makers, plugs or covers over the chute (e.g. during shipping or periods of non-use) аге removed for the 
determination of volume. 


Fic. 16 AUTOMATIC ICE-MAKER DISPENSER AND CHUTE 


INCLUDE ALL 
VOLUME 


Fic. 18 RAIL Or DRAWER TYPE SHELVES OR BASKETS 


57 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


NOTE — Rotary divider is calculated with the door closed. Volume of internal rotary divider (A) is not included. Protrusion from door 


liner (B) is not included. 


Fic. 19 Rotary DIVIDER OF FRESH FOOD COMPARTMENT FOR FRENCH DOORS 


ANNEX J 
( Clauses 6.8.5, B-3.2, E-3.3, E-4.3, E-4.6 and G-2) 
( Informative ) 


WORKED EXAMPLES OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION CALCULATIONS 


J-1 EXAMPLE CALCULATION 
ENERGY CONSUMPTION 


OF DAILY 


In accordance with 6.8.2, the daily energy consumption 
of a refrigerating appliance with a defrost system (with 
its own defrost control cycle) is given by: 


A Еј x24 


E ,. = Рх24+ 


daily 
t 
df 


...60 
The average temperature for each compartment for this 
temperature control setting is given by: 

АТһ, 

At 


T. 


average 


=T + 


4 ...61 


An automatic defrost refrigerator-freezer had the 
following test results at 32 °C: 


Steady state power P,, (Annex B): 43.2 W 
Steady state fresh food temperature 7, : 3.6 °C 
Steady state freezer temperature 7,: 19.4 °C 


Incremental defrost energy ДЕ, (Annex С): 94.3 Wh 


df32 


58 


Accumulated temperature during defrost in fresh food 
АТА (Annex C): + 1.6 Kh 


df32 
Accumulated temperature during defrost in freezer 
ATh ,.., (Annex C): + 8.5 Kh 


df32 
(Annex D): 23.4 h 


Defrost interval At 
Daily energy and average compartment temperature at 
an ambient of 32 ?C is: 


94.3x 24 


df32 


E = 43.2х24+ =1134Wh/d 
daily32 
ЖЕТ 
averageFF 23 .4 
= —19.4+ = 19.049 C 
averageFZ 23 4 


J-2 VARIABLE DEFROST - CALCULATION 
OF DEFROST INTERVALS 


In Annex D. variable defrost controllers use a 
calculation approach to determine the defrost interval 
for determination of daily energy consumption. 


The defrost interval for a variable defrost system is 
given by: 

Af, max ХАГ 
[02x (At, А )+А min | 


d-min 


Alas; = 


2262. 
where 


defrost interval for the test ambient 
temperature of 32 °C; 


maximum possible defrost interval 
at an ambient temperature of 32 °C 
as specified by the manufacturer, 
in hours of elapsed time; and 


minimum possible defrost interval 
at an ambient temperature of 32 °C 
as specified by the manufacturer, 
in hours of elapsed time. 


The following limits are placed on the input variable 


Ata a aNd At, > irrespective of the manufacturer's 
specification: 

timin ^ normally greater than 6 h and shall 
not exceed 12 h at an ambient 
temperature of 32 °C (elapsed time); 
Ақ, Z Shall not exceed 96 h at an ambient 
temperature of 32 °C (elapsed time). 
Ақ, ^ Shall be greater than Аг, at an 


ambient temperature of 32 ?C. 


A manufacturer has a product where the elapsed time 
for relevant defrost intervals are: 

a) At 
b) At, тах 
an 
с) The condition that Az, shall be greater than 

At, . at an ambient temperature of 32 °C is 


d-min 


satisfied. 


At an ambient temperature of 32 °C the value of 
At... 18: 


df32 


‚ is 6.5 h at an ambient temperature of 32 °C; 


d-min 


is 44 h at an ambient temperature of 32 °C; 


А 44х 6.5 
"* [o2x(44-6.5)«6.5] = 
= 20.43 h (elapsed time) 


= 20.4 h (rounded to the nearest 0.1) 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


J-3 EXAMPLES OF INTERPOLATION 


J-3.1 General 


This clause (J-3) provides examples for linear 
interpolation, triangulation and solutions using matrices. 
The examples provided are useful for checking that 
automated systems for analysis are calculating results 
correctly. 


J-3.2 Linear Interpolation 
J-3.2.1 General 


As set out in E-3.3 the equations used for linear 
interpolation are: 


f = PM 
(Т,-Т,) ...64 
Т-Т,-/х(Т,-Т,) 65 
Е-Е +f x(E,- E.) ...66 


The following examples illustrate how these equations 
can be applied to test data. 


J-3.2.2 Single Compartment Example 


A separate freezer had the following test results at 
32 °C in accordance with 6.8.2 as set out in Table 4. 


Validity check: Т, and 7,, shall not be more than 4 К 
apart. Result = OK. 


As set out in E-3, it is necessary to perform calculations 
for each compartment i from 1 to n compartments. 
Each of these iterations is referred to as a loop. There 
is only a single compartment so only | loop needs to be 
performed in this case. 


Step 1: Calculate f; = [-18.0 — (-19.6)]/[(-17.1) 
(-19.6)| = 0.640. Verify that this is higher 
than 0 and lower than 1. Result = OK. (This 
is always the case if one test point lies above 
the target temperature and one below the target 
temperature). 


Calculate 7; = -19.6 40.640 x [(-17.1) — 
(-19.6)| = -18.0 (only needed for j = 1). As 
there is only one compartment this delivers the 
target temperature back for compartment i. 


Step 2: 


Step 3: Verify that for all 7, its value is equal or below 
target. In this case this is true. Then calculate E 


= 789 + 0.640 x (668 — 789) = 711.6 Wh/d. 


Table 4 Example of Linear Interpolation, Single Compartment 


SI No. Parameter Test 1 Test 2 Type Target 
() (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Compartment A Tpi =—19.6 °C Tyo =-17.1 °C Freezer —18.0 °C 
ii) Energy Еау = 789 Wh/d Еһшу2- 668 Wh/d 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Interpolation is on Compartment A and the slope Si is 
given by: 


| (5 - E) 
e ov ...67 
68 — 789 
S = (5645 182) = — 48.4 Wh/d/k 


^ [(=17.1)-(-19.6) | 


J-3.2.3 Two Compartments 


First an example is given with two compartments 
with one point above and one point below the target 
temperatures for both compartments as shown in 
Table 5. 


Validity check: Compartment A temperatures of both 
points are within 4 K of each other as well as for 
compartment B, so linear interpolation can be used. 


Loop 1 for i = A (Compartment A) 


End of loop for i = A 
Loop 2 for i = B (Compartment B) 


Step 1: Calculate / = [-18 – (-16.5)]/[-18.9 – (-16.5)] 
= 0.625. Verify that this is higher than 0 and 
lower than 1. Result is OK. 


Step 2: Calculate 7; values: 
T,—4.9 + 0.625 x (1.4 — 4.9) - 2.71 °C 
T, ——16.5 + 0.625 х [-18.9 - (-16.5)] = 
—18.0 °C 

Step 3: T, less than or equal to target of 4 °C? Result: 
true 
T, less than or equal to target of —18 °C? 
Result: true 
All interpolated temperature are below 


target so energy consumption interpolation: 
Ері, = 822.1 + 0.625 х (935.6 — 822.1) = 
893.0 Wh/d. 


Step 1: Calculate f = (4.0 — 4.9)/(1.4 – 4.9) = 0.257. End of loop fori = В 
Verify that this is higher than 0 and lower than Тһе final interpolated energy consumption is Ej. = 
1. Result is OK. minimum valid value of E4 -tar and Ep tar Which means 
Step 2: Calculate T values: that Elinear = Евлаг = 893.0 Wh/d (noting that E, tar is 
T,= 4.9 + 0.257 x (14 — 4.9) = 4.0 °C осе 
_ — Interpolation is on Compartment B and the slope 
T, = —16.5 + 0.257 x [-18.9 16.5 Š 
215 12°C l ( ) S, is —47.292 Wh/d/K. 
Step 3: T, less than or equal to target of 4 °C? This example is illustrated in Fig. 20 and Fig. 21 which 
Result: true show that only interpolating on compartment B gives a 
li It in thi : 
T, less than or equal to target of — 18 °С? ны CHR . . 
Result: false In the second example neither of the test points has both 
Not all interpolated temperature are below compartments below the target temperatures as shown 
Target so na neres поло аа calculation: in Table 6. This can still lead to valid interpolation 
E š = ула БУ P ` cases. If not valid, the algorithm will identify this. 
A-tar - ы 
Table 5 Example 1 of Linear Interpolation, Two Compartments 
( Clause J-3.2.3 ) 
SI No. Parameter Test 1 Test 2 Type Target 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Compartment A Ty, =+4.9°C T, T tla cc Fresh food +4.0 °C 
ii) Compartment B Tg, =—16.5 °C Tg, = -18.9 °С Freezer —18.0 °C 
iii) Energy Еу = 822.1 Wh/d Et, = 935.6 Whid 
Table 6 Example 2 of Linear Interpolation, Two Compartment 
( Clause J-3.2.3 ) 
SI No. Parameter Test 1 Test 2 Type Target 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Compartment A Ty, = +5.2 °С ТА) = 42.2 °C Fresh food +4.0 °C 
11) Compartment B Thi = 18.8 °C Bim 73°C Freezer —18.0 °C 
iii) Energy E = 853.9 Wh/d Е ло = 828.6 Wh/d 


Daily1 


60 


Daily2 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


-16.5; 4.9 


T A-tar; 


-17.12; 4.0 


-21 -20 -19 -18 


-17 


60 _ 

e 

50 D 

2 

| 

2; 

40 & 

n. 

" 

3.0 = 

< 

> 

20 Ш 

= 

= 

c 

10 Z£ 

= 

% 
0.0 

16 -15 


COMPARTMENT В TEMPERATURE (°C) 


FIG. 20 EXAMPLE LINEAR INTERPOLATION TWO COMPARTMENTS (COMPARTMENT B CRITICAL) 


10.0 2. 
e 
4.9 4.0 1 
— — 5.0 x TARGETA 
о = И co: E 
| ~ 1.4 < — @— СОМРА 
| 0.0 T 
| с — €- — TA-tar 
ш 
| -5.0 E TARGET В 
| 10.0 ü —— @ — СОМРВ 
| Е 
— — B-tar 
| š ЕС 
ащ 
-150 = 
"uL | -18.0 Š 
B ү 
820 851.3 893.0 920 “ 
ENERGY Wh / DAY 


FIG. 21 EXAMPLE LINEAR INTERPOLATION TWO COMPARTMENTS (COMPARTMENT B CRITICAL) 


Validity check: Compartment A temperatures of both 

points are within 4 K of each other as well as for 

compartment B, so linear interpolation can be used. 
NOTE — In this example (and the following example) the 
temperature of Compartment A and Compartment B are 
moving in opposite directions. This would normally only be 
possible where there are two independent user-adjustable 
temperature controls and where Compartment A is set colder 
for test Point 2 and Compartment B is set warmer for test 
Point 2. 


Loop 1 for i= A (Compartment A) 
Step 1: Calculate f = (4.0 — 5.2)/(2.2 — 5.2) = 0.400. 


Verify that this is higher than 0 and lower than 
1. Result is OK. 


61 


Step 2: 


Step 3: 


Calculate T values: 
Т,- 5.2 +0.400 x (2.2-5.2) = 4.0 °C 
= 18.8 40.400 х [-17.3 — (-18.8)] = -18.20 


B 
ue 
T, less than or equal to target of 4 °C? Result: 
true 


T, less than or equal to target of —18 °C? 
Result: true 


Allinterpolatedtemperatures are below targetso 
the interpolated energy consumption becomes: 
Е А tar = 853.9 +0.400 х(828.6 — 853.9) = 843.8 
Wh/d. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


End of loop for i =A 
Loop 2 for i= B (Compartment B) 


Step 1: Calculate f = [18.0 (-18.8)]/ 
[17.3 — (-18.8)] = 0.533. Verify that this is 
higher than 0 and lower than 1. Result is OK. 


Step 2: Calculate Т values: 
T, = 5.2 + 0.533 х (2.2-5.2) 


= 3.60 °C 


T, = — 18.8 + 0.533 x [-17.3 — (-18.8)] = 


—18.0 °C 


Step 3: T, less than or equal to target of 4 °C? Result: 


true 


T, less than or equal to target of —18 °C? 


Result: true 


АП interpolated temperatures are below 
target so energy consumption interpolation: 


E, 853.9 + 0.533 (828.6 — 853.9) = 840.4 
Whid. 


End of loop for i = B 


The final interpolated energy consumption is 
Elinear = minimum value of Еда and E,q, which 
means that E. = E... = 840.4 Wh/d. 


linear в таг 
Interpolation is on Compartment B and the slope 5, is 
—16.87 Wh/d/K. 


This example is illustrated in Fig. 22 and Fig. 23 which 
show that there are two valid interpolation points. The 
minimum consumption value is taken as this is closer to 
the optimal case where both compartment temperatures 
would be at their respective target temperatures. 


The third example is to show what happens if there is 
no valid interpolation point possible. Example data is 
shown in Table 7. 


-21 -20 


-19 -18 


60 _ 
9 
50 H 
TA-tar ; x 
-18.20; 4.0 Е 
40 © 
ТВ - tar ; ш 
-18.0; 3.60 = 
30 E 
< 
-17.3; 2.2 = 
2 @ 
= 
= 
x 
10 2 
= 
8 

0.0 

-17 -16 -15 


COMPARTMENT B TEMPERATURE (*C) 


FIG. 22 EXAMPLE INTERPOLATION WHERE BOTH TEST POINTS 
HAVE BOTH COMPARTMENTS BELOW TARGET (TWO VALID RESULTS) 


ENERGY Wh / DAY 


10.0 
"m 5.2 о 
pum с” 50 d TARGET A 
cone wes or 
22 e— 2 
Е ---ө--- COMPA 
00 5 
ш 
g көшесі a TA- tar 
-5.0 H 
– TARGET B 
2 
-10.0 Hi 
= — —@— — СОМРВ 
< 
-18.0 ы” eg = Tus 
473° ар ias 9 
| é ó = -20.0 
820 8404 843.8 


FIG. 23 EXAMPLE INTERPOLATION WHERE BOTH TEST POINTS 
HAVE BOTH COMPARTMENTS BELOW TARGET (TWO VALID RESULTS) 


62 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 7 Example 3 of Linear Interpolation, Two Compartments 
( Clause J-3.2.3 ) 


SI No. Parameter Test 1 Test 2 Type Target 
() 0 6) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Compartment A T = +5.2 °С T s = +2.3 °С Fresh food +4.0 °C 
ii) Compartment B Tg, 7-18.3 °C Tg, = -16.8 °C Freezer —18.0 °C 
iti) Energy Е мм = 853.9 Wh/d Epai = 828.6 Wh/d 


Validity check: Compartment A temperatures of both 
points are within 4 K of each other as well as for 
compartment B, so linear interpolation can be used. 


Loop 1 for i= A (compartment A) 


Step 1: Calculate / = (4.0 — 5.2)/(2.3 — 5.2) = 0.414. 
Verify that this is higher than 0 and lower than 
1. Result is OK. 


Validity check: All compartment temperatures for 
both points lie within 4 K of each other, so linear 
interpolation can be used. 


Loop 1 for i= A (compartment A) 


Step 1: Calculate / = (4.0 — 5.5)/(2.4 — 5.5) = 0.484. 
Verify that this is higher than 0 and lower than 
1. Result is OK. 


Step 2: Calculate Т values: Step 2: Calculate Т, values: 
T,=5.2 + 0.414 x (2.3 - 52) = 4.0 °C T, = 5.5 + 0.484 x (2.4 — 5.5) = 4.0 °C 
T, = –18.3+ 0.414 х [-16.8 — (-18.3)] = T, = -16.5-0.484 x [-18.9 - (-16.5)] 
—17.68 °C = -17.66 °C; loop can be stopped as 
Step 3: T, less than or equal to target of 4 °C? Result: 2—18 °C: E, „= invalid. 
true As one of the compartments is above target for 


T, less than or equal to target of —18 °C? 
Result: false 


Not all interpolated temperatures are below 
target so no interpolated energy consumption 
can be calculated: E, -tar = invalid. 


End of loop for í = А 
Loop 2 for i= B (Compartment B) 


Step 1: Calculate f = [-18— (-18.3)]/[-16.8 – (-18.3)] 
— 0.200. Verify that this is higher than 0 and 


loop І, calculations can be stopped (if done manually). In 
practice all values would be calculated simultaneously 
in a spreadsheet and validity of each point checked 
afterwards (see table below for an example). 


End of loop for = А 
Loop 2 for i= B (Compartment B) 


Step 1: Calculate f = [-18— (-16.5)]/[-18.9 – (-16.5)] 
= 0.625. Verify that this is higher than 0 and 
lower than 1. Result is OK. 


lower than 1. Result is OK. Step 2: Calculate 7; values: 

Step 2: Calculate Т values: T, — 5.5 + 0.625 х (2.4 —5.5) = 3.56 °C 
T = 5.2 + 0.200 x (2.3 — 5.2) = 4.62 °C T, = -16.5 + 0.625 x[-18.9 — (-16.5)] = 
T, = 18.3 + 0.200 x [-16.8 - (-18.3)] =—18.0 °C -18.0 °C 

Step 3: T, less than or equal to target of 4 °C? Result: Tg 1.3 + 0.625 x (2.0 — 1.3) = — 0.76 °C 
false T, = -10.7 + 0.625 x [-13.9 — (—10.7)]х` = 
T, less than or equal to target of —18 °C? -12.7 °C 
Result: true Step 3: 7, less than or equal to target of 4 °C? Result: 

true 


Not all interpolated temperatures are below 
target so no interpolated energy consumption 
can be calculated: Ep ja, = invalid. 


End of loop for i= B 


The final interpolated energy consumption cannot be 
derived as neither Ел у nor Ё, „ have valid values. This 


example is illustrated in Fig. 24 and Fig. 25. Another test 
point needs to be selected. 


J-3.2.4 Multiple Compartments 


The next example deals with the case that two test point 
are available for a cabinet with 4 compartments. Example 
data is given in Table 8. 


63 


T, less than or equal to target of —18 °C? 
Result: true 


T, less than or equal to target of 0 °C? Result: 
true 


T, less than or equal to target of —12 °C? 
Result: true 


All interpolated temperatures are below target 
so the interpolated energy consumption can be 
calculated: E, = 822.1 + 0.625 х (935.6 — 


B-tar 


822.1) = 893.0 Wh/d. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


60 _ 
-18.3; O 
5.2 n 
5.0 
TB - tar; ШЕ 
= : > 
18.0; 4.62 ТА - tar; 46 < 
-17.68;4 ` L 
[ащ 
" 
3.0 ғ 
« 
= 
-16.8; 2.3 
20 å 
= 
H} 
x 
1.0 a 
z 
% 
0.0 
-21 -20 -19 -18 -17 -16 -15 
COMPARTMENT B TEMPERATURE (°C) 
FiG. 24 EXAMPLE INTERPOLATION WHERE NEITHER TEST PoINT 
Has BorH COMPARTMENTS BELOW TARGET (No VALID RESULTS) 
10.0 
a0 E z TARGET A 
ee ee 5.0 u 
23e—- = 
— a = OMP A 
00 @ ый © 
2 
= == —- TA -tar 
50 Ш 
= TARGET B 
z 
100 E 
Е ——e —— СОМР В 
се 
15.0 £ 
" vot - acl Ross - 
Б === ee 5180 6 Тв tar 
== 18.3 ° 
e -20.0 
820 843.4 848.8 
ENERGY Wh / DAY 
FiG. 25 EXAMPLE INTERPOLATION WHERE NEITHER TEST POINT 
Has BorH COMPARTMENTS BELOW TARGET (NO VALID RESULTS) 
Table 8 Example of Linear Interpolation, Test Data for Four Compartments 
( Clause J-3.2.3 ) 
SI No. Parameter Test 1 Test 2 Compartment Type Target 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Compartment A °C +55 +2.4 Fresh food +4.0 
il) Compartment B °C -16.5 -18.9 Freezer(Four-star) — 18.0 
iii) Compartment C °C +1.3 -2.0 Zero-star 0.0 
iv) Compartment D °C —10.7 -13.9 Frozen(Two-star) — 12.0 
v) Energy Wh/d 822.1 935.6 


NOTE — Column (6) indicates interpolation at the compartment target temperature. 


64 


End of loop for i = B 
Loop 3 for i = C (compartment C) 


Step 1: Calculate / = (0.0 —1.3)/(-2.0 — 1.3) = 0.394. 
Verify that this is higher than 0 and lower 
than 1. Result is OK. 

Calculate T, values: 


T, = 5.5 + 0.394 x (2.4 — 5.5) = 4.28 °C; 
loop can be stopped as > 4 °C: 
E... = Invalid. 


C-tar 


End of loop for i = C 
Loop 4 for i = D (compartment D) 


Step 1: Calculate f; = [-12.0 (-10.7)]/[-13.9 
(—10.7)] = 0.406. Verify that this is higher than 
0 and lower than 1. Result is OK. 


Calculate T, values: 


T, = 5.5 + 0.406 x (2.4 — 5.5) = 4.24 °C; loop 
can be stopped as > 4 °C: Е, invalid. 


End of loop for i= D 


Step 2: 


Step 2: 


The final interpolated energy consumption 18 
we minimum value of Е, to Eper As only 
ват has a valid value, this is by definition the E... 


value (893 Wh/d). 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Interpolation is on Compartment B and the slope 
S, 15 —47.29 Wh/d/K. 


The calculations for this example are shown in 
Table 9 and are illustrated in Fig. 26. Moving from 
coldest to warmest, Compartment B (with energy ЕЁ.) 
is the first to cross its target temperature (while all 
other compartments are less than target temperature). 
The data can also be laid out in a table, which is useful 
when calculating the results using a spreadsheet. Blue 
text is where compartment temperatures are at or below 
target, red text are temperatures above target. Only loop 
2 (Compartment B at target) is valid (column 3, energy 
in green text) as all compartments are at or below target 
temperature. 


J-3.3 Two Compartments — Manual Triangulation 


For this example, we consider a refrigerator-freezer 
with two compartments used for triangulation. The test 
data for 3 points is given in Table 10. This example 
provides a worked example of the equations in E-4. 


All 3 test points lie within the +4 K of the target 
temperature for each compartment, so the points are 
valid. The 3 test points surround the intersection of 
the target temperatures (as illustrated in Fig. 27, so 
triangulation can proceed. 


Table 9 Example of Linear Interpolation, Results for Four Compartments 
( Clause J-3.2.3 ) 


SI. No. Parameter Interpolation Interpolation Interpolation Interpolation 
Compartment A Compartment B Compartment C Compartment D 

(loop 1) (loop 2) (loop 3) (loop 4) 

о) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Ж 0.483 87 0.625 0.393 94 0.406 25 

ii) Compartment A °C 4.0* 3.5625 4.278 8 4.240 6 

iii) Compartment B °C —17.661 —18.0* —17.445 -17.475 

іу) Compartment С °C —0.296 77 – 0.762 5 0.0% —0.040 625 

v) Compartment D °C — 12.248 -12.7 — 11.961 -12.0% 

уі) Energy Wh/d interpolated 877.02 893.04 866.81 868.21 


NOTE 


* indicates interpolation at the compartment target temperature. 


Red text indicates that the compartment temperature is above the target temperature (not valid). 


Blue text indicates that the compartment temperature is at or below target temperature (valid). 


Red text for energy indicates an invalid value as one or more compartment temperatures are above target temperature for that interpolation. 


Green text for energy indicates a valid value as all compartment temperatures are at or below target for that interpolation. 


Table 10 Example of Triangulation, Two Compartments 
( Clause J-3.3 ) 


SI No. Parameter Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Point 4 (calc) Type Target 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Compartment A -20.7 -17.5 -16.0 -18.435 8 Freezer —18.0 
ii) Compartment B +6.5 +0.8 #71 +6.789 Fresh Food +4.0 
iii) Energy Wh/d 1 390 1310 1 120 1 259.93 


65 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


o TARGET A 
m —-e—— COMPA 
= — —9— —  TA-tar 

5 TARGET В 
gl ---ө--- СОМРВ 
= — —9— —  TB-ter 

= TARGET C 
a —-e—— СОМРС 
Ë — —9— — Tc-tar 

24 --------  TARGETD 
= — e—  CovP D 
° ---ө--- Ta 


ENERGY Wh / DAY 


FiG. 26 EXAMPLE INTERPOLATION FOR 4 COMPARTMENTS 


Firstly, check that Point Q lies inside the triangle formed 
by test points 1, 2 and 3. Calculate the following two 
parameters as set out in E-4.2.2: 


Check] = (7, B-tar | Ty )x(T,, - Ta) } 
(7, tar -Т,)х(1,,- Та) 
[as tar -Ta)x(T — Тл») | 
(Т, tar - T. )x (Ts; - Т) 

Check2 = | (Ts. tar Ne Т») n 
(ТА tar -1,)<(1,- Т) 
(Та Т) (Т - Tas) | 
(Ta. ~ Tas )* (Toi — Tos) 


Point Q lies within the triangle formed by Points 1, 2 
and 3 if the following inequality is true: 


IF {[Check 1 > 0] AND [Check 2 > 0]) = TRUE ...68 


NOTE — It is recommended that these equations be entered 
into a spreadsheet for regular use to avoid errors. A value 
of 0 for Checkl or Check2 indicates that the Point Q lies 
exactly on one of the triangle sides and that linear 
interpolation could yield the same result with less data. 


Іп this case, Check] and Check2 yield the following 
results: 


4 
Checkl = 
18- 


(4-6.5)х(-17.5-(-20.7)) 
(-18-(-20.7))х(0.8-6.5) | 
de 8)x (-16- (17.5) | 
| 


18-(-17.5))х(7.1-0.8) 


Check1 = 58.750 5 


Check2 = 106.291 5 


As both Check] and Check2 are greater than 0, Point Q 
lies inside the triangle formed by Points 1, 2 and 3, so 
triangulation using manual interpolation or matrices can 
proceed. 


An alternative approach to check that Point Q lies inside 
the triangle (using the same principles) is set out in E-4.6. 
Calculate the Determinant of each of the following four 
matrices: 


D for [20.7 6.5 1 
—17.5 0.8 1 
—16.0 7.11 
—-18.0 4.01 
-17.5 0.81 
—16.0 7.11 
-20.7 6.51 
18.04.0 1 
—16.0 7.1 1 
-20.7 6.5 1 
—17.5 0.81 
18.04.01 
As a check D. = D +D, + D, 
28.71 = 7.95 +13.37 + 7.39 


If D and D, and D, are the same sign as Do, then Point Q 
is Inside of the triangle (correct). 


= 28.71 
D, for = 7.95 
D, for 


-]13:37 


D, for = 7.39 


correct 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


-16.0; 7.1 


COMPARTMENT B TEMPERATURE (°C) 


-22.0 


-21.0 


-20.0 -19.0 


-18.0 


-16.0 


COMPARTMENT A TEMPERATURE (°C) 


FIG. 27 EXAMPLE OF TRIANGULATION (TEMPERATURES) 


The equations to determine the values for manual 
interpolation are set out below. 


Calculate the temperature in Compartment A at Point 4, 
which is the intersection of a line through Point 2 and 
Point Q (target) and a line between Points | and 3. 


ЛЕН i Ту — ЖЕ 
T DEM | " + 
Т, х (Ту – Та) 
T = (Т -Тл) 
С (7,,-Т,) (7,,-Т,,) 
(Т, 2m (74; Se cuc) 
2.69 
-18.0)х(0.8-4.0 
= CIO) > 
(-20.7)х(7.1-6.5) 
T= aea e = —18.435 8°C 
(7.1-6.5) 
((-16.0)-(-20.7)) - 
(0.8-4.0) 


((-17.5) - (-18.0)) 


Fig. 27 shows clearly that Point Q lies within the 
triangle of test Points 1 to 3. Equation (33) above also 
confirms that Point Q lies inside the triangle formed by 
Points 1 to 3. An additional check may be performed 
as follows: 


Т,, "s T dk 5 Т,, or 


Duc > Тапа 


A-tar 


67 


T E Та > T, or 

Tay > TA a Tu 

In this example the first condition of each is met: 
—18.435 8 °С<—18 °C<-17.5 °C and 
-20.79С<-18.435 8 ?C«—16.0 °C 

Where is there any doubt whether the Point Q lies inside 
the triangle (for example, close to one of the sides of 


the triangle), mathematical evaluation in accordance 
with equation 68 shall be used to confirm validity. 


The interpolated energy consumption at the temperature 
for Point 4 between test Points 1 and 3 is determined as 
follows (compartment A temperatures are used): 


(Та -T4) 
(T, -T,4) E 
-18.4358)-(-20.7) | 
((-16.0)-(-20.7)| 
=1259.93 Wh / d 


The calculated energy consumption at the target 
temperature (Point Q) using temperature and energy 
data for Point 4 above and test Point 2 is determined 
as follows (compartment A temperatures are used) is 
given by: 


E, = E, +(Е, -E )x 


a= 


E, 21390 (1120—1390)x ( 


T... — T, 
Eu = E, * (E, gy at a2) 
(7,4 - Та) wohl 
-18.0)-(-17.5 
Eppa =1130+(1 259.93) x ( ) ( )] 


[ (-18.435 8) - (-17.5)] 
=1283.25 Wh /d 


E.g, 15 the energy consumption determined using 


triangulation of compartments A and B. This is 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


illustrated in Fig. 28. Note that the results above for 7', , 
E, and Е, g are normally calculated without rounding. 
Small differences will occur if the rounded values 
shown above are used in the equations in this standard. 
Unrounded values should be used for all calculations 
where possible. Calculations are normally undertaken 
in a spreadsheet or other mathematical tool. 


J-3.4 Two Compartments-Triangulation Using 
Matrices 


For this worked example, we consider the same 
refrigerator-freezer with two compartments used 
for triangulation in the previous example. The use 
of equation 68 has already confirmed that the 3 test 
points surround Point Q. Note that it is not necessary 
to calculate a value for Point 4 when matrices are used. 


The basic premise ofthe approach on two compartments 
using matrices is to assume that we have 3 simultaneous 
equations to describe the 3 test points as follows: 


FE $A ФВХ Т -Е, 
E t4xT t Bx T, = E, 
E TAx T, tBx T, = E, 
In this example, the equations are: 
E +A x (20.7) + Bx 6.5 = 1 390 
E + Ax (17.5) + B x 0.8 = 1310 
E, +A x (-16.0) + Bx 7.1 = 1 120 


The value of É is conceptually the energy consumption 
of the refrigerating appliance at the given ambient 
test temperature when the temperature of both 
compartments is 0 °C (which will not be possible to 
achieve in practice). 


These three equations can be organised into matrices 
as follows: 


[M,,] x [C] = [E] 12 
where 
[M,,] isa 3 3 matrix of 1 (constant), Тл and Tp for 
each test point 
[C,,] isa 3x 1 matrix of E,, A and B (constants to be 
solved) 
[E] isa3 x 1 matrix of E,, E, and E, 
1- 20.7 6.5| | E, 1390 
1—17.5 0.8 |x} A |=|1310 
1-16.0 7.1 B 1120 


To solve for the unknown constants matrix [C,,], find 
the solution to the matrix multiplication [М]! x [Е, ] 


In this example, [M,,] is equal to: 
—3.88192 +1.49669 +3.385 23 
—0.21944 +0.02090 +0.198 54 
0.05225  —0.16371 —0.11146 
The matrix multiplication [M,,] x [£,] yields the 
following matrix for Е, A and B 
356.2522 
[СА] =| —55.276 9 
—16.997 6 
Using the solved constants from matrix [C, ], the energy 
consumption at any combination of compartment 


temperatures can be accurately estimated by the 
equation: 


1450 
-20.7; 1 390 


1400 


1350 


1300 
18.435 


8; 1 259. 


-17.5; 1 310 


1250 


1200 


ENERGY Wh/DAY 


1150 


-16.0; 1 


1100 


1050 


1000 


-22.0 -21.0 -200 -19.0 


-148.0 -17.0 -16.0 -15.0 -14.0 


COMPARTMENT A TEMPERATURE (°C) 


FIG. 28 EXAMPLE OF TRIANGULATION (TEMPERATURE AND ENERGY) 


68 


Ex, = 356.252 2 — 55.276 9 x T, — 16.997 6 x T, 


The energy consumption at the target temperature for 
Compartment A = —18.0 and Compartment B = + 4.0 
is given by: 
E ga 336.2522 — 55.276 9 х (-18.0) — 16.997 6 x 
4.0 = 1 283.246 Wh/d 


NOTE — The result using matrices gives exactly the same 

result as manual interpolation as set out in the previous sub 

clause. In the examples documented in this sub clause and 

the previous sub clause, some errors in the last significant 

figure may occur due to rounding. This would not occur if 

spreadsheets are used to calculate the results without rounding. 
The energy impact of a change in compartment 
temperatures can be readily calculated from these 
parameters. 


For Compartment A (freezer), the change in energy 
resulting from a 1K warmer compartment temperature 
is given by: 
А -552769 _ 
Е 1283.246 


target 


-4.31% 


That is, 1 K warmer freezer temperature will result 
in a 4.31 percent decrease in energy consumption 
(for a constant fresh food temperature). 


Similarly, for Compartment B (fresh food), the change 
in energy resulting from a 1K warmer compartment 
temperature is given by: 


B _ -16.997 _ 
Ej. 1283.246 


target 


1.32 % 


That 15,1 K warmer fresh food temperature will result 
in a 1.32 percent decrease in energy consumption (for a 
constant freezer temperature). 


J-3.5 Three Compartments-Triangulation Using 
Matrices 


For this worked example, we consider a 
refrigerator-freezer with three compartments and four 
points used for triangulation, as shown in Table 11. 


Firstly we check that the Point Q lies inside the 
tetrahedron formed by the four test points. Calculate 
the Determinant of the following five matrices: 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


—16.0 6.4 -10.5 1 
-17.4 2.4 -10.5 1 
—18.0 4.0 -12.0 1 
-18.8 1.3 -12.51 
—16.0 6.4 10.5 1 
-17.4 2.4 -10.5 1 
-20.14.3-14.21 
—18.0 4.0 -12.0 1 
—16.0 6.4 -10.5 1 
-17.4 2.4 -10.5 1 
—20.1 4.3 -14.2 1 | = -4.075 
-18.8 1.3 -12.51 
—18.0 4.0 -12.0 1 
-17.4 2.4 -10.5 1 
-20.14.3-14.21 
-18.8 1.3 -12.5 1 
—16.0 6.4 -10.5 1 
—18.0 4.0 -12.0 1 
As a check D, =D + D, +D, +D, 
11.898 = -3.190 – 3.022 — 4.075 


If D, and D, and D, and D, are the same sign as D,, then 
Point Q is inside of the tetrahedron (correct). 


D, for = —3.190 


D, for 


= –3.022 


D, for 


D, for ——].611 


1.611 = correct 


As per the previous example, the data can be organised 
into a matrices as follows: 

[M] * [C4] = [Е, ] gl 
is a 4 x 4 matrix of 1 (constant), 7,, T, and T, 
for each test point 


[C4] isa4 x 1 matrix of E, A, B and C (constants to 
be solved) 


(М, 


[Ej] isa4 x 1 matrix of E, E, E, and Е. 
—20.1 +4.3 -142 1 E, 1250 
—18.8 +13 -12.1 1 A 1220 
-160 +64 -10.5 1| B | |1080 
-174 +24 -10.5 1 C 1150 


D for |-20.1 4.3 –14.2 1 | =—11.898 To solve for the unknown constants matrix [Сл], find 
18.8 1.3 —12.5 1 | the solution to the matrix multiplication [M4] ! x [E41] 
Table 11 Example of Triangulation, Three Compartments 
( Clause J-3.5 ) 
SI No. Parameter Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Test 4 Type Target 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Compartment A —20.1 —18.8 —16.0 —17.4 Freezer —18.0 
ii) Compartment B +4.3 +13 +6.4 +2.4 Fresh Food +4.0 
iii) Compartment C -14.2 -12.5 -10.5 -10.5 Two-star -12.0 
iv) Energy Wh/d 1 250 1 220 1 080 1 150 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


In this example, [M44] ' is equal to: 
—8.68129 +10.810 39 +6.496 47 


—0.672 38 +1.243 91 -1.232 98 
+0.235 33 -0.435 37 +0.181 54 
+0.34123 -113І 28 +1.263 24 


The matrix multiplication [M44] х [£4] yields the 
following matrix for Eg, A, B and C 


583.8452 
— 26.466 6 
—8.2366 8 
—11.943 2 


[Ca] E 


Using the solved constants from matrix [C4;], the 
energy consumption at any combination of compartment 
temperatures can be accurately estimated by the equation: 


E se = 583.845 2 – 26.466 6 x T, — 8.236 68 x 
7, — 11.943 2 xT, 


The energy consumption at the target temperature for 
Compartment A = —18.0 and Compartment B = +4.0 and 
Compartment C = —12.0 is given by: 


E ge 283-845 2 – 26.466 6 x (-18) 8.236 68 x 
(+ 4) – 11.943 2 x (12) Wh/d 


— 1 170.616 Wh/d 


The energy impact of a change in compartment 
temperatures can be readily calculated from these 
parameters. 


For compartment A, a 1 K warmer compartment 
temperature will result in a 26.466 6 Wh/d decrease in 
energy consumption (equivalent to 1.10 W decrease or a 
2.26 percent energy decrease per K warmer). 


For compartment B, a 1 K warmer compartment 
temperature will result in a 8.236 68 Wh/d decrease in 
energy consumption (equivalent to 0.343 W decrease ora 
0.70 percent energy decrease per K warmer). 


For compartment C, a 1 K warmer compartment 
temperature will result in a 11.943 2 Wh/d decrease in 
energy consumption (equivalent to 0.498 W decrease ora 
1.02 percent energy decrease per K warmer). 


J-4 CALCULATING THE ENERGY IMPACT OF 
INTERNAL TEMPERATURE CHANGES 


J-4.1 General 


It is often useful to calculate the energy impact of 
internal compartment temperature changes which 
result from changes in user adjustments to temperature 
control settings. Calculation of these values can give a 
good indication of the user-related impact of changes in 
temperature control settings that may occur from user to 
user and can assist with analysis of field data. 


Analysis of a range of refrigerator-freezers tested at 
an ambient of 32 ?C showed that the impact of freezer 


70 


temperature was typically an increase in energy of 
2 percent to 5 percent per degree K compartment 
decrease and for the fresh food temperature was 
typically an increase in energy of 1 percent to 3 percent 
per degree K decrease. These values vary by model. 


While such calculations are of interest and are 

recommended, they are not required as part of this 

standard. 
NOTE — When calculating the energy impact of internal 
temperature changes, great care is required in cases where the 
base ofthe triangle is less than 2 K and the height ofthe triangle 
is less than 1 K. Small or flat shaped triangles may not provide 
an accurate estimate of the impact in either compartment for 
products with 2 user-adjustable temperature controls. 


J-4.2 One Compartment 


Where two-point interpolation using a single control is 
used to calculate the energy for a refrigerating appliance 
with only one compartment, the energy impact per 
degree K change can be readily calculated. 


(TaT) 


tar 


E =E +(Е, E 
*( 2 a (P 7) 


target 


and 
(E, -E) 


ДЕ = 
(7, -Т)ХЕ 


target 
where 
= energy consumption at the target 


temperature determined by linear 
interpolation from test Points 1 and 2; 


target 


measured energy consumption at test 
Point 1 for temperature control setting 
1; 
Е, measured energy consumption at test 
= Point 2 for temperature control setting 
2; 
Ti measured temperature at test Point 1 
= for temperature control setting 1; 
T, measured temperature at test Point 2 
— for temperature control setting 2; 
target temperature for the compartment 
— type as set out in Table 1 ; and 
energy change in percent of the target 
— energy consumption per change in 
degree K for the compartment. 


NOTE — The value of AE is usually negative in that an 


increase in temperature will result in a decrease in energy. 


Using the example for a single compartment from 
J-3.2.2. 


E payı = 789 Wh/d 


T, =-19.6°C 
Е,ш- 668 Wh/d 
T, =-17.1 °C 


2 


Target temperature for freezer: — 18.0 °C 
(-18.0-(-19.6)) 
(-17.1-(-19.6)) 
= 711.56Wh/d 


Е, = 7894 (668-789) x 


therefore: 
_ (668—789) 
(-17.1-(-19.6)) 711.56 
AE — —0.068 per K 


or a 6.8 percent energy increase per degree K decrease in 
internal temperature. 


Where the temperatures in two compartments are 
affected by a single control, the calculation for AE is 
performed for each compartment using the target energy 
consumption for the critical compartment as specified 
in E-3. Because it may not be possible to independently 
vary the compartment temperatures, values for both 
compartments should be reported together. 


Where there are two independent user-adjustable 
temperature controls that are both adjusted (or only 
one is adjusted) to get two test points, the resulting 
calculations will not give a valid representation of the 
temperature energy impact in both compartments. This 
can only be done using triangulation (3 test points for 
2 compartments). 


J-4.3 Triangulation 


Where triangulation is undertaken in accordance with 
E-4, the test points can be used to derive another useful 
characteristic of the refrigerating appliance, which is the 
energy change per degree temperature change for each 
compartment (where there are two compartments and 
two controls changed). This is most reliably done when 
the triangle surrounding Point Q are well spread in both 
compartments (e.g. close to an equilateral triangle, rather 
than a flat triangle). 


To calculate these parameters, exactly the same equations 
in E-4 are used but with an adjusted target temperature for 
each compartment applied separately. For the purposes of 
this analysis, it 1s not critical whether the adjusted target 
temperature Point Q strictly lies inside the triangle of test 
points or not if the data are not used as the basis of a 
primary claim. 


If matrices are used to interpolate (as set out in E-4.4), 
then the derived coefficients A and В are in fact the ДЕА 
and AE, parameters for Compartments A and B (i.e. 
energy change per degree change in each compartment) 
as set out in the examples in J-3.3. This is the easiest 
approach. Alternatively, the impacts can be manually 
determined as set out below. 


For а refrigerator-freezer with 2  user-adjustable 
temperature controls, the recommended approach is: 


a) Determine the energy consumption at Point Q for the 
specified target temperatures of +4 °C and – 18 °C 


(ЕД 18); 


71 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


b) Determine the energy consumption at the 
temperatures of +4 °C and -19 °C (Ед 19); and 
c) Determine the energy consumption at the 
temperatures of +3 °C and -18 °C (E; 4). 
NOTE — These calculations can be done for any two 


compartments A and B. The fresh food and freezer is used as 
an illustrative example. 


The temperature response to changes in internal 
temperatures can then be calculated as: 


E E 


4-18 7. 


E 


4,-18 


4,-19 


АЕ 


freezer | 


change in energy consumption 
per degree K warmer in freezer 
temperature as a percent of the 
target energy consumption at Point 
energy consumption by 
interpolation at +4 °C and —18 °C; 
and 

energy consumption by 
interpolation at +4 °C and —19 °C. 


The temperature response to changes in internal 
temperatures can then be calculated as: 


E E 


4-18 - 


E 


4,-18 


3,-19 


AE 


freshfood ~~ 


where 


change in energy consumption per 
degree K warmer in fresh food 
temperature as а percent of the 
target energy consumption at Point 


freshfood 


energy consumption by 
interpolation at +4 °C and —18 °C; 
and 
energy consumption by 
interpolation at +3 °C and —18 °C. 


NOTE — The value of AE is usually negative in that a warmer 
temperature will result in a decrease in energy. 
The energy response to internal temperature changes 
(away from the target temperature) can be calculated 
in a similar way for all relevant compartments with 
separate user-adjustable temperature controls. 


J-5 AUTOMATICALLY CONTROLLED 
ANTI-CONDENSATION HEATER(S) 


The probability of various indoor relative humidity 
levels in the jurisdiction shall be as in the three 
“Probability constant” columns in Table 12. 


A refrigerator-freezer has automatically controlled 
anti-condensation heaters. For this particular model 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 12 Example of Population-Weighted Humidity Probabilities 
and Heater Wattages at 32 °C 


( Clause J-5 ) 


SI No. RH Band Mid-point Regional Probability, R, Average Heater Power P. Probability Times Power at 
(in Percent) (in Percent) (in W) (from Manufacturer) each Ambient Temperature 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) 5 0.03 0 0.0000 
ii) 15 0.33 1 0.003 3 
iti) 25 2.35 2 0.047 0 
iv) 35 2.56 3 0.076 8 
v) 45 3.57 4 0.142 8 
vi) 55 1.11 5 0.055 5 
vii) 65 0.05 6 0.003 0 
уш) 75 0.00 7 0.0000 
ix) 85 0.00 8 0.000 0 
x) 95 0.00 9 0.000 0 
Xi) Total 10 


(at compartment target temperatures) at the various 
relative humidity levels and the three ambient 
temperatures, the average wattage of the heaters is as 
in the “Average heater wattage” columns in Table 12. 


For each ambient, 


k 
omm = | (R a Py ) х1.3 
il ...74 
Weighted average annual power, Wheaters 
=2.415 8 x 1.3 W 
=3.140 54 W 


The system loss factor (1.3) is to allow for the extra 
energy used to remove heater energy that leaks into the 
refrigerating appliance. 
The annual energy from this auxiliary can be calculated 
as: 

E ux = 3.140 54 W x 24 h/d х 365 d/year x 0.001 

kW/W = 27.511 kWh/year 

This value would add to the annual energy value if 
the heater was not operating when tested for energy 
consumption. 


NOTE — The values for energy consumption are initially 
calculated on a daily basis in 6.8.2, so care is required to ensure 
consistent units when adding energy values. 


J-6 CALCULATION OF LOAD PROCESSING 
EFFICIENCY 


A product has been tested for load processing efficiency 
in accordance with Annex G of this standard. 


The appliance attributes were as follows: 


a) Fresh food volume: 300 1, therefore the water load 
= 3 600 g (12 g/l) 


72 


b) Freezer volume: 120 1, therefore the water load = 
480 g (4 g/l) 
An unfrozen load of 3 600 g is made up of 6 PET bottles 
of 500 g and 2 bottles of 300 g. These are placed: 


1) 1 000 g at the level of TMP; 
2) 1 300 g at the level of TMP,; and 
3) 1 300 g at the level of TMP.. 


A frozen load of 480 g is made up of one ice cube tray 
of 200 g and two ice cube trays of 140 g. 


The water load is left in the test room for 20 h prior to 
the test. The average test room temperature in the 6 h 
prior to the start of the test is 32.1 °C. 


The following data was collected during the test: 


i) Steady state prior to load insertion: 
+3.7 °C, 118.5 °C, 45.2 W (3 blocks as per 
B-3); and 

Steady state at completion of load 
processing: 43.5 °С, -18.4 °C, 46.3 W 
(3 blocks as per B-3). The fresh 
food temperatures are T, = + 4.8 °C, 
T, = +3.4 °C, T, = +2.3 °C measured at 
sensor positions TMP,, TMP, and TMP, 
respectively. 


ii 


МУ 


Comparing steady state conditions before and after 
the load processing efficiency test, the spread of 
temperature is less than 1 K in both compartments 
(0.2 K and 0.1 K respectively) and the spread of power 
is less than 2 W and 5 percent (1.1 W and 2.4 percent 
respectively), so the data is acceptable (refer G-4.4). 
Both compartment temperatures are within | K of the 
relevant target temperature. 


The equations to calculate the input energy are specified 
in Annex G. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


[ M, x (Zon -T)+ M; x (T, -T,)+ M; x (T, - T,) |x4.186 


а а а 
unfrozen-test ~~ 


3.6 ...75 
For this example, the data 15: 3.6x (32 = 4) x4.186 
1.0x (32.1–4.8)+1.3х unfrozen nominal 3.6 
x 4.186 
= [(82.1-3.4)+1.3x(32.1-2.3)] | : = 3.4) Ш 13 х (32. 1 2 23) unfrozen-nominal Е 1 17.21 Wh 
unfrozen-test ^. 3.6 
; Ж 4.186хТ ьа + 
= 4 
= 120.17 Wh А Mars *| 3336-7, x2.05 
: 4.186x Таљ + frozen — nominal 3.6 ENT 
0-87 333.6—Т„_„х2.05 
E, frozen-test — 3 6 
| TR 4.186x32 + 
For this example, the data is: = 048% 333.6 - (-18)x2.05 
4.186x 32.14 frozen — nominal 3.6 
0.48x ¿ бо 
E, = p _ is ii | x = E rozeni nominal T 67.26 Wh 
rozen —test 
D 67 43 Wh a0 E aas Е оаа) + Ее nominal 82 
Es Е pa 1 17.21 + 67.26 = 184.47 Wh at an ambient 
input-test = unfrozen-test + frozen-test ks 77 of 32 С 
Eyes 120.17 + 67.43 = 187.60 Wh The daily energy impact of а known daily processing 
The following data were recorded during the test: load of 155 Wh at an ambient temperature of 32 °C 
a) E 403.8 Wh could be calculated as follows: 
start ` 
b) E „1910.5 Wh ppn Essor 
c) P 46.3 W 5 Efficiency oad ambient Бе 83 
d) Т, 462Һ ass 


e) T 72.1 h =142.3Wh/d 
f) z= 1 defrost occurred during the test period 


g) АЕ „135.2 Wh (determined from Annex C) 


processing | 1.089 


The value of 155 Wh/d in this example is a regional 
factor intended to represent user related heat loads and 


Calculate the ДЕ о during the test as given in could be fixed for all refrigerating appliances or it could 
Annex G: be a function of size and type of product. 
AE qasa = ( Ea Es ) -Paa Х Alternatively, the nominal daily energy impact specified 


in the load processing efficiency test could be scaled to 


(a а) 2A Би ...78 ап equivalent ambient temperature of 32 °C as follows: 


A E ation tesi = (1910.5 – 403.8) — 46.3 x | a 
rocessin; = š xa 
(72.1-46.2)-1x135.2 = 172.33 Wh P 7 Efficiency a ambient 84 
E, ut — tesi 
Efficiency oad ambient = ——— A E processing = 1 * 0.9 = 152.45 Wh / d 
А E aditional-test 2279 1.089 
187.60 The value of a = 0.9 in this example is a regional factor 


Efficiency = —— = 1. that reflects user related heat loads. It would normally 
104320 172 33 
| be fixed for all refrigerating appliances of a similar type 


The nominal load added for the load processing (as the Einput-nominal 15 a function of appliance volume), 


efficiency test Einput-nominal 15 then calculated: but it may vary by product type (e.g. freezers may be 
expected to have less user interaction and processing 
M ње x Care m ym )x 4. 1 86 


== ЛОБЕ CU ашыш шәр унт load than refrigerator-freezers). 
3.6 


unfrozen — nominal 


..80 


73 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


J-7 DETERMINATION OF ANNUAL ENERGY 
CONSUMPTION 


A product has been tested for energy consumption 
in accordance with this standard. Daily energy 
consumption at 32 °C has been determined. 


A number of possible approaches to determine annual 
energy consumption can be used. One possible 
approach is to use the results from test ambient 
temperatures with a regional factor for the equivalent 
number of days in each ambient condition in a year to 
give a representative annual energy consumption. The 
example below illustrates how the components in this 
standard could be assembled in this way to make a 
regionally relevant estimate of energy consumption. It 
is one possible example — many other local approaches 
could be developed and applied. 


Consider the following refrigerating appliance: 
E= 1230 М at target temperature (triangulation). 


The measured load processing efficiency at an ambient 
temperature of 32 °C is 1.15 Wh/Wh. 


10— 


The daily regional processing load for warmer 
conditions is 390 Wh/d (ambient temperature of 32 ?C). 


The regional equivalent operating factors for a 
refrigerating appliance are: 


Annual days operating at an ambient temperature of 
32 °C equivalent is 195 d (Day,,). 


Day,, = 365 


A regional function of the annual energy at 32 ?C 1s 
expressed as follows: 


Жы gi: UE ucl + E ак + AE ааа “к .85 
E dis (Day;,, E * (E ) + (AE 


t Daily32C) aux 
E ы = (195 + 170 x 1 230 + 597/1 000) + 195 + 170 
x 390 +135/1.15 + 1.47/1 000) 


E = 239.85 +15.612 2 + 66.130 4 


total 
E a 349.104 kWh/year 


NOTE — The factor of 1 000 in this equation converts the 
units of Wh/d to kWh/d. Care is required to make sure all units 
are consistent. 


— 9 


TEMPERATURE OF UNFROZEN COMPARTMENT (ARITHMETIC MEAN OF 3 TEMPERATURE SENSORS) 


МАЛЛЛЛЛЛАЛЛЛЛЛЛЛЛЛ/\ЛЛДАЛЛДДДЛЛ\ 


TEMPERATURE OF FROZEN COMPARTMENT (ARITHMETIC MEAN OF 5 TEMPERATURE SENSORS) 


TEMPERATURE (° C ) 


ю 
© 


VV 


VVVVVVVVVVVVVE * 


үү уу үү 


-30 


1 2 3 4 5 6 F 8 


THE NUMBER OF TEMPERATURE CONTROL CYCLE IN EXAMPLE 


9 410 |11 |12 113 [14 [15 116 |17 


200 


19 DEFROST HEATER 
20 RECOVERY 


18 
21 į 22 | 23 | 24 | 25 | 26 | 27 | 28 | 29 | 30 |31 


POWER ( WATT ) 


100 


| АМТАМНО О POWER 


0 5 10 


ELAPSED TIME (HOUR) 


FiG. 29 AN EXAMPLE OF POWER AND TEMPERATURE DATA 


74 


J-8 EXAMPLES OF DETERMINATION OF 
POWER AND TEMPERATURE FROM RAW 
DATA 


J-8.1 Manual Review of Data 


Figure 29 shows an example of test data for a 
refrigerator-freezer that has been tested for energy 
consumption. The figure illustrates data for power and 
temperature in the fresh food and frozen compartments 
that is collected every minute. The product operates in 
a steady state condition and then undertakes a defrost 
and recovery period as marked. The follow steps 
outline how this data is analysed using approach SS1 in 
Annex B to determine the key characteristics of the 
product in accordance with this standard. Later examples 
for approach SS2 and for the calculation of defrost and 
recovery energy and temperature change are included 
using the same data set. 


Stepl: Select temperature control cycles from the 
raw data (not provided in this example). In 
this example, each temperature control cycle 
Is selected from the operation of compressor 
“on” to the subsequent compressor “on” (the 
product is relatively simple and this provides 
the most reliable and stable temperature control 
cycles). In this example, temperature control 
cycle 18 is a short compressor run before the 
defrost heater operates (temperature control 
cycle 19). The recovery period is temperature 
control cycle 20. 


Step 2: Calculate the average temperature in each 
compartment, the energy consumed and the 
average power for each temperature control 
cycle (TCC) from the raw data. The raw data 
that 1s illustrated in Fig. 29 has been used to 
determine the values for each TCC that are set 
out in table format in the Table 13. This data for 
each TCC is used as the basis for subsequent 
sample calculations in this example. 


Step 3: Select the number of temperature control 
cycles per block to be examined. (See B-3.1). 
In this example, 3 temperature control cycles 
in each block (A, B, C) have been selected as 
the first example because each temperature 
control cycle is just under 1 h in length and the 
minimum permitted block size of the test data 
is no less than 2 h in duration for each block 
(that is, a block size smaller than three TCC 
would yield no valid data). The sample data 
for each possible block (1 to 56) is illustrated 
in Table 14. 


Possible test periods, made up of consecutive 
blocks of data, are then constructed from these 
blocks. An example of all possible test periods 
using a block size of 3 temperature control 
cycles is illustrated in Table . The first test 
period consists of Block A (block 1 using TCC 


Step 4: 


75 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


1 to 3), Block B (block 4 using TCC 4 to 6) 
and Block C (block 7 using TCC 7 to 9). The 
second test period consists of Block A (block 
2 using TCC 2 to 4), Block B (block 5 using 
TCC 5 to 7) and Block C (block 8 using TCC 
8 to 10). A total of 36 possible test periods are 
listed in Table using this approach. It is then 
possible to calculate the characteristics for 
each of the selected test periods and check the 
validity requirements across the blocks of data 
(spread of temperature, slope of temperature, 
spread of power and slope of power from 
Block A to Block C) as set out in B-3.1. 


Once each of the validity characteristics across 
the blocks has been calculated, these can be 
evaluated against the validity criteria in B-3.2. 
In this example fora block size of 3 temperature 
control cycles, there are several possible test 
periods that meet the specified validity criteria 
in B-3.2 (a total of 7 test periods, noted as 
VALID in the last column in Table 15). Note 
that the test periods that start with temperature 
control cycles in the range 10 to 24 (in Table ) 
do not comply with the validity criteria because 
of the effects of the defrost and recovery 
period that occur at temperature control cycle 
19 (see Fig. 23 and Table 13). Where there are 
a number of possible test periods that meet all 
of the validity criteria in B-3.2 for the selected 
block size, the test period with the minimum 
spread of power should be selected. In this 
example, the test period before the defrost that 
has the lowest power spread across blocks A, 
B and C is test period starting with temperature 
control cycle number 10 (the test period from 
TCC 4 to TCC 12 inclusive). The lowest 
power spread in this case is 0.32 percent and is 
marked in green in Table 15. Note that this 1s 
the third consecutive test period for this block 
size where all validity criteria are met (each 
one incremented by one TCC) as set out in 
B-3.2. There are several valid test periods after 
the defrost at TCC 19. The one with the lowest 
power spread across blocks A, B and C is test 
period starting with temperature control cycle 
number 26 (coloured in green — the test period 
from TCC 26 to TCC 34 inclusive). The lowest 
power spread in this case is 0.74 percent and is 
also marked in green in Table . Note that the 
power and the temperatures after the defrost 
are slightly different to those before the defrost. 


In this example (Table 14 and Table 15), the relatively 
small block size (3 TCC) means that the power spread 
is larger and this occasionally exceeds the permitted 
level of 1 percent spread (for a test period of around 
7.5 h). While the standard does allow very short test 
periods for very stable products (as short as 6 h), a 
] percent power spread (for test periods less than 
12 h) is quite onerous and even this quite stable product 


Step 5: 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 13 An Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and Temperature 
for Each Temperature Control Cycle (TCC) 


( Clause J-8.1 ) 


SI No. Numberof Time Length Cumulative Energy Average Average Average Remark 
TCC of TCC Time at Start Consumption Power Unfrozen Frozen Temp. 
TCC During TCC Temp. 
hh:mm:ss h Wh w °С; °C 
а) 0) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) 1 0:50:00 0.000 38.625 46.350 3.741 -18.956 
ii) 2 0:50:00 0.833 38.250 45.900 3.765 —18.920 
ili) 3 0:50:00 1.667 39.000 46.800 3.760 —18.919 
iv) 4 0:49:00 2.500 36.250 44.388 3.766 —18.932 
v) 5 0:50:00 3.317 38.375 46.050 3.793 —18.876 
vi) 6 0:50:00 4.150 38.750 46.500 3.805 —18.900 
vii) 7 0:50:00 4.983 38.250 45.900 3.775 —18.940 
viii) 8 0:50:00 5.817 38.250 45.900 3.772 —18.894 
ix) 9 0:50:00 6.650 37.875 45.450 3.747 —18.900 
x) 10 0:50:00 7.483 38.125 45.750 3.767 —18.902 
xi) 11 0:50:00 8.317 38.375 46.050 3.759 —18.931 
xii) 12 0:50:00 9.150 38.000 45.600 3.750 —18.941 
xiii) 13 0:50:00 9.983 38.000 45.600 3.755 —18.928 
xiv) 14 0:50:00 10.817 38.000 45.600 3.775 —18.927 
xv) 15 0:50:00 11.650 38.375 46.050 3.773 —18.912 
xvi) 16 0:50:00 12.483 38.000 45.600 3.744 —18.922 
xvii) 17 0:50:00 13.317 38.000 45.600 ЗЕТА – 18.924 
xviii) 18 0:16:00 14.150 29.625 111.094 4.288 —17.509 Pre-cool 
xix) 19 0:26:00 14.417 47.500 109.615 4.179 —15.294 Defrost 
xx) 20 1:01:00 14.850 74.750 73.525 4.757 —14.996 Recovery 
xxi) 21 0:50:00 15.867 41.000 49.200 4.019 —18.817 
xxii) 22 0:50:00 16.700 38.750 46.500 3.819 —18.973 
xxiii) 23 0:50:00 17.533 38.875 46.650 3.784 —18.977 
xxiv) 24 0:50:00 18.367 38.000 45.600 3.755 —18.970 
xxv) 25 0:50:00 19.200 38.250 45.900 3.739 —18.956 
xxvi) 26 0:51:00 20.033 40.250 47.353 3.724 —18.954 
xxvii) 27 0:50:00 20.883 38.250 45.900 3.709 —18.995 
xxviii) 28 0:50:00 21.717 38.250 45.900 3.699 — 19.006 
xxix) 29 0:50:00 22.550 38.625 46.350 3.693 —19.034 
xxx) 30 0:50:00 23.383 38.000 45.600 3.681 —19.049 
xxxi) 31 0:50:00 24.217 38.500 46.200 3.705 —19.016 
xxxii) 32 0:50:00 25.050 38.375 46.050 3.703 —19.041 
xxxiii) 33 0:50:00 25.883 38.750 46.500 3.717 —19.041 
xxxiv) 34 0:50:00 26.717 38.500 46.200 3.723 —19.033 
ххху) 35 0:50:00 27.550 38.500 46.200 3.730 -19.006 
хххуі) 36 0:49:00 28.383 36.500 44.694 3.704 -19.057 
xxxvii) 37 0:51:00 29.200 40.250 47.353 3.760 —18.931 
xxxviii) 38 0:50:00 30.050 38.375 46.050 3.730 —19.031 
xxxxix) 39 0:50:00 30.883 38.500 46.200 3.719 —19.079 


76 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 13 ( Concluded) 


SI No. Numberof Time Length Cumulative Energy Average Average Average Remark 
TCC of TCC Time at Start Consumption Power Unfrozen Frozen Temp. 
TCC During TCC Temp. 
hh:mm:ss h Wh w °C °С 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
xl) 40 0:50:00 31.717 38.500 46.200 3.706 — 19.061 
xli) 41 0:50:00 32.550 38.500 46.200 3.703 —19.069 
xlii) 42 0:50:00 33.383 38.750 46.500 3.703 — 19.067 
xliii) 43 0:50:00 34217 38.125 45.750 3.682 —19.084 
xliv) 44 0:50:00 35.050 38.375 46.050 3.690 —19.062 
xlv) 45 0:50:00 35.883 38.000 45.600 3.685 —19.096 
xlvi) 46 0:50:00 36.717 38.250 45.900 3.691 —19.110 
xlvii) 47 0:50:00 37.550 38.000 45.600 3.668 —19.138 
xlviii) 48 0:50:00 38.383 38.000 45.600 3.693 —19.073 
xlix) 49 0:51:00 39217 40.375 47.500 3.708 —19.039 
1) 50 0:50:00 40.067 38.000 45.600 3.683 —19.095 
li) 51 0:16:00 40.900 29.625 111.094 4.142 —17.758 Pre-cool 
lii) 52 0:27:00 41.167 50.500 112.222 4.232 —14.685 Defrost 
liii) $3 1:02:00 41.617 76.000 73.548 4.767 —15.220 Recovery 
liv) 54 0:50:00 42.650 42.125 50.550 4.001 —18.885 
lv) 55 0:49:00 43.483 37.875 46.378 3.735 —19.146 
lvi) 56 0:50:00 44.300 39.250 47.100 3.673 — 19.108 
lvii) 57 0:49:00 45.133 37.250 45.612 3.639 —19.162 
Туш) 58 0:50:00 45.950 39.500 47.400 3.661 —19.116 


Table 14 An Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and 
Temperature for All Possible Blocks (size = 3 TCC) 


( Clause J-8.1 ) 


SI No. Block Start TCC End TCC Time Length Energy Average Average Average 
of Block Consumption Power Unfrozen Frozen Temp. 
During Block Temp 

hh:mm:ss Wh W C ue 

0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
1) 1 1 3 2:30:00 15.875 46.350 3.756 —18.932 
ii) 2 2 4 2:29:00 13.500 45.705 3.764 —18.924 
iii) 3 3 5 2:29:00 13.625 45.755 3.773 — 18.909 
iv) 4 4 6 2:29:00 13.375 45.654 3.788 —18.903 
v) 5 5 7 2:30:00 15.375 46.150 3.791 —18.905 
vi) 6 6 8 2:30:00 15.250 46.100 3.784 —18.911 
vii) 7 7 9 2:30:00 14.375 45.750 3.765 —18.911 
viii) 8 8 10 2:30:00 14.250 45.700 3.762 — 18.899 
ix) 9 9 11 2:30:00 14.375 45.750 3.758 —18.911 
x) 10 10 12 2:30:00 14.500 45.800 3.759 —18.925 
xi) 11 П 13 2:30:00 14.375 45.750 3.754 -18.933 
xii) 12 12 14 2:30:00 14.000 45.600 3.760 —18.932 
xiii) 13 13 15 2:30:00 14.375 45.750 3.767 —18.922 
xiv) 14 14 16 2:30:00 14.375 45.750 3.764 —18.920 


77 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 14 ( Concluded) 


SI No. Block Start TCC End TCC Time Length Energy Average Average Average 
of Block Consumption Power Unfrozen Frozen Temp. 
During Block Temp 
hh:mm:ss Wh W °C °С 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
ху) 15 15 17 2:30:00 114.375 45.750 3.762 —18.919 
xvi) 16 16 18 1:56:00 105.625 54.634 3.830 —18.728 
xvii) 17 17 19 1:32:00 115.125 75.082 3.976 —17.652 
xviii) 18 18 20 1:43:00 151.875 88.471 4.538 -15.462 
хіх) 19 19 21 2:17:00 163.250 71.496 4.378 —16.447 
xx) 20 20 22 2:41:00 154.500 57.578 4.236 —17.418 
xxi) 21 21 23 2:30:00 118.625 47.450 3.874 —18.923 
xxii) 22 22 24 2:30:00 115.625 46.250 3.786 —18.973 
xxiii) 23 23 25 2:30:00 115.125 46.050 3.759 — 18.968 
xxiv) 24 24 26 2:31:00 116.500 46.291 3.739 — 18.960 
хху) 25 25 27 2:31:00 116.750 46.391 3.724 -18.968 
xxvi) 26 26 28 2:31:00 116.750 46.391 3.711 —18.985 
xxvii) 27 27 29 2:30:00 115.125 46.050 3.700 —19.011 
xxviii) 28 28 30 2:30:00 114.875 45.950 3.691 —19.030 
xxix) 29 29 31 2:30:00 115.125 46.050 3.693 —19.033 
XXX) 30 30 32 2:30:00 114.875 45.950 3.696 —19.036 
xxxi) 31 31 33 2:30:00 115.625 46.250 3.708 — 19.033 
xxxii) 32 32 34 2:30:00 115.625 46.250 3.714 — 19.038 
xxxiii) 33 33 35 2:30:00 115.750 46.300 3.724 —19.027 
xxxiv) 34 34 36 2:29:00 113.500 45.705 3.719 —19.032 
XXXV) 35 35 37 2:30:00 115.250 46.100 3.732 —18.997 
xxxvi) 36 36 38 2:30:00 115.125 46.050 3.732 — 19.005 
xxxvii) 37 37 39 2:31:00 117.125 46.540 3.737 — 19.013 
xxxviii) 38 38 40 2:30:00 115.375 46.150 3.718 —19.057 
xxxxix) 39 39 41 2:30:00 115.500 46.200 3.709 —19.070 
xl) 40 40 42 2:30:00 115.750 46.300 3.704 — 19.066 
xli) 4l 41 43 2:30:00 115.375 46.150 3.696 —19.073 
xlii) 42 42 44 2:30:00 115.250 46.100 3.692 —19.071 
xliii) 43 43 45 2:30:00 114.500 45.800 3.686 — 19.081 
xliv) 44 44 46 2:30:00 114.625 45.850 3.689 — 19.089 
xlv) 45 45 47 2:30:00 114.250 45.700 3.681 —19.115 
xlvi) 46 46 48 2:30:00 114.250 45.700 3.684 —19.107 
xlvii) 47 47 49 2:31:00 116.375 46.242 3.690 —19.083 
xlviii) 48 48 50 2:31:00 116.375 46.242 3.695 —19.069 
xlix) 49 49 51 1:57:00 108.000 55.385 3.756 — 18.888 
1) 50 50 52 1:33:00 118.125 76.210 3.921 —17.585 
Ii) 51 51 53 1:45:00 156.125 89.214 4.534 — 15.469 
lii) 52 52 54 2:19:00 168.625 72.788 4.387 — 16.435 
liii) 53 53 55 2:41:00 156.000 58.137 4.215 —17.553 
liv) 54 54 56 2:29:00 119.250 48.020 3.804 — 19.046 
lv) 55 55 57 2:28:00 114.375 46.368 3.683 — 19.139 
Ivi) 56 56 58 2:29:00 116.000 46.711 3.658 —19.128 


NOTE — The values in Table 14 can be derived from the data in Table 13. Great care is required to ensure that time weighted 
averages of power and temperature are derived for each block. 


78 


2021 


IS 17550 (Part 3) 


qTIVA 
CITVA 
GI TVA 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
GI TVA 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
CITVANI 
GI TVA 
GI TVA 
GI TVANI 
GI TVANI 
GI TVANI 
(8D 


PHEA 
ротләд 
389, 


3DLL 
TAAL 
ANAL 
3DLL 
NAL 
3S'IVÀ 
dS'IVÀ 
3S'IVÀ 
3S'IVJ 
dS'IVÀ 
3S'IVÀ 
3S'IVÀ 
dS'IVÀ 
3S'IVÀ 
3S'IVÀ 
dS'IVÀ 
3S'IVÀ 


H 
H 
Я 


NAL 
NAL 
NAL 


HS IV4 


Я 
Я 
H 
Я 


NAL 
(ep 
(LL 
NAL 


HSTVÀ 
(¿D 


q 


xouuy 


EHI 


ош 


(ЭЭЛ € JO YI 89044 ç) зротлод ISIL оја15504 [Гу лој әлпјеләйшәј pue ләмод Адлопч JO иорепәүео јо ојашеху uy sq әче], 


01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
01 
(91) 
% 


реәл4< 
ломод 
Popu d 


1900 
1900 
8РГ0 
00070 
6cVO 
66<0 
ТАЗ; 
tSt'6 

968`51 

£8 01 
Vect 
0/70 
“105 

сері 

сері 
веса 
C88 ç 
000°0 
00 
00070 
8120 
vLUO 
9070 
2000 
2000 
7970 
($1) 
u/% 


О-у) 
ломод 
99015 


801070 
0 <100 
I $1070 
1 ETO'O 
©1100 
24100 
21060 
РРТСО 
LLSLO 
6 6LC0 
9 7500 
8 00070 
C v9€0 
€ CLC 0 
T ESL'O 
15820 
11900 
11000 
€ 0070 
© C000 
1 000 
9 $0070 
€ 70070 
t 0000 
I $0070 
1 $0070 
(#0) 
wa 


О-у) 
uəZo J 
ədols 


L 00070 
1 5000 
9 8000 
Z€10°0 
06100 
9 v€0'0 
0 <0Г0 
S €€10 
0 £LTO 
I 9700 
6 6000 
$9700 
9 vITO 
TITO 
68910 
I 6700 
C $1070 
01000 
ғ 00070 
S 000°0 
8 7000 
61000 
6 <00%0 
I 5000 
ғ 00070 
8 1000 
(£D 
үз 


О-у) 
похолји n 
ədols 


pL 0 
<60 
70 
70 
<60 
00'€ 
L6'CC 
8e 9p 
6€ €L 
8905 
017% 
Se'vL 
OE TS 
[4052 
ІЗ) 
EL'SS 
IF91 
£€0 
ITO 
то 
601 
860 
TEO 
9L'0 
860 
ІСІ 
(¿D 
% 
O-g-v) 


ломод 
perds 


6 650'0 
0 <900 
6<400 
9 <900 
11900 
6 8800 
99961 
69057 
C 86v € 
L6vS'T 
£ 97e c 
0 197'E 
20051 
ISLvC 
€ OLV € 
C I8CT 
696T0 
80000 
8 600 
1100 
80000 
8 РЕО'О 
(500 
62000 
T S700 
26000 
(ID 
A 
(2-9-Уу) 


U9ZOJq 
реәл4< 


91200 
© €£0°0 
I ЕР00 
79900 
I $600 
9 4120 
t $50 
0%590 
6 86/0 
TLLr0 
1 26<0 
LSLLO 
12490 
8 0190 
ӯ 81170 
9 1000 
8 1100 
6 7000 
€ 6000 
L 80070 
Y 9c0'0 
L 9Є0`0 
56000 
9200 
1 6z0°0 
9 60% 
(0D 
A 
(2-9-Уу) 


похолји у 
perds 


9ç0 Z€ 
LEOTE 
LEOTE 
8t0'c€ 
86076 
LEOTE 
8EO'TE 
gc0 ¿c 
gc0 ¿c 
LEOTE 
LEOTE 
LEOTE 
LEOTE 
95076 
LEOTE 
LEOTE 
LEOTE 
9€0'c€ 
95076 
96076 
96076 
337443 
931443 
76006 
3143 
St0'cE 
(6) 
2o 
(2-9-У) 
"ој, 
шәташу 


(18-І əsnpjO ) 


1151 
1151, 
1151, 
1151, 
1151, 
1151, 
00LL 
00€L 
€£L'9 
11179 
11179 
11179 
11179 
11179 
11179 
EESO 
£€6'9 
00€L 
00€ 
00€ 
00€ 
00€L 
ЄЗ 
ЄЗ 
ЄЗ 
ЄЗ 
(8) 
Ч 
(2-9-Уу) 
pomad 
3891, 


ломод 
porq 
389, 


610'61— 
010`61— 
20061- 
$66'81— 
066'81— 
$96'81— 
€eg8r- 
І8Г8І- 
75081- 
87081- 
?У081- 
15081- 
TEOST- 
S7O'8I— 
оро'81– 
829 81– 
698'81— 
12681- 
LI68I— 
61681— 
81681- 
216'81– 
£I681— 
01681- 
60681- 
<1681- 
(о) 
Do 


Uu9Z0.4 
роәд 
3891, 


90L'€ 
80/75 
cre 
IZL'€ 
YELE 
ILLE 
016€ 
0<6%< 
666% 
666% 
000% 
200% 
100% 
666% 
096 < 
018 
[TAS 
09L'€ 
09L'€ 
79/76 
L9L'€ 
69L'€ 
04476 
CLE 
сє 
69L'€ 
(s) 
Do 


пәолуиг 
porq 


зә], 


РЕ 9) Z€ 
££ 01 [€ 
TE 01 0€ 
16 01 6С 
06 01 82 
6c 01 LZ 
8c 0190 
LT SZ 
9c 01 tZ 
SZ о ЄС 
РС 0) СС 
£C 01 IZ 
cc 1 02 
12961 
02 0381 
61 03 LI 
810191 
пос 
91 оз] 
ST OV €I 
той 
EIO 
Z10101 
П 16 
01038 
6 OL 
(p) 
SOOL 


16 01 6С 
06 9382 
67 03 LZ 
80 0190 
LC 01 SZ 
9c 01 tZ 
SZ о ЄС 
РС 91 СС 
£C 01 IZ 
cc o 02 
IT 61 
02 0381 
61 03 LI 
810191 
LISI 
91 03 #1 
SI OI €I 
той 
1911 
21901 
П 16 
0198 
6 OL 
8019 
LAS 
дозу 
(9) 
5221 


87 0) 97 
LT çZ 
90 01 tC 
STOI ET 
0% 
£c о IZ 
cc o 02 
129 61 
02 9181 
61 0/1 
81 %91 
11093 $1 
91 #1 
SIEI 
PLOT 
єго п 
(1901 
11036 
0198 
601L 
8019 
LAS 
90y 
SE 
Ро С 
£o 
(0) 
SOOL 


O35999 Я 99184 VO 


“ON TS 


79 


2021 


IS 17550 (Part 3) 


"ezis xoo[q рә)оә|әв әш pue вјер јо eSuez sry} 10) јешцӣо se papajos uəəq sey Jey} poured 1591 әш sojeorpur Surpeus опја 14871 
"TI TVA 10 ANAL SI EHI jueAo[o1 әш jeu] sojeorpur suuinpoo oA 1521 әш ur Surpeus Аәлгу 


'g xeuuy jo вупәшәлпБәз Хпрцел oytoods әш чим Ајашоо jou ѕәор лојошелеа 1591 рә)оә|ә8 оф јеф sojeorpur Surpeus uoo1r) 


SALON 
CITVANI ANAL 01 00 16100 08000 ECO 95900 С0700 їЄ0%Є 0054 ГОР 6Ұ061- TILE %010 190166 860196 (Аххх 
GIIVANI ANAL 01 00 65100 201000 то $9100 09800 РЕОСЕ O0€L €€19r THOGI- SILE ЄрО›]} 000186 Еос (Аххх 
CITVANI HSTV4 01 1500 89000 1<000 ІЗІ 9(500 67800 ЄСЄ 0054 €819r 180617 002ғ56 (0070107 66016 DEMPE (Amxxx 
GIIVANI ANAL 01 сРО0 98000 80000 ғ<0 Є #900 #8000 ҰС076 0054 89р %061- CULE ІР0166 860196 сео ес (ххх 
GIIVANI ANAL 01 ЕР00 2000 80000 [4210 10900 Є/100 £€0'ce 0054 19Г97 1Е061- CELE 090186 LEMSE PETE (пххх 
GIIVANI STVA 01 920 07000 95000 ier 86100 ¿8200 £€0'ce 0054 19Г99 900617 IZLE 660/6 960196 core (ххх 
GIIVANI ANAL 01 ЕР?00 09000 121000 9/20 10800 95500 SEO'TE 0054 009 %061- LILE 860196 560166 TEMOE (xxx 
GIIVANI ANAL 01 500 61000 81000 £r $1700 68800 0% OOSL «ЕГОР %061- «ШЕ 1601566 HEOTE 160160 (ххх 
GIIVANI HSTV4 01 LOTO %0000  LS000 6Г1 ЄЄ000 #8000 %с076 ЄЗ, 6965 16061- 9076 960196 66016 060180 (AXX 
GITIVA = ANAL. 01 8070 0<000 9%000 9/20 19000 51000 SEO'TE 0054 009 520617 10254 SEMEE (760106 600170 (mxx 
(81) (41) (91) (sD (#0) (£D (ср) (ID (0D (6) (8) (4) (9) (ç) (ғ) (9) (0 0) 
% 4/% Ww уз % 3 A Do Ч A 2, Do SOOL 50021 5001 
g 
ред xouuy peadg (у-у) (О-у) Оо-у) (ОУ) (о-Я-7) (о-Я-7) (2-9-У) (О-Я-/) о ломод | поход uəzojgun 
pord EIM ломод домод  uozoi[ uozoiu() AIMOg uozorq = uozoggu[) "шә, ромәд ромәд pord ропоа 
3891, ош рәцимәд 24015 — edo[s о4о рвәлі реәлі | peords — juerqury 3991, 3891, 3891, 3891, DPN CPT уззоя 0 


(popnj2uo;) ) ST әче], 


80 


does not always meet the requirements for such a short 
duration. 


Where there is a longer period of data available, more 
robust results can be obtained by selecting longer 
test periods, which are constructed from blocks that 
contain a larger number of TCCs. The following tables 
(Table 16 to Table 17) illustrate the same source data 
set out in Fig. 23 and Table 13 with test periods made 
up of 3 blocks with a block size of 5 TCC (test periods 
made up of 15 TCC) and a block size of 9 TCC (test 
periods made up of 27 TCC). These give a test period 
length of around 11.7 h and 21.7 h respectively for this 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


particular product. Only valid data after the first defrost 
can be found for the larger block size of 9 TCC (as the 
period before the first defrost is too short to establish 
stability). 


Note that values for P... are corrected for deviations 
in the measured ambient temperature during the test 
period according to equation 15 (not shown in this 
example). 


The examples set out in these tables can be used to 
check that laboratory software for undertaking steady 
state analysis in accordance with approach 551 in 
Annex B is operating correctly. 


Table 16 An Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and Temperature 
for All Possible Blocks (size = 5 TCC) 


( Clause J-8.1 ) 


SI No. Block Start End TCC Time Length Energy Average Power Average Average 
TCC of Block Consumption Unfrozen Frozen Temp. 
During Block Temp. 
hh:mm:ss Wh W °С °С 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) 1 1 5 04:09:00 190.500 45.904 3.765 —18.921 
ii) 2 2 6 04:09:00 190.625 45.934 3.778 —18.909 
iii) 3 3 7 04:09:00 190.625 45.934 3.780 —18.913 
iv) 4 4 8 04:09:00 189.875 45.753 3.782 —18.908 
v) 5 5 9 04:10:00 191.500 45.960 3.778 —18.902 
vi) 6 6 10 04:10:00 191.250 45.900 3.773 —18.907 
vii) 7 7 11 04:10:00 190.875 45.810 3.764 —18.913 
vill) 8 8 12 04:10:00 190.625 45.750 3.759 —18.914 
ix) 9 9 13 04:10:00 190.375 45.690 3.755 —18.920 
x) 10 10 14 04:10:00 190.500 45.720 3.761 —18.926 
xi) 11 П 15 04:10:00 190.750 45.780 3.762 -18.928 
xii) 12 12 16 04:10:00 190.375 45.690 3.759 —18.926 
xiii) 13 13 17 04:10:00 190.375 45.690 3.763 —18.923 
xiv) 14 14 18 03:36:00 182.000 50.556 3.804 —18.817 
xv) 15 15 19 03:12:00 191.500 59.844 3.863 -18.311 
xvi) 16 16 20 03:23:00 227.875 67.352 4.154 —17.167 
xvii) 17 17 21 03:23:00 230.875 68.239 4.221 -17.141 
xviii) 18 18 22 03:23:00 231.625 68.461 4.233 —17.153 
xix) 19 19 23 03:57:00 240.875 60.981 4.135 —17.514 
xx) 20 20 24 04:21:00 231.375 53.190 4.058 —18.014 
xxi) 21 21 25 04:10:00 194.875 46.770 3.823 —18.939 
xxii) 22. 22 26 04:11:00 194.125 46.404 3.764 —18.966 
xxiii) 23 23 27 04:11:00 193.625 46.285 3.742 —18.970 
xxiv) 24 24 28 04:11:00 193.000 46.135 3.725 —18.976 
хху) 25 25 29 04:11:00 193.625 46.285 3.713 -18.989 
ххуі) 26 26 30 04:11:00 193.375 46.225 3.701 -19.007 
xxvii) 27 27 31 04:10:00 191.625 45.990 3.697 —19.020 
xxviii) 28 28 32 04:10:00 191.750 46.020 3.696 —19.029 


81 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 16 ( Concluded) 


SI No. Block Start End TCC Time Length Energy Average Power Average Average 
TCC of Block Consumption Unfrozen Frozen Temp. 
During Block Temp. 
hh:mm:ss Wh w 56 "€ 
Q) (2) 3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
Xxix) 29 29 33 04:10:00 192.250 46.140 3.700 —19.036 
XXX) 30 30 34 04:10:00 192.125 46.110 3.706 —19.036 
xxxi) 31 31 35 04:10:00 192.625 46.230 3.716 —19.027 
xxxii) 32 32 36 04:09:00 190.625 45.934 3.716 —19.036 
xxxiii) 33 33 37 04:10:00 192.500 46.200 3.727 —19.013 
xxxiv) 34 34 38 04:10:00 192.125 46.110 3.730 —19.011 
XXXV) 35 35 39 04:10:00 192.125 46.110 3.729 —19.020 
xxxvi) 36 36 40 04:10:00 192.125 46.110 3.724 —19.031 
xxxvii) 37 37 41 04:11:00 194.125 46.404 3.724 —19.034 
xxxviii) 38 38 42 04:10:00 192.625 46.230 3.712 —19.062 
ххххіх) 39 39 43 04:10:00 192.375 46.170 3.703 —19.072 
xl) 40 40 44 04:10:00 192.250 46.140 3.697 — 19.069 
xl) 41 41 45 04:10:00 191.750 46.020 3.692 —19.076 
xlii) 42 42 46 04:10:00 191.500 45.960 3.690 —19.084 
xlii) 43 43 47 04:10:00 190.750 45.780 3.683 —19.098 
xliv) 44 44 48 04:10:00 190.625 45.750 3.685 —19.096 
xlv) 45 45 49 04:11:00 192.625 46.046 3.689 —19.091 
xlvi) 46 46 50 04:11:00 192.625 46.046 3.689 —19.091 
xlvii) 47 47 51 03:37:00 184.000 50.876 3.722 —18.988 
xlviii) 48 48 52 03:14:00 196.500 60.773 3.806 —18.351 
xlix) 49 49 53 03:26:00 234.500 68.301 4.123 —17.233 
1) 50 50 54 03:25:00 236.250 69.146 4.196 -17.187 
li) 51 51 55 03:24:00 236.125 69.449 4.211 —17.190 
lii) 52 52 56 03:58:00 245.750 61.954 4.103 —17.554 
liii) 53 53 57 04:20:00 232.500 53.654 4.002 —18.155 
liv) 54 54 58 04:08:00 196.000 47.419 3.742 — 19.083 


NOTE — The values in Table 16 can be derived from the data in Table 13. Great care is required to ensure that time weighted averages 
of power and temperature are derived. 


82 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 17 An Example of Calculation of Energy, Power and | 
Temperature for all Possible Blocks (size = 9 TCC) 


( Clause J-8.1 ) 


SI No. Block Start TCC End ТСС Time length of Energy Average Average Average 
Block consumption Power Unfrozen Frozen Temp. 
during Block Temp. 

hh:mm:ss Wh w °С °С 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) 1 1 9 07:29:00 343.625 45.919 3.769 –18.915 
ii) 2 2 10 07:29:00 343.125 45.852 3.772, —18.909 
iii) 3 3 11 07:29:00 343.250 45.869 3.772 —18.910 
iv) 4 4 12 07:29:00 342.250 45.735 3.770 —18.913 
v) 5 5 13 07:30:00 344.000 45.867 3.769 -18.912 
уі) 6 6 14 07:30:00 343.625 45.817 3.767 —18.918 
vii) 7 7 15 07:30:00 343.250 45.767 3.764 —18.919 
viii) 8 8 16 07:30:00 343.000 45.733 3.760 -18.917 
іх) 9 9 17 07:30:00 342.750 45.700 3.760 —18.921 
x) 10 10 18 06:56:00 334.500 48.245 3.782 —18.869 
xi) 11 11 19 06:32:00 343.875 52.634 3.810 —18.628 
xii) 12 12 20 06:43:00 380.250 56.613 3.960 —18.040 
xiii) 13 13 21 06:43:00 383.250 57.060 3.993 —18.025 
xiv) 14 14 22 06:43:00 384.000 57.171 4.001 —18.031 
xv) 15 15 23 06:43:00 384.875 57.301 4.002 —18.037 
xvi) 16 16 24 06:43:00 384.500 57.246 4.000 —18.044 
xvii) 17 17 25 06:43:00 384.750 57.283 3.999 —18.048 
xviii) 18 18 26 06:44:00 387.000 57.475 3.993 —18.054 
xix) 19 19 27 07:18:00 395.625 54.195 3.950 —18.181 
xx) 20 20 28 07:42:00 386.375 50.179 3.910 —18.433 
xxi) 21 21 29 07:31:00 350.250 46.596 3.771 —18.965 
xxii) 22 22 30 07:31:00 347.250 46.197 3.734 —18.990 
xxiii) 23 23 31 07:31:00 347.000 46.164 3.721 —18.995 
xxiv) 24 24 32 07:31:00 346.500 46.098 3.712 —19.002 
XXV) 23 25 33 07:31:00 347.250 46.197 3.708 —19.010 
xxvi) 26 26 34 07:31:00 347.500 46.231 3.706 -19.019 
xxvii) 27 27 35 07:30:00 345.750 46.100 3.707 -19.025 
xxviii) 28 28 36 07:29:00 344.000 45.969 3.706 —19.031 
xxix) 29 29 37 07:30:00 346.000 46.133 3.713 —19.023 
xxx) 30 30 38 07:30:00 345.750 46.100 3.717 -19.023 
хххі) 31 31 39 07:30:00 346.250 46.167 3.721 —19.026 
xxxii) 32 32 40 07:30:00 346.250 46.167 3.722 —19.031 
xxxiii) 33 33 41 07:30:00 346.375 46.183 3.722 —19.034 
xxxiv) 34 34 42 07:30:00 346.375 46.183 3.720 -19.037 
ххху) 35 35 43 07:30:00 346.000 46.133 3.715 -19.042 
xxxvi) 36 36 44 07:30:00 345.875 46.117 3,711 —19.049 
xxxvii) 37 37 45 07:31:00 347.375 46.214 3.709 —19.053 
xxxviii) 38 38 46 07:30:00 345.375 46.050 3.701 -19.073 
ххххіх) 39 39 47 07:30:00 345.000 46.000 3.694 -19.085 
xl) 40 40 48 07:30:00 344.500 45.933 3.691 —19.085 


83 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 17 ( Concluded) 


SI No. Block Start TCC End ТСС Time length of Energy Average Average Average 
Block consumption Power Unfrozen Frozen Temp. 
during Block Temp. 

hh:mm:ss Wh W °С °С 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
xli) 41 41 49 07:31:00 346.375 46.081 3.691 —19.082 
xlii) 42 42 50 07:31:00 345.875 46.014 3.689 —19.085 
xliii) 43 43 51 06:57:00 336.750 48.453 3.705 —19.036 
xliv) 44 44 52 06:34:00 349.125 53.166 3.744 —18.732 
xlv) 45 45 53 06:46:00 386.750 57.155 3.907 -18.155 
xlvi) 46 46 54 06:46:00 390.875 57.765 3.946 —18.129 
xlvii) 47 47 55 06:45:00 390.500 57.852 3.952 —18.131 
xlviii) 48 48 56 06:45:00 391.750 58.037 3.952 -18.127 
xlix) 49 49 57 06:44:00 391.000 58.069 3.946 —18.135 
1) 50 50 58 06:43:00 390.125 58.083 3.941 —18.143 


NOTE — The values in Table 17 can be derived from the data in Table 13. Great care is required to ensure that time weighted 
averages of power and temperature are derived. 


84 


2021 


IS 17550 (Part 3) 


GIIVA NAAL еР0І 1000 (%000 <0000 100 50900 00800 950756 LISTI 80197 80061- S€ 860196 66060 800190 (ліхх 
GIIVANI ANAL РОТ 2500. 15000 81000 150 16500 19700 90056 LISTI 899P #0061= (026 160166 (601480 10960 (хх 
GIIVANI ANAL THOI TTO #8000 85000 201 96900 $9900 95075 00501 0119 /0061- 9025 960106 16092 900100: (пхх 
GIIVANI = dS TVA ЕРОТ 95076 501 8ОРӘР 16681- Е SEIE 060190 стор (хх 
GIIVANI — dS TVÀ 8501 LEOTE 00001 658 0O0L98I- 6086 PECOE 600155. vcooc (хх 
GIIVANI HSTV4 <01 LEOTE 006801 #0605 105817 8086 66060 800190 ETAGI (xx 
GIIVANI STVA 0001 LEOTE ЄЕП 58505 19У81- LOVE (60180 10960 00981 (ШАХ 
GIIVANI — dS TIVÀ 0001 86008: ЖЕГП 6605 657%1- — cL8€ 160170 90900 1091 (пх 
GIIVANI dS TVÀ 0001 LEOTE ЄЕП 11505 Сї SLE 060190 стор 0009070 (Ax 
GIIVANI = dS TVÀ 0001 1808: ЖГП 605 Crb8I- (886 60060 vcoc 61961 (Ax 
CITVANI STVA 0001 86005: ЖЕГП 68706 <6/81- 1886 80070 60061 «SIMPL (Am 
GIIVANI dS TVÀ 0001 LEOTE ЖГП 8977С<  6cv8I- 1686 — LcOMC 00981 21961 (um 
GIIVANI — dS'TIVÀ 0001 8601585: ЖГП 19706 <0791- %686 90010 1091 919010 (IX 
GHVANI HSTV4 0001 LEOTE — LILIL 19605 €cv8I- 1686 60010 00991 SIVIM — (x 
GIIVANI — dS'TIVÀ 0001 LEOTE LILII 15675  61P81- — 668€ %00100 610151 10101 (x 
GIIVANI — dS TIVÀ 0001 LEOTE — LILIL 0905 vIb8I- 8686 <0046І 81091 £I96 (а 
GIIVANI HSTV4 0001 LEOTE — LILTIL 1805 80P81- 1686 20981 11961 2198 (ША 
GIIVANI — dS TVÀ 0001 9505: LILII бїз 90/81- бє  ITOLI 91921 TIAL (пл 
GIIVANI = dS TVA 0001 9c0c€ 2011 5005 (ІР8І- — 6L8€ 000191 810111 01919 ал 
CITVANI HSTV4 0001 20100 91070 96076 EESTE  ScL6óv LvL'8I- 9626 610151 ФІ00І 6906 (А 
GIIVANI HSTV4 0001 "100 120000 8010 1%%00 95076 1611 8107 S8881- O8LE ГОРІ «106 80% (^t 

GIIVA NAAL ОРО $900 11000 0000 ESO 26000 0100 <076 О 1605р 91681- LOLE  LIOEI соз 106 (ш 
CITVANI NUL OvO'T $900 02000 20000 0 #9100 18100 — SEOTE ЄЗ 1185р 91681- 9068 91901 TIOL 900 (п 
GIIVANI ANAL Ov0'T C£00 60000 %0000 LTO 90200 1100  SEOTE «ЕРСІ 19857 61681- LI'E 510111 0199 со ( 

(81) (LD) (91) (s1) (rl) (c (с) (ID (01) (6) (8) (O) (9) ($) (p) (9) (0 (1) 
% 4/% u yA % 3 A Do q A Do Do SOOL 8091 8001 
pea = q@xouuy = peatdg (О-у) (о-У) Оо-у) (Ошу) (O-g-V) (O-g-V) (O-g-V) (O-g-v) ломод uəzoiq uəzojgun 
pond BID ломод TMOG _ похода  uozojjgu[) ломод uozoiq пәтолшп dur ромәд роләд pomad pond у q 
38ә], ош poud ƏədoS әЧйо$ ədols peoidg peoidg рғәлі — juorqury —— jso[ 38ә], 38ә], 38ә], PAG зоя VAG ONIS 


(1:8-( 25101 ) 


(ODL S JO Чәвә sx20[q c) 
SpoLiagd ISIL 91415504 HV 10} әлпҙеләйшәт pue ломод 8ләия Jo uonv[no[e?) Jo o[durex иу $] AQEL 


85 


2021 


IS 17550 (Part 3) 


“ә218 xoo[q рә}зәәз әш pue езер јо обиел sty} 107 [etunudo se рәјоәјәѕ uəəq sey jeu роџод 159] әш sojeorpur Surpeus on[q 348771 


"TI TVA 10 ANAL 51 enojo JULA әш jeu зојеотрш SUNOS OM} 35е] IY} ur Surpeus Аоло) 


'g xeuuy jo өшәшәлаВәт ÁjrprpeA ogroeds әш qr Apduroo jou ѕәор 19joureaed 1591 ројоојов оф је sojeorpur Surpeus UIN 


SALON 

GI'TVA SOLL ЕРО L100 11000 С%000 020 56500 #5800 98006 LISTI 65097 99061- | COLE 0S%9F 501 000196 (1лххх 
CITVA SOLL ЕРО L100 S8000 %%000 020 80400 86800 98076 LISTI 66097 09061- SOLE брор ротор 660166 (Аххх 
CITVA SOLL сРО 1 7600 20100 <<000 160 05800 <«%00 5025 00501 01097 09061- 9025 ВРО 0166 860106 — (Arxxx 
CITVA SOLL [42081 6010  cOIOO <5<000 860 16800 — Ott0O — vtOCC OOSTI 0/097 85061- 8006 ¿Oh (001486 160166 (MXXX 
CITVA SOLL [42001 1000 85000 0£:£000 201 10800 900 076 00501 00797 15061- 012764 ғо IFO 960106 (ххх 
CITVA SOLL [42001 5<00 85000 80000 970 €8r00 21800 РЕОТЕ 00601 00197 50617 TILE Spor 000196 seare (ххх 
CITVA SOLL сто 8000 6<000 11000 100 78700 480500 5075 00501. 00197 (%061- OILE Фту010у 660166 peoe (xxx 
CITVA SOLL [42001 8000 <%00 <0000 его 11900 00800 X "ЕСТЕ 00501 0ғГ9Р OFOGI- TILE — €O6ç 860196 66060 (ххх 
Пул SOLL [42001 ss0'0 — 6€000 61000 970 98700 11800 <5076 00601 0597 SEGI- TILE (00186 160166 (0601480 (ШАХхХ 
CITVA SOLL [42001 80L0 11000 “¿Z :£000 201 $5100 €9700 <076 00001. 01197 06061- TILE 10/6 960726 16070 (mxx 
qTIVA SOLL ер0і 0500 60000 10000 900 0%00 8000 5076 LISTI 88197 (0061- FILE 0У0196 SEIE 0601902: ЏАХХ 
CITVA TAAL ЕРО сто0 — 8€000 61000 8€0 9Lv00 1%00 SECTE LISTI 8919F SIO6I- ILE 6601566 PEOOE 6001566 (axx 

(81) (41) (91) (ст) (71) (Єр) (ст) (ID (0D (6) (8) (L) (9) (ç) (p) (£) (0 0) 

% 4/% Р үз % 3 3 2, 4 A Do 2, SOOL 5021 5001 

ред gxəuuy = резлаб Оо-у) О-у) О-у) (2-9-У) (о0-4-У) (2-9-у) (O-g-V) (О-Я-У) ломод  uezoip uəzogun 
porq 136571806) Јәмоа мод  Uuoezojq  uozojju() J9MOq uozojg X uozojgu() Яшә, роләі ромәд pouod porq о) q 

3891, OHI рәшә 9406  ədols 94015 peoidg = реолдб — реолдб juəquy әр 3891, 3891, 3891, зоо WIA WPI “ON IS 


(popnj2uo;) ) 81 әче], 


86 


2021 


IS 17550 (Part 3) 


GI TIVA SOLL 81871 
GI TIVA SOLL 8L8'I 
GITIVANI NAL 9L8'I 
GI TVANI TIMEN 9LS'T 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 0681 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 8S8'l 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 11871 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 11871 
аПУАМ | dS'IVÀ 11871 
аПУАМ HSIV4A 11871 
АаІТУАМІ — dS'IVÀ 11871 
аПУАМ HSIV4A 11871 
аПУАМ HSIV4A 11871 
аПУАМ HSIV4A 1181 
АаІТУАМІ — dS'IVÀ 01871 
АаІТУАМІ — dS'IVÀ 11871 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 11871 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 11871 
аПУАМ HSIV4 11871 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 11871 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 01871 
аПУАМ | dS'IVÀ 01871 
аПУАМ HSIV4A 01871 
аПУАМ — dS'IVÀ 01871 
(81) D (91) 
% 

PHEA g xəuuy peoids 

pond ELI9JLIO ломод 
3891, Ой Punda 


c10°0 
©10`0 
8£0°0 
9800 


1500 
1.00 
19070 
0700 
cr0'0 
9900 


(ст) 
4/% 


О-у) 
ломод 
ədols 


5 $000 
8 $0070 
€ 9000 
0 8000 


61000 
T L00°0 
79000 
6 $0070 
8 $000 
Ӯ $000 


(1) 
ч/з 


О-У) 
U9ZO.1q 
ədo[s 


S 100°0 
0 ©00`0 
8 с00'0 
І 50070 
86100 
29100 
£6100 
76100 
T6100 
T6100 
T6100 
98100 
99100 
990070 
T $0070 
L £000 
8 £000 
6 £000 
6 £000 
Y 000 
9 с00'0 


(ст) 
ч/з 


О-у) 
чәолуип 
ədo[s 


1<0 
610 
1<0 
6СІ 


(cD 
% 
О-я-У) 
домод 
peaidg 


LC800 <(%00 9505 с̧әс 8609р 07061- 80/75 05007 РОС (60190 (Amxx 

69800 10600 95006  EESTT LELI 9%061- TILE бро} 0У0106 160160 (mxx 

0%600 #00 9505 1155205. 66097 %061- — SIL€ 870107 660016 0601006 (mxx 

90710 1400 95076 115(0 (09% %0061- 8026 170166 860106 600110 (mx 

95076 00/0  8LvLY 688817 9008 901486 LENGT 800100 (хх 

950046 006(05 HL Br 091817 1826 броје 96080 10061 (хх 

95046 «ЕГІС 096% 181—7 1608 %70196 SELT 900181 (ШАХ 

950756 «ЕС 6967 100817 0086 <Р0166 Ф%С0192 STOLI (Qux 

95076  EEL'IT 10967  ICL81- (0086 тро} EEST #0019] (Ах 

95046 «ЕГІС 0666 SIL8I- 5086 190166 (60190 ETOIST (Ах 

95076 «ЕГІС «= LOS OH 601817 8086 оро 16060 ссор] — (ux 

95076 «ЕГІС  vvS6v  vOLSI- — 0186 66046 060100 со (их 

95045 «ЕГІС 10667 6698I- TIVE 860106 6001102 0001010 (1х 

95076 «ЕГІС 10667 869817 (186 16060 80000 6191 (1х 

95076 | LIL IT 1967  v6981- (186 960180 100161 81001 (x 

95076 «ЕГІС 9876  88981- МЄ — ScoMc 90981 11060 QI 

95076 «ЕГІС SLV6v  v8981- — 6186 701902 STALI 9198 (ША 

LEOTE | CELT €9or'6r 08981- LISE — <6050 оор SIAL (пл 

LEOTE — CELT ЖӨӨ” SL9SI- 1586 (6090 60951 FIOM (IA 

LEOTE  EEL'IT €orór 899817 E 16060 бор roc (А 

LEOTE LILIT 86067 599817 /586 060590 10961 соу (б 

588Г0 950086 1110 РРР  09981- OESE 60000 оос mae (п 

64670 9505 1110 90767 95981- (86 800100 61911 01092 (п 

: 70810 — 9c0c€ LILIT Рб FS99I- — РЕКЕ /0061 81901 601 (1 

(ID (0D (6) (8) (4) (9) (9) (р) (9) (0 0) 
3 3 Do q A до 2, SOOL SOOL SOOL 

(O-g-V) (Ову) (2-9-у) (O-g-v) Imoq чә?олл  uəzoasun 

пә?олЛ — похолји(ј Яшә, pond ромәд pod porod 2 q У 

реәлі рвәлі — juorqury — jso 3891, 3891, 3891, PIT Wl WIA “9816 


(001 610 Чәвә 5014 c) 


( 1`8-[ 257171) ) 


вромәд ISIL 91415804 Це 10} олпјелодшој pue 49404 8ләия JO uon e[no[e?) Jo o[durex 4 uy 61 AQEL 


87 


2021 


IS 17550 (Part 3) 


"ә71 xoo[q pƏ1oə[əs әш pue езер јо əSuet sty} 103 [etundo se рәјоәјәѕ uəəq sey jeu ponad 159] әш sojeorpur Surpeus опја 14871 


"CI TVA 20 ANAL St euejuo jueAo[or әш jeu sojeorpur SUNOS OM} JSP] әш ur Surpeus Аәлгу 


`g xeuuy jo өшәшәлпһәт Апрцел ogroods оф чим Атйшозэ jou Soop 19joureaed 16ә) ројзојов әш је зојеотрш Surpeus UIN 


SHLON 
GIIVANI — 8STVJ 11871 с691 10900 05100 60'vC 06660 86700 — 9€0cC EELIT 00867  vLLSI-  6LL'E 860106 ӨР opaze (пххх 
GIIVANI — 8STVJ 11871 9691 60900 +5100 8ttC 06960 ESSTO 9E07E EELIT  vLL6V  OLLSI- 1826 8016р 800100 660116 (ххх 
GIIVANI HSTV4 EISI Or9] 501900 19100 6Г}© 18660 568550 95076 05/10 0//6ў 99L81- (826 95018 190166 860106 (xxx 
GIIVANI HSTV4 6181 191 01900 29100 DNO 90760 10550 95076 — OSLIC Ibl6r €9L8I- EBLE <С0/ү Ороз LEMNGT (бахх 
GIIVANI — 8STVJ 71871 0191 91900 +9100 TL ET ETOO 96860 98076 LILIT  lcL6v 851817 CLE PSI SpOME 9601480 (maxx 
GIIVANI ASTVA 71871 6061 #6500 1<100 ІЕ(0 6680 10080 95076 19/10 бр  €9oL8l- | OLLE 6016р vrolog 560170 (mxx 
GIIVANI dSTVd 66/71 L860 16100 92000 9S vI 10160 61:00 9506 — €8€IC LOE Sh  Or68I- 1026 ор росе PEOOT (XX 
GIIVANI — 8STVJ IESI 9c€0 81000 20000 78% 1900 05100 980085 196102 90697 1061-- TILE IS%€h (00196 66015606 (Axx 
(8D UD (91) (ст) (71) (£D z) (ID (01) (6) (8) (4) (о) ($) (p) (9) (c) (1) 
% 4/% Р Р % A 3 Do Ч A 2, Deo SOOL 5001 SOOL 
ред g xəuuy — резлаб о-у) О-у) (0-V) (o-a-v) (о-Я-7) (gv) (2-9-ү) О-#-у) ләмоі  uezojp uəzojun 
ромәд 138671006) ләмоЯ ләмоЯ uozorig шпә?о1ш( J9MOq пәтоз] — похолић duro, porq pond pouoq pond 2 q v 
3891, ош popud — 94015 94018 98015 резлаб рвәлі реәлі — juemury әр 3891, 3891, 3891, xog оя WG ONIS 


(popnj2uo;) ) 61 9Iq*L 


88 


The next set of calculations to be performed in this 
example is to determine the incremental energy and 
temperature change associated with a defrost and 
recovery event in accordance with Annex C. The 
defrost to be examined in the sample data is the one 
that occurs at TCC 19. 


Firstly, a pertod of no less than 3 TCC and 3 h in length 
is selected before and after the defrost event to be 
analysed (Periods D and F respectively). Period D is 
before the defrost and ends no less than 3 h before the 
nominal centre of the defrost (which is 2 h after the 
defrost heater operation at TCC 19). Period F is after 
the defrost and ends no less than 3 h after the nominal 
centre of the defrost. 


The defrost heater starts at a cumulative test time 
of 14.417 h. The nominal centre of the defrost and 
recovery period according to C.3 is 2 h after the start of 
the defrost heater, which is 16.417 h. The end of Period 
D must be before 13.417 h and the start of Period F 
must be after 19.417 h. Note that the cumulative hours 
at the end of a TCC is exactly the same time as the start 
of the next TCC. In this case TCC 16 ends at 13.317 h 
(start of TCC 17) so this defines the end of Period D. 
Similarly, TCC 26 starts at 20.033 h so this defines the 
start of Period F. 


In this example Period D is made up of 4 TCC (TCC 
13 to TCC 16 inclusive) and is a total of 3 h and 20 min 
in duration. Period F is made up of 4 TCC (TCC 26 to 
TCC 29 inclusive) and is a total of 3 h and 21 min in 
duration. 


Aseries of checks are conducted on Periods D and F to 
ensure that they meet the requirements for DF 1 as set 
out in C-3.2. These are set out in Table 20. 


If the validity of the original periods D and F are not 
met, the standard allows for the size of D and F to be 
incremented by one TCC steps to see if any complying 
periods are present. Similarly, if no complying periods 
are found, the size of D1 (from the end of Period D to 
the nominal centre of the defrost and recovery) and F1 
(from the nominal centre of the defrost and recovery to 
the start of Period F) can be increased in 30 min steps. 
The position of the nominal centre of the defrost and 
recovery period can also be adjusted if required. For 
these data, none of the above adjustments are needed. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


From the data for each TCC given in Table 13 the 
following values can be determined: 


Total energy from start Period D to end of Period F = 
692.5 Wh (TCC 13 to 29 inclusive) 


Total time from start Period D to end of Period F = 13 
h 24 min (= 13.4 h) 


Average power for Period D and Period F = 46.046 55 
W (note that this is not time weighted) 


From equation 19: 


AE = (Enit — E iD) 
Poo P. 
| > 2 = z) X (tondr Eun) 


For the selected defrost: 
AE ge = (692.5) – 46.046 55 х 13.4 
АЕ = 75.476 2 Wh 


The next step is to determine the temperature variation 
during the selected defrost and recovery event. 


From the data for each TCC given in Table 13 the 
following values can be determined: 


Average fresh food temperature from start Period D to 
end of Period F = 3.867 0 °C (TCC 13 to 29 inclusive) 
(time weighted average) 


Average freezer temperature from start Period D to end 
of Period F = –18.502 7 °C (TCC 13 to 29 inclusive) 
(time weighted average) 


Average fresh food temperature for Period D and Period 
Е = 3.734 0 °C (note that this is not time weighted) 


Average freezer temperature for Period D and Period 
— —18.959 45 °C (note that this is not time weighted) 


From equation 20: 


ATh 


dfj-i = Же 7 REA 


) Es t Lgs ] 
2 


x (T. 


av—startD—endF—i 


For the selected defrost: 
ATh = (13.4) x [(3.867 0) — (3.734 0)] 
ATh = 1.782 2 Kh 


df-freshfood 


df-threshold 


Table 20 Determination of Defrost Validity DF1 
( Clause J-8.1 ) 


SI No. Parameter Period D Period F Spread/Criteria Validity and Notes 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Length (time) 03:20:00 03:21:00 Ratio 0.995 OK (0.8 to 1.25, 23 h, both > 3 TCC, equal number of 
TCC in D and F) 
ii) Power W 45.712 5 46.380 6 1.45 % and 0.668 W OK (either < 2 % or «1 W) 
iii) Fresh food °C 3.761 5 3.706 5 0.055 0 OK (< 0.5K) 
iv) Freezer °C —18.9221 —18.996 8 0.074 7 OK (< 0.5K) 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


АТА pooner = (13.4) x [C 18.502 7) — (18.959 45) 
ATi s a= 6.120 4 Kh 


As an alternative to approach SS1 (which uses 3 blocks 
of steady state data to assess validity), the following 
calculation sets out an example using approach 552 to 
determine the steady state power between defrosts as 
set out in B-4 using the same data set illustrated in Fig. 
29 and Table 13. The previous calculations have shown 
that the defrost at TCC 19 is valid according to DF1 
in Annex C, so the SS2 approach can be used on this 
data set. 


Firstly, a period of no less than 4 TCC and 4 h is 
selected before each defrost event. Period X is before 
the defrost heater operation at TCC 19 and Period 
Y is before the defrost heater operation at TCC 52 
(see Fig. 29 and Table 13. In this example Period X is 
made up of 5 TCC (TCC 13 to TCC 17 inclusive) and is 
a total of 4 h and 10 min in duration. Period Y is made 
up of 5 TCC (TCC 46 to TCC 50 inclusive) and is a 
total of 4 h and 11 min in duration. 


df-freezer 


A series of checks are conducted on Periods X and Y to 
ensure that they meet the requirements for SS2 as set 
out in B-4.2. 


From the data for each TCC given in Table 13 the 
following values can be determined: 


Total energy from end of Period X to end of Period 
Y —1 309.25 Wh (TCC 18 to 50 inclusive) 


Total time from end of Period X to end of Period 
Y = 26 h 45 min (= 26.75 h) 


The incremental energy of the defrost at the start of the 
period ЛЕ = 75.476 2 Wh 


From equation 12: 
EY T Ex ) = АЕ, 
Lacs f dx ) 
(1 309.25) — 75.476 2 
(26.75) 


Ва =! 


552 


Рес) = 46.122 4 W 


This compares well with the value for Pss, determined 
in Table for TCC 23 to TCC 49 of 46.137 W, which is a 
comparable test period. 


Note that Pss, and Ресә must be corrected for the 
measured ambient temperature during the test period 
according to equation 15 in Annex B in order to get a 
value for Рес to be used in subsequent calculations and 
analysis. In this case, the measured ambient temperature 
is very close to the target ambient temperature of 32 °C 
so the adjustment is very small. 


Similar calculations are also done to determine the 
steady state temperatures in each compartment using 
the approach SS2. 


Average fresh food temperature from end of Period X to 
end of Period Y = 3.776 4 °C (TCC 18 to 50 inclusive) 
(time weighted average). 


Average freezer temperature from end of Period 
X to end of Period Y = –18.779 6 °C (TCC 18 to 
50 inclusive) (time weighted average). 


From equation 13: 


АТА. 
Таза = [rete Ges ) = l 
end-Y end-X 
1.7822 
Тар пећ род = (3.776 4) 4 26 T | 
1 зона = 3.709 6 
6.1204 
Tss2_seezer = (718.779 6) -| 26 35 | 
Т, --19.0084 


SS2-freezer 

These values compare well with the values for Рес) 
determined in Table for TCC 23 to TCC 49 of 3.711 
°C for fresh food and —19.036 °C for freezer, which 
is a comparable test period. Because the exact test 
periods selected for P... and P... are slightly different, 
small differences in the results for each parameter are 
expected. The examples set out above can be used to 
check that laboratory software for undertaking steady 
state analysis in accordance with approach SS2 in 


Annex B and DF1 in Annex C is operating correctly. 


J-8.2 Review of Data and Selection of Minimum 
Spread Using Bespoke Software 


Fig. 30 shows an example of locating a possible test 
period at a given moment in time. Here the situation is 
illustrated at 38.4 h after start of data collection for the 


Table 21 Determination of Steady State Values Using SS2 
( Clause J-8.1 ) 


SI No. Parameter Period X Period Y Spread/Criteria Validity and Notes 
(1) Q) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Length (time) 04:10:00 (5 ТСС) 04:11:00 (5 TCC) Ratio 0.996 OK (0.8 to 1.25, 2 4 h, both z 4 TCC, 
equal number of TCC in X and Y) 
ii) Power W 45.690 0 46.045 8 0.78 % and 0.356 W OK (either < 2 % or < 1 W) 
ili) Fresh food °C 3.763 3 3.688 7 0.074 6 OK (< 0.5 K) 
iv) Freezer °C —18.922 6 —19.090 8 0.168 2 OK (< 0.5 K) 


90 


testofarefrigerator-freezer. The power signal is plotted 
in the middle panel (the diagram contains 5 panels 
stacked on each other). From this point it is possible to 
define a number of trial test periods, all consisting of 
three blocks and reaching backwards in time. For each 
of these trial periods the energy consumption is plotted 
in the second panel. For each of these trial periods 
the spread in power within the test period (which is 
the difference between the maximum and minimum 
average power observed between block A, B and C) 
is plotted in the bottom panel. The minimum possible 
value of this spread is then looked up and in the diagram 
an arrow is drawn here. This identifies the best possible 


91 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


stable test periods from all the trial periods possible. 
In this example the length of this test period is 12.5 h. 


The energy consumption measured over this best 
possible test period is plotted in panel number 4 while 
the spread at this test period is plotted in the top panel. 
The other markers in these two panels illustrate the 
results of the best test periods at other moments in time. 
Combining these markers one can see that the energy 
consumption measured converges over time and that 
the spread gradually reduces. This effect is caused by a 
continuous increase in the length of the best test period 
found. 


2021 


IS 17550 (Part 3) 


мамо N] GVAUdS пиу Ним аогана 1591 V ONIGNIY яо ялайухд 0 214 
'D'8-f ur o[durexo рәзлом оф ut UMOYS s? ouis оф 
SI po3oo[os A19A0231 pue jsoJjop AJL '91 91481, UMOYS oArsn[out / p DOL 01 EE DOL Woy ponad 159] әш о} juo[eA mbo st олоде porad 1591 [SS ројоојов ou, — ALON 


- LG Jo ge poued 159] = š = 
022 (u)xeur ep 6412-нан кылан n EMEN a7 pas 
09 (u)uu еру со [2 | . (9,)eymejeduie | bos 


oze (OD) dws} juaiquiy әләц spoued sə} | 
Bcc 


00 (ч)әпүел jenuew әш чбполҙ 10295 1 t > : Ж. | ; | 
sz (чуемаш заодед нн МИЛА // M NWA а 


9[oKo |одиоо 1soJjeq [ЖАЫ 
NT ejos B i ct a ы ы Ау. | 
уд Чә2014 | (ојалпјеледше | әбеләлу RIF 
8/7), Ч5ә14 912 
(чм)Абләиә |ејиошелоц f 
у 'S/(uw)KB1jeue jejueueJ9u| 9021 90°61 
. ко) 961 
981-200 06/- 68/- | Sp сет $5594: eod 
6€ 900 Z€ Í O)usə14 2” OV (u)eun 9€ ce 8c сі 8 r 0 
sjusupedwoy |S ¿L n 00 
р/ц) uonduinsuoo | 905 
LVG9ev yoy 297 | M) зәмоа әбеләлуу 000, 
VERSO ve се 4 (u)uyBue a i 003 
gz OL P (м) зәмоа | 0002 
9L JequinN 05072-- — - 07052 
€L U10J4 0707 МЕ 
оќо ово" pue 
51025 lsynsej |4-а Ha J ory tees у 
пара LT KERI (РАЧА) uonumsuoo fBieus. 
f е Əjepdn [2755 ГЕ JOMOd z (о) роо; uezdi4 (БЕЛЕТ 
ѕіѕАјеие Á19A40291 % 1soljəq YTA рощәш 66 ајоло јодиод :uMous јиәшрейшоо зопрола 


92 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX K 
( Informative ) 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE IEC GLOBAL TEST METHOD FOR REFRIGERATING APPLIANCES 


K-1 PURPOSE 


This Annex sets out the background to the development 
of the international test procedure and outlines the 
broad objectives of a global approach to energy testing. 


K-2 OVERVIEW 


Household refrigerating appliances are complex 
thermo-dynamic products and a wide number of 
factors can have an effect on their measured energy 
consumption. Detailed investigations have shown that 
the most important factors (not necessarily in order of 
importance) that can impact on the energy consumption 
during normal use are: 
a) Operating conditions: 

1) Ambient temperature and humidity in which 
the product operates during normal use (indoor 
or outdoor, whether the space is conditioned or 
not); 

2 


— 


The temperature control setting selected by the 
user; 

3) User interactions with the appliance during 
normal use (air exchange resulting from door 
openings, addition of warm food, drinks and 
humidity); and 


4 


— 


Installation of the appliance (clearances, 
airflow). 

Product design and how the product responds to 
operating conditions: 


b 


x 


1) The defrost and recovery characteristics of the 
product; 


2) 
3) 


The defrost interval during normal use; 


The load processing efficiency of the 
refrigeration system to remove heat load 
equivalents that arise from normal use and 
through normal heat gain; 


4 


— 


The quality and level of thermal insulation in 
doors, walls and gaskets etc.; 


5 


— 


Operation of certain auxiliaries that may be 
affected by ambient conditions and usage; and 
6) The size, configuration and proportions 
(dimensions) of the product. 
While there are a number of other factors that can also 
affect energy consumption, in general terms these are 
generally minor and of secondary importance. 


K-3 TEST METHOD OBJECTIVE 


The objective of this test method is to quantify as 
many as possible of the key components of energy 


93 


consumption in a generic manner to allow them to be 
aggregated in a way that can reflect operating conditions 
and usage patterns of household refrigeration products 
in different climates and regions around the world. 
Regions and countries can select those test elements 
that are most important and combine them in a way that 
is most relevant to them. 


The purpose of any test procedure is to provide accurate, 
quantitative data which can be used as the basis for 
comparing products that operate under comparable 
conditions when performing comparable tasks. While it 
is recognised that every single household refrigerating 
appliance in the world will have different actual 
operating conditions and different usage patterns, the 
dis-aggregation of energy into its key components 
allows typical operating and usage conditions to be 
applied to products for comparative purposes. It also 
provides a sound basis for understanding variations 
in actual energy consumption in individual products 
during normal use in a home on a case by case basis, 
where this is of interest. 


The advantage of this global approach to energy 
determination is that manufacturers (ultimately) need 
only undertake a suite of standard tests to meet the 
requirements of all major regions. Regional differences 
can be achieved by applying different factors to the 
standardised test results. This will help manufacturers 
avoid expensive retesting of models that are sold into 
different regions. 


K-4 DESCRIPTION OF KEY COMPONENTS 
OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION 


The most common technology used in household 
refrigerating appliances is the vapour compression 
cycle, which is effectively a heat pump that 
removes energy from the refrigerated space (inside 
compartments) to the surrounding ambient air in the 
room. Some other technologies are used to perform this 
heat pump function (for example, some absorption or 
thermoelectric (Peltier effect) systems) but these are 
usually less efficient and are generally used only in 
niche applications. 


Under conditions of no user interaction, the heat flow 
into the internal compartments depends on the effective 
insulation of the cabinet. This is largely dictated by 
the wall thickness and insulation value of the wall 
materials, but there are many other factors that can also 
affect heat flows such as the design of gaskets and seals 
and the presence of penetrations through the walls (for 
services, wiring and ducts). There may also be internal 
electronic controls, heaters or other devices which 
consume energy (or put heat into the compartments) 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


and that are required to maintain normal operation in 
the refrigeration appliance. The operation of some of 
these devices may vary with ambient conditions. 


The energy consumption under this standard is 
determined under no use (steady state) conditions at an 
ambient temperature of 32 °C. This provides a good 
basis for determining the temperature-energy response 
of the refrigerating appliance. Most previous test 
procedures test energy consumption at a single ambient 
temperature only. This provides no information on the 
energy impacts of the different operating temperatures 
commonly encountered during normal use. 

NOTE — In view of the lack of data at 16 °C the testing at this 

temperature shall be kept in abeyance pending availability of 

authenticated test data and will be reviewed at a later date. 
It is well understood that user selected temperature 
control settings on refrigerating appliances affect 
internal operating temperatures, which in turn affect 
the energy consumption. Under this standard (and most 
other test procedures), techniques are applied to energy 
measurements conducted at different temperature control 
settings in order to estimate the energy consumption 
at standard internal temperatures. They are called 
“target temperatures for energy consumption” in this 
standard. Single tests used as the basis for declaration of 
energy consumption are required to have their internal 
temperatures at or below the relevant target temperature 
for the compartment type or be based on estimates of the 
energy consumption at the target temperature. Additional 
tests may be conducted at a range of temperature control 
settings in order to determine the optimum (lowest 
possible) energy consumption at the relevant target 
temperatures at each ambient temperature condition. 


In this standard, the target temperature for a fresh food 
compartment is 4 °C while the target temperature for a 
freezer compartment is —18 °C. Note that to increase 
speed of testing and to improve overall repeatability, for 
all frozen compartment types, temperatures are based on 
average air temperatures — test packages are no longer 
used for energy tests. 


For products that include a defrost system (with its own 
defrost control cycle), there is usually additional energy 
associated with the automatic defrost. Some systems, 
where the evaporator operates close to freezing, can 
effectively defrost by extending the period without 
compressor operation — these use little additional energy 
(in fact they may use less energy during defrost as the 
compartment warms). Some products defrost on every 
compressor cycle (usually only evaporators that operate 
close to freezing) — these are called cyclic defrost (and 
do not have a defrost control cycle) and any defrosting 
energy is built into the normal operating schedule. 
Where applicable, the additional (or reduced) energy 
required to perform an automatic defrost and to recover 
back to a steady state condition is determined for a 
number of representative defrost and recovery periods. 
The frequency of defrosting also affects the total energy 


94 


consumption. To determine the expected defrost interval, 
the test method includes a number of different methods 
appropriate to the different types of control used. 


A significant part of the heat load inside a refrigerating 
appliance during normal use results from user related 
aspects such as door openings and insertion and removal 
of foodstuff. These heat loads are fairly complex and 
occur due to the exchange of air during door openings 
(warm air and moisture) and the addition of heat in the 
form of warm food and drinks. Sometimes moisture is 
released from foodstuff as well. The geometry of the 
compartment (e.g. open versus drawers and bins) and the 
speed and frequency of door openings can affect the air 
exchange. The temperature and humidity of the ambient 
air can also have an effect. 


Attempting to replicate actual use through door openings 
and addition of food loads is difficult for laboratories to 
undertake and can be difficult to reproduce consistent 
results. It also requires tight control of test-room 
humidity in order to have any chance of consistent 
results. Calculating the resulting heat load from door 
openings is highly complex and the internal geometry 
can have an impact from product to product. 


To minimise these problems, a new test has been devised 
for this standard which measures the load processing 
efficiency of the household refrigerating appliance. 
A precise mass of water at a known temperature (and 
of known enthalpy) is placed inside the refrigerating 
appliance and the product is operated until it returns to 
a steady state condition. The incremental energy used 
to “process” this load is determined from the test data 
and the difference between the initial and final energy 
of the water is used to determine the load processing 
efficiency. Processing of a single known heat load (in 
the form of warm water) provides a sound basis to 
determine the equivalent energy impact of user related 
interactions that could arise during normal use. It also 
allows the quantification of actual heat load equivalents 
to be determined when data from real homes is analysed. 


Some auxiliaries are known to be affected by ambient 
conditions. Under this standard, the incremental energy 
consumption of specified auxiliaries under specified 
conditions is declared. These values can be added onto 
the standardised energy consumption for the product 
where applicable. 


This standard does not provide a single global energy 
consumption number. Rather it provides detailed 
documentation of a number of key energy components 
which can be assembled to provide an estimate of 
energy consumption under a range of possible operating 
and usage conditions. Not all regions will use all test 
components. Regions are expected to use many of the 
standard components in a way that is most relevant to 
their regional requirements. Dis-aggregation of the 
energy components in this manner is an attempt to 
ultimately eliminate the need for regional test methods 
for household refrigerating appliances. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX L 
( Clause B-4.2, and C-2 ) 
( Normative ) 


ANALYSIS OF A REFRIGERATING APPLIANCE 
WITHOUT STEADY STATE BETWEEN DEFROSTS 


L-1 PURPOSE 


This Annex illustrates the approach to be used for 
the analysis of test data for a refrigerating appliance 
without steady state conditions between defrosts. 


L-2 PRODUCTS WITH 
CHARACTERISTICS BUT 
STEADY STATE OPERATION 


REGULAR 
WITHOUT 


L-2.1 General 


In addition to the routine use of Case SS2 to determine 
steady state power illustrated in Fig. 3, there is one 
special case that is theoretically envisaged where all 
data between successive defrost and recovery periods 
using Case SS2 may not be able to establish stability for 
the initial defrost in accordance with Annex C (DF1). 
In this case the incremental defrost and recovery energy 
for the initial defrost has to be determined using an 
approach called DF2, which is outlined in this Annex. 


In this case, the refrigerating appliance exhibits a 
regular and stable pattern of operation but the power 
between defrosts is not constant (usually increasing 
or decreasing power). This example would apply to a 
refrigerating appliance that has relatively short defrost 
intervals and over-cools or under-cools after a defrost 
and then takes some time to reach steady conditions 
just prior to the next defrost. An example is illustrated 
in Fig. 31. 


POWER 


; PERIOD 
D1 


1 PERIOD 


DEFROST & RECOVERY ENERGY 


STEADY STATE 
POWER 


L-2.2 Special Case DF2 Approach 


Case DF2 is only used where the refrigerating appliance 
does not reach steady state operation between defrost 
and recovery periods and establishment of incremental 
defrost and recovery energy using DF1 (C-3) is not 
possible. In this case the refrigerating appliance usually 
exhibits a regular stable pattern of operation but may 
not establish steady state operation between defrost 
and recovery periods. Comparable parts of successive 
defrost and recovery periods are examined. This usually 
applies to refrigerating appliances that have shorter 
defrost intervals. 


A period (called Period D1), ending at the start of a 
defrost and recovery period and made up of no less than 
2whole temperature control cycles (where temperature 
control cycles are present) and no less than 2 h in 
length, is selected. A second period (called Period D2), 
ending at the start of the next defrost and recovery 
period and made up no less than 2 whole temperature 
number of temperature control cycles, or they shall 
be the same length where there are no control cycles 
(where temperature control cycles are present) and no 
less than 2 h in length, is selected. 


A period (called Period F1), starting after the first 
defrost and recovery period and made up of no less than 
2 whole temperature control cycles (where temperature 
control cycles are present) and no less than 2 h in 
length, is selected. A second period (called Period F2), 


1 PERIOD ;, PERIOD 


F2 


DEFROST& – |-—— PSEUDO STEADY STATE ---| DEFROST & 
RECOVERY RECOVERY 
TIME 


Fic. 31 SPECIAL CASE SS2 — WHERE STEADY STATE OPERATION IS NEVER REACHED BETWEEN DEFROST AND 
RECOVERY PERIODS AND ANNEX C STABILITY MAY NOT BE ESTABLISHED 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


starting after the next defrost and recovery period and 
made up of no less than 2 whole temperature control 
cycles (where temperature control cycles are present) 
and no less than 2 h in length, is selected. 


Periods D1, D2, F1 and F2 shall all contain an equal 
temperature control cycles present. 
NOTE — As guidance, the pseudo steady state can be safely 
identified where the power change per temperature control 
cycle is consistently less than 5 percent. A significant change 
in the duration of the temperature control cycle is also a good 
indicator of the start of a defrost and recovery period. 


L-2.3 Case DF2 Acceptance Criteria 


For the two defrost and recovery periods to be valid, 
the following criteria shall be met: 


a) The spread of temperature for the PeriodsD1 and 
D2 shall be less than 0.5 K for each compartment; 


b) The spread of temperature for the Periods F1 and 
F2 shall be less than 0.5 K for each compartment; 


c) The spread of power for the Periods D1 and 
D2 shall be less than 2 percent of the average 
power of Periods D1 and D2 or less than 1W, 
whichever is the greater value; 


d) The spread of power for the Periods F1 and 
F2 shall be less than 2 percent ofthe average power 
of Periods F1 and F2 or less than 1 W, whichever is 
the greater value. 

NOTE — Care is required to ensure that period pairs D1/D2 
and Е1/Е2 are from comparable parts of the defrost control 
cycle. Where all of the above criteria are met, this data can 
provide steady state power for a single temperature control 
setting and energy/temperature data for two defrost and 
recovery periods. For some refrigerating appliances (especially 
those that use mechanical timers) the temperature control cycle 
immediately prior to the operation of the defrost heater can 
be random in length, so care is required to avoid these when 
comparing comparable parts of the cycle. 

Where there are more than two compartments, 

assessment of temperature stability as set out above is 

required for: 


1) The largest unfrozen compartment and largest 
frozen compartment (where applicable); or 


2) The largest two compartments (where all 
compartments are frozen or unfrozen). 


L-2.4 Case DF2 Calculation of Values 


Where the acceptance criteria in K-2.3 have been met, 
the determination of additional energy associated with 
the first defrost and recovery period is calculated as 
follows: 


АЕ „=(Е 


df ( end-D2 | E ми) E T acus S (tus E tsp) 


AE, = additional energy consumed by the 
refrigerating appliance for a valid 


defrost and recovery period in Wh; 


— accumulated energy reading at the 
end of Period D1 just before the first 
defrost and recovery period in Wh; 


end-D1 


accumulated energy reading at the 
end of Period D2 just before the 
second defrost and recovery period 
in Wh; 

pseudo steady state power 
consumption that occurs from the 
start of Period F1 to the end of Period 
D2 inclusive between successive 
defrost and recovery periods in W 
and meets the acceptance criteria in 
K-2.3, see equation (87); 

= test time at the end of Period D1 just 


before the first defrost and recovery 
period in hours; 


test time at the end of Period D2 
just before the second defrost and 
recovery period in hours; 


Е1-02 


EM 


NOTE — This calculation gives the defrost and recovery 
energy for the first defrost and recovery period (bounded by 
Periods D1 and F1). A similar calculation using values for 
Periods D2 and F2 can be performed to determine the energy 
consumption of the second defrost and recovery period. 


P 2: p -E en) 


Е1-р2 


L tart-F1 ) i 87 


DTE 7 
where 


= accumulated energy reading at the 
start of Period F1 just after the first 
defrost and recovery period in Wh; 


= test time at the start of Period 
F1 just after the first defrost and 
recovery period in h; 


start-F 1 


ta rt-F1 


The determination of the temperature change in each 
compartment i associated with the defrost and recovery 
period is calculated as follows: 


AT Paci Е [T анары eu FI-D2-i ) x 


(ЕЕ — Lam) 2288 

where 
АТ = accumulated temperature 
difference over time 


in compartment і (for 
compartments 1 to n) 
associated with a defrost and 
recovery period in Kh; 


average temperature 
in compartment i (for 
compartments 1 to n) over the 
period from the end of Period 
D1 just before the first defrost 
and recovery period to the end 
of Period D2 just before the 
second defrost and recovery 
period in °C; 


Tanabi -endD2-i 


pseudo steady state 
temperature in compartment 
i(for compartments 1 to n) that 
occurs from the start of Period 
F1 to the end of Period D2 
between successive defrost 
and recovery periods in °C 
and meets the acceptance 
criteria in J-2.3; 


F1-D2-i 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


test time at the end of Period 
D1 just before the first defrost 
and recovery period in hours; 
and 


test time at the end of Period 
D2 just before the second 
defrost and recovery period in 
hours. 


The additional compressor run-time associated with a 
defrost and recovery period (over and above the steady 
state run time) (in hours) shall also be calculated as set 
out in C-3.3. 


ANNEX M 
( Informative ) 
DERIVATION OF AMBIENT TEMPERATURE CORRECTION FORMULA 


M-1 PURPOSE 


Ambient temperature has a very important influence 
on energy consumption and even within the permitted 
range of ambient test temperatures specified in 
IS 17550 (Part 1) (nominally+0.5K). The expected 
impact is significant, which has the potential to reduce 
repeatability and reproducibility ofthe measured values. 
A correction for ambient temperature has been included 
to normalize the impact of actual variations in ambient 
temperature that occur in the laboratory during the test. 
The values have been checked against a large number 
of refrigerating appliances of different configurations 
across a wide range of operating conditions and the 
results have been found to be in line with observed 
values. This Annex provides some of the theoretical 
and practical background to the ambient temperature 
correction included in B-5 to improve understanding 
and confidence in the use of the formula. 


M-2 BACKGROUND 


The steady state power of refrigerating appliances 
generally exhibits a strong response to changes in 
ambient temperature. The following equation sets 
out the main factors that drive energy for a single 
compartment refrigerator or freezer: 


97 


p. Ux4x( -T) 


a 


COP 
where 
P — (expected) steady state power consumption; 


U= overall average U value (insulation) of the 


cabinet walls; 


A= surface area of the cabinet walls; 
Т, = average ambient temperature around the 
refrigerating appliance; 
T;— internal average temperature of the 
refrigerating appliance; and 
COP = operating coefficient of performance 


(efficiency) of the refrigeration system. 


The value of insulation (U) and the total surface area (A) 
of the appliance remain constant once the refrigerator 
has been constructed (but every refrigerator is different). 
The internal temperature also (should) remain fairly 
constant for a given compartment type. So, the steady 
state power 1s a function ofambient temperature divided 
by COP. The change in COP of real compressors tends 
to be fairly linear with changes in ambient temperature 
(which determines the condensing temperature). The 
power response to changes in ambient temperature are 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


non-linear because a linear change in the denominator 
results in a non-linear quotient. 


There are many smaller factors that affect the energy 
consumption of a particular refrigerating appliance 
(such as heaters and other auxiliaries (internal and 
external fans), compressor operating losses, compressor 
start-up losses and variable speed drives and throat or 
gasket losses), but the compressor efficiency and heat 
gain into the compartment(s) are the most significant 
factors and are the ones directly addressed in the 
correction formula. 


During a test, a value of steady state power P is 
measured. For an ambient temperature correction, an 
estimate of the slope or change in steady state power 
is required for a change in ambient temperature. The 
final correction equation needs to invert this effect so 
that the power consumption is estimated at the target 
ambient temperature. For example, an increase in test 
room ambient temperature above the nominal test 
room temperature will increase the measured steady 
state power. The correction formula will decrease 
the measured power consumption value back to the 
value that would be expected at the nominal test room 
temperature. 


The impact of small differences in ambient test 
temperature is significant. Typically, the impact per 
degree of ambient temperature change could be 
expected to be 6 percent to 8 percent at 16 °C and 
around 4 percent to 5 percent at 32 °C (depending on 
the product). Given that test laboratories are required 
to hold ambient temperatures within+0.5 K of the 
nominal test temperature, the measured values could 
vary between labs by 4 percent to 8 percent due to 
permitted ambient temperature variations alone. So 
this ambient correction is an important inclusion in this 
standard. 


M-3 APPROACH 


The following equation should provide an estimate of 
the total heat gain into a refrigerating appliance: 


Q=U xA x(T,-T)+U,x 4 x (Т,-Т,)............... 
+U,x Ax(T, -T.) 


where 
Q= total heat gain into the compartment; 
= U value (insulation) of each compartment for 1 

= | to n compartments; 

A= surface area of each compartment for i = 1 to 
n compartments (excluding common partitions 
between compartments); 

T,= average ambient temperature around the 


refrigerating appliance; and 


98 


Т. = 


; = is the internal average temperature of each 


compartment for i = 1 to n compartments. 


This equation is a simplification as it ignores heat gain 
through door seals (which can be factored into the 
compartment overall U value) and energy consumed by 
auxiliaries. 


For a change in ambient temperature, the change in heat 
gain can be estimated by differentiating the equation 
above, so the change in heat gain per change in ambient 
is simply: 

dQ 


d A E ЕТТЕ +U,x Á, 


a 


This equation shows that the change in heat gain for a 
change in ambient temperature is constant, no matter 
what the ambient temperature, as it is a function of the 
U and A values for each compartment. 


However, in terms of a correction for inclusion in this 
standard, relative correction has been adopted. So the 
value we need to calculate is the change in heat gain 
over the total heat gain at a given ambient temperature: 


40 
dT, 
9 


This means that the relative correction for heat 
gain becomes smaller as the ambient temperature 
increases (because total heat gain Q becomes larger 
and the numerator is constant). This matches well with 
modelling and physical test data. 


IEC heat gain correction (%) = 


We do not know the actual insulation factor U for each 
refrigerating appliance and each compartment — to 
obtain this would be quite onerous. In order to calculate 
a change in heat gain above we only need an estimate 
of the relative insulation factor for each compartment 
and the relative surface area of each compartment. It 
should then be possible to make a reasonable estimate 
of the relative heat gain of freezers versus fresh food 
compartments (or indeed any compartment operating 
at any temperature). 


The surface area can also be difficult to estimate 
accurately and it requires a different set of 
measurements from those already available. In the 
context of a correction for this standard, it has been 
found that volume data for each compartment provides 
a reasonable proxy for surface area for the purposes of 
a steady state power correction to be included in the 
IEC standard. The impact of surface area and insulation 
is only important for products with two or more 
compartments operating at different temperatures. 
For single compartment product operating at a single 
temperature, these values can be ignored (they will 
cancel out in the equation below where n = 1). 


T 
х|1+ [T 


-т, рохи +. 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


-U,xV,] 1 


Ss ssm (9, xV. ЖШ. 
where 

V;— nominal volume of compartment i (for n 
compartments); 

О. = relative U value of compartment i (for n 
compartments); 

Tym = Measured ambient temperature during the test; 
Ta = target (nominal) ambient temperature (correcting 


back to this temperature); 


T;= measured compartment temperature during the 


test; 
ACOP =expected COP impact for the product type and 
test condition; 
Р = measured steady state power during the test in 
accordance with Annex B; and 
Ре, = corrected steady state power that is expected 
at the nominal ambient test temperature in 
Annex B. 
Conceptually, the components of the equation are: 
a) (T, др is the deviation from the target ambient 


temperature in K; 


b) UxV terms on the numerator estimate the slope of 
the heat gain for all compartments; 


c) The denominator is total heat gain at the ambient 
temperature; and 


d) Thelastterm is an overall correction for the expected 
change in COP for a change in ambient. 


Note that the heat gain slope and heat gain in the above 
equation are based on relative U values and rated volume 
for each compartment (not surface area) and so will not 
be an accurate estimate in watt. 


The value of U; is estimated from the nominal temperature 
of operation ofthe compartment. This has been derived on 
the expectation that compartments that operate at colder 
temperatures tend to have better overall insulation (and 
therefore lower U values). An empirical fit of real data 


x 
-T)+..+U,xV х(Та —T;)] | [1«(7, -T,,)xA COP | 


am i 


showed that the following values provided a reasonable 
estimate of the relative insulation in products with two 
compartments. 


The overall correction equation can be further simplified 
by building in the above values from Table 22 for 
relative insulation into the equation itself by using 
constants as follows: 


F=f, 


ssm 


x 1+[T,, T. |х 


j (1-(Т,-Т,,хАСОР)| 


Тһе СОР corrections included іп the correction formula 
in Annex B (Table 2) were adjusted to optimise the fit 
to actual data. Nominally, the COP impact is expected to 
be about —1.2 percent/K at an ambient temperature of 16 
°C and —1.7 percent/K at an ambient temperature of 32 
°C with an evaporator temperature of —25 °C. The actual 
values used vary from these because of following: 


1) An adjustment for multi-compartment products 
helps to partly compensate for the use of volume 
in lieu of surface area, hence the lower than 
expected COP values; 


2) Compressor start losses at low ambient 
temperatures become significant and to some 
extent these counterbalance the increase in COP 
as ambient temperatures fall (at low ambient 
temperatures) hence the lower than expected 
COP values; and 


3) Single compartment products appear to be 
able to better optimise their operation (less 
starts, warmer evaporator for all refrigerating 
appliance with only unfrozen compartments). 


Table 22 Assumed Relative Insulation Value for Multi-Compartment Products 
( Clause M-3 ) 


SINo. Compartment Target Temp °C Relative Insulation Effectiveness Relative Insulation Factor U, , 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) -18 1.250 0.800 
ii) -12 1.182 0.846 
iii) -6 1.114 0.898 
iv) 0 1.045 0.957 
v) 2 1.023 0.978 
vi) 4 1.000 1.000 
vii) 12 0.909 1.100 
viii) 17 0.852 1.173 


99 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX N 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 
BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 


Blue Star Limited, Mumbai 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Carrier Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Limited, 
Gurugram 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 

Emerson Climate Technologies(India) Pvt. Ltd, Karad 

Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Limited, 
Mumbai 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engg, Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Bengaluru 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


ProF (DR) Кам KUMAR (Chairman) 


SHRI G. K. PRASAD 
SHRI J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
SHRI BALASUBRAMANIAN ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 
Ms DEEPSHIKHA WADHWA (YP) 
SHRI T. P. AsHWIN (YP) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
SHRI D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


Dr P. CHANDRA SEKHAR 
SHRI GUJJALA B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
ӛнкі K. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate I) 
Suri М. N. S. V. KIRAN Kumar (Alternate П) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI D. P. DESPANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI BURZIN J. WADIA 
SHRI A. A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
DR NITIN KARWA (Alternate) 


DR D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
DR Supe K. Das (Alternate) 


DR JvoriRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. VENKANNA 
SHRI J. GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI MAYUR KARMAKAR 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
SHRI C. M. PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
SHRI RAJAT SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


100 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Organization(s) Representative(s) 
National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida SHRI D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
SHRI S. К. ЈНА (Alternate) 
Refrigeration & Airconditioning Manufacturers SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Association, New Delhi SHRI R. K. MEHTA (Alternate) 
Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 
Sierra Aircon Private Limited, Gurugram SHRI D. K. MUDGAL 
SHRI S. DHIMAN (Alternate) 
The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
SHRI NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Voltas Ltd, Mumbai SHRI SRINIVASAN MOTURI 
Suri A. D. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 
Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer Suri H. S. WADHWA 
Voice, New Delhi Suri В. К. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) SHRI J. K. AGRAWAL 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur | SHRI P. К. MUKHERJEE 
Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “Е? AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 
SCIENTIST “С? (MED), BIS 


Panel on Household Refrigerating Appliances 


Organization Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE (Convener) 
Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity, (F-88, Abdul Fazal Enclave, Suri S. T. H. FARIDI (Co-Convener) 
Jamia Nagar, New Delhi) 

Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 

Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru SHRI A. R. RAVI KUMAR 

Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer ӛнкі B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
Voice, New Delhi 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 

Electrical Research and Development Association, SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
Vadodara 


BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, SHRI MADHANRAJ RAMALINGAM 
Chennai 


UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru SHRI V. MANJUNATH 


Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad 


101 


IS 17550 (Part 3) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Dr JyoTiRMAY MATHUR 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 
Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


Consumer Electronics and Appliances Manufacturers SHRI Конт KUMAR SINGH 
Association, New Delhi SHRI AMIT CHADHA (Alternate) 


Voltas Beko, New Delhi SHRI ANSHU DHANDA 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


102 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (12798). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


