Indian Standard 


БІН, weiten sit uem at 
Sect T wad sists — fee 


(Vel YTRA ) 


Adhesives for Use with Ceramic, 
Mosaic and Stone Tiles — 
Specification 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 83.180; 91.100.25 


© BIS 2019 


mA AM = 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ө AM чач, 9 етте VHC APM, As І5еей-110002 
Қыша МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 8 


Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 2004. This revision incorporates the experience gained with the use of this 
standard and brings it in line with the latest developments in this field. The following are the significant modifications 
incorporated in this revision: 


a) Title of the standard has been modified to ‘Adhesives for use with ceramic, mosaic and stone tiles — 
Specification’ from ‘Adhesives for use with ceramic tiles and mosaics — Specification’. 


b) Adhesives have been classified into five types namely, Type 1, Type 2, Type 3, Type 4 and Type 5. 
c) Measurement of adhesion strengths have been modified to load per unit area. 

d) Measurement of adhesion strengths are now to be done using UTM. 

e) Requirements such as slip and deformation of adhesives have been added. 

f) Requirements such as rheology and storage stability have been done away with. 


This standard also specifies the procedure for the tests to evaluate the properties of different types of tile adhesives 
suitable for fixing tiles of different porosity on various substrates. 


The suitability of a tile adhesive largely depends on the following factors of tiles to be fixed: (a) The porosity/ 
density; (b) Size of tile; (c) The nature, surface and location of the substrate; and (d) The area of application, 
interior or exterior submerged conditions or wet areas. 


As the tiles installed should establish 100 percent contact with the substrate. However, the following minimum 
contact requirements should be used for designing the adhesive: (a) 95 percent contact area for high demanding 
conditions; (b) 85 percent minimum contact area for normal conditions; and (c) In case of using spot bonding 
technique or blob technique for fixing of tiles for decorative purposes or internal use, where it is sufficient to have 
50 percent contact area, the shear bond strength of the proposed adhesive should be at least 10 MPa. 


While formulating this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following ISO standards: 


ISO 13007-1 : 2014 Ceramic tiles — Огош and adhesives — Part | : Terms, definitions and specifications 
for adhesives 


ISO 13007-2:2013 Ceramic tiles — Grouts and adhesives — Part 2 : Test methods for adhesives 
The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated expressing the result ofa test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15477 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


ADHESIVES FOR USE WITH CERAMIC, MOSAIC AND 
STONE TILES — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements for adhesives 
used for fixing tiles of different porosity and classifies 
the tile adhesive into different types suitable for their 
proposed application. 


This standard covers adhesives for installation of 
ceramic (vitrified and non-vitrified), porcelain, clay, 
glass, glass mosaic, metal, natural stone and engineered 
stone tiles. 
NOTE — АП interior and exterior wall installations of stone 
tiles above 3 m height shall be clamped for safety, where the 


background is not robust enough to support the load of stone 
tile installation. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
10890 : 1984 Specification for planetary mixer 
used in tests of cement and 
pozzolana 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Fine Thin Bed Fixing — A process of tile fixing 
into a bed of an adhesive average of 2 mm in final bed 
thickness. 


3.2 Thin Bed Fixing — A process of tile fixing into a 
bed of an adhesive average of 6 mm in final bed 
thickness. 


3.3 Medium Thick Bed Fixing — A process of tile 
fixing into a bed of an adhesive not less than average 
6 mm and not exceeding average 12 mm in final bed 
thickness. 


NOTE — If level variation on floor or wall is more than an 
average 12 mm in 3 m length (excluding intentional slope for 
floors, provided for flow of liquids to drain points), surface 
preparation as required to bring the surface true to plumb level 
shall be taken up with appropriate materials. 


3.4 Open Time — Maximum time interval after 
application at which tiles can be embedded in the 
applied adhesive. 


3.5 Adjustment Time — Maximum time interval after 
which tiles positioned in the adhesive layer can be 
adjusted without significant loss of adhesion. 


3.6 Shelf Life — Time storage under stated conditions 
during which an adhesive is expected to maintain its 
working properties. 


3.7 Slip — Downward movement of a tile embedded 
in the combed adhesive layer on vertical surface. 


3.8 Deformability — Capacity of hardened adhesive 
to be deformed by stresses between the tile and the 
fixing surface without damage to the installed surface. 


3.9 Transverse Deformation — Deflection recorded 
at the centre when a beam of hardened adhesive is 
subjected to three-point loading. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


The adhesives shall be classified into 5 types. The 
recommended application of these types of adhesives 
are given in 4.1 to 4.5. 


4.1 Type 1 Adhesive 


This adhesive is suitable mainly for tiles with apparent 
porosity greater than 3 percent. It is suitable for most 
of the clay and ceramic (non-vitrified) tiles of small 
dimension (size not more than 300 mm x 300 mm) and 
the majority of cement based backgrounds (substrates) 
like cement plaster, cement concrete, cement screed, 
etc, and for interior dry area applications only. 


NOTE — Type 1 adhesive generally contains varying small 
amounts of chemical polymers, hence the name general purpose 
adhesive is suitable for general, internal, clay or ceramic floor 
and wall tiling. The vital minor amounts of chemical polymers 
enable powder adhesives, which are based on bulk cement and 
filler, to be modified to have appropriate properties. 


4.2 Type 2 Adhesive 


This adhesive is suitable mainly for tiles with an 
apparent porosity less than or equal to 3 percent. It is 
suitable for vitrified/fully vitrified tiles, glass mosaic 
tiles, all stones, dense and large dimension (More than 
300 mm x 300 mm size) tiles and stones (slabs), and 


IS 15477 : 2019 


where background and location is more demanding like 
wet areas, submerged areas, etc. This type of adhesive 
is recommended for both interior floor and wall 
applications, and for exterior floor applications. 


4.3 Type 3 Adhesive 


This adhesive is suitable mainly for tiles and stone tiles 
on exterior wall substrates like plaster or concrete. It is 
suitable for tiles like ceramic, clay tiles, basalt tiles, 
vitrified, glass mosaic tiles and porcelain tiles and all 
natural stone tiles. 


4.4 Type 4 Adhesive 


This adhesive is suitable mainly for tiles and stone tiles 
which are included in Type 1, Type 2 and Type 3 but 
intended for installation on dry wall board substrates. 
It is suitable for all types of tiles and stones except 
metal tiles or engineered stones to be installed on dry 
wall board substrates like gypsum boards, plywood, 
wood, calcium silicate boards, medium density fibre 
boards, fiber cement boards, cement boards, bison 
panel, etc. 


For all tiles/stones of size more than 600 mm x 600 mm, 
the adhesive shall also comply with 5517 category of 
transverse deformation. For all tiles/stones of size more 
than 1 200 mm x 1 200 mm, the adhesive shall also 
comply with ‘S2’ category of transverse deformation. 


Similar results to polymer modified adhesive can be 
achieved by the addition of a liquid admixture to the 
standard general purpose adhesive which is called as 
polymer fortified adhesive. This is a more of specialist 
and technical solution that provides enhanced adhesion 
and increased flexibility. Thus, by addition of liquid 
admixture to Type 1 adhesive, its properties can be 
enhanced to meet the performance criteria of Type 2 or 
Type 3 or Type 4 adhesive. 


NOTE — Type 2, Type 3 and Type 4 adhesives are more 


technical products, generally referred as polymer modified 
adhesives, and are required in situations where the background 
(substrate) or the tile or the surface is particularly challenging. 


4.5 Type 5 Adhesive 


This adhesive is suitable for all types of tiles including 
engineered stones (manufactured stones) which are 
intended for installation on glass or metallic substrates 
like, grid iron, mild steel, stainless steel, aluminum or 
copper, etc. It is suitable for metal tiles, glass tiles, 
engineered stones or for all types of tiles and stones to 
be installed on different cement based substrates like 
cement screeds, plaster, concrete, drywall boards like 
gypsum boards, plywood, wood, metals composite 
boards, modified backer boards and the metallic 
substrates. 


NOTE — Type 5 adhesive is generally a mixture of synthetic 
resin, mineral fillers and organic additives in which hardening 
occurs by chemical reaction. They are available in one or more 
component forms and in essence, these cover polyurethanes, 
epoxy adhesives and the like. 


5 REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Tensile Adhesion Strength 


When tested in accordance with the method given in 
Annex A, the mean tensile adhesion strength of adhesive 
shall comply with the requirements given in Table 1. 


5.2 Shear Adhesion Strength 


When tested in accordance with the method given in 
Annex B, the mean shear adhesion strength of adhesive 
shall comply with the requirements given in Table 1. 


5.3 Open Time 


When tested in accordance with the method given in 
Annex C, the open time shall not be less than that stated 
by the manufacturer. 


Table 1 Minimum Tensile and Shear Adhesion Strength of Adhesive 
(Clauses 5.1 and 5.2) 


SI Characteristic Requirement 
No. N/mm? 
Typel Type2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 5 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Tensile adhesion strength, Min: 
a) Dry condition 0.5 1.0 1.5 1.5 2.0 
b) Wet condition -- 1.0 1.0 1.0 -- 
ii) Shear adhesion strength, Min: 
a) Dry condition 1.0 1.25 1.5 1.5 6.0 
b) Heat aging condition mE 1.0 1.0 1.0 3.0 
c) Wet condition — 1.0 1.0 1.0 -- 


5.4 Adjustment Time 


When tested in accordance with the method given in 
Annex D, the adjustment time shall not be less than 
that stated by the manufacturer. 


5.5 Slip (Required for Vertical Application Only) 


When tested in accordance with the method given in 
Annex E, the slip shall not be more than 0.5 mm. Slip 
resistant adhesives shall be designated as ‘P’. 


5.6 Deformability (Required for Vertical 
Application Only) 


When tested in accordance with the method given in 
Annex F, the deformability shall be within the range 
mentioned below for a particular class as stated by the 
manufacturer: 


SI Classification Transverse 
No. Deformation 


i) Deformable adhesive, $1 > 2.5 mm, < 5.0 mm 


i) Highly deformable > 5.0 mm 
adhesive, 52 


6 CONDITIONING 


Unless otherwise stated, all the tests shall be carried 
out at standard atmospheric conditions of 27 + 2 °C 
temperature and 65 + 5 percent humidity. 


7 INSTRUCTIONS 


Adhesive supplied in accordance with this standard, 
when mixed and spread in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions, shall be suitable for tile/ 
stone fixing on those types of background for which 
they are recommended by the manufacturer. The 
manufacturer’s instruction shall be carefully 
followed when any pre-mixing of the adhesive is 
required. 


IS 15477 : 2019 


8 PACKING AND MARKING 


8.1 Packing 


The packing of the adhesive shall comply with the 
following: 


a) Adhesive shall be suitably packed in leak proof 
and moisture proof bags or containers, and 


b) Liquid admixture/liquid components of 
adhesive shall be bottled in suitable leak proof 
and moisture proof containers. 


8.2 Marking 


8.2.1 Each bag or liquid container of adhesive shall be 
legibly and indelibly marked with the following: 
a) Name ofthe manufacturer and the trade-mark, 
if any; 
b) Batch or lot number; 
c) Month and year of manufacturing; 
а) Type of adhesive that is Type І or Type 2 or 
Type 3 or Type 4 or Type 5; 
e) Special characteristics: 
1) Deformability — To be marked with 5517 
or ‘S2’, if and as applicable. 
2) Slip resistance — To be marked with ‘7’, 
if applicable. 
f) Open time and adjustment time of the 
adhesive; 
g) Storage life and storage condition for the 
adhesive; and 
h) Appropriate mixing instructions. 


8.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirement of this 
standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may 
be marked with the standard mark. 


IS 15477 : 2019 


ANNEX А 
(Clause 5.1) 
DETERMINATION OF TENSILE ADHESION STRENGTH 


A-1 APPARATUS 


A-1.1 Square Notched Trowel — Trowel used shall 
be with 6 mm x 6 mm square notch trowel with a clear 
internal gap of 6 mm between adjacent notches. 


A-1.2 Weight — Weight shall be of mass 2 kg 
occupying less than 50 mm x 50 mm cross-sectional 
area. 


A-1.3 Pull Head Plates — These shall be square or 
circular metallic plates, with dimensions of 50+ 1 mm 
edge or diameter and a minimum thickness of 8 mm 
with a suitable fitting for connection to the test 
machine. 


A-1.4 Universal Testing Machine (UTM) — UTM 
shall be capable of applying the load to the pull head 
plate at the rate of 250 + 50 N/s through a suitable 
fitting that does not exert any bending force. 


A-1.5 Laboratory Oven, controlled at 70 + 3 °C. 


A-1.6 Concrete Test Substrate — Concrete test 
substrate shall be 40 + 5 mm thick, having a moisture 
content of less than 3 percent by mass, and water 
absorption at the surface after four hours of testing in 
range of 0.5 ст?-1.5 cm?. The cohesive strength shall 
be at least 1.5 N/mm”. 


NOTES 


1 A method for manufacturing a suitable concrete test slab 
and the procedures for measuring the cohesive strength and 
surface water absorption is given in Annex G for information 
only. 


2 Other test substrates — Other substrates may be used upon 
agreement, if the substrate is recommended for tile 
application by the adhesive manufacturer. To demonstrate 
compatibility with other optional substrates, the adhesive 
shall be applied to the selected substrate with cohesive 
strength of greater than 1.0 N/mm? or if cohesive failure 
occurs in the substrate, the requirement is considered 
satisfied. 


A-1.7 Mixer for Mixing the Adhesive — See IS 10890 
for specification of mixer. 


NOTE — Use of mixer is recommended for mixing the 
adhesive. 


A-2 FAILURE PATTERNS 


The modes of failure may be a combination of any of 
that given below, which shall be recorded for each 
specimen: 


a) Adhesion failure (AF-S or AF-T) — Failure 
occurs at the interface between adhesive and 
substrate (AF-S) (see Fig. 1A) or between tile 


and adhesive (AF-T) (see Fig. 1B). The test 
value equals the adhesive strength. In some 
cases the failure may occur in the adhesive 
layer between the tile and the pull head plate 
(BF) (see Fig. 1C). In this case, the adhesive 
strength is greater than the test value and the 
test shall be repeated. 

b) Cohesive failure within the adhesive 
(CF-A) — Failure occurs within the adhesive 
layer (see Fig. 1D). 

с) Cohesive failure in the substrate or in the tile 
(CF-S or CF-T) — The failure occurs within 
the substrate (CF-S) (see Fig. 1E) or within 
the body of the tile (CF-T) (see Fig. 1F). In 
this case, the strength of the adhesive is greater 
than the test value. 


A-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


A-3.1 For tensile adhesion strength test, tile or stone 
shall be cut to sizes of 50 + 1 mm x 50 + 1 mm, witha 
nominal minimum thickness of 6 mm or more. The tile 
pieces required for the testing shall be five for each 
test condition. Hence, a total of ten tile pieces shall be 
prepared for tensile testing of an adhesive. 


A-3.2 For Type | adhesive, ceramic tiles with porosity 
more than 3 percent shall be used for testing. For Type 2, 
Type 3, Type 4 and Type 5 adhesives, vitrified or porcelain 
tiles with porosity less than 3 percent shall be used. 


A-4 MIXING OF THE ADHESIVE 


The amount of water and/or liquid admixture, 
required for preparing the adhesive, shall be as stated 
by the manufacturer in proportion by mass (for 
example, the amount of liquid, in litres and the 
amount of powder, in kg to be mixed shall be 
declared). If a range of values are given, the average 
shall be used. 


A minimum quantity of 2 kg of the adhesive shall be 
prepared in a mixing bowl using mixer as per IS 10890 
with mixing instructions as given in the technical data 
sheet provided by the manufacturer. 


Let the adhesive mature in accordance with the adhesive 
manufacturer’s instructions followed by further mixing 
for 15 s. 


А-5 PREPARATION OF SPECIMENS 


A-5.1 Take five test piece tiles of size 50 + 1 mm x 
50 + 1 mm x б mm or higher thickness. 


A-5.2 Apply a thin layer of the adhesive, mixed as given 
above, to the concrete slab with a straight edge trowel. 
Then apply a thicker layer and comb with a square 
notched trowel. The trowel shall be held at an angle of 
approximately 45° to the substrate at a right angle to 
one edge of the slab and drawn across the slab parallel 
to that edge (in a straight line). Place at least five test 
tiles 50 mm apart on the adhesive. Load each tile with 
2 kg for 30 s. 


A-6 CONDITIONING 


Condition one set of five specimens for each of the 
regimes as appropriate: 


a) Dry condition — After storing for 27 days 
under standard conditions, bond the pull 
head plates to the tiles with a suitable high 
strength adhesive (Example, Epoxy). After 
further 24 h storage under standard 
conditions, determine the tensile adhesion 
strength of the adhesive as per the procedure 
given in A-7. 

b) Wet condition — Condition the specimens 
under standard conditions for 7 days and 
thereafter immerse in water at standard 
temperature. After a total of 20 days, remove 
the specimens from water, wipe with a cloth, 
and bond the pull head plates to the tile or 
stone. After a further 7 h under standard 
conditions, immerse the specimen in water at 
standard temperature. 

On the following day (that is after a total of 
21 days), remove the specimens from water 
and immediately determine the tensile 


TILE 
ADHESIVE 


1A ADHESIVE FAILURE BETWEEN 
ADHESIVE AND SUBSTRATE 


IS 15477 : 2019 


adhesion strength of the adhesive as per the 
procedure given in A-7. 


A-7 PROCEDURE 


A-7.1 After pull head plates are strong enough, 
determine the tensile adhesion strength of adhesive 
by placing the tile on concrete slab to be tested exactly 
in axial line of pull head, and subject the unit to tensile 
loading at a rate of 250 + 50 N/s to the specimen. 
Note the tensile adhesion strength ofthe specimen. A 
suitable arrangement shall be made for clamping the 
substrate to hold in position while the test is in 
progress. 


A-7.2 Failure of the unit shall be deemed to have 
occurred when the applied force reaches a maximum 
value. Then test each of the other specimens similarly. 
If one or both of the test tiles are broken in the test, 
record the value at which the breakage occurs, and 
include it in the mean tensile adhesion strength 
calculation if, the value is within 15 percent of the 
mean value. Discard any individual result in which 
the breaking force differs by more than 15 percent 
from the mean value. If 3 or more out of the 5 units 
fail at forces outside these limits, repeat the whole 
test. 


A-8 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 


Calculate for each conditioning sequence the tensile 
adhesion strength (N/mm?) as the mean tensile adhesion 
breakage of at least three specimens. The bond area 
for calculating the adhesive tensile strength may be 
taken as 85 percent for normal conditions and 
95 percent for high demanding conditions. 


1B ADHESIVE FAILURE BETWEEN 
TILE AND ADHESIVE 


IS 15477 : 2019 


1С ADHESIVE FAILURE BETWEEN TILE 
AND PULL HEAD PLATE 


1E COHESIVE FAILURE WITHIN THE SUBSTRATE 


ADHESIVE 
SUBSTRATE 


1D COHESIVE FAILURE 
WITHIN THE ADHESIVE 


1F COHESIVE FAILURE WITHIN THE TILE 


FiG.1 FAILURE PATTERNS 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 5.2) 
DETERMINATION OF SHEAR ADHESION STRENGTH 


B-1 APPARATUS 
B-1.1 Square Notched Trowel — See A-1.1. 


B-1.2 Support for Shear Specimen — Test Unit 
Holder — Support for shear bond specimens shall be 
as given in the shear bond test jig (see Fig. 2) to place 
the tile such that edges are loaded against the non- 
movable support. 


B-1.3 T- Spacer Bar, made of brass or steel and shall 
be as given in Fig. 3. 


B-1.4 Universal Testing Machine (UTM) — UTM 


shall be capable of applying the compression load with 
displacement at the rate of 5 + 0.5 mm/min. 


B-1.5 Laboratory Oven, controlled at 70 + 3 °C. 


B-2 TEST SPECIMENS 


B-2.1 For Type | adhesive, ceramic tiles with porosity 
more than 3 percent shall be cut to size of 100+ 1 mm х 
100 + 1 mm, with a nominal minimum thickness of 
6 mm or more. Two test pieces are required for each 
specimen (test unit). Five such cut tiles are required 
for Type | adhesive for each condition. 


B-2.2 For Type 2 to Type 5 adhesives, vitrified or 
porcelain tiles with porosity less than 3 percent shall 
be cut to size of 100 € 1 mm x 100 + 1 mm, with a 
nominal minimum thickness of 6 mm or more. Two 
test pieces are required for each specimen (test unit). 
Five such cut tiles are required for each of the Type 2 
to Type 5 adhesive for each condition. 


B-3 PREPARATION OF SPECIMENS 


Prepare mortar as specified in A-4. Assemble 5 shear 
specimens of 100 + 1 mm х 100 + 1 mm tile for each 
condition, with a minimum of 3 mm mortar layer by 
bonding the two pieces oftile together for each specimen. 
The 3 mm mortar bonding layer shall be established by 
placing 3.2 mm thick T- spacer bar on the smallest tile 
edge; be sure to rub all ofthe mortar off the underside of 
the spacers by sliding them back and forth along the edge. 
The top tile shall be placed with the cut edge opposite to 
that of the bottom tile's cut edge and squeezed until a 
3 mm thickness of mortar is obtained. The specimen shall 
be constructed so that the cut edge will be loaded. The 
tile shall then be slid back and forth along the stainless 
steel spacers to ensure proper thickness of the mortar. 
The tile shall then be slid to ensure a 6-8 mm offset. 
Care shall be taken in removing the stainless steel spacer 
so as not to cant or slide the tiles in relation to each other 
or to alter the offset distance. Specimens shall not be 
individually handled for 24 h and shall be treated with 
care until broken. 


B-4 CONDITIONING 


Condition one set of five specimens for each-of the 


HARDENED 


INSERT 
ADJUSTABLE JAWS 
(FROM 12 mm TO 45 mm) 


[5 — 12761 


IS 15477 : 2019 


regimes as appropriate: 


a) Dry condition — 28 days under normal 
laboratory conditions. 

b) Heat ageing condition — 14 days under 
normal laboratory conditions followed by 
14 days at 70 +3 °C. 

c) Wet condition — 7 days under normal 
laboratory conditions followed by 21 days in 
water at laboratory temperature. 


B-5 PROCEDURE 


B-5.1 On completion of conditioning, remove the 
specimen from the conditioning environment. Remove 
five specimens assembled as directed above. Insert it 
into the test unit holder mounted in the UTM machine 
and individually test with compression loading with 
displacement at a rate of 5 + 0.5 mm/min, so that the 
mortar is stressed to failure. Record these values. 


B-5.2 Each specimen shall be tested and the failure 
load shall be recorded. If one or both of the test tiles 
are broken in the test, record the value at which the 
breakage occurs, and include it in the mean shear 
adhesion strength calculation if, the value is within 
15 percent of the mean value. Discard any individual 
result in which the breaking force differs by more than 
15 percent from the mean value. If more than three out 
of the five units fail at forces outside these limits, repeat 
the whole test. 


B-6 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 


Calculate for each conditioning sequence, the shear 
adhesion strength (N/mm?) as the mean shear adhesion 
breakage of at least three specimens. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 SHEAR Вомр TEst Ла 


IS 15477 : 2019 


54 min. 
| 
12.5 
3 


Fic. 3 SPACER BAR 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.3) 
DETERMINATION OF OPEN TIME 


C-1 APPARATUS 


C-1.1 Square Notched Trowel — Trowel used shall 
be with 6 mm x 6 mm square notch trowel with a clear 
internal gap of 6 mm between adjacent notches. 


C-2 TEST SPECIMENS 


C-2.1 For open time test, tile shall be cut to size of 
50+ 1 mm x 50+ 1 mm, with a nominal minimum 
thickness of 6 mm or more. Ten such tiles have to be 
prepared for the test. 


C-2.2 Ceramic tiles with absorption more than 3 percent 
shall be used for Type 1 adhesive and vitrified or 
porcelain tiles with less than 3 percent absorption shall 
be used for Type 2 or Type 3 or Type 4 or Type 5 
adhesives. 


C-3 PROCEDURE 


C-3.1 The adhesive shall be applied onto a gypsum 
board using trowel. Tile pieces of size 50 + 1 mm x 
50 + 1 mm shall be fixed to the adhesive with a 2 kg 
of mass placed on the tiles for 30 s to improve the 
contact. 


C-3.2 At definite intervals of time, say 5 min, 10 min, 
15 min, etc, each designated tile, each time be flipped 
to see the area of contact of adhesive behind the tile. 


C-4 RESULT 


The open time is defined as the last measurement of 
time in minutes before the adhesive fails to wet 
minimum of 50 percent of tile area. 


IS 15477 : 2019 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 5.4) 
DETERMINATION OF ADJUSTMENT TIME 


D-1 APPARATUS 


D-1.1 Square Notched Trowel — Trowel used shall 
be with 6 mm x 6 mm square notch trowel with a clear 
internal gap of 6 mm between adjacent notches. 


D-2 TEST SPECIMENS 


D-2.1 For adjustment time test, tile shall be cut to size 
of 50 € 1 mm x 50 + 1 mm, with a nominal minimum 
thickness of 6 mm or more. Ten such tiles have to be 
prepared for the test. 


D-2.2 Ceramic tiles with absorption more than 3 percent 
shall be used for Type 1 adhesive and vitrified or 
porcelain tiles with less than 3 percent absorption shall 
be used for Type 2 or Type 3 or Type 4 or Type 5 
adhesives. 


D-3 PROCEDURE 


D-3.1 The adhesive shall be applied onto a gypsum 
board using trowel. Tile pieces of size 50 + 1 mm x 
50+ 1 mm shall be fixed to the adhesive keeping a 
minimum gap of 35 mm between adjacent tiles, with a 
2 kg of mass placed on the tiles for 30 s to improve the 
contact. 


D-3.2 At definite intervals of time, say 5 min, 10 min, 
15 min, etc, each designated tile, each time be rotated 
through 90° and then turned back to its original position. 


D-4 RESULT 


The adjustment time is defined as the last measurement 
(time in minutes) before the tile fails to rotate. 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 5.5) 
DETERMINATION OF SLIP 


E-1 APPARATUS (see Fig. 4) 
E-1.1 Steel straight edge. 
E-1.2 Clamps, to hold the straight edge in place. 


E-1.3 Masking Tape, approximately 25 mm wide shall 
be used. 


E-1.4 Two pieces of 25 + 0.5 mm х 25 + 0.5 mm x 
10 + 0.5 mm spacers made from stainless steel shall be 
used. 


E-1.5 A weight of mass 5 kg with a cross-sectional area 
less than 100 mm х 100 mm shall be used. 


E-1.6 Vernier Caliper, accurate to 0.01 mm shall be 
used. 


E-1.7 Concrete test substrate as specified in A-1.6 shall 
be used. 


E-1.8 Square Notched Trowel — Trowel used shall 
be with 6 mm x 6 mm square notch trowel with a clear 
internal gap of 6 mm between adjacent notches. 


E-2 TEST SPECIMENS 


E-2.1 For slip test, tile shall be cut to sizes of 100 + 
1 mm x 100+ 1 mm, with a nominal minimum thickness 
of 6 mm or more. Three such tiles have to be prepared 
for the test. 


E-2.2 For Type | adhesive, ceramic tiles with porosity 
more than 3 percent must be used for testing. For 
Type 2, Type 3, Type 4 and Type 5 adhesives, vitrified 
or porcelain tiles with porosity less than 3 percent 
should be used. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


Prepare mortar as specified in A-4. Secure the steel 
straight edge at the top ofthe concrete substrate so that 
its bottom edge is horizontal when the slab is raised to 
its vertical position. Position 25 mm wide masking tape 
immediately below the steel straight edge, and apply a 
thin layer of the adhesive to the concrete slab with the 
straight edge of trowel. 


IS 15477 : 2019 


Then apply a thicker layer of adhesive to the surface of 
the concrete substrate so that it just overlaps the bottom 
edge of the masking tape. Comb the adhesive at right 
angles to the straight edge with trowel, holding at 45? 
to the base of concrete substrate. 


Immediately remove the masking tape, position 25 mm 
spacers as shown against the straight edge; and after 
2 min, place the 100 + 1 mm x 100 + 1 mm cut tile 
specimen against the spacers as shown in Fig. 4 and 
load it with a weight of mass 5 kg for 30 + 5 s. 


Remove the spacers, and measure the gap between the 
straight edge and the tile with the vernier caliper to 


within 0.1 mm accuracy. Then lift the concrete substrate 
slab carefully into a vertical position. After 20 + 2 min, 
re-measure the gap, as before, at its maximum point. 
The maximum slip of the tile under its own weight is 
the difference between the two readings. 


Carry out the test for three tile specimens and report 
each individual result and the mean value in mm. 


E-4 TEST RESULTS 


Slip in millimetres shall be reported for individual and 
average value. Tile must not sag more than 0.5 mm 
from its original position. 


1. STEEL STRAIGHT EDGE 


. ADHESIVE 


2 
3 
4. TILE (100 x 100) mm 
5 
6. CONCRETE SLAB 


. MASKING TAPE 25 mm WIDE 
. (25 x 25 x100) mm THICK SPACER OF SPACING BARS 


Fic. 4 SLIP APPARATUS 


10 


IS 15477 : 2019 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 5.6) 
DETERMINATION OF DEFORMABILITY 


F-1 APPARATUS 


F-1.1 Substrate — Polyethylene film with minimum 
thickness of 0.15 mm. 


F-1.2 Plastic Container — A plastic container that is 
capable of being sealed to make it air tight, with an 
internal volume of 26 + 5 litre (say, a container with 
dimensions 600 + 20 mm x 400 + 10 mm x 110 + 
10 mm). 


F-1.3 Support — Rigid, smooth and flat support for 
the polyethylene film. 


F-1.4 Anvil — A metallic construction with dimensions 
as shown in Fig. 5. 


F-1.5 Test Jig — Two metallic cylindrical supports of 
diameter 10 + 0.1 mm, spaced 200 + 1 mm centre to 
centre, of length 60 mm minimum (see Fig. 6). 


F-1.6 Template A — A smooth, rigid, non-absorbent 
rectangular frame of internal dimensions 280 + 1 mm x 
45 + 1mm x 5 + 0.1 mm [For example, made from 
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or metal] (see Fig. 7). 


NOTE — A round hole of 2 mm diameter drilled at each internal 
corner is recommended to ease production of the test piece. 


F-1.7 Template B — A smooth, rigid, non-absorbent 
mould or similar device capable of producing a test 
specimen of dimensions 300 + 1 mm x 45 + 1 mm x 
3 + 0.05 mm (see Fig. 8). 


F-1.8 Test Machine — The test machine shall be a 
press, capable of applying the anvil to the test piece at 
a rate of 2 mm/min. 


F-1.9 Flow Table — The flow table used for the 
compaction of the 280 mm x 45 mm x 5 mm specimen 
(see Fig. 9). 


F-2 TEST SPECIMENS 


F-2.1 Preparation of Substrate 


Fix the polyethylene film firmly to the rigid support, 
ensuring the surface to which the adhesive is to be 
applied is not distorted (that is, without pleats or 
wrinkles). 


F-2.2 Preparation of Test Units 


Hold the Template A firmly onto the polyethylene film. 
Trowel sufficient adhesive across the template and then 
screed clean so as to neatly and completely fill the hole 
in the template. Clamp the mould firmly to the flow 
table and compact the sample using 70 jolts. Lift the 


11 


mould gently from the flow table and carefully remove 
the template vertically. Apply a layer of release agent 
to the Template B and position it centrally over the 
specimen. Load the template with a weight capable of 
exerting a force of 100 + 0.1 N and an approximate 
cross-sectional area of 290 x 45 mm. The applied 
pressure ensures that the material fully fills the recess 
of the template to the required thickness. Remove any 
excess material from the sides of the template and 1h 
later, remove the weight. After 48 h, remove the 
template. Prepare five samples for each test 


F-3 PROCEDURE 


F-3.1 Conditioning 


Immediately after the removal of Template B place five 
specimens, on the support, horizontally into the plastic 
container and seal it to make it air tight. Condition the 
test units at 27 + 2 °C. After 12 days remove them from 
the plastic container and condition them for 14 days in 
air in standard conditions. 


F-3.2 Transverse Deformation 


After conditioning has been completed, remove the 
specimens from the polyethylene film and measure their 
thickness, using a caliper with 0.01 mm precision, at 
three positions, that is, in the middle and 50 + 1 mm 
from each end. If the three values fall within the required 
tolerance of 3.0 + 0.1 mm, calculate the average value; 
discard any specimen which falls outside the required 
permissible thickness. Place the test sample on the test 
jig. The starting point is defined when the anvil touches 
the sample. Deform the sample, from the starting point, 
with a transverse load applied by the anvil at a rate of 
2 mm/min until failure. Record the deformation from 
the starting point, in mm. Repeat the test on the other 
test pieces. Discard any individual result in which the 
deformation differs by more than 15 percent from the 
mean value. If more than three out of the five units 
result deformation values outside these limits, repeat 
the whole test. 


F-4 TEST RESULTS 


The transverse deformation is determined to 0.1 mm, 
by calculating the average value of the deformations 
obtained in the test. Deformation value in millimetre 
shall be reported for individual and mean values for 
deformability of adhesive (mm). The adhesive 
deformability is classified as ‘S/’ or ‘S2’ Class based 
on the result obtained from this test. 


IS 15477 : 2019 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 5 ANVIL 


1 
2 


ы 
PLANE 


200 mm 
1. Cylinderical support diameter (10 + 0.1 mm). Length 60 mm minimum 
2. ADHESIVe (3 + 0.1 mm) THICK 


Fic. 6 TEST Ла 


280 +1 
45 +1 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 7 TEMPLATE A 


IS 15477 : 2019 


L %0.05 


45 £1 
300 +1 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 8 TEMPLATE B 


385 — —- Th C 


0254 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 9 FLow TABLE 


13 


IS 15477 : 2019 


ANNEX G 
(Clause A-1.6) 
CONCRETE TEST SLAB 
G-1 GENERAL INFORMATION h) Conditioning : The slabs shall be 
A concrete test slab suitable for the adhesive tests stored for 24 h under 
standard conditions 


described in this standard may be manufactured and 
tested using these described procedures. 


G-2 TEST CONDITIONS 


Test conditions given in 5 shall apply. 


G-3 APPARATUS 
G-3.1 Pull Head Plates — As given in A-1.3. 


G-3.2 Universal Testing Machine (UTM) —As given 
in A-1.4. 


G-3.3 Carsten-Rohrchen Flask, or other suitable 
apparatus for measuring the water absorption at the 
surface of the concrete slab (see Fig. 10). 


G-4 CONCRETE TEST SLAB 


G-4.1 Manufacture of the Concrete Slab 


The specification (listed in A-1.6) may be achieved by 
using the following procedure to manufacture the 
concrete slab: 


a) Binder : Portland cement. 

b) Aggregate : Gravel sand, of up to 8 
mm particle X size, 
continuous grading 


curve between A and B 
(see Fig. 11). 

: 1:5 m proportion by 
mass. 

: 500 kg/m? prepared 
concrete shall contain 
concrete ultrafines in 
order to be properly 
workable and have a 
closed structure: the 
ultrafines content 
consists of cement and 
aggregate particle size 
up to 0.125 mm. 

: 0.5 

: Vertically or 
horizontally in moulds, 
avoid the use of any 
mould release agent. 


c) Mix ratio of binder 
and aggregate 


d) Ultrafines content 
per п? of concrete 


e) Water-cement ratio 
f) Manufacture 


g) Compaction : 90s ona vibrating table 


at 50 Hz. 


14 


followed by 6 days 
water immersion at 20 + 
2°C. 

Before use or before 
being tested for water 
absorption and surface 
cohesive strength, the 
concrete slabs shall be 
stored separately, in 
vertical position, in a 
dry апа ventilated 
environment, for at least 
3 months and 
conditioned for at least 
24 h under standard test 
conditions. 


The test surface shall have a finish similar to that 
obtained by using a wooden float and shall be clean 
and dust-free at the time of the test. 


G-4.2 Measurement of Surface Water Absorption 


Water absorption at the surface of the concrete slab 
shall be determined by the following method: 


a) Bond a measuring tube graduated in ml 
(Carsten Rohrchen flask) to the concrete slab 
by means of a suitable sealant. 

After the sealant has cured, fill the measuring 
tube with water, to the upper level. 


Record the drop in water level during the 4h 
duration of the test. The total drop in water 
level at the end of 4 h gives the surface water 
absorption. 

Perform at least three tests on a reference 
concrete slab from each batch and calculate 
the average surface absorption. 


b) 


с) 


d) 


G-4.3 Measurement of Surface Cohesive Strength 


The tensile strength between the pull head plate and 
concrete surface shall be at least 1.5 N/mm”. The 
strength shall be determined by bonding at least five 
pull-head plates directly to the slab, for example, with 
an epoxide resin, and determining the tensile adhesion 
strength by applying a force which increases at a 
constant rate of 250 + 50 N/s. 


G-4.4 Measurement of Moisture Content 


The specimen of size 100 mm x 100 mm shall be 
weighed, W, shall be weighed to nearest 1 g. The 
specimen, then, shall be dried out at 105 + 5°C in a 


thermostatically controlled oven until constant mass is 
obtained within a duration of 4 h. Immediately after 
remvoing from the drying oven, the specimen shall be 
weighed (if necessary by cooling to room temperature 
ina suitable desiccator), and weighed, W obtained. The 
moisture content, in percent of the dry block, shall be 
determined as follows, correct to one decimal place: 


= (W,/W — 1) x 100 


G-4.5 Data Recorded 


The following items shall be recorded: 


a) Description ofthe concrete slab and reference 


g) 


Ø EXT.21 
| 


EE O 


ØINT. 30 
AREA=707 mm? 


@ EXT. 41 


IS 15477 : 2019 


to the batch; 

Handling and storage of concrete slabs before 
testing; 

Water absorption of concrete slab, 
representative of the batch; 

Moisture content of the concrete slabs, 
representative of the batch; 

Tensile adhesion strength of concrete slab, 
representative of the batch; 

Any other factor that might have influenced 
the result; and 

Date of test. 


Ø INT. 8 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 10 APPARATUS FOR EVALUATING WATER ABSORPTION (CARSTEN — ROHRCHEN FLASK) 


15 


IS 15477 : 2019 


100 


80 


--------- CURVE A 


CURVE B 


60 


UNDERSIZE, % 


40 


20 


NOMINAL APERTURE, mm 


Fic. 11 GRADING CURVES FOR 8 mm MAXIMUM PARTICLE SIZE 


16 


IS 15477 : 2019 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi) 
Ardex Endura India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Carborundum Universal Limited, Chennai 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, Naroda 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Choksi Laboratories Limited, Indore 


Construction Chemicals Manufacturers Association, Navi Mumbai 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Ultratech Cement Limited, Mumbai 
Gyan Construction Company, Mumbai 


H. R. Johnson (India) Limited, Dewas 


Indian Council of Ceramic Tiles & Sanitaryware, New Delhi 


Institution of Engineers (India), New Delhi 


Lloyd Insulation (India) Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Mapie Construction Products India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 


Modern Tiles & Marble, New Delhi 


Morbi Dhuva Glaze Tiles Association, Morbi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Mumbai 


MYK Laticrete India, Hyderabad 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


17 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA (Chairman) 


Suri К. P. PAULSON 
SHRI GoPINATH KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. GUPTA 
Suri РАМКА) Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. RAJAGOPALAN 
DR М. RAMASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR KAUSHAL 
Suri ARUN Kumar TYAGI (Alternate) 


Suri 5. К. SINGH 
Suri AcHAL Kumar Міттлі. (Alternate) 


Dr SATYENDRA NATH MISRA 
Dr RAKESH KUMAR 


ӛнкі К. D. MATHUR 
Suri RAMESH ВАЅАРРА (Alternate) 


ӛнкі UPEN PATEL 
SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER (Alternate) 


Suri Р. R. Swarup 
Suri Ravi Ja (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (Dwk) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) (Alternate) 


Cor INDRA Kumar JAGGI 


Suri J. К. BHAGCHANDANI 
SHRI AKHILESH Maurya (Alternate) 


Suri В. KUMAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri G. S. PATNAIK 
Suri Аким Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN RAO 
Suri P. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri К. К. KAPILA 


Suri Morir KHANNA 
Suri K. K. Mirra (Alternate) 


Dr G S. Ravi SHANKAR 
Suri Авншт Dutta (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI МАГА МОНАМ 
SHRIMATI NAMRATA Кони (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KAPOOR 
ӛнкі KAMESWAR Rau (Alternate) 


SHRI NILESH JETPARIA 
Suri JERAM МАрНАУ Kavar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr P. ARJUNAN 
ӛнкі М. RADHAKANTH (Alternate) 


Dn S. К. BREJA 


SHRI S. C. JINDAL 
Suri К. Р. KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


IS 15477 : 2019 


Organization Representative(s) 
National Test House, Kolkata Suni D. V. S. PRAsAD 
Suri Атоке Dev (Alternate) 


National Tiles Corporation, Panchkula Suri Prem CHAND GUPTA 
Suri S. R. Gara (Alternate) 


New Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE 
Premier Polyfilm Limited, Ghaziabad Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
Suri К. K. Naran (Alternate) 
Research, Designs and Standards Organization, Ministry of EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (Works) 
Railways, Lucknow SHRI ASHUTOSH Kumar (Alternate) 
Responsive Industries Limited, Mumbai Suri RISHABH AGARWAL 


SHRI ABHISHEK AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, New Delhi DR P. K. KAICHER 
Dn Laxmi Rawat (Alternate) 


Somany Ceramic Ltd, Bahadurgarh Suri G. G. TRIVEDI 
Dr Авнотовн Сокі (Alternate) 


Super Tiles and Marble Private Limited, Mumbai SHRI ASHOK RAJPUROHIT 
Suri SUDHAKAR Mop! (Alternate) 


Xebec Design and Facilities Private Limited, New Delhi SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
Suri SAMIR Влмввл (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General Suri SANJAY Pant, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engg) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SRIKANTH YAJALA 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 
AND 
Suri MILIND Gupta 
Scientist “С” (Civil Engg), BIS 


18 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 05 (10108). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern  : 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


