NAT Alan IS 17472 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


wHlfas-19 AeA & EN Asst A 
miaa caret & fere Ramay 


Guidelines for Safe Working of 
Organisation during COVID-19 
Pandemic 


ICS 03.100.01 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2020 Price Group 7 


Resource Management Sectional Committee, MSD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Resource 
Management Sectional Committee had been approved by Management and Systems Division Council. 


The world today is overwhelmed by current pandemic COVID-19. With social distancing as the new norm 
all the organisations will have to rethink and reshape their critical functions and will have to conduct business 
in an innovative way. Organizations around the world are conducting businesses remotely. Protecting the health 
and safety of employees, partners, and communities will be job one for leaders around the world during the 
coming months. 


Today all the organisations face the question of ensuring the continuity of the businesses along with the safety 
and reassurances to all stakeholders, employees being the major one. This standard provides guidelines for 
mitigating risks, planning and tracking, communications, risk assessment etc. and to devise a new way of work 
and including following norms like social distancing etc. 


This standard aims to help organisation building resilience and ensuring business continuity along with taking 
care of safety of their stakeholders especially employees. The standard identifies that an organisation should 
place in all available measures to mitigate the risks of COVID-19. This standard further identifies the roles 
and responsibilities of both employers and employees. These guidelines are generic in nature and can be applied 
to any organisation irrespective of size and location. However, these guidelines are not meant for clinical 
establishments. This standard intends to help management of the organisation to provide a safer environment 
for employee(s). 

By implementing this standard an organisation: 


a) has identified risks associated with COVID-19 that may impact various stakeholders especially 
employee(s) and is establishing a process to mitigate the risks and demonstrate the measures to contain 
the possible disruptions. 


b) has identified the roles and responsibilities of both management and employee(s). 
c) is adapting to the changing situation for ensuring business continuity. 
This standard adopts the process approach methodology known as “Plan-Do-Check-Act’ (PDCA). 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 17472 : 2020 


Indian Standards 


GUIDELINES FOR SAFE WORKING OF 
ORGANISATION DURING COVID-19 
PANDEMIC 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard provides general guidance to 
organizations on how to manage the risks related to 
COVID-19 in order to protect work-related health, 
safety and wellbeing. This standard is intended for 
use by organizations of all sizes and sectors including 
those: 


a) have been operating throughout the pandemic; 
and 


b) are resuming operations following full or 
partial closure. 


1.2 This standard also provides guidance relating to 
the protection of employees of all types, including 
workers, volunteers, contractors, those on zero hours 
contracts, freelancers and other relevant interested 
parties. 


1.3 This standard does not provide specific guidance 
for employee(s) in high risk clinical roles. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


2.1 Organization — Person or group of persons that 
has its own functions with responsibilities, authorities 
and relationships to achieve its objectives 


NOTE — The concept of organization includes, but is not 
limited to, sole-trader, company, corporation, firm, enterprise, 
authority, partnership, association, charity or institution, or part 
or combination thereof, whether incorporated or not, public or 
private. 


2.2 Employees — Person performing work or work- 
related activities under the control of the organization. 


NOTES: 


1 Persons perform work or work-related activities under 
various arrangements, paid or unpaid, such as regularly or 
temporarily, intermittently or seasonally, casually or on a part- 
time basis. 


2 Employee(s) include top management, managerial and non- 
managerial persons. 

3 The work or work-related activities performed under the 
control of the organization may be performed by employee(s) 
employed by the organization, employee(s) of external 
providers, contractors, individuals, agency employee(s), and 
by other persons to the extent the organization shares control 


over their work or work-related activities, according to the 
context of the organization. 


2.3 Workplace — Place under the control of the 
organization where a person needs to be or to go for 
work purposes. 


NOTE — The organization’s responsibilities for the work- 
place depend on the degree of control over the workplace. 


2.4 Pandemic — Worldwide spread of a new disease. 


2.5 COVID-19 — Infectious disease caused by a newly 
discovered coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). 


2.6 Wellbeing — Fulfilment of the physical, mental 
and cognitive needs and expectations of employee(s) 
related to his/their work. 


NOTES: 


1 Wellbeing can also contribute to the quality of life outside of 
work. 


2 Wellbeing relates to all aspects of working life, including 
work organization, social Note factors at work, work 
environment, equipment and hazardous tasks. 


2.7 Transmission — Transfer of disease. 


2.8 Shared Spaces — Spaces and amenities provided 
for the use of more than one-person. Examples of shared 
spaces include corridors, elevators and stairs, parking 
places, cafeteria, meeting rooms and conference halls, 
washrooms/toilets etc. 


2.9 High Risk Group — People who are at a higher risk 
from severe illness if they are infected by COVID-19. 
This includes, older adults, people who have underlying 
medical conditions like heart disease, diabetes, lung 
disease, kidney disease, cancer medication, pregnant 
women and kids below 10 years. 


2.10 Social Distancing — It refers to a set of 
interventions or measures taken to prevent the spread 
of a contagious disease by maintaining a physical 
distance between people and reducing the number of 
times people come into close contact with each other. It 
involves keeping a distance of at least one meter from 
others and avoiding gathering together in large groups. 


2.11 Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) — 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) are protective 
gears designed to safeguard the health of employee(s) 
by minimizing the exposure to a biological agent, 


IS 17472 : 2020 


especially in healthcare and related organizations. 
Components of PPE are goggles, face-shield, mask, 
gloves, coverall/gowns (with or without aprons), head 
cover and shoe cover. 


2.12 Face Shield and Goggles — Protection of the 
mucous membranes of the eyes/nose/mouth by using 
face shields/goggles. The flexible frame of goggles 
should provide good seal with the skin of the face, 
covering the eyes and the surrounding areas and even 
accommodating for prescription glasses. 


2.13 Masks — Masks are crucial while dealing with 
a suspect or confirmed case of COVID-19/performing 
aerosol generating procedures to protect from 
droplet and aerosol mediated infections of the mucus 
membranes of mouth and nose. The type of mask to be 
used is related to particular risk profile of the category 
of personnel and his/her work. There are two types of 
masks which are recommended for various categories 
of personnel depending upon the work environment. 
These include triple layer medical mask (a disposable 
mask, fluid-resistant, provide protection to the wearer 
from droplets of infectious material emitted during 
coughing/sneezing/talking) and N-95 Respirator mask 
(a respiratory protective device with high filtration 
efficiency to airborne particles. To provide the requisite 
air seal to the wearer, such masks are designed to 
achieve a very close facial fit). 


2.14 Gloves — Nitrile gloves are preferred over latex 
gloves because they resist chemicals, including certain 
disinfectants, such as chlorine. However, if nitrile 
gloves are not available, latex gloves can be used. Non- 
powdered gloves are preferred to powdered gloves. 


2.15 Coverall/Gowns — Coverall/gowns are designed 
to protect torso from exposure to virus. Coveralls and 
gowns are equally useful in reducing transmission of 
infection to employee(s). Gowns are considerably 
easier to put on and for removal. An apron can also be 
worn over the gown to facilitate personal protection 
and decontamination. 


2.16 Shoe Covers — Shoe covers to be used over 
shoes should be made up of impermeable fabric to 
facilitate personal protection and decontamination. 


2.17 Head Covers — Those using gowns, should use a 
head cover that covers the head and neck. Hair and hair 
extensions should fit inside the head cover. 


3 PLANNING 


3.1 Understanding the Context of the Organization 


3.1.1 To understand the specific risks to employee(s), 
organizations should consider what can affect the ability 
of individuals to work safely during the COVID-19 
pandemic. How organizations should operate, has 


changed and there is currently an increased risk to 
health, safety and wellbeing at work. 


3.1.2 Before assessing risks, organizations should 
consider the specific external and internal issues that 
can affect an organization’s ability to work safely and 
how these issues have been impacted by the pandemic. 


3.1.3 External issues can include, but are not limited to: 
a) how employee(s) travel to work; 
b) employee(s)’ access to childcare and schooling; 
c) changes or issues in the supply chain; 


d) changes in customer needs and expectations, or 
behaviours; 


e) increased or decreased demand of products/ 
services; 


f) prevalence of COVID-19 within the organization 
and the community; and 


g) local, regional, national circumstances and related 
regulatory guidance. 


3.1.4 Internal issues can include, but are not limited to: 
a) the number and types of workplaces; 
b) the type of work; 


c) the type of employee(s) in the organization (for 
example, employed, contractors, volunteers, 
freelance); 


d) the degree to which it is possible to change 
the workplace to implement social distancing 
measures or any others measures which is 
appropriate; 

e) individual needs of employee(s) [for example, 
the vulnerable and/or high risk employee(s), 
differently abled employee(s), care providers to 
the vulnerable and high risk employee(s)]; 


f) Prolonged absence from work (for example, 
due to sickness, self-isolation requirements, 
bereavement, etc.); and 


g) resource availability. 


3.1.5 Reorganization of work (for example, changed 
work demands, pace of work, stringent timelines, shift 
work and its impact on health, safety and wellbeing 
of employee(s). The organization should take these 
issues into account while assessing risk and planning to 
resume or modify operations. 


3.2 Leadership and Employee(s) Participation 


3.2.1 Owners, managers and other decision makers 
should: 


a) demonstrate leadership and commitment 
to safe working practices through effective 
communication and by complying with official 
guidance and internal policies at all times; 


b) ensure adequate resources are provided (see 4) 
and make them available to all employee(s) as per 
requirements in a timely and effective manner; 


c) consult employee(s)/employee(s) representatives 


on decisions that affect health, safety and 
wellbeing at work; 
d) communicate how employee(s) can report 


incidents or raise concerns and how these will be 
addressed and communicated; and 


e) protect employee(s) from reprisals when reporting 
incidents or if employee(s) remove themselves 
from unsafe work situations. 


3.2.2 Organizations have a duty of taking care of their 
employee(s). The people who do the work are often 
more aware of risks related to their role and understand 
them better than the people at the highest levels of the 
organization. By consulting employee(s) and other 
stake holders, organizations can have a better overview 
of risks to health, safety and wellbeing at work during 
the pandemic. Therefor organizations should: 


a) involve employee(s)/employee(s) representatives 
in assessing risks related to COVID-19 and 
making decisions on how to manage them; 


b) communicate to employee(s) and other relevant 
interested parties (for example, customers, 
suppliers, visitors, investors, shareholders, 
regulators, unions) how the organization is 
managing risks from COVID-19 (communication 
can be through any appropriate method, see 5); 


c) provide one or more ways for employee(s) and 
other interested parties to give feedback on 
actions taken to manage work-related health, 
safety and wellbeing (for example, through virtual 
meetings, collaboration tools, online surveys, 
emails); and take timely and appropriate action to 
address concerns raised by employee(s) and other 
interested parties and communicate these actions 
to them. 


3.3 General Planning 


3.3.1 Planning for safe working enables the 
organization to identify and prioritize risks related to 
COVID-19 that can affect work-related health, safety 
and wellbeing. 


3.3.2 Although it is not possible to eliminate the 
risks related to COVID-19 entirely, nevertheless 
planning should aim to ensure the risk to employee(s) 
is reduced to the lowest reasonably practicable 
level. 


3.3.3 When planning for safe working, organizations 
should consider: 


a) the types of work activities and how that work is 
organized; 


IS 17472 : 2020 


b) where the work takes place and practical changes 
that need to be made; 


c) interaction between employee(s) or others, 
including the public; 

d) the safe use of shared spaces, amenities and 
equipment; and 

e) the impact of the pandemic on employee(s)’ 
psychological health and wellbeing at work. 


3.3.4 Organizations should take a systematic approach to 
determining and addressing risks related to COVID-19. 
Organizations should identify work activities that: 


a) can be done from home; 


b) cannot be done from home but can be done while 
complying with social distancing guidelines in the 
workplace, if practical adjustments are made; and 


c) cannot be done from home and cannot be done 
while complying with social distancing guidelines 
in the workplace. 


3.3.5 The organization should ensure additional support 
measures are implemented to protect the psychological 
health and wellbeing for employee(s) who are working 
from home. 


3.3.6 The organization should consider if it is possible 
to enable a safe return to the physical workplace for 
individual employee(s) when working from home has 
a significant negative impact on their psychological 
health and wellbeing. 


3.3.7 Work activities that cannot be done from home 
and cannot comply with social distancing guidelines 
with practical adjustments may only take place if they 
are essential for the operation of the organization and 
additional controls are implemented to mitigate the 
risks to health, safety and wellbeing at work. 


3.3.8 When planning to address risks related to 
COVID-19, the organization should take into account 
existing occupational health and safety (OH&S) risks 
and measures already in place to manage these. The 
organization should: 


a) assess if existing safety measures and controls 
need to be adjusted; 

b) consider new OH&S risks that can be occour 
by implementing additional safety measures to 
manage the risks related to COVID-19; and 


c) plan actions to address new OH&S risks. 
3.4 Workplaces 
3.4.1 General 


The organization should ensure that workplaces 
(including all premises, sites and other locations where 
work takes place) and facilities within those workplaces 
are clean and safe to use. 


IS 17472 : 2020 


To prepare for safe operation, the organization should, 
as a minimum: 


a) 
b) 
c) 


d) 


e) 


assess all premises, sites, or parts of sites, including 
those that have been closed or partially operating; 


perform maintenance checks and activities on 
equipment and systems; 


establish enhanced and/or more frequent cleaning 
and disinfection schedules; 


provide enhanced personal hygiene facilities, 
including additional handwashing stations where 
possible and hand sanitizer points where this is not 
possible; and 


coordinate and cooperate with other organizations 
on shared sites, including with contractors, 
landlords and other tenants. 


Further should take actions, including, but are not 
limited to: 


1) cleaning and disinfection of workplaces and 
equipment/amenities should be tested before 
use if required; 

2) ensuring sufficient air ventilation and 
minimizing recirculation of air; and 

3) Putting in place adequate measures to ensure 
social distancing and hygiene. 


3.4.2 Working at Customer 5 Site 


Employee(s) should not perform work activities at 
customers’ site where someone has symptoms of 
COVID-19 (or is self-isolating after being exposed to 
someone with COVID-19) or is considered clinically 
extremely vulnerable and has been asked to shield, 
except: 


a) 


b) 


to provide essential health and personal care (for 
example, medical or social care workers); or 


to remedy a direct risk to safety (for example, 
emergency repairs by a plumber, electrician, gas 
engineer). 

When preparing for employee(s) to perform 
activities in at customers’ site, the organization 
should: 


1) check if anyone in the customers’ site has 
symptoms of COVID-19 or has been advised 
to shield; 


consider if the work can be performed using 
digital or remote alternatives (for example, 
video or phone consultations); 


2) 


3) communicate with customers prior to work 
commencing to discuss and agree how work 
will be carried out and general practices to 
minimize risk (for example, how to enter 
the building without face-to-face contact, 
maintaining social distancing whilst the 


employee(s) is in the home, leaving internal 


doors open to minimize contact with door 
handles); 

assign employee(s) to work at customers’ site 
local to them, wherever possible, to minimize 
travel and use of public transport; and 


4) 


5) allocate the same individual or pairs of 
employee(s) at customers’ site if repeat visits 
are necessary or the work is ongoing (for 


example, the same carers, cleaners). 


3.4.3 Roles and Responsibility 


In assessing roles, activities and whether employee(s) 
should work on-site or at home, the organization should 
take into account those employee(s) who: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


are considered vulnerable and/or 
employee(s); 


high-risk 


are caring for someone or staying with person who 
suspected/infected with COVID19; and 


may need additional support for their psychological 
health and wellbeing as considered appropriate. 


3.4.3.1 Employee(s) with roles that can be carried out 
remotely should continue to work from home. 


To ensure it’s effectiveness, the organization should: 


a) 


b) 


d) 


provide access to the organization’s systems (for 
example, email, shared electronic drives, video 
conferencing, databases, applications or any other 
software as needed to function etc. 


determine if additional essential equipment is 
needed and provide the same if feasible; 


establish regular virtual meetings to provide 
support, monitor and address wellbeing issues and 
ensure they are connected to other employee(s), 
including those working on-site; and 


ensure individual employee(s) needs are 
understood and accommodated as far as possible. 


3.4.3.2 For employee(s) who need to be physically on- 
site, the organization should: 


a) 


b) 


d) 


determine which roles are critical for business 
continuity, safe facility management or 
regulatory requirements and cannot be performed 
remotely; 


identify employee(s) in critical roles who 
are unable to work remotely due to home 
circumstances or the unavailability of special 
equipment; 

determine the minimum number of employee(s) 
needed on-site at any one time to operate safely 
and effectively; and 


determine how activities are organized (for 
example, reducing job rotation, requiring 
employee(s) to perform one activity with one set 
of equipment throughout the shift). 


The organization should offer vulnerable and/or high 
risk employee(s) who are unable to perform remotely, 
if feasible, the option of the safest available roles in 
the workplace. Such roles should allow employee(s) 
to maintain social distancing at all times. If such 
employee(s) cannot comply with social distancing 
guidelines, the organization should consult with the 
employee(s)/employee(s) representatives to assess if 
there is an acceptable level of risk, if additional safety 
measures and controls are implemented. 


NOTE — This should be followed as per the extant 
guidelines/advisories issued by the Government. 


The organization should ensure that safety measures 
or controls introduced do not have an unjustifiable 
negative impact on some groups compared to others 
(for example, employee(s) with caring responsibilities, 
employee(s) with religious commitments, employee(s) 
with disabilities, pregnant women and kids below 
10 years). 


3.5 Activities 


If social distancing guidelines cannot be complied 
with for an essential activity, the organization should 
take all possible further mitigating actions to reduce 
the risk of transmission of COVID-19 amongst 
employee(s) and other people in the workplace. 


3.5.1 Before resuming work, the organization should 
take mitigating actions, such as: 


a) establishing fixed small teams or pairs of 
employee(s) to limit the number of people 
in close contact. Teams or pairs should be 
treated as a unit if any employee(s) develops 
COVID-19 symptoms and all members of the 
unit should self-isolate following government 
guidance; 


b 


wm 


revising work instructions to enable safe 
operation of activities (for example, keeping 
activity times as short as possible, using screens 
or barriers to separate people, using back-to- 
back or side-to-side working instead of face-to- 
face); 


c 


wa 


establishing distinct zones for work activities 
which cannot comply with social distancing; 


d 


wa 


identifying activities where employee(s) directly 
pass objects (for example, job information, spare 
parts, samples, purchased items) to each other or 
to other people, including the public, and establish 
processes to remove direct contact (for example, 
drop-off or transfer zones); 

e) providing appropriate PPE and guidance on how it 

should be used; and 

f) training and creating awareness on protocols 
which should be followed at the work place and 
mechanism to report the issues/risk. 


IS 17472 : 2020 


3.6 Emergency Preparedness and Response 


The organization should prepare for foreseeable 
emergencies and revise existing processes if necessary. 


3.6.1 The organization should consider, for example: 


a) fire evacuation processes (for example, guidance 
on evacuating in teams to limit close contact, 
adjusting how employee(s) are required to muster 
outside the building to increase social distancing 
between teams); and 


b 


wm 


providing additional appropriate PPE for first 
aiders in case of medical emergency or accidents; 
and providing clear guidance on processes for 
dealing with aggressive or violent people. 


3.6.2 In an emergency where there is immediate danger 
(for example, chemical spill, fire, break-in) complying 
with social distancing guidelines can be challenging. 
The organization should take this into account when 
planning and amend emergency plans to mitigate 
the risk of transmission of COVID-19 in emergency 
situations, as far as practicable. 


3.6.3 Organizations should consider carrying out 
fire drills, simulations or other practice exercises to 
raise awareness of amended emergency plans. When 
planning for these exercises, the organization should 
ensure that additional safety controls and measures 
are in place if social distancing cannot be maintained 
during, for example, evacuation from the workplace. 


3.6.4 The organization should ensure that employee(s) 
who provide assistance to others in emergency 
situations take additional and immediate hygiene 
measures following the emergency event, including 
hand washing. 


4 RESOURCES 


The organization should establish processes to ensure 
that essential resources are maintained, appropriately 
managed and can be supplied reliably as needed. 
Employee(s) with responsibility for managing 
resources to mitigate the risks related to COVID-19 
should be clearly identified and communicated to 
employee(s) and other relevant interested parties. 
The organization should ensure there is a process to 
enable ongoing dialogue with employee(s) about 
specific needs for resources to manage COVID-19 
and how employee(s) can escalate issues. Ensure 
there is tracking and monitoring mechanism for all 
the reported issues and they are addressed with in 
stipulated time not impacting the operations and safety 
of employee(s). 


4.1 The organization should make a provision of all 
the required resources in order to mitigate the risk of 
COVID-19. 


IS 17472 : 2020 


4.2 Protocols or Standard Procedures should be 
established for procurement, storage, retrieval and 
supply of all the essentials in a secured manner. 


4.3 Further the ongoing needs of the employee(s) 
should be established by two way communication. 


4.4 Proper financial resources should be accounted for 
and budget provisioning should be made. 


4.5 An indicative list of essentials that should be 
provided by organization is: 


a) Thermal scanners; 

b) Sanitizers (minimum 70 percent alcohol); 

c) Disinfectants; 

d) Appropriate PPEs; 

e) Separating screens; 

f) Visual and audio tools for communication; and 


g) Information and communication technology (ICT) 
infrastructure like internet, video conferencing 
tools etc. 


5 COMMUNICATION 


5.1 The organization should identify and establish 
protocols for reporting of cases, for communicating 
guidelines, regulatory requirements, other 
communications for the employees as well as other 
stake holders in organization like suppliers, customers 
etc. 


5.2 Organization needs to identify the internal & 
external stakeholders to be considered for relevant 
communication related to COVID-19 concerns and 
crisis. 


5.3 There should be clear communication regarding 
what is expected from various stake holders and 
their responsibility. This should include roles and 
responsibilities and how individuals may contribute to 
the organization’s measures to prevent COVID-19. 


5.4 The organization should emphasize and 
communicate the importance of not working during 
illness. 


5.5 Direct contact should be discouraged and all other 
forms of communication like internet, telephones, 
posters, signs, text messages, images, announcements, 
videos etc. should be used. Both formal and informal 
means of communication should be used. The 
communication should be on regular basis with 
requisite updates. 


5.6 Organization should try to establish a helpline for 
immediate address of queries, grievances and reporting 
of incidences. 


5.7 Communication should be two way where 
organization should be able to receive feedback in 
order to improve over the established procedures and 
identify the gaps in the current system. 


5.8 Communication should be divided in three stages 
that is, pre-arrival of the employee(s) in the workplace 
providing them with clear instructions before reporting 
to workplace, post arrival the workplace and throughout 
the workplace. It should consist of new work procedures 
like new staggered timings, guidelines about social 
distancing, hygiene, various dos and don’ts, use of 
shared spaces, emergency protocols etc. 


5.9 Communication of isolation facility, communication 
and display of emergency contact numbers, sanitization 
protocols, screening mechanism, reporting system etc. 


5.10 Ensure proper signages are in place related to 
health and safety, precautions for COVID-19 and 
protocols during and after work hours. 


6 HYGIENE AND SANITIZATION 


6.1 The organization should implement processes 
to keep the workplace clean and maintain hygiene, 
reduce the risk of transmission of COVID-19 from 
contaminated surfaces and enable good hygiene 
throughout working hours and at the end of each 
working shift. 


6.2 Frequent hand washing with hot water and soap 
is recommended to limit transmission of COVID-19. 
When hand washing is not possible, hands should be 
sanitized with an alcohol-based sanitizer (preferably 
with 70 percent ethyl/isopropyl alcohol-based 
sanitizer). 


6.3 The organization should implement processes to 
ensure: 


a) employee(s) wash their hands for at least 20 s (or 
sanitize if this is not possible) at frequent intervals 
and communicate when this should be done (for 
example, before entering or leaving an area of the 
workplace, before and after breaks, after using 
toilets, before and after handling shared resources 
such as telephones, computers, tools etc.); 


b 


wm 


additional hand washing and/or hand sanitizing 
facilities are available in all workplaces; 


c 


wa 


additional cleaning materials are available to 
employee(s) to enable frequent cleaning of 
workstations and equipment, including between 
uses by different employee(s); 


d 


wm 


frequent cleaning of surfaces that are touched 
regularly (for example, door handles, light 
switches, counters, pay points, testing surfaces, 
shared resources, computer accessories, etc.); 


e) effective, adequate and frequent waste disposal; 


f) promotion of good hygiene practices, including 
posters and signs in the language understood by 
all the employees to remind them of required 
handwashing techniques and frequency, the need 
to avoid touching faces and hair, and to cough or 
sneeze into a disposable tissue or into their elbow; 


wa 


safe use of toilets, showers and changing rooms, 
replacing hand dryers with paper towels where 
possible; 


g 


h) use of Biometric attendance or entry turnstile 
should be discontinued; 


j) use of each other’s phones, belongings, sharing of 
common stationery like pens, or other work tools 
and equipment, should be discouraged; 


or provide hand sanitizer where this is not 
practical. 


k) The organization should require employee(s) 
to keep personal belongings in personal spaces, 
such as lockers, if possible, and to ensure that 
belongings are removed from the workplace at the 
end of each shift; 


The organization should take action to reduce the 
risk of transmission of COVID-19 through contact 
with objects that come into the workplace and 
vehicles used by the organization; 


m 


wm 


n) The organization should restrict non-essential 
deliveries, including personal deliveries to 
employee(s); and 


wm 


p) The organization should establish processes to: 


1) ensure materials, equipment and other objects 
entering the workplace are cleaned to reduce 
transmission of COVID-19 from contaminated 


surfaces; 

2) clean shared equipment after each use; 

3) regularly clean vehicles used for work 
activities, including vehicles employee(s) 
drive home; and 

4) increase handwashing for employee(s) 


handling deliveries 


7 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
(PPEs) 


7.1 Identify necessary PPEs required to carry out work 
with in facility as per job safety analysis and COVID-19 
precautions. Ensure sufficient PPEs are provided at 
workplace. Ensure the communication on importance 
of PPEs and training to use them is provided at regular 
intervals 


7.2 PPEs are not alternative to basic preventive public 
health measures, such as hand hygiene, respiratory 
etiquettes which must be followed at all times. As far 


IS 17472 : 2020 


as possible, the employee(s) should maintain a distance 
of at least 1 meter from contacts/suspect/confirmed 
COVID-19 cases. 


7.3 The organization should: 


a) establish guidelines for when and how PPE (or 
its components) should be used; 


b) provide suitable PPE (or its components) 
component free of charge; 


c) ensure PPE (or its component) is used 
appropriately, correctly fitted and disposed of 
safely as per prescribed guidelines; and 


d) ensure employee(s) take regular breaks to 
minimize fatigue caused by using PPE (or 
its component), which can lead to reduced 
compliance to safety measures and unsafe use of 
equipment. 


8 OPERATIONS 


8.1 General 


8.1.1 The organization needs to be aware of the risks 
arising out of the COVID-19 crisis and to have suitable 
risk mitigation measures in place for safe operations. 


8.1.2 The organization needs to demonstrate the 
identified risks arising out of the COVID-19 pandemic 
that may impact people, operations and workplace. The 
risks include (but not limited to) compliance, safety 
hazards, COVID-19 breakout, etc. The organization 
needs to create and secure workplace for employees. 


8.1.3 The organization should prioritize the functions 
and has to identify key functions like supply chain 
management, payroll etc. A Lead Response Team 
should be made with clear establishment of roles and 
responsibilities. 


8.1.4 All employees should be made aware of the basic 
preventive measures for prevention of COVID-19 
infection, for example, social distancing and basic 
hygiene measures. 


8.1.5 No employee(s) is obliged to work in an unsafe 
work environment. 


8.2 Resuming and Attending the Work 


8.2.1 The employee(s) before starting from home is 
required to ensure that he is not infected by COVID-19 
or experiencing any symptoms of the COVID-19. 


8.2.2 The organization should: 


a) Ensure all employee(s) resuming to work, or 
attending a different workplace or site, are 
provided with necessary instructions on safety and 
hygiene measures to be followed at workplace. 


IS 17472 : 2020 


b) Provide hand hygiene (sanitizer dispenser) at the 
entrance and non-contact type thermal screening 
provisions at entrances with the help of non- 
contact thermometer. Anyone with temperature 
more than 37.5 °C (99.5 °F) should not allowed 
entry into the organization. 


c 


<~ 


Allow only asymptomatic staff/visitors. 


d) Should not expose vulnerable and high risk 
employee(s) to any front-line work requiring 
direct contact with the public. 

e) Office management should facilitate work from 
home wherever feasible. 

f) Allow entry to employee(s) if using face cover/ 
masks. The face cover/mask should be worn at all 
times inside the office premises. 


St 


Use social distancing indicators on the floors or 
walls and introduce one-way systems at entry and 
exit points, corridors, stairways and other common 
areas and taking other actions to mitigate the risks 
where this is not possible. 


8 


h 


wm 


Staggering of office hours, lunch hours/coffee 
breaks should be done, as far as feasible. 


j) Restrict number of people in the elevators, duly 
maintaining social distancing norms with walls 
and floors having social distancing indicators. 

k) Create separate entry and exit points for high-risk 
work areas or sites (for example, mechanical test 
sites, wet labs, etc.) 

m) Provide alternatives to 
devices, such as keypads. 


touch-based security 


n) Provide storage for employee(s)’ clothes and bags. 


p) Provide facilities for employee(s) to change into 
work clothing and equipment on-site, where social 
distancing and hygiene guidelines can be met. 


q) Wash or clean work clothing and equipment (for 
example, uniforms, hard hats, goggles, gloves) 
on-site if possible. 

r) Provide additional outside spaces for employee(s) 
to use for breaks, where possible. 


8.3 Work Zones and Workstations 


8.3.1 Organizations should ensure social distancing 
between individual employee(s) in work zones and at 
workstations wherever possible. 


8.3.2 The organization should: 


a) review work zones and move workstations to 
enable social distancing between each station, 
paying attention to the space needed to move to 
and from workstations; create work zones so as to 
limit the number of persons in one work zone; 


b 


wm 


arrange workstations by moving equipment, desks 
etc. so that employee(s) are facing side-by-side or 
back-to-back; 


c) if workstations cannot be set as prescribed, use 
screens/partitions to separate employee(s); 


d) use floor or wall markers to indicate recommended 
social distancing. Specific markings may be made 
with sufficient distance to manage the queue and 
ensure social distancing in the premises requiring 
public interactions; 


establish cleaning stations to enable employee(s) to 
wipe surfaces and equipment throughout working 
hours. Increased and repetitive cleaning and 
sanitation of shared items and frequently touched 
surfaced and items like pens, shared equipment 
like fax, phones, printers etc. Organizations 
should limit the number of people using shared 
equipment by creating working teams or pairs and 
assigning them to designated shared equipment; 
and 


f) The organization should establish SOPs for each 
cleaning and sanitizing activity performed in the 
workplace. SOP may contain frequency, procedure 
to be followed, specification of cleaning agents 
and their storage etc. Verification and validation 
procedures for each SOP should be developed to 
ensure their effectiveness, where required. 


e 


wm 


8.4 Meetings and Visitors 


8.4.1 The organizations should ensure that: 


a) Meetings, as far as feasible, should be done through 
video conferencing. Minimize or reschedule 
meetings involving large number of people unless 
necessary. 


b 


we 


If physical meetings are essential, the organization 

should: 

1) limit participation to the minimum number of 
essential people and maintain social distancing; 

2) avoid shared resources (for example, pens, 
water or coffee jugs); 

3) provide hand sanitizers in the meeting room; 

4) hold meetings outside or in well ventilated 
rooms, if possible; and 


5) use floor or wall marking to indicate acceptable 
social distancing. 


8.4.2 Only asymptomatic visitors shall be allowed. 


8.4.3 Ensure the visitors are wearing appropriate 
kits/PPEs. 


8.4.4 Routine issue of visitors/temporary passes should 
be suspended and visitors with proper permission of 
the officer to be visited, should be allowed after being 
properly screened. 


8.4.5 Schedules should be such so as to reduce 
interaction of essential employee(s) and other regular 
visitors like contractors, suppliers etc. 


8.4.6 Proper recording of personal details of the visitors 
should be there for enabling contact tracing if required. 


8.5 Use of Shared Spaces/Common Areas 


8.5.1 Organizations should implement processes to 
facilitate the safe use of essential shared spaces, through 
frequent cleaning, limiting the number of people with 
social distancing measures in shared spaces at one time, 
limiting how long people can be in shared spaces. 


8.5.2 Organizations should consider: 
a) Staggering break times and lunch times. 


b) Installing screens or practicing social distancing 
to protect employee(s) in reception or similar 
areas; Adequate crowd and queue management 
by indicators on floors or walls to be ensured to 
ensure social distancing norms. 

c) Encouraging employee(s) to bring in their own 
food or providing packaged meals to avoid 
opening canteens as far as possible. 


d) regulating the use of locker or changing rooms, 
showers and other common facilities. 


e) Encouraging storage of personal items in personal 
spaces, for example, lockers, during working 
hours. 


f) Effective and frequent sanitation within the 
premises should be maintained with particular 
focus on public areas like lavatories, drinking and 
hand washing stations/areas, cafeterias, meeting 
rooms, receptions, lifts and stairs. 


g) Close all gyms/recreation centres/creches located 
in buildings. 


8.6 Working with the Public 


8.6.1 The organization needs to provide required 
resources to reduce physical public interactions to the 
minimum. Where physical, face-to-face interactions 
are required, the organization should have defined 
protocols including use of masks and other PPEs, 
social distancing norms etc. to eliminate/minimize risk 
of infection. 


8.6.2 The organization should take actions such as: 


a) Using visual and other communications to 
inform customers and other members of the 
public of safety measures and controls and how to 
maintain social distancing; 


b) Posters to be displayed in shared spaces/visiting 
areas, entry and exit points for visitors for 
following social distancing norms. Should make 
regular announcements to remind customers to 
maintain social distancing and follow other safety 
measures; 


c) Limiting the number of customers in the building 
so that social distancing can be maintained; 


IS 17472 : 2020 


d) Providing hand sanitizers and thermal screeners at 
entrances; 


e) Ensuring cleaning of frequently touched areas and 
shared resources, (for example, card payment and 
cash machine keypads, handles of baskets and 
trolleys, hand rails, buttons etc); 


f) Limiting customer handling of products (for 
example, through different display methods, 
signs, rotation of high-touch items); 


g) Providing physical barriers, such as screens in 
places where interaction between employee(s) and 
customers is frequent (for example, pay points, 
customer service desks); 


h) Reducing customer facilities and adapting services 
if social distancing cannot be complied with (for 
example, closing fitting rooms, using fixed pairs 
of employee(s) to carry heavy items to customers’ 
vehicles); 


j) Encouraging digital money transactions, 
establishing no-contact collection and return 
points; and staggering collection times; and 


k) putting in automation for work force as far as 
possible like solving queries through emails, 
telephones, and putting interaction screens so as 
to discourage direct public interactions. 


8.7 Work-related Travel and Deliveries 


Organization should: 


a) discourage all unnecessary work travel and 
deliveries; 


b) ensure that in case of essential work travel, all 
norms of social distancing should be followed as 
far as possible, by reducing the number of person 
in one vehicle, avoiding face to face sitting; 


c) ensure proper sanitization of the vehicle after each 
use; 


d) plan of schedule of the deliveries in such a manner 
so as to reduce interactions of the people; 


e) define responsibility of designated employee(s) 
or team for loading or unloading the deliveries; 


f) maintain proper documentation or logs for every 
delivery handled by whom; 


g) minimize person-to-person contact during 


deliveries including during payment and 
exchange of documentation (for example, 
electronic tools for payment, signing and 


document exchange); 


h) designate separate facility for incoming goods like 
sanitization tunnel/chamber fitted with sprayer or 
equivalent; 

j) arrange manual spraying of sanitizer with 
appropriate sanitizers/chemicals on the outer 
surface of packaging material goods; 


IS 17472 : 2020 


k) undertake essential correspondence on official 
email and avoid sending files and documents to 
other offices, to the extent possible; and 


m) facilitate delivery and receipt of documents/ 
Dak/Courier at the entry point itself of the office 
building, as far as practicable. 


8.8 Waste Management 


8.8.1 The organization should identify measures for 
safe handling and management of all housekeeping 
activities including waste collection, storage and 
disposal etc. with special focus on disposal of used 
PPEs. 


8.8.2 Measures may be taken by the organization to 
identify waste that may have a potential for infection. 
Practices like colour coding, labelling etc. may be 
adopted for disposal. 


8.8.3 The organization should define and implement the 
waste management system for used PPEs and ensure it 
is communicated to all cleaning staff, employee(s) and 
other stake holders. 


8.8.4 Ensure and track the proper disposal of used 
PPEs. 


8.9 Transport/Parking Management 


8.9.1 There should be proper vehicle management 
outside the workplace and in parking lots. Indicators at 
the floor for safe parking can be arranged. 


8.9.2 Sanitization of steering wheels of cars, car door 
and car keys should be done. 


8.10 Measures to be Taken on Occurrence of Case(s) 


8.10.1 Despite taking the above measures, the 
occurrence of cases among the employees working in 
the office cannot be ruled out. In case of occurrence 
the directives/guidelines provided by the government 
need to be followed. Trigger points have to be defined 
for initiating work from home and a SOP has to be 
established in order to ensure quality, compliance, 
productivity for virtual work force. 


8.10.2 Please visit following links for further guidance: 


a) https://www.mohfw.gov.in/ 
pdf/1 SoPstobefollowedinO ffices.pdf 


b) https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/Guidelinesondis 
infectionofcommonpublicplacesincludingoffices. 
pdf 

c) https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/ 
Guidelinesonrational 
useofPersonalProtectiveEquipment.pdf 


d) https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/Revisedtesting 
guidelines.pdf 


10 


NOTE — Latest updates regarding guidelines can be assessed 
by visiting the site of ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
India. 


8.11 Closure of Workplace 


In case of a large outbreak or signs of an emerging 
cluster, the directives/guidelines provided by the 
government need to be followed. 


9 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 


9.1 Monitoring and Evaluation 


The organization should use a systematic approach to 
monitor and evaluate: 


a) how effective safety measures and controls to 
protect employee(s) are; 
b) how the work is being done; and 
c) behaviour of employee(s) and other people in 
the workplace. 
9.2 Monitoring and evaluation activities should: 


a) determine the extent to which the guidance is 
being complied with; 


b) determine if processes for ongoing risk 
assessments are in place and operating 
effectively; 


c) determine the extent to which controls are working 
and if these need to be changed, enhanced or 
enforced more actively; 


d) determine if the use of controls is creating new 
risks that need to be addressed; and 


e) consider feedback from employee(s), employee(s) 
representatives/related stakeholders. 


9.3 Management Review, Incidents and Reporting 


The organization should review the outputs of 
monitoring and evaluation (see 9.1) at regular intervals 
considering: 


a) issues identified with people’s level of 
compliance to safety measures and controls put 
in place; 

b) incidents reported by employee(s) and other 
relevant interested parties; 


c) root cause(s) of incidents; and 


d) effectiveness of actions taken to deal with 
incidents, including actions taken at the time of 
the incident and actions to address the root causes 
of the incident. 


The results of the management review should be 
communicated to employee(s) and other stake 
holders. Communications should include actions 
taken and other improvement measures that are or 
will be introduced (see 10). 


9.4 As per NDMA Guidelines it is the responsibility of 
the organization to make a formal report to concerned 
authorities if: 

a) an incident at work has led to someone’s possible 
or actual exposure to the coronavirus that causes 
COVID-19; 

b) a employee(s) has been diagnosed with 
COVID-19 and there is reasonable evidence that 
it was caused by exposure at work; or 

c) a employee(s) dies as a result of occupational 
exposure to the coronavirus. 


10 IMPROVEMENT 


The organization should determine opportunities 
for improvement in managing risks related to 
COVID-19 and implement necessary actions. 


IS 17472 : 2020 


10.1 The organization should consider the results of 
monitoring, evaluation and review (see 9) and: 


a) take immediate actions to improve or change 
safety measures and controls that are not effective; 


b) implement additional safety measures and controls 
if needed; and 


c) address changes to the external and internal 
issues that can affect health, safety and wellbeing 
at work (see 3.1), including changes to legal 
requirements or official guidance. 


10.2 To ensure the organization continues to manage 
the risks related to COVID-19, it should review the 
recommendations in this standard regularly to take into 
account the dynamic nature of the situation. 


11 


IS 17472 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Resource Management Sectional Committee, MSD 12 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Materials Management, Delhi 


Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry of India 
(ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Limited, New Delhi 


CMAI Association of India, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, Gurgaon 


Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(DSIR), New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, New Delhi 


Fore School of Management, New Delhi. 
Indian Institute of Management, Tiruchirappalli 


Institute of Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG), 
New Delhi 


International Facility Management Association, 
Bengaluru 


International Management Institute (IMI), New Delhi 


R Systems International Ltd, Noida (U.P.) 


UN Global Compact Network, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


12 


Representative(s) 


Suri V. K. Jain (Chairman) 


Suri M. K. BHARDWAJ 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
Ms Exta Buarpwas (Alternate) 


Suri N. K. GOYAL 
Suri M. K. SETH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANUPAM KAUL 


DR SUJATA CHAKLANOBIS 


CoL RAJEEV CHAWLA 
Suri N. PRABAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBIR VERMA 
Dr BHIMARAYA METRI 


Suri M. M. GHosu 


SHRI BASAVARAJU N. L. 


Dr MAMTA MOHAPATRA 
Dr Swati Duir (Alternate) 


SHRI PREM GOSWAMI 
SHRI NARENDRA SHUKLA (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMAL SINGH 
Suri B. DHAL 
SMT RENU SHARMA 


Ms Sneu Lata, HEAD (MSD) AND MEMBER SECRETARY 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Composition of Panel for standard formulation of COVID 19, MSD 12/P-6 


Organisation 


Indian Institute of Material Management, New Delhi 


CMAI Association of India, New Delhi 


Department of Public Enterprises, (M/o Heavy 
Industry & Public Enterprises), New Delhi 


Directorate of General Health and Services, 
New Delhi 


International Facility Management Association, 
Bengaluru 


National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories, Gurgaon 


National Disaster Management Authority 


Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


V. M. Medical College and Safdarjung Hospital, 
New Delhi 


Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi 
Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi 
Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri V. K. Jar (Convener) 
SHRI PRAVEEN DWIVEDI 


DR NITIN AGGRAWAL 


Dr Manis GOEL 
Dr ANIL Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI BASAVARAJU N. L. 


SHRI RAMPRASATH R. 


SHRI VIJAY SINGH NEMIWAL 


Dr R. N. SHUKLA 
Dr AparNA DHAWAN (Alternate) 


Dr Harish CHANDER SACHDEVA 


SMT SNEH LATA 
SMT SUNEETI TUTEJA 


Dr PRADEEP DUA 


Member-Secretary, MSD 12/P-6 
SMT PARUL GUPTA 
Deputy DIRECTOR, MSD 


13 


IS 17472 : 2020 


IS 17472 : 2020 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Website of Ministry pf Health and Family Welfare at https://www.mohfw.gov.in 


2. Draft Indian Standard on Food Safety and Hygiene — Code of Practice for Food Businesses during 
Epidemic and Pandemic situations with specific reference to Covid-19 (Doc: FAD 15 (15559)F) 


3. Website of National Disaster Management Authority at https://ndma.gov.in/en/ 
4. Work Place Assessment for Safety and Hygiene (WASH), a scheme by QCI 


5. Safe working during the COVID-19 pandemic — General guidelines for organizations by The British 
Standards Institution 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 12 (15991). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


