Indian Standard slk eni 


agir — urun yraa 
sir udi 
(AAT FRAT) 


Hydrometry — Vocabulary and 
Symbols 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 17.120.20 


© BIS 2016 


ARMs AH AAR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 Teg wt art, TE feeei-110002 
Yemlik MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2016 Price Group 13 


Hydrometry Sectional Committee, WRD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Hydrometry Sectional Committee, WRD 01 had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1959 under the title ‘Glossary of terms used in measurement of flow of water 
in open channels’. Subsequently deriving assistance from ISO/R 772 : 1968 ‘Glossary of terms and symbols used 
in connection with the measurement of liquid flow with a free surface’, the first revision was published in 1971 
under the modified title “Glossary of terms and symbols used in connection with the measurement of liquid flow 
with a free surface (first revision)’. The second revision of this standard was published in 2003 under the title 
“Hydrometric determination — Vocabulary and symbols (second revision)’ wherein a great deal of assistance 
was derived from ISO 772 : 1996 “Hydrometric determination — Vocabulary and symbols’. 


This is the third revision of this standard. This revision has been taken up to bring in further modifications/ 
improvements in the light of experience gained while using the earlier version of the standard. This revision has 
been prepared by largely deriving assistance from ISO 772 : 2011 ‘Hydrometric determination — Vocabulary 
and symbols’. However the part on groundwater has been deleted from the same and is proposed to be covered 
in a separate standard. 


Further in this standard the following three principles as adopted in 1SO 772 : 2011 were followed, wherever 


possible: 


a) To standardize suitable terms and symbols without perpetuating unsuitable ones. 


b) To discard any term or symbol used with differing meanings and to replace that term or symbol by one 
which has an unequivocal meaning. 


c) To exclude terms which are self-evident. 


The terminology entries are presented in systematic order, grouped into sections according to particular methods 
of determination or in relation to particular subjects. 


Annex A lists the symbols used in this standard. An alphabetical index is included at the end. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


Indian Standard 
HYDROMETRY —VOCABULARY AND SYMBOLS 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard gives terms, definitions and symbols used 
in standard in the field of hydrometry. 


2 GENERAL TERMS 


2.1 Liquid Flow — Movement of a volume of a 
substance that is neither a solid nor a gas, that is 
practically incompressible, that offers insignificant 
resistance to change of shape and that flows freely. 


Example : 
Water or water with sediment. 


2.2 Flow Regime — State of flow in alluvial streams 
characterized by a bed configuration of ripples, dunes 
(lower regime), plane bed (transition), standing waves 
and antidunes (upper regime). 


NOTE — The lower-regime flow is subcritical; the upper- 
regime flow is supercritical. 


2.3 Steady Flow — Condition in which the discharge 
does not change in magnitude with respect to time. 


2.4 Unsteady Flow — Condition in which the 
discharge changes in magnitude with respect to time. 


2.5 Uniform Flow — Flow, in an open channel, in 
which the depth and velocity remain constant along 
the open channel. 

NOTE — For uniform flow, the velocity vector is constant along 


every stream line. Uniform flow is possible only in an open 
channel of constant slope and cross-section. 


2.6 Critical Flow — Flow, in an open channel, in 
which the specific energy is a minimum for a given 
discharge. 


NOTE — Under this condition, the Froude number is equal to 
unity and small surface disturbances cannot travel upstream. 


2.7 Subcritical Flow — Flow in an open channel at 
less than critical velocity, that has a Froude number of 
less than unity, and in which small surface disturbances 
can travel upstream. 


2.8 Supercritical Flow — Flow in an open channel at 
more than critical velocity, that has a Froude number 
of greater than unity, and in which small surface 
disturbances cannot travel upstream. 


2.9 Transverse Flow, Lateral Flow — Flow 
horizontally perpendicular to the main direction of flow 
parallel to the axis of the open channel(s). 


NOTES 


1 Transverse (lateral) flow is frequently associated with 
secondary flow. 


2 Transverse (lateral) flow in open channels with a curved plan 
form causes super elevation of the water surface at the outside 
of the bend. 


2.10 Stratification of Flow — State of a fluid that 
consists of two or more layers arranged according to 
their density, the lightest layer being on top and the 
heaviest at the bottom. 


2.11 Critical Depth — Depth of flow at which critical 
flow occurs. 


2.12 Critical Velocity — Velocity at critical flow. 


2.13 Channel — Course of a river, stream, or other 
waterway. 
NOTE — The term can be qualified adjectively to describe a 


particular type of channel, such as a low-water channel, a main 
channel or an artificial channel. 


2.14 Open Channel — Longitudinal boundary surface 
consisting of the bed and banks or sides within which 
the liquid flows with a free surface. 


2.15 Canal — Man-made channel, usually of regular 
cross-sectional shape. 


2.16 Stable Channel — Open channel in which the 
bed and the sides remain essentially stable over a 
substantial period of time in the reach under 
consideration, and in which the scour and deposition 
during the rising and falling stages are negligible. 


2.17 Unstable Channel — Open channel that changes 
frequently and significantly in its plan—form and/or 
cross-sectional form for the reach under consideration. 


2.18 Tidal Channel — Open channel in which the 
flow is subject to tidal action. 


2.19 Tidal Waterway — One or more tidal channels 
together with the shallows and the banks or sides by 
which the water at high tide is bounded. 


2.20 Estuary — Lower reaches of a river that is freely 


IS 1191 : 2016 


connected with the sea and which receives fresh water 
supplies from upland drainage areas. 


2.21 Stream — Water flowing in a natural open 
channel. 


NOTE — By extension, this refers to moving water and the 
channel containing it. 


2.22 Current — Liquid flow in a discernable general 
direction. 


2.23 River — Stream of water in a natural open 
channel. 


2.24 Alluvial River — River which flows through 
alluvium formed from its own deposits. 


NOTE — The sediment carried by an alluvial river, except for 
the wash load, is similar to that in the bed. 


2.25 Incised River — River which has formed its 
channel by a process of degradation. 


2.26 Braided River — River characterized by a wide 
and shallow open channel in which flow passes through 
a number of small interlaced channels separated by 
shoals. 


NOTES 


1 Frequently, there is little or no erosion of the main banks of a 
braided river. 


2 Generally, there is little or no meandering of the main channel 
of a braided river, but meandering in the minor channels is usual. 


2.27 Reach — Length of open channel between two 
defined cross-sections. 


2.28 Meandering Channel — Channel following a 
sinuous path, characterized by curved flow leading to 
bank erosion alternating with shoaling. 


2.29 Dune — Large bed form having a triangular 
profile, a gentle upstream slope and a steep downstream 
slope. 
NOTE — Dunes are formed in quiet flow and thus are out of 
phase with any water surface disturbance that they may produce. 
They travel slowly downstream as sand is moved across their 


comparatively gentle upstream slopes and deposited on their 
steeper downstream slopes. 


2.30 Antidunes — Bed form of a curved symmetrically 
shaped sand wave that may move upstream, remain 
stationary or move downstream. 


NOTE — Antidunes are curved in a wave train but they are in 
phase and interact strongly with gravity water surface waves. 


2.31 Ripple — Small triangular-shaped bed form 
similar to a dune. 
NOTE — Ripples have much smaller and more uniform 


amplitudes and lengths than dunes. Ripple wavelengths are less 
than 0.6 m and wave heights are less than 0.06 m. 


2.32 Thalweg — Line of greatest depth, and thus the 
lowest water thread, along the stream channel. 


2.33 Transition, Crossover — Inflection reach 
between two meander loops in which the main flow 
crosses from one side of the channel to the other. 


NOTE — The depth of flow in a transition is usually reduced 
from normal depth and is more uniform than in the curved reach. 


2.34 Node, Nodal Point, Inflection Point — Point in 
a transition at which the sinuous path crosses the mean 
axis of the meander system. 


NOTE — In a meandering stable channel, the node migrates 
downstream with the meander loops. Migration can be prevented 
by the creation of a natural or artificial obstruction in the 
channel. 
2.35 Discharge, Q —Volume of liquid flowing through 
a cross-section in a unit time. 


NOTE — This term is not synonymous with flow. 


2.36 Unit Discharge, Discharge per Unit Width, gu 
—Discharge through a unit width of a given vertical 
section. 


2.37 Specific Discharge (in relation to area), Q — 
Discharge per unit area of catchment or aquifer. 


2.38 Specific Discharge (in relation to stage), g — 
Discharge corresponding to a specific stage or to a 
specific gauge height. 


2.39 Stream Gauging — All of the operations 
necessary for the measurement of discharge of a stream. 


2.40 Discharge Measurement — Process of 
measuring the discharge of liquid in an open channel. 


2.41 Gauge — Device installed at a gauging station 
for measuring the level of the surface of the liquid 
relative to a datum. 


2.42 Velocity — Speed of flow past a point in a 
specified direction. 


2.43 Speed (of flow) — Ratio of the distance covered 
by a body of water, moving in a specified direction, to 
the time taken to cover that distance. 


2.44 Left Bank — Bank to the left of an observer 
looking downstream. 


2.45 Right Bank — Bank to the right of an observer 
looking downstream. 


2.46 Invert — Lowest part of the cross-section of a 
natural or artificial channel. 


2.47 Bed Slope, Bottom Slope, S — Difference in 
elevation of the bed per unit horizontal distance, 
measured in the direction of flow. 


NOTE — The slope is usually mathematically negative in the 
direction of flow. 


2.48 Bed Profile — Shape of the bed in a vertical plane. 


NOTE — The shape of the bed may be considered longitudinally 
or transversely; this should be stated. 


2.49 Side Slope — Ratio of the horizontal to the 
vertical components of the bank slope, unless otherwise 
stated. 


2.50 Surface Slope — Difference in elevation of the 
surface of the stream per unit distance, measured in 
the direction of flow. 


2.51 Surface Drawdown — Local lowering of the 
water surface in an approach channel, caused by 
acceleration of the flow passing over an obstacle or 
through a control. 


2.52 Fall, Canal Fall — Difference in elevation of 
the water surface between the extremities of a defined 
reach at a given instant of time, for example as recorded 
at a twin-gauge station. 


2.53 Top Width — Width of the open channel 
measured across the stream at the water surface normal 
to the direction of flow. 


2.54 Wetted Perimeter, Pw — Contact length 
between a stream of flowing water and its containing 
open channel, measured in a direction normal to the 
flow. 


2.55 Cross-section (of a stream) — Section normal to 
the mean direction of flow bounded by the free surface 
and wetted perimeter of the stream. 


2.56 Gauging Section, Measuring Section — Section 
at which discharge measurements are taken. 


2.57 Measuring Reach — Reach of open channel 
selected for measurement of hydraulic parameters. 


2.58 Converging Reach — Reach in which the cross- 
sectional area gradually decreases in the direction of 
flow. 


2.59 Expanding Reach — Reach in which the cross- 
sectional area gradually increases in the direction of 
flow. 


2.60 Flood Mark, Trash Line, Debris Line — Traces 
of any kind left on the banks or obstacles or flood plain 
by a flood. 


NOTE — The flood mark may be used to determine the highest 
level attained by the water surface during a flood. 


2.61 Normal Velocity Distribution — Velocity 
distribution in a straight open channel of uniform cross- 


section and constant slope which is of sufficient length 
to develop uniform resistance-controlled flow. 


2.62 Surface Velocity — Velocity of a liquid at its 
surface at a given point. 


2.63 Mean Velocity Depth — Depth below the surface 
at which the mean velocity on a vertical occurs. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


2.64 Mean Velocity (at a cross-section) — Velocity 
at a given cross-section of a stream, obtained by 
dividing the discharge by the cross-sectional area of 
the stream at that section. 


2.65 Mean Velocity (of a reach) — Velocity calculated 
by dividing the discharge by the average cross- 
sectional area of the stream along the reach. 


2.66 One-Point Method — Observations of velocity 
are made in each vertical at one point (for example 
at 0.6 of the depth) below the surface. 


2.67 Two-Point Method — Observations of velocity 
are made in each vertical at two points (for example 
0.2 and 0.8 of the depth) below the surface. 


NOTE — Generally, the mean velocity value is the 
mathematical average of the observations. 


2.68 Three-Point Method — Observations of velocity 
are made in each vertical at three points (for example 
0.2, 0.6 and 0.8 of the depth) below the surface. 


NOTE — Generally, the mean velocity value is the 
mathematical average of the observations. 


2.69 Velocity of Approach, Approach Velocity — 
Mean velocity at a cross-section at a specified distance 
upstream of a measuring device. 


2.70 Velocity Head — Head due to velocity, equal to 
the kinetic energy per unit weight of flowing fluid. 


NOTES 


1 The velocity head is the kinetic energy per unit weight of the 
flowing fluid. 


2 It is expressed as the square of the velocity divided by twice 
the acceleration due to gravity. 


2.71 Gauged Head — Level of the water surface or 
stage related to the invert of the flume or weir crest 
level or an arbitrary datum such as below the thalweg. 


2.72 Piezometric Head — Sum of the free surface 
elevation and the pressure head. 


NOTE — At any cross-section, it is the total head above the 
datum minus the velocity head at that cross-section. 


2.73 Total Head, Energy Head, H — Sum of the 
elevation of the free surface above the horizontal datum 
of a section plus the velocity head based on the mean 
velocity at that section. 


NOTE — The total head, H, is given by the following equation: 


where 

h = head of the liquid level, 

v =mean velocity of the liquid, 
a = Coriolis coefficient; and 

g = acceleration due to gravity. 


The Coriolis coefficient (a > 1), also known as energy 
coefficient or energy correction factor, takes into account the 


IS 1191 : 2016 


non-uniform velocity distribution. In many cases, a is assumed 
to equal unity. 


2.74 Total Head Line, Energy Head Line — Plot of 
the total head in the direction of flow. 


2.75 Total Head Level — Sum of the elevation of the 
free surface and the velocity head based on the mean 
velocity at the section. 


2.76 Energy Gradient — Difference in total head per 
unit horizontal distance, measured in the direction of 
flow. 


2.77 Energy Loss, Head Loss (between cross- 
sections), V — Difference in total head between two 
cross-sections in the direction of flow. 


2.78 Specific Energy — Sum of the elevation of the 
free surface above the bed and the velocity head based 
on the mean velocity at that section. 


2.79 Stage, Gauge Height, Liquid Level — Elevation 
of the free surface of a stream, canal, river, lake or 
reservoir relative to a specified datum. 


2.80 Gauge Height of Zero Flow — Highest point 
on the thalweg downstream from the gauge in a natural 
or artificial channel. 


2.81 Gauge Height of Zero Flow Line — Line on a 
shift diagram where the sum of the stage plus the shift 
adjustment is equal to the gauge height at zero flow 
for the rating. 


2.82 Stage-Discharge Relation, Rating Curve — 
Curve, equation or table that expresses the relation 
between the stage and the discharge in an open channel 
at a given cross-section, for a given condition of steady, 
rising or falling stage (see Fig. 1). 


Y 


100 200 300 x 
Key 
X — discharge, m°/s 
Y — stage, m 


Fic. 1 STAGE-DISCHARGE RELATION 


2.83 Stage Hydrograph — Graphical representation 


of changes in stage with respect to time. 


2.84 Discharge Hydrograph — Graphical 
representation of changes in discharge with respect to 
time. 


2.85 Shift Adjustment — Correction made to the 
recorded stage to compensate for vertical movement 
of the bed or for shifting of the control reach. 


2.86 Cumulative Volume Curve, Mass Discharge 
Curve — Curve in which the cumulative volume of 
flow or flow mass is plotted against time. 


2.87 Gauging Station — Site selected on a stream, 
river or open channel at which systematic 
measurements of water level or discharge, or both, are 
made. 


2.88 Single-Gauge Station — Gauging station at 
which stage records from a single gauge are adequate 
to establish a stage-discharge relation. 


2.89 Twin-Gauge Station, Slope Station — Gauging 
station at which two water-level gauges define a reach 
for measurement of water-surface slope as an essential 
parameter for establishing a stage-discharge relation. 


2.90 Control — Physical properties of a cross-section 
or a reach of an open channel, either natural or artificial, 
that govern the relation between stage and discharge 
at a location in the open channel. 


2.91 Rating — Relation between discharge and other 
variables, or the taking of observations and making of 
calculations needed to establish the relation. 


2.92 Calibration (of a station) — Establishment of a 
discharge relation with the measured variable(s). 


NOTE — Also referred to as the rating of a station. 


2.93 Unit-Fall Rating — Relation between stage and 
discharge when the fall is equal to one. 


2.94 Discontinuous Rating — Rating that exhibits a 
change in shape resulting from a change from lower- 
to upper-flow regime in all or part of the control reach. 


NOTE — The change in shape is usually abrupt. 


2.95 Shift Diagram — Curve or set of curves 
expressing the relation between stage and shift 
adjustment for a given rating. 


2.96 Afflux — Rise in liquid level immediately 
upstream of, and due to, an obstruction. 


2.97 Backwater — Afflux upstream of a given location 
on an open channel resulting from impedance offered 
to flow. 


NOTE — Backwater may be caused by a momentary storage 
of water in a channel. 


2.98 Backwater Curve — Profile of water surface, 


concave upwards, along an open channel, from the 
raised surface at an obstruction or confluence to the 
point upstream at which the flow is at normal depth. 


NOTE — The term is also used to denote all liquid surface 
profiles that are non-uniform with respect to distance upstream 
or downstream. However, this usage is deprecated. 


2.99 Drawdown Curve — Profile of the liquid surface 
when its surface slope exceeds the bed slope. 


NOTE — From the point at which the bed slope increases, or 
drops abruptly, to the point at which normal depth occurs, the 
profile along an open channel is convex upwards in an upstream 
direction and concave upwards in a downstream direction. 


2.100 Depth, D — Linear dimension measured in the 
vertical direction from the water surface to the bed. 


2.101 Normal Depth — Depth from the water surface 
to the bottom grade line of a channel for uniform flow. 


NOTE — Normal depth is a function of the geometry, slope 
and roughness of the channel, and of the rate of discharge. 


2.102 Length, / — Linear dimension measured in the 
direction of the stream flow. 


2.103 Width, Breadth — Linear dimension measured 
perpendicular to the direction of the stream. 


2.104 Frazil Ice — Fine spicules, plates or discoids 
of ice suspended in water that are generally formed by 
the supercooling of turbulent water. 
NOTE — Frazil ice may float or accumulate under ice cover or 
adhere to the stream bed as anchor ice. 


2.105 Anchor Ice — Submerged ice found attached 
to the bed, irrespective of the nature of its formation. 


2.106 Rime Ice — White mass of tiny ice crystals or 
granular ice tufts formed on exposed objects due to 
atmospheric moisture. 


2.107 Surface Ice, Ice Cover, Ice Sheet — Layer of 
ice formed on the surface of a lake or river. 


2.108 Slush Ice — Mass of loosely packed anchor ice 
that is released from the bottom, or frazil ice that floats 
or accumulates under surface ice. 


2.109 Peak Stage — Maximum instantaneous stage 
during a given period. 


2.110 Friction, Drag — Boundary shear resistance 
that opposes the flow of a liquid. 


2.111 Conveyance, K (ISO) — Carrying capacity of a 
channel. 


NOTE — The term “conveyance factor” is used also in the 
form, K = QS 12 

where 

K = conveyance factor, 

O = total discharge; and 

S = energy gradient. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


2.112 Hydraulic Jump — Sudden transition from 
supercritical flow to subcritical flow. 


NOTE — Immediately upstream of the hydraulic jump, the 
velocity and the depth are respectively greater and less than 
their critical values; beyond the jump, the velocity and the depth 
are respectively less and greater than their critical values. 


2.113 Hydraulic Mean Depth, Mean Depth, r, — 
Area of the cross-section of water flowing in an open 
channel divided by the width of the open channel at 
the water surface. 


2.114 Hydraulic Radius, 7, — Cross-sectional area 
of water flowing in an open channel divided by the 
length of the wetted perimeter at that cross-section. 


2.115 Stage Gauge — Device installed for measuring 
the level of the surface of the liquid relative to a gauge 
datum. 


2.116 Gauge Datum — Elevation of the zero of the 
gauge to which the level of the liquid surface is 
referred. 


NOTE — The gauge datum is related to a benchmark. 


2.117 Benchmark — Permanent mark, the elevation 
of which should be related, where practicable, to a 
national datum. 


2.118 Gauge Well, Stilling Well — Chamber open to 
the atmosphere and connected with the stream in such 
a way as to permit the measurement of the stage in 
relatively still water. 


2.119 Stilling Tube — Tube connected with the stream 
in such a way as to permit the measurement of the stage 
in relatively still liquid. 


2.120 Float Well — Stilling well in which a float 
device is used. 


2.121 Rugosity Coefficient, Roughness Coefficient 
— Coefficient that characterizes the roughness of the 
channel cross-section and which is taken into account 
when computing the resistance to flow or the energy 
gradient. 


NOTE — The common types are the Manning’s n, Chezy C or 
an element roughness height, k. 
2.122 Froude Number, F, — Mean velocity divided 
by the square root of the product of the hydraulic mean 
depth and the acceleration due to gravity: 


v 
F =— m 
(e) 
where 
y = mean velocity of the liquid, 


= acceleration due to gravity, and 


E 
D,, = hydraulic mean depth of the cross-section. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


NOTE — The Froude number is dimensionless. 


2.123 Reynolds Number, Re — Ratio of the forces of 
inertia to forces of viscosity. 


NOTES 


1 For open channels, Re = Mi 
n 
where 
y = mean velocity of the liquid, 
r, = hydraulic radius of the cross-section, and 
h= kinematic viscosity of the liquid. 


2 The Reynolds number is dimensionless. 


2.124 Weber Number, We — Ratio of the forces of 
inertia to surface tension forces. 


NOTES 


1 For open channels, We = px D 
o 


where 
r= Density of the liquid, 
= Mean velocity of the liquid, 


SI = 


= Hydraulic mean depth of the cross-section, and 
s = Surface tension of the liquid. 


2 The Weber number is dimensionless. 


2.125 Telemetry — Data or information acquisition 
system in which the measurement facility is sufficiently 
remote from the location of data presentation that a 
system of data transmission is necessary. 


2.126 Remote Sensing (hydrometry) — Acquisition 
of data or information on some property of an object 
or phenomenon by a sensor which is significantly 
remote from the object or phenomenon. 


NOTES 


1 Common usage of this term usually implies that the sensor is 
mounted in an aircraft or in a space vehicle. 


2 It is recommended that the term not be used when the sensor 
merely is not in contact with the object or phenomenon. 


2.127 Remote Telemetry Station — All the facilities 
necessary to accept or acquire measured data and to 
transmit that data from a hydrometric station without 
human intervention. 


2.128 Remote Telemetry Unit — Set of equipment 
which acquires the input of signals from sensors and 
status indicators, and performs all the processes 
required to present a data message to a communication 
link. 


2.129 Encoding — Process of converting data to a 
specific code. 


2.130 Parity Check — Addition of an extra bit so that 
the total number of bits in a sample is either always 
even or always odd. 


2.131 Code — Set of rules which specifies the format 
in which data may be represented. 


2.132 System — Set of elements organized to perform 
a set of designated functions in order to achieve the 
desired results. 


2.133 Data, Raw Data — Output resulting directly 
from the measurement of variables. 


2.134 Energy — Quantity characterizing the ability 
of a system to do work. 


2.135 Power, P — Time rate required for transferring 
energy, transforming energy, or doing work. 


2.136 Work — Transfer of energy expressed as the 
product of a force and the distance through which its 
point of application moves in the direction of the force. 


2.137 Hardware — Tangible equipment associated 
with a system. 


2.138 Software — Intangible element of a system 
which, when applied to the hardware, enables the 
system to perform in the desired manner. 


2.139 Firmware — Element of hardware whose 
associated software is integrated during manufacture. 


NOTE — In operation, the hardware and the software act 
together as a fixed entity. 


2.140 Real Time — Pertaining to the processing of 
data by a computer in connection with another process 
outside the computer according to time requirements 
imposed by the outside process. 


2.141 Free Surface Flow — Flow within a closed or 
open conduit, under gravity and having a free surface. 


NOTE — Where the flow exceeds the free surface capacity of 
the conduit, the flow will become surcharged with the 
consequent disappearance of the free surface. Instances of 
surcharging of short duration do not normally affect the overall 
concept of free surface flow in closed conduits. 


2.142 Hydrometry — Science and practice of the 


measurement of water including the methods, 
techniques and instrumentation used. 


NOTE — The adjective is “hydrometric”. 


2.143 Hydrological Cycle — Constant movement of 
water in all states of its form, above, on and below the 
earth’s surface. 


2.144 Hydrogeology — Study of subsurface water in 
its geological context. 


2.145 Hydraulic Gradient — Change in static head 
per unit distance in a given direction. 


2.146 Static Head, Static Water Level — Height, 
relative to an arbitrary reference level, of a column of 
water that can be supported by the static pressure at a 
given point. 


2.147 Creek (river) — Small river, often a tributary 
to a larger river. 


2.148 Creek (sea coast) — Recessed inlet on a sea 
coast or estuary. 


2.149 Hydrograph — Relation in graphical, 
educational or tabular form between time and flow 
variables such as depth, discharge, stage and velocity. 


NOTE — Typically, stage and discharge hydrographs are used 
for open channel flows. 


2.150 Gradually Varied Unsteady Flow — Generally 
non-uniform flow in which there are no abrupt changes 
in depth along the longitudinal axis of a channel and 
in which depth, together with discharge and velocity, 
changes with time. 


2.151 Live Storage — Reservoir storage which can 
be drawn off for users downstream. 


2.152 Total Storage — Reservoir storage between the 
lowest bed level and the top water level. 


2.153 Flood Storage — Volume of water temporarily 
held above the top water level of a reservoir during a 
flood event. 


NOTE — Flood storage is not retained in the reservoir but is 
discharged through an overflow until the normal top water level 
is reached. 


2.154 Boundary Condition — Condition to be 
satisfied by a dependent variable of a differential 
equation along the boundary of a model domain. 


2.155 Courant Condition — Condition for the 
numerical stability of the explicit formulation of a 
numerical scheme which requires that the ratio, Cr, of 
the propagation speed of a physical disturbance to that 
of a numerical signal should not exceed unity, that is 
Cr< i. 


NOTE — The condition is a requirement for an explicit finite- 
difference formulation applied to a hyperbolic partial differential 
equation. 


2.156 Explicit Finite — Difference Numerical 
Scheme — Scheme which converts either the 
characteristic equation or the governing equation into 
an equation from which any unknown may be 
evaluated directly (explicitly) without an iterative 
computation. 


NOTES 


1 Dependent variables on the advanced time level are 
determined one point at a time from known values and 
conditions at the present or previous time levels. 


2 The stability of an explicit scheme is conditional upon an 
error being a function of the time and distance finite-difference 
step sizes which may result in an error growing as the solution 
progresses. 


3 When the Courant condition is met, resulting in limitations 
in the maximum time and distance steps which can be used, an 
explicit scheme is generally stable, but there can be instances 
of instability. 

4 If the converted equation is linear and algebraic, an iterative 
computation is not needed. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


2.157 Implicit Finite — Difference Numerical 
Scheme — Scheme which converts either the 
characteristic equation or the governing equation into 
a non-linear algebraic equation from which an 
unknown may be evaluated iteratively. 


NOTES 


1 All of the unknowns within the model domain are determined 
simultaneously. 


2 Generally, an implicit scheme is stable. 


3 Although complex algorithms are required, generally an 
implicit scheme is computationally sufficient. 


2.158 Initial Condition — Description of the 
discharge, depth of flow or other dynamic condition 
at the beginning of a simulation period for unsteady 
flow models. 


NOTE — For subsequent times, the state of the system is 
described by the governing equations and the boundary 
conditions. 


2.159 Method of Characteristics — Mathematical 
approach for solving boundary values by transforming 
the original partial differential equations representing 
the physical system into corresponding characteristic 
equations. 

NOTE — Characteristic equations are ordinary differential 


equations and are generally more amenable to numerical 
solution than are the partial differential equations. 


2.160 Momentum Coefficient, Boussinesg 
Coefficient — Quantification of the deviation of the 
velocity at any point in a cross-section from a uniform 
velocity distribution in the same cross-section. 


NOTE — Values of the coefficient correspond to the following: 


a) Unity indicates that a uniform velocity distribution is present 
in the cross-section, 


b) 1.01 to 1.12 indicates a fairly straight prismatic channel, and 


c) Greater than 1.12 indicates a large or a deep channel. 


2.161 Standing Wave, Stationary Wave — Curved 
symmetrically shaped wave on the water surface and 
on the channel bed, that are virtually stationary. 


NOTE — When standing waves form, the water surface and 
the bed surfaces are roughly parallel and in phase. 


2.162 Isotropic — Having the same properties in all 
directions. 


2.163 Photomultiplier — Electronic device for 
amplifying and converting light pulses into measurable 
electrical signals. 


2.164 Water Course (irrigation) — Channel which 
feeds water from a branch canal or a distributary to a 
delineated block of land. 


2.165 Tributary — Surface or underground stream 
which contributes its water, continuously or 
intermittently, to another large or larger stream. 


2.166 Brook — Small shallow stream, usually 


IS 1191 : 2016 


continuous in its discharge, which flows in somewhat 
turbulent manner. 


NOTE — Its channels are usually irregular in shape and have 
numerous boulders, ledges or small drops which cause the 
turbulent flow. 


2.167 Longitudinal Section — Section representing 
an object as cut through its centre (or as specified) 
lengthwise and vertically. 


2.168 Delta — Quantity of irrigation water, expressed 
in depth units over the irrigated area, stated with 
reference to the place at which it is measured or 
assessed. 


Example 


Delta at farm, delta at outlet, head of watercourse or 
lateral head, delta at distributary head, delta at head of 
main canal. 


2.169 Delta Reach of River — Reach of a river when 
it approaches the sea, with very gradual bed slope and 
surface slope, and, at low velocity, deposits its sediment 
and divides out into channels on either side of the 
deposits, resulting in the formation of deltas. 


2.170 Water Level — Altitude reached by the surface 
of flowing or still water. 


2.171 Saturation Line, Line of Saturation, 
Percolation Line, Hydraulic Grade Line — Line 
across the banks on either side of a canal, in filling or 
partly in filling and partly in cutting, up to which the 
banks get saturated after the canal has been running 
for some time (see Fig. 2). 


2.172 Annual Flood — Highest momentary peak 
discharge, recorded at the respective point of 
observation, which is equalled or exceeded once every 
year. 


2.173 Annual Storage, Within-the-Year Storage — 
Difference between the maximum and minimum 


volumes in storage over a year of reservoir operation. 


2.174 Base Flow — Sustained flow of stream resulting 
from outflow of groundwater and from drainage of 
large lakes and swamps. 


NOTE — Base flow includes water sustained in glaciers, snow 
and other sources, not a result of direct runoff. 


2.175 River Capture — Process by which a river 
having more rapid power of erosion than another cuts 
into the headwaters of the latter and takes over certain 
of its tributaries. 


2.176 Drainage Basin — Part of the land area enclosed 
by a topographic divide from which direct surface 
runoff from precipitation drains by gravity into a stream 
or other water body. 


3 VELOCITY-AREA METHODS 


3.1 Velocity-Method — Method of determining 
discharge from the area of the cross-section, bounded 
by the wetted perimeter and the free surface, while 
integrating the component velocities in the cross- 
section. 


3.2 Slope-Method — Indirect method of determining 
discharge in a reach which is based on the friction 
(energy) slope, the reach roughness, the wetted 
perimeters and the flow areas of the various wetted 
cross-sections in the reach. 


3.3 Mean Direction of Flow — Direction in which 
the summation of the component velocity elements in 
a cross-section is a maximum when the components 
are taken along that direction. 


3.4 Vertical — Vertical line on which velocity 
measurements or depth measurements are made. 


3.5 Drift (measuring boat) — Distance that a 
measuring boat travels during the time taken to make 
a velocity observation. 


Key 
1 — canal 
2 — earth filling 


3 — scratched ground (for bonding) 


4 — saturation line 
5 — ground level 


Fic. 2 CANAL IN FILLING 


3.6 Drift (current meter) — Distance that a current 
meter assembly is carried downstream when used with 
a flexible suspension. 


3.7 Drift Velocity — Velocity in the direction of the 
drift current. 


3.8 Period of Pulsation — Average period of a cycle 
of pulsation during which the velocity in the cross- 
section fluctuates between limiting high and low 
values. 


3.9 Vertical Velocity Curve — Curve showing the 
relation between depth and velocity along a vertical 
line in a specified section of a stream (see Fig. 3). 


3.10 Velocity Vertical Gradient — Change in velocity 
per unit distance along the vertical velocity curve. 


3.11 Vertical Velocity Coefficient — Coefficient 
applied to a single, velocity determination at any depth 
on a vertical to infer the mean velocity on that vertical. 


3.12 Sounding — Operation of measuring the depth 
from the free surface to the bed. 


3.13 Air Line Correction — Correction to the 
sounding line measurement applied to that part of the 
sounding line above the liquid surface (see Fig. 4). 


0,5 


1,5 
0 
Yİ 


0,5 


Key 
X — velocity, m/s. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


Key 
kl, — air line correction. 
kl, — wet line correction. 
B — drift. 
a — direction of flow. 
Fic. 4 SOUNDING LINE CORRECTIONS 


3.14 Wet Line Correction — Correction to the 


Y — depth below surface, m. 


Fic. 3 VERTICAL VELOCITY CURVE 


IS 1191 : 2016 


sounding line measurement applied to that part of the 
sounding line below the liquid surface (see Fig. 4). 


3.15 Reference Gauge — Stage gauge normally linked 
to a specified datum. 


3.16 Reference Current Meter — Current meter that 
is immersed at a fixed position in the cross-section 
during the discharge measurement. 
NOTE — For slight changes in discharge during the gauging 
operation, it is assumed that the change in velocity indicated 


by the reference current meter is proportional to the change in 
discharge. 


3.17 Standard Current Meter — Calibrated current 
meter used as a basis of comparison with other current 
meters. 


3.18 Velocity Integration Method (velocity-area 
measurement) — Method of measuring the velocity 
along a vertical, involving the raising and lowering of 
a current meter at a constant rate through the entire 
depth of the vertical. 


3.19 Point Velocity Method — Method of measuring 
the velocity along a vertical by placing a current meter 
at a number of designated points on the vertical. 


NOTE — The velocity is usually measured at one, two, three, 
five or six points on the vertical. 


3.20 Float Gauging — Measurement of velocity of a 


- 
sss ree 


Key 
1 — stream panels. 
2 — vertical. 


3 — mid-section segment. 


stream by means of a float or floats. 


3.21 Moving Boat Method — Method of measuring 
discharge from a boat by traversing the stream along 
the measuring section while continuously measuring 
velocity, depth and distance travelled and angle of 
current velocity. 


3.22 Channel Storage — Generally, volume of liquid 
contained in an open channel at a given instant or 
specifically, volume contained in a defined reach at a 
given instant, as a function of the mean depth of flow 
in the reach. 


3.23 Mean Section Segment — Area bounded by two 
consecutive verticals in a cross-section, the bed of the 
open channel and the water surface (see Fig. 5). 


3.24 Mid-Section Segment — Area at a vertical 
defined by the depth at that vertical multiplied by one- 
half of the distance between the preceding and 
succeeding verticals (see Fig. 5). 


3.25 Stream Panel — That part of the surface of the 
stream enclosed between the corresponding traces of 
segments in adjacent cross-sections (see Fig. 5). 


3.26 Storage Curve — Curve depicting the volume 
of stored water plotted against stage or time. 


3.27 Cubature — Numerical technique for computing 


2 
ME F 
We Zİ > AN 
WE Mez 
W ea ees W 


4 — mean section segment. 
5 — bed profile. 


Fic. 5 GEOMETRIC DEFINITIONS 


10 


discharge in a tidal channel at a cross-section from the 
rates of change in volume of water up to the tidal limit, 
with algebraic allowance for the fresh water discharges 
entering the channel. 


NOTE — The maximum volume is usually that occurring at 
high water of spring tide. 


3.28 Looped Stage-Discharge Curve, Hysteresis of 
the Stage-Discharge Relation — Effect on the stage- 
discharge relation at a gauging station where, for the 
same gauge height, the discharge on the rising stage is 
different from that on the falling stage (see Fig. 6). 


Y 


Key 
X — discharge, m/s. 
Y — stage, m. 
a — falling stage. 
b — rising stage. 
Fic. 6 LOOPED STAGE-DISCHARGE CURVE 


3.29 Sensitivity of the Stage-Discharge Relation — 
Measure of the change in stage of a gauging station 
due to a change in discharge. 
NOTE — When a small increase in discharge produces a 
relatively large increase in stage, the relation is said to be 
sensitive. When a large increase in discharge produces a 


relatively small increase in stage, the relation is said to be non- 
sensitive. 


3.30 Stilling Well Lag — Difference at a given instant 
between the channel stage and the stilling well stage, 
during conditions of rising and falling stages in a 
channel. 


3.31 Fall Stage-Discharge Relations, Slope-Stage- 
Discharge Relation — Family of curves that expresses 
the relationship between the free water surface slope, 
stage and discharge in a given reach of an open channel 
subject to variable backwater. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


3.32 Normal Fall Stage-Discharge Relation, Normal 
Fall Method — Relationship between stage and 
discharge established graphically from a number of 
distinct sets of measurements of stage, discharge and 
fall, at a gauging station subject to variable slope, so 
as to define the condition of minimum backwater in 
terms of the upstream gauge. 


3.33 Constant Fall Stage-Discharge Relation, 
Constant Fall Method — Relationship, established 
by graphical interpolation, between a number of 
distinct sets of measurements of stage, discharge and 
fall, recorded at a gauging station subject to variable 
slope, so as to define those pairs of stage and discharge 
measurements for which the measured fall has the same 
value. 


3.34 Tide — Periodic rise and fall of water due 
principally to the gravitational attraction of the sun and 
the moon. 


3.35 Ebb Tide — Occurrence of falling water surface 
of a tide. 


3.36 Ebb Current — Current experienced during ebb 
tide. 


3.37 Flood Tide — Occurrence of rising water surface 
of a tide. 


3.38 Flood Current (tidal) — Current experienced 
during flood tide. 


3.39 Spring Tide — Tide of large amplitude, occurring 
twice during the lunar month, when the resultant of 
the attractive forces of the sun and the moon acting 
upon the earth is at a maximum. 


3.40 Neap Tide — Tide of small amplitude, occurring 
twice during a lunar month near the time of quadrature 
of the moon with the sun, that is when the resultant of 
the attractive forces acting upon the earth is at a 
minimum. 


3.41 High Water (tidal) — State of tide when the water 
is highest for any given tidal cycle. 


3.42 Low Water (tidal) — State of the tide when the 
water is lowest for any given tidal cycle. 


3.43 Ebb Volume — Total discharge of an ebb tide. 


3.44 Flood Volume (tidal) — Total discharge of a 
flood tide. 


3.45 Tidal Amplitude — One-half of the difference 
in height between consecutive high water and low 
water, hence half the tide range. 


3.46 Tidal Cycle — Period that includes a complete 
set of tide conditions or characteristics, such as a tidal 
day. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


3.47 Tidal Day — Interval between two upper transits 
of the moon over a local meridian. 


NOTE — Approximately 24.84 h. 


3.48 Duration of Tide — Time taken for the 
completion of one tidal cycle. 


NOTE — Usually, the duration is either 12.42 h for a 
semidiurnal tide or 24.84 h for a diurnal tide. 


3.49 Tidal Prism — Volume of water that flows into 
a tidal channel on the flood tide. 


3.50 Tidal Range — Difference in level between high 
water and low water of a tide. 


NOTE — The range is specific to a particular tide if consecutive 
high and low waters are used; otherwise, the range can refer to 
extremes of high and low waters over any specified period of 
time. 


3.51 Diurnal Inequality (waters) — Difference in 
heights and durations of the two successive high waters 
or two successive low waters of each day. 


3.52 Diurnal Inequality (currents) — Difference in 
speed and direction of the two flood currents or the 
two ebb currents of each day. 


3.53 Seiche — Oscillation of the surface of a liquid 
caused mainly by winds and variations in atmospheric 
pressure. 


3.54 Density Current — Phenomenon of gravity flow 
of a liquid relative to another liquid or of relative flow 
within a liquid medium due to difference in density. 


NOTE — see salt-water wedge (3.55). 


3.55 Salt- Water Wedge — Wedge-like intrusion of a 
large mass of salt water flowing in from the sea under 
the fresh water in a tidal waterway. 


3.56 Current Meter — Instrument for measuring 
water velocity. 


3.57 Flood Flow — Flow corresponding to or 
exceeding natural bankfull stage. 


3.58 Bankfull Stage — Stage at which an open 
watercourse just overflows its natural banks. 


3.59 Divergence of Tidal Conditions — Angular 
deviation in degrees between the flow axis of the ebb 
current and of the flood current, at a point where the 
axes Cross. 


NOTES 
1 Ina straight ideal reach, there will generally be no deviation. 


2 When conditions are not ideal, the ebb and the flood 
directions are not on the same axis and there will be an angular 
deviation. 


3.60 Mixed Tide — Tide which has at least two 
markedly unequal successive high waters, or at least 
two markedly unequal successive low waters, or both. 


12 


3.61 Ebb Predominance — Situation where the ebb 
flow exceeds the flood flow, over a tidal cycle, at a 
point or on a vertical. 


NOTE — Usually, the extent of the predominance is assessed 
using integration of velocity-time graphs. 


3.62 Flood Predominance — Situation where the 
flood flow exceeds the ebb flow, over a tidal cycle, at 
a point or on the vertical. 


NOTES 


1 Usually, the extent of the predominance is assessed using 
integration of velocity-time graphs. 


2 When an integration value is a net zero, there is no 
predominance. 


3.63 Sand Point — Pipe with a well screen, underlying 
or adjacent to a stream, in which a gas-purge orifice is 
installed. 


3.64 Fall Velocity, Settling Velocity, Terminal 
Velocity — Limiting velocity reached asymptotically 
by a particle falling under the action of gravity in still 
water. 


3.65 Vertical Velocity Distribution — Variation in 
velocity in a stream or river between the surface and 
bed (see 2.9). 


3.66 Vertical-Velocity-Curve Method — 
Observations of velocities normally taken at several 
points of the depth (for example at 0.1-depth 
increments between 0.1 and 0.9 of the depth) below 
the surface. 


4 FLOW MEASUREMENT STRUCTURES 


4.1 Flow Measurement Structure — Hydraulic 
structure (for example weir, flume or gate) installed in 
an open channel where in most cases the discharge 
can be derived from the measured upstream water level. 


4.2 Weir — Overflow structure that may be used for 
controlling upstream surface level or for measuring 
discharge or both (see Fig. 7). 


4.3 Height of Weir, Apex Height — Height from the 
upstream bed to the lowest point of the crest. 


4.4 Head Over the Weir — Elevation of the water 
surface above the lowest point of the crest, measured 
at a point sufficiently upstream to be unaffected by 
the drawdown of the weir. 


NOTE — The distance upstream of the point of measurement 
depends on the type of weir used. 
4.5 Upstream Total Head — Elevation of the total 


head relative to the flume invert level or the weir crest 
level, measured upstream of the structure. 


4.6 Downstream Total Head — Elevation of the total 
head relative to the flume invert level or the weir crest 
level, measured downstream of the structure. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


Key 

1 — weir crest. 

2 — weir block. 

3 — hydraulic jump. 
4 — total head line. 


5 — control block. 
6 — stilling basin. 
a — direction of flow. 


Fic. 7 WEIR 


4.7 Weir Abutment, Abutment, Wing Wall — Wall 
at the side of a channel, generally parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the weir, against which the weir 
terminates. 


4.8 Weir Block, Weir Body — Part of a weir lying 
between the abutments and over which the water flows. 


4.9 Full Width Weir, Suppressed Weir — Weir 
whose crest fills the width of the channel in which it is 
placed, thus eliminating side contraction of the stream. 


4.10 Divide Wall — Wall running in the direction of 
flow and separating the individual sections of a 
compound structure. 


4.11 Glacis — Sloping downstream face of a weir 
block and continuation of the crest. 


4.12 Weir Slope — Ratio of the horizontal to the 
vertical components of the upstream face, the 
downstream face or the cross-slope of a weir. 


4.12.1 Upstream Face Weir Slope — Ratio of the 
horizontal to the vertical components of the upstream 
face of a weir. 


4.12.2 Downstream Face Weir Slope — Ratio of the 
horizontal to the vertical components of the 
downstream face of a weir. 


4.12.3 Cross-Slope — Ratio of the horizontal to the 
vertical components of the slope of a weir. 


4.13 Approach Channel — Reach of the channel 
upstream of the gauging structure in which suitable 
flow conditions have to be established to ensure correct 
gauging. 

4.14 Straightening Vane, Guide Vane — Device 


13 


placed in the approach to improve flow conditions. 


NOTE — A similar purpose is served by the use of baffles; see 
also 4.15. 


4.15 Baffle — Wall or block placed downstream of a 
structure to dissipate energy or to cause improved 
velocity distribution. 


4.16 Control Block, Baffle Pier, Energy-Block — 
Block constructed in a channel or stilling basin to 
increase turbulence and thereby dissipate the energy 
of water flowing at high velocity (see Fig. 7) for the 
application of a control block to a weir construction. 


4.17 Stilling Basin — Basin constructed downstream 
of a structure to dissipate the energy of fast-flowing 
water and to protect the bed and banks from erosion 
(see Fig. 7). 


4.18 Separation Pocket (at a corner or at a point of 
large curvature) — Region of recalculating flow in a 
structure caused by separation of the main flow from 
the structure. 
NOTE — This phenomenon can occur at broad-crested weirs 
which do not have rounded upstream or downstream corners or 


which do not have a crest of sufficient length in the direction of 
flow. 


4.19 Separation Pocket (triangular-profile weir) — 


Near-cylindrical volume of slowly moving water 
immediately downstream of the crest of the structure. 


4.20 Throat — That part of a flume at which critical 
flow occurs, usually where the wetted cross-sectional 
area is at a minimum. 


NOTE — The throat may be rectangular, trapezoidal, U-shaped 
or of another specially designed shape. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


4.21 Modular Flow, Free Flow — Flow over or 
through a structure when the upstream level is 
independent of the downstream level for a given 
discharge. 


4.22 Discharge Coefficient — Coefficient in the 
discharge equation depending on the type and shape 
of the measuring structure and the head over the weir. 


4.23 Modular Limit — Submergence ratio for flow 
over a weir at which the upstream level just begins to 
be affected by the downstream level for a given 
discharge. 


4.24 Drowned Flow, Non-modular Flow, 
Submerged Flow — Flow, over or through a structure, 
when it is affected by changes in the level downstream. 


4.25 Submergence Ratio — Ratio of the downstream 
total head to the upstream total head in a structure. 


4.26 Critical Flow — Flow conditions for which the 
total energy head above the invert reaches a minimum 
at a given discharge and for given channel dimensions. 


NOTES 


1 This is the specific definition of critical flow when used in 
reference to the field of flow measurement structures. 


2 The water depth for these flow conditions is called critical 
depth and occurs during the transition from subcritical to 
supercritical flow. 


3 Critical flow in overflow structures and undershot gates occurs 
at the critical section, also called the control section. Critical 
flow in a measuring structure is a condition for modular flow. 


4.27 Double Gauging — Measurement of two 
simultaneous but independent heads to facilitate 
measurement in the drowned flow range. 

NOTE — The usual head measurement locations lie between 


3Hy,, upstream of the weir and 3H,,,, downstream of the weir, 


where 3H,,,, is the maximum total head over the weir crest. 


4.28 Broad-Weir — Weir with a horizontal 
longitudinal crest which has a length equal to or greater 
than the maximum operating head (see Fig. 8). 


NOTE — The streamlines above the crest are approximately 
straight and parallel, at least over a short distance. 


4.28.1 Rectangular Broad-Weir — Broad-crested weir 
of which the crest is a horizontal rectangular plane 
surface and of which the upstream face forms a sharp 
right-angled corner at its intersection with the plane of 
the crest (see Fig. 8). 


4.28.2 Round-Broad-Weir — Broad-crested weir of 
which the crest is a horizontal rectangular plane surface 
and of which the upstream corner is rounded to avoided 
flow separation (see Fig. 8). 


4.28.3 Trapezoidal Broad-Weir — Broad-crested weir 
of which the crest is a horizontal plane surface and of 
which the upstream face and the downstream face are 
sloping (see Fig. 8). 


14 


4.28.4 V-Broad-Weir — Broad-crested weir with a 
triangular cross-sectional profile, rounded off at the 
upstream corner (see Fig. 8). 


4.29 Nappe — Jet formed by the flow over a weir (see 
Fig. 9). 


4.29.1 Clinging Nappe — Nappe that maintains contact 
with the downstream face of a weir. 


4.29.2 Unconfined Nappe — Nappe where the guide 
walls of the structure end at the crest (or at the edge), 
thus permitting free lateral expansion of the flow. 


4.29.3 Fully Ventilated Nappe, Fully Aerated Nappe 
— Nappe springing clear of the downstream face of 
the weir with atmospheric pressure on the underside 
of the nappe. 


4.29.4 Fully Developed Contraction (nappe) — 
Contraction that occurs when further increases in the 
depth or width of the approach channel no longer 
affects the nappe. 


4.30 Thin-Plate Weir, Sharp-Weir — Weir 
constructed of a vertical thin plate from which the 
nappe springs clear of the crest, provided that the nappe 
is ventilated (see Fig. 9). 


NOTE — The streamlines above the crest are strongly curved. 


4.31 Thin-Notch Weir — Weir whose crest is a notch 
cut in a thin plate (see Fig. 10). 


4.32 Short-Weir — Weir with a horizontal longitudinal 
crest that is shorter in length than half the maximum 
operating head or with a longitudinal crest which is 
concave, convex or uneven. 


NOTE — The streamlines above the crest are curved. 


4.33 Triangular-Weir — Two-dimensional weir with 
a triangular longitudinal profile (see Fig. 11). 


NOTE — Usually, the upstream slope is 1:2 and the 
downstream slope is 1:5. 


4.34 Streamlined Triangular-Weir — Two- 
dimensional weir with a triangular longitudinal profile 
in which the sharp edge between the two sloping faces 
is replaced by a circular arc connecting the two faces 
tangentially. 


4.35 Flat-Weir — Triangular profile weir with a crest 
that is shallow and V-shaped when viewed in the 
direction of flow (see Fig. 12). 


NOTE — Usually, the cross-slope of the V shape is 1:10, 1:20 
or 1:40. 


4.36 Compound Structure — Series of weirs and/or 
flumes that may be of different crest levels, which are 
disposed across the width of an open channel and 
separated by divide walls (see Fig. 13). 


IS 1191 : 2016 


trapezoidal 


V-shaped 


a) Longitudinal profile. b) Cross-section over crest. 
Fic. 8 BROAD-CRESTED WEIRS 


IS 1191 : 2016 


ZA 
Sa = 


p 
A” 


Key 
1 Nappe 
Fic. 9 THIN-PLATE WEIR 
a 
/4 lal ce A A 

Key 
1 — thin-plate notch weir. 4 — triangular (V-notch). 
2 — full width. 5 — trapezoidal. 
3 — rectangular. 6 — circular. 


Fic. 10 THIN-PLATE WEIRS 


Fic. 11 TRIANGULAR-PROFILE WEIR (LONGITUDINAL PROFILE) 


16 


IS 1191 : 2016 


Fic. 12 FLat-V WEIR 


bLimensions en metres 


Dimensions in metres. 


Key 

1 — stilling basin. 4 — recorder housing. 
2 — crest-tapping pipe: Ø 0.1. 5 — intake: Ø 0.1. 

3 — connecting pipe to crest-tapping box (0.3 x 0.6 0.15): 00.01. 6— transition formed. 
H— head over weir. a— Direction of flow. 


Fic. 13 EXAMPLE OF COMPOUND STRUCTURE DESIGN 


17 


IS 1191 : 2016 


4.37 End-Method — Approximate method to establish 
the discharge in a horizontal or gently sloping channel, 
when the bed is discontinued abruptly, by measuring 
the head exactly at the commencement of the free 
overfall. 


4.38 Flume — Streamlined constriction in an open 
channel usually consisting of an entrance section, a 
throat section and a downstream expansion, that can 
be used for measurement of flow. 


4.38.1 Critical-Flume, Standing-Flume — Measuring 
flume of dimensions that produce critical flow in the 
throat and in which the measurement of only the 
upstream water level permits the calculation of 
discharge. 


4.38.2 Long-Flume — Measuring flume having a throat 
length equal to or greater than the maximum operating 
head (see Fig. 14). 


NOTE — The streamlines in the throat section are 
approximately straight and parallel, at least over a short distance. 


4.38.3 Short-Flume — Measuring flume having a 
substantially shorter throat length as compared with 
long-throated flumes. 


NOTE — The streamlines in the throat section are curved. 


4.38.4 Throatless Flume — Measuring flume which 
does not have a parallel-walled throat and which does 
not generate parallel flow at the critical section. 


4.38.5 Parshall Flume — Measuring flume having a 
converging entrance section with a level floor, a short- 
throat section with a floor inclined downwards at a 


3 


14A Longitudinal profile 


VLLLLLILLLLLLLLLLL jy ff fY9— LL LL LL LL LAL LL 


a——> 


gradient of 3:8, a diverging exit section with a floor 
inclined upwards at a gradient of 1:6, and having a 
specified cross-section depending upon the range of 
discharge flowing in the channel (see Fig. 15 B). 


4.38.6 Saniiri Flume — Measuring flume with a 
converging entrance section having a level floor with 
a fall at its downstream end and vertical walls to join it 
to the downstream channel (see Fig. 15 A). 


4.39 Vertical Underflow Gate — Vertical gate, 
situated in a channel of rectangular cross-section with 
a flat bed, for regulating the water level upstream of 
the gate or the discharge through the gate opening. 


NOTES 


1 The gate is movable in vertical slots and it can be raised or 
lowered by hand or mechanically. 


2 The underflow is two-dimensional except at vertically narrow 
gate openings. 


5 DILUTION METHODS 


5.1 Tracer — Ion, compound or radionuclide 
introduced into a flow system to follow the behaviour 
of some component of that system. 

NOTE — It is necessary that the tracer, which can be observed, 


behaves in exactly the same fashion as the component to be 
followed whose behaviour cannot easily be observed. 


5.2 Dilution Gauging — Gauging method in which 
the discharge is deduced from the determination of the 
ratio of the concentration of the injected tracer to that 
of the tracer at the sampling cross-section. 


5.3 Constant-Injection Method — Method of 


LL 


4 


14B Plan view 


Key 
1 — subcritical flow. 
2 — throat. 


3 — critical flow. 


4 — supercritical flow 
a — direction of flow. 


Fic. 14 LONG-THROATED FLUME 


IS 1191 : 2016 


15 A Saniiri flume 


Key 
1 — stilling wells. 3 — h, intake 
2 — h, intake. a — direction of flow 
15 B Parshall flume 
Key 
1 — crest. 4 — level floor. 
2 — partially submerged flow. 5 — alternative 45* wing wall. 
3 — free flow. a — direction of flow. 


Fic. 15 MEASURING FLUMES WITH CONVERGING ENTRANCE SECTION 


19 


IS 1191 : 2016 


measuring the discharge in which a tracer of known 
concentration is injected at a constant and known rate 
at one cross-section and its dilution is measured at 
another section located sufficiently downstream that 
complete mixing has taken place. 


5.4 Integration Method, Dilution Gauging (dilution 
methods) — Method of measuring the discharge in 
which a known quantity of tracer is injected over a 
short time at one cross-section and its dilution is 
measured at another cross-section located sufficiently 
downstream that complete mixing has taken place, and 
allowing sufficient time for all the tracer to pass that 
cross-section so that the mean concentration of tracer 
during the sampling time can be determined. 


5.5 Multiple Injection — Simultaneous injection of 
tracer at several points in the injection cross-section 
with the aim of improving transverse mixing in a given 
downstream measuring reach. 


5.6 Background Concentration — Concentration of 
the tracer substance or a substance that reacts like the 
tracer in the detection scheme used in the liquid in the 
channel, and that is not attributable to the injection of 
the tracer for the gauging, that is present upstream or 
before the injection. 


5.7 Constant Level Tank — Equipment for the 
injection of a concentrated solution at constant rate. 


NOTE — Using the overflow weir, a constant head is 
maintained above a selected nozzle or orifice. 


5.8 Mariotte Vessel — Equipment for the injection 
of a concentrated solution at constant rate. 


NOTE — Constant-rate injection is achieved by means of an 
airtight vessel provided with an orifice plate or nozzle at its 
bottom portion. The liquid flows through the constriction and 
air enters the vessel through a tube maintaining atmospheric 
pressure at the lower end of the tube set at a determined height 
above the constriction. The head on the constriction and 
consequently the injection rate remain constant, regardless of 
the level of liquid in the vessel. 


5.9 Floating Siphon — Equipment for the injection 
of a concentrated solution at constant rate. 


NOTE — The solution is taken from a vessel by means of a 
siphon that is fixed on a float. The lower end of the siphon is 
fitted with an orifice plate or nozzle. The head on the 
constriction and consequently the injection rate remain constant, 
regardless of the level of liquid in the vessel. 


5.10 Mixing Length (constant-rate injection method) 
— Minimum length of the reach between the injection 
cross-section and cross-sections where the tracer 
concentration is homogeneous in the section. 


5.11 Mixing Length (integration method) — 
Minimum length of the reach between the injection 
cross-section and the cross-section where transverse 
mixing is such that the integral of the tracer 


20 


concentration as a function of time is constant 
throughout the section. 


5.12 Degree of Mixing — Extent to which mixing has 
been achieved in a cross-section downstream of the 
point of injection of the tracer. 

NOTE — The degree of mixing immediately downstream of 


an injection is nearly zero. Complete (100 percent) mixing does 
not occur until further downstream. 


5.13 Adsorption — Fixation of an ion (for example a 
tracer) from a solution onto the surface of a solid (for 
example sediment in suspension). 


5.14 Dilution Ratio, Dilution Factor (constant-rate 
injection method) — Ratio between the concentration 
of the injected tracer solution and the concentration of 
added tracer detected at the sampling cross-section 
when steady conditions have been reached. 


5.15 Dilution Ratio, Dilution Factor (integration 
method), N — Ratio between the concentration of the 
injected tracer solution and the mean of the 
concentration of added tracer detected at the sampling 
cross-section. 


5.16 Sampling Cross-section, Sampling Station — 
Cross-section of an open channel, downstream of the 
injection cross-section, at which samples are taken or 
in which concentration is directly measured. 


5.17 Standard Solution — Reference solution 
containing a selected concentration of dissolved 
substance. 


5.18 Dispersion of a Tracer — Process by which 
differential velocities, turbulent motions and the rate 
of diffusion of a liquid cause the spreading of a cloud 
of dissolved or suspended substances throughout the 
liquid. 

NOTE — In a stream, dispersion generally takes place vertically 


in the water columns, transversely across the stream and 
longitudinally in the direction of flow. 


5.19 Dispersion Coefficient of a Tracer — 
Coefficient used to describe the capacity of a moving 
liquid to dissipate an initially localized substance or 
property throughout the liquid. 


NOTE — In open channel flow, dispersion takes place 
vertically, transversely and longitudinally. Each component of 
the dispersion has its own dispersion coefficient. 


5.20 Time of Travel of a Tracer — Time for the 
movement of liquid, or of dissolved materials, between 
cross-sections in an open channel. 


NOTES 

1 Time of travel may refer to leading edge, the peak 
concentration, the mass centroid or the trailing edge of a 
dissolved material in a stream. 

2 When the term is used for the time of travel of any part of the 
tracer other than the centroid, it should be qualified. 


5.21 Tracer Recovery Ratio — Ratio of the tracer 
mass recovered in a stream to the tracer mass injected, 
as determined by sampling. 


5.22 Unit Tracer Concentration — Concentration of 
a tracer in a stream for one unit of injected conservative 
tracer in one unit of discharge. 


6 INSTRUMENTS AND EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Vertical Gauge, Staff Gauge — Graduated 
vertical scale, fixed to a staff or to a structure against 
which the liquid level may be read. 


6.2 Inclined Gauge, Ramp Gauge — Gauge on a 
slope generally graduated directly to indicate vertical 
heights. 


6.3 Float Gauge — Gauge consisting essentially of a 
float that rides on the liquid surface and rises or falls 
with it, its movement being transmitted to a recording 
or indicating device. 


6.4 Point Gauge — Gauge whose essential element is 
a pointed rod that is lowered until it touches the surface 
(see Fig. 16). 


NOTE — The instant when the point touches the water surface 
is often indicated by an electrical device. 


6.5 Hook Gauge — Gauge whose essential element 
is a pointed hook which, after immersion, is raised until 
it touches the surface (see Fig. 17). 


6.6 Crest Stage Gauge — Gauge, usually vertical, 
used to indicate peak stage. 


6.7 Wire Weight Gauge — Graduated gauge 
connected to a weighted wire or chain, which is 
lowered to make contact with the surface of the liquid. 


Fic. 16 POINT GAUGE 


21 


IS 1191 : 2016 


NOTE — Contact with the liquid is determined visually. 


6.8 Servo System — System that detects an imbalance 
between the actual and desired states of a controllable 
quantity and then applies a restoring force which 
reduces the imbalance to an acceptable value. 


NOTES 


1 The typical location of a servo system is the output shaft of 
an electromechanical water level sensing instrument. 


2 A typical restoring force arrangement is to have the meter 
contact switches in the zero position to check that the output 
shaft corresponds to the correct water level. 


6.9 Servo Manometer, Servo Beam Balance — Type 
of liquid head sensor that incorporates a servo system 
to convert a detected liquid pressure into a recording 
or an indication of the liquid level. 


6.10 Elastic Pressure Bulb — Device, operating on a 
closed gas system, sometimes used to transmit liquid 
pressure to a sensor. 


NOTE — It normally comprises a short cast hollow cylinder 
with an open end, sealed with a slack highly flexible diaphragm, 
connected to the sensor by means of suitable tubing. 


6.11 Gas Purge Technique, Bubbler Technique — 
Method of transmitting liquid pressure in which a small 
discharge of non-corrosive gas or compressed air is 
allowed to bleed through a tube to an immersed fixed 
orifice. 


NOTE — The pressure measured by a pressure sensor is directly 
proportional to the liquid head. 


6.12 Backlash, Instrumental Hysteresis — 
Difference between the movement of the input 
mechanism and the associated movement of the stylus, 
occurring as a result of the mechanical linkage. 


Fic. 17 Hook GAUGE 


IS 1191 : 2016 


6.13 Liquid Level Recorder, Stage Recorder — 
Device that records automatically, either continuously 
or at regular time intervals, the liquid level as detected 
by a sensor. 


6.14 Sensor — Device that responds to a physical or 
chemical stimulus. 


6.15 Rotating Element Current Meter — Device 
provided with a rotor, the rotational velocity of which 
corresponds to the local velocity of the surrounding 
liquid. 


6.16 Cup-Type Current Meter — Current meter 
whose rotor is composed of a wheel fitted with cups 
turning on a vertical axis and perpendicular or nearly 
perpendicular to the flow (see Fig. 18). 


Key 
1— sounding weight. 
a — direction of flow. 
Fic. 18 Cur-TyPE CURRENT METER 


6.17 Propeller-Current Meter — Current meter 
whose rotor is a propeller rotating around an axis 
approximately parallel to the flow (see Fig. 19). 


NOTE — “Propeller” is also known as “impeller”. 


Key 
1 — sounding weight. 
a — direction of flow. 


Fic. 19 PROPELLER TYPE CURRENT METER 


6.18 Component Propeller-Current Meter — 
Propeller-type current meter whose rotor is designed 
to compensate an angular flow component. 


NOTE — “Propeller” is also known as “impeller”. 


22 


6.19 Propeller Pitch — Degree of inclination or slope 
of the blade, or the distance that a given propeller would 
advance in one revolution. 


NOTE — “Propeller” is also known as “impeller”. 


6.20 Rotor Pitch — Degree of inclination or slope of 
the blade, or the distance that a given rotor would 
advance in one revolution. 


6.21 Spin Test — Test in which the rotor of a current 
meter is spun, either with the fingers or by blowing 
into the cup or into the propeller, to check that it rotates 
freely and uniformly. 


6.22 Minimum Speed, Velocity of Response — 
Velocity of the liquid, relative to the rotor of a current 
meter, at which the rotor attains continuous and 
uniform angular motion. 

NOTE — Velocity of the liquid, relative to the rotor of a current 


meter which is immersed in the liquid, at which continuous 
and angular motion of the rotor is initiated. 


6.23 Rating Tank, Calibration Tank — Tank 
containing still liquid through which the current meter 
is moved at a constant velocity in order to calibrate 
the meter. 


6.24 Epper Effect — Phenomenon in which the 
disturbance produced by a current meter and its 
suspension, moving forward, in a rating (calibration) 
tank interferes with and reduces the rate of rotation of 
a mechanical meter’s rotor. 


6.25 Cableway System, Cableway — Cable and 
carriage, often incorporating a winch, used for placing 
measuring or sampling instruments at any desired point 
in the cross-section. 


6.26 Main Cable, Track — Anchored cable in a 
cableway system along which the instrument or 
personnel carriage travels (see Fig. 20 and Fig. 21). 


6.27 Suspension Equipment — Cables and cable 
winches or rigid rods to which hydrometric instruments 
may be attached for suspension in a channel. 


6.28 Anchorage — Cableway fixture to which the 
track (main cable) or stay line is attached (see Fig. 20 
and Fig. 21). 


6.29 Stay Line — Cable, placed between the towers 
(pier posts) and anchorages, that is used with a manned 
cableway system for ensuring the stability of the towers 
(pier posts) (see Fig. 20 and Fig. 21). 


NOTE — Stay lines are sometimes also used with an unmanned 
cableway system. 


6.30 Suspension Cable — Wire, from which the 
current meter is suspended, possibly incorporating an 
electrically insulated core and controlled by the winch 
(see Fig. 20 and Fig. 21). 


IS 1191 : 2016 


Key 

1 — stay lines 

2 — tower (pier post) 

3 — suspension cable 

4 — double—drum winch 
5 — suspension cable 


Fic. 20 CABLEWAY SYSTEM: TYPICAL UNMANNED INSTRUMENT CARRIAGE 


6.31 Tow Cable, Traversing Cable — Moving cable 
controlled by the winch, by which an instrument 
carriage is positioned from the bank (see Fig. 20). 


6.32 Hand-Suspension — Suspension of the current 
meter by a hand-held suspension cable or rod, used 
for gauging from bridges or similar structures. 


6.33 Gauging Reel, Winch — Drum-type hand-or 
machine-operated winch around whose drum is wound 
a suspension cable. 


6.34 Double- Winch — Winch with two drums, one of 
which controls the suspension cable while the other 
controls the movement of an unmanned cableway 
carriage (see Fig. 20). 
NOTE — The cableway carriage control drum may be a 
spooling drum or a friction-drive pulley driving an endless loop. 
The operator is able to drive both drums simultaneously in 
traversing mode, or to lock the traversing drum in sounding 
mode so as to operate the suspension cable drum only. The 
same operations may be carried out using two single drum 


winches, each allocated to one function. Measuring counters 
are fitted to record horizontal and vertical cable movements. 


6.35 Bridge Winch Board — Hardwood plank, 
reinforced with brass or steel, to which a hand-operated 
suspension cable winch is bolted, constructed to slide 
along bridge handrails to travel between gauging 
observation points. 


6.36 Sounding Weight, Sinker — Weight of 


23 


6 — current meter. 

7 — sounding weight 
8 — main cable 

9 — tow cable 

a — to anchorages 


streamlined shape attached to a sounding line or to the 
suspension of a current meter when observing depths 
or velocities in streams (see Fig. 20 and Fig. 21). 


6.37 Sounding Rod, Sounding Line — Graduated 
rigid rod or a chain or cable, usually with a weight 
attached to its lower end, used for determining depth. 


6.38 Wading Rod — Light, hand-held, graduated rigid 
rod for sounding depth and positioning the current 
meter for measuring the velocity in shallow streams 
suitable for wading (see Fig. 22). 


NOTE — A wading rod may also be used from boats or ice 
cover at shallow depths. 


6.39 Pendant Wire, Tag — Wire or cord marking the 
measuring section and carrying pendants or markers 
to indicate the position of the observation points. 


NOTE — The wire or cord is not used for suspending apparatus. 


6.40 Float — Any natural or artificial body that is 
supported by buoyancy (Archimedian) forces (see 
Fig. 23). 


6.41 Surface Float — Float with its greatest drag near 
the surface, used to determine surface velocities (see 
Fig. 23 a). 


6.42 Subsurface Float — Float with its greatest drag 
below the surface for measuring subsurface velocities 
(see Fig. 23 b). 


IS 1191 : 2016 


6.43 Double Float — Body of slightly negative 
buoyancy that moves with the stream at a known depth 
and whose position is indicated by a small surface float 
from which it is suspended (see Fig. 23 c). 


6.44 Velocity Rod, Rod Float — Float, in the form of 
arod, weighted at its base so that it travels in a current 
in an almost vertical position, used for determining 
stream velocities (see Fig. 23 d). 


NOTE — The immersed portion may be adjustable. 


6.45 Echo Sounder — Instrument using the reflection 
of an acoustic signal from the bed to determine the 
depth. 


6.46 Transducer — Device that responds to a 
phenomenon and produces a signal which is a function 


of one or more characteristics of the phenomenon. 


6.47 Tracking Window (of an echo sounder) — 
Opening of limited size which follows and 
automatically centres itself at the depth indicated by 
the last received echo. 


NOTES 


1 If the next echo falls within the window, the signal is accepted 
as correct; if it does not, the signal is rejected. 


2 The purpose of a tracking window is to screen out erroneous 
readings caused by fish, debris or other sonar-reflecting 
materials. 


6.48 Pulse — Controlled transient increase or decrease 
in transmitted energy. 


6.49 Bit — Binary digit (1 or 0) used to represent a 
number in binary notation. 


5 


Key 

1 — stay lines 

2 — anchorage 

3 — suspension cable 
4 — personnel carriage 
5 — main cable 


6 — current meter 

7 — sounding weight 
8 — stay line 

a — to anchorages 


Fic. 21 CABLEWAY SYSTEM: TYPICAL MANNED INSTRUMENT CARRIAGE 


a ——_ 


ZED 


a — direction of flow. 
Fic. 22 WADING Rob 


= 
Bi Ww 
ea 


ING 


Key 
1 — surface float. 
2 — subsurface float. 


Fic. 23 Types OF FLOATS 


3 — double float. 
4 — velocity rod. 


6.50 Byte — Group of adjacent binary digits operated 
on by a computer as a unit. 


6.51 Baud, Bd — Unit measure of data flow on a 
communication path. 


NOTE — Baud is a special name for the second to the power 
minus one for this quantity. 


6.52 Electromagnetic Current Meter — Current 
meter which creates a magnetic field perpendicular to 
the flow direction, thus enabling the velocity to be 
deduced from the induced electromotive force 
produced by the motion of a conducting liquid in the 
magnetic field. 


6.53 Ultrasonic (Acoustic) Velocity Meter — System 
that analyses the transmission of ultrasonic pulses in 
water to estimate velocity. 

NOTE — There are several different techniques that are used 


to analyse the transmitted sound pulses, which include travel 
time, frequency and echo (acoustic) correlation. 


6.54 Electromagnetic Gauging Station — Gauging 
station at which the integrated velocity is determined 
by inducing a magnetic field in the channel and 
measuring the induced electromotive force produced 
by the motion of the conducting liquid in the magnetic 
field. 


6.55 Default Mode — Condition adopted automatically 
by a system unless it is directed otherwise, or condition 
to which it reverts when either it is unable to sustain the 
directed condition or the direction given is unclear. 


6.56 Influencing Factor, Environmental Factor — 
Quantifiable effect of environmental elements, external 
to the measuring equipment, which may influence 
equipment performance. 


6.57 Performance Measure — Degree to which the 
intended functions of the equipment are accomplished. 


6.58 Range of Values — Span of values of a quantity 
used to measure an influencing factor. 


6.59 Conditions of Storage and Transport — 
Conditions specified by the manufacturer, under which 
equipment may be stored and transported in an 
inoperative state and may be subjected to influences 
outside those experienced in operation. 


NOTE — Under these conditions, the equipment may be 
specially packed or protected in whatever way considered 
appropriate by the manufacturer in order that it does not suffer 
damage or degradation of performance when subsequently 
operated within the range of operating conditions foreseen. 


6.60 Operating Conditions — Conditions within 
which the equipment is expected to measure the 
determinant in accordance with the appropriate criteria 
of performance. 


25 


IS 1191 : 2016 


NOTE — The range of operating conditions will be defined by 
the user. 


6.61 Abnormal Conditions of Equipment Use — 
Those conditions occurring only exceptionally, which 
lie outside the range applicable to equipment operation, 
and against which the equipment is provided with no 
special protection. 
NOTE — The equipment is expected to resume required 
performance levels as soon as the influencing factors return to 
those lying within the range applicable to the operation mode. 


The limits of these conditions should be specified by the 
manufacturer. 


6.62 Hazardous Area — Area in which there exist 
hazardous conditions potentially capable of 
endangering safety. 

NOTE — Such conditions may be attributable to physical 


location or to a situation where a potentially explosive 
atmosphere may exist from time to time (for example in sewers). 


6.63 Overall Performance Level — Statement of the 
expected performance of the equipment, relative to the 
true values of the measured hydrological variable. 


6.64 Timing Performance — Statement of the 
expected performance of any timing element of the 
equipment which is employed to control the sampling 
rate or frequency of the equipment. 


6.65 Permanent Flowmeter — Flowmeter installed 
for a long period of time (in excess of about 12 months) 
and used to determine flow continuously or at discrete 
time intervals. 


NOTES 


1 Any high costs incurred in the installation of these flowmeters 
may be tolerated as they are spread over a period of time. 


2 The measurements provided may be used as the basis for an 
archive system to examine present trends, to forecast future 
trends and to determine daily operational requirements. 


6.66 Temporary Flowmeter — Flowmeter installed 
for a specific period of time (no more than about 
12 months) and used to determine flow continuously 
or at discrete time intervals. 


NOTE — The installation of the flowmeter needs to be simple 
with minimal or no associated civil engineering costs. 


6.67 Portable Flowmeter — Flowmeter, not used as 
part of a fixed installation, used to obtain instantaneous 
measurements of flow or the velocity and depth 
components thereof. 


6.68 Hydrometric Equipment — Equipment used for 
the hydrometric monitoring of hydrological 
parameters. 


6.69 Recording Device — Device that records 
automatically, either continuously or at regular time 
intervals, the parameters sensed by any associated 
sensors. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


6.70 Recording Equipment — Equipment comprising 
one or more sensors and a recording device. 


NOTES 

1 Equipment producing a record demonstrating changes of value 
of a hydrological parameter with time may require the 
incorporation of a timing device. 

2 If the record comprises observations of the changes in values 
of a sensed hydrological variable linked to changes in one or 
more other physical parameters, the recording equipment should 
monitor adequately such linkages. 


6.71 Non-Equipment — Equipment comprising one 
or more sensors but no recording device. 


6.72 Instrument Carriage — Device having one or 
more track wheels which run on the main cable, a 
pulley to support the instrument suspension cable and 
a point of attachment for the tow cable. 


6.73 Load-Brake — Component of a manual gauging 
reel which prevents the reel handle from being driven 
by the load when the handle is released by the 
operator. 


6.74 Payout Rate — Rate at which a traversing cable 
or a suspension cable is paid out by a gauging reel. 


6.75 Torque Limiter — Device to limit the 
transmission of torque by causing the driving element 
to slip at a pre-determined rate. 


6.76 Tower, Pier Post — Principal support structure 
for a cableway. 


6.77 Minimum Winding Diameter — Minimum 
diameter of a drum or a pulley around which a cable 
may be wound or bent without causing damage to the 
cable. 


6.78 Winding Handle — Handle of a manual gauging 
reel by which a motive force is applied. 


6.79 Cableway Support — Structure that supports the 
main cable span across the stream. 
NOTE — This structure may also provide mountings for the 


winch and pulleys (sheaves) carrying the tow and suspension 
cables. 


6.80 Personnel Carriage — Work platform or cabin 


suspended from track wheels running on the main cable 
from which gauging observations are made. 


6.81 Track Wheel — Sheave (grooved wheel) that 
rides on the main cable to support the carriage. 


6.82 Ping — Series of acoustic pulses, of a given 
frequency, transmitted by an acoustic Doppler current 
profiler. 


6.83 Ensemble — Collection of pings. 


NOTE — Because the measurement from a single ping has 
relatively high uncertainty, the measurements from more than 
one ping are averaged to represent a single measurement. 


26 


6.84 Transect — Single pass across a river, lake or 
estuary. 


NOTES 

1 A transect may be described as a collection of ensembles. 

2 One transect may constitute a single measurement of 

discharge. 
6.85 Data Collection Platform — Instrument that 
gathers measurements from various sensors and then 
transmits them to receiving stations. 


6.86 Data Logger — Device that can read various 
types of electrical signals and log the data in internal 
memory for later transmission by telemetry or 
downloaded to a laptop or memory card. 


6.87 Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler — 
Instrument that uses the principle of Doppler shift to 
compute water velocity and discharge. 
NOTE — These instruments are usually mounted on a vessel 
that transmits across a river channel, generally perpendicular 
to flow, to compute total discharge of the channel. 
6.87.1 Side-Looker/Horizontal ADCP, H-ADCP — 
Device that uses the principle of Doppler shift to 
compute water velocity. 


NOTES 


1 These devices are usually fixed at the side of the channel and 
sample velocity in what is effectively a horizontal wedge across 
the watercourse. 


2 It is not necessary to sample velocity across the full width of 
the channel. 


6.88 Doppler Shift — In acoustic Doppler instruments, 
difference or shift in frequency of emitted sound waves 
as they are reflected back from moving particles in the 
water. 


NOTE Only radial velocity with respect to stationary and 
moving particles/objects: measured either towards or away from 
the stationary measuring equipment. 


6.89 Acoustic Doppler Velocity Meter — Class of 
instruments that uses the principle of Doppler shift to 
compute water velocity. 
NOTE — These instruments are usually deployed at a fixed 
point in a cross-section and commonly used to develop an index 
velocity for the computation of an average velocity for that 
cross-section. 
6.90 Blanking Distance — Distance travelled by the 
signal when the vibration of the transducer during 
transmission prevents the transducer from receiving 
echoes or return signals. 


6.91 Bottom Tracking — Method where the velocity 
of the bottom is measured together with the water 
velocity, which allows the system to correct for the 
movement of the vessel. 


6.92 Differential Global Positioning System — 
Enhancement to Global Positioning System that uses 
a network of fixed ground-based reference stations to 


broadcast the difference between the positions 
indicated by the satellite systems and the known fixed 
positions. 


6.93 Side-Interference — Reflections of the side-lobe 
energy from the river bed overwhelm the echoes of 
the main beam from particles near the bottom of the 
water column. 


6.94 Radar Velocity Meter — Instrument that 
transmits an electromagnetic beam directed at the fluid 
surface at an oblique angle, thus collecting scattered 
radiation and its frequency compared with the 
frequency of transmission. 


6.95 Optical Velocity Meter — Laser Doppler, 
particle image velocimetry and laser particle 
velocimetry devices located above the water that can 
be used to track the movement of disturbances and 
particles at, or close to, the water surface. 


6.96 Echo (Cross) Correlation Velocity Meter — 
Device that uses the transmitting and receiving of 
consecutive ultrasound pulses to track the movement 
of flowing particles, both in time and space. 


NOTE — The velocity of the moving particles is estimated 
and assumed to be the same as the velocity of the water. 


7 SEDIMENT TRANSPORT 


7.1 Fluvial Sediment — Solid particles derived from 
rocks, biological materials, or chemical precipitants, 
that are transported by, suspended in, or deposited by 
flowing water. 


7.2 Fluvial Sediment Transport — Movement of 

solids transported in any way by a flowing liquid. 
NOTE — This is usually expressed as the mass or volume of 
sediment passing a cross-section per unit time. 


7.3 Total Load (origin) — Sum of the bed material 
load and the wash load (in suspension). 


7.4 Total Load (transport) — Sum of the bed load and 
the suspended load. 


7.5 Bed Material — Material of the same particle size 
as that which is found in appreciable quantities in that 
part of the bed affected by sediment transport. 


7.6 Bed Material Load — That part of the total 
sediment transport that consists of bed material and 
whose rate of movement is governed by the 
transporting capacity of the channel. 


7.7 Suspended Load — That part of the total bed 
material load that continues to remain in suspension 
by turbulence in the flowing water. 


NOTES 


1 It moves with practically the same velocity as the flowing 
water. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


2 Suspended load is generally expressed in mass or volume per 
unit of time. 


7.8 Bed Load — That part of the total load (transport) 
in almost continuous contact with the bed, carried 
forward by rolling, sliding or hopping. 


7.9 Wash Load — That part of the total load that 
remains in suspension and is composed of particles 
washed from the catchment and whose size is normally 
smaller than those found in the channel bed. 


NOTES 


1 It is in near permanent suspension and, therefore, is transported 
through the stream without deposition. 


2 The discharge of the wash load through a reach depends only 
on the rate at which these particles become available in the 
catchment and not on the transport capacity of flow. 


3 Wash load is generally expressed in mass or volume per unit 
of time. 


7.10 Sediment Concentration — Proportion by mass 
or volume of the dry sediment in a water-sediment 
mixture to the total mass or volume of the mixture. 


7.11 Mean Suspended Concentration Time- 
Weighted-Mean-Suspended-Concentration (time- 
related) — Average of sediment concentration over 
time. 


7.12 Average of the Suspended Concentration (area- 
related) — Average of the suspended concentration 
over the cross-sectional area of a channel. 


7.13 Specific Mass — Ratio of the mass of a given 
volume of the sediment to the mass of an equal volume 
of water. 


7.14 Bulk Density (deposited sediment) — Total dry 
mass of a unit volume (including pores) of undisturbed 
deposit. 


7.15 Oden Theory — Principle, for uniformly 
dispersed sediment systems, which postulates that the 
sediment concentration at any level remains constant 
until the largest particle in suspension has had time to 
settle from the surface to the level in question. 


7.16 Integration Method (sediment transport) — 
Method of sampling in which the sampler, held 
stationary at a point, is filled with a water-sediment 
mixture to almost its full capacity during a sampling 
period. 
NOTE — Suspended-sediment sampling can be made with 
respect to time as well as with respect to space. When it is 


made with respect to time, the method is termed “time 
integration”. Mathematically, it can be explained as: 


: i 
8 = 7 | gdt 
T 0 
& = average sediment transport rate, 


T = time interval of integration, and 
= instantaneous transport rate. 


ga 
| 


IS 1191 : 2016 


7.17 Depth Integration Method — Method of 
sampling suspended sediment in which, by traversing 
the depth of the stream both in the downward and 
upward directions at a uniform speed, the sampler 
takes, at every point on the vertical, a small specimen 
of the water-sediment mixture, each increment of 
which is proportional to the local sediment discharge, 
so that the sampler is filled with a water-sediment 
mixture that is adequate for sample analysis without 
overfilling. 


7.18 Direct Method of Measurement — Method in 
which the time-average suspended- sediment load at a 
point is measured directly. 


Example: 


One way of measuring directly is by using a point- 
integrating isokinetic sampler. 


7.19 Indirect Method of Measurement — Method 
in which the time-average concentration of the 
sediment and the time-average current velocity at a 
point are measured practically simultaneously with the 
aid of separate devices. 


NOTE — The two values are multiplied together to obtain the 
sediment discharge. 


7.20 Sedimentation Method — Method of obtaining 
the sediment concentration in a sample containing 
suspended sediment by letting the sample stand 
undisturbed so that the sediment settles out from 
suspension, then successively decanting the sediment- 
free liquid and ultimately allowing the sample to dry 
by evaporation. 


7.21 Filtration Method — Process of passing a water- 
sediment mixture through a filter paper or other 
filtering medium for the removal of suspended or 
colloidal material. 


7.22 Hydrometer Method — Method of estimating 
the total concentration of suspended load and dissolved 
matter from the density indicated by a hydrometer. 


7.23 Gravimetric Method — Method of estimating 
the total sediment by allowing the sediment to settle in 
a container, with a suitable additive to hasten settling, 
siphoning off the supernatant water and carefully 
transferring all the sediment from the container to a 
beaker and from the beaker to a filter paper, then drying 
the sample and determining the mass of total sediment. 


7.24 Pipette Method — Analysis of very fine particles 
of sediment (less than 0.32 mm in diameter) by 
sampling with a pipette. 


7.25 Fall Velocity, Settling Velocity — Limiting 
velocity reached asymptotically by a particle falling 
under the action of gravity in still water. 


28 


7.26 Size Distribution — Numerical or graphical 
representation of the results of a particle size analysis. 


7.27 Particle Size Distribution, Grain Size 
Distribution — Proportion by mass of each particle 
size present in a given sediment sample. 


7.28 Hydrometer — Device, based on Archimedes’ 
principle, used for determining the relative density of 
a liquid and often used to determine the relative 
abundance of fine (<0.063 mm) particles in a sediment 
sample. 


7.29 Siltometer — Instrument that separates into 
different sizes the particles of a sample of sediment, 
either by deposition through a water column or by 
means of an air current, and measures the volume or 
mass of the different grades thus separated. 


7.30 Bottom Withdrawal Tube — Instrument for 
analysis of sediment particles of less than 0.5 mm in 
diameter, based on the principle that in an uniformly 
dispersed suspension (such as used in the bottom 
withdrawal tube), the sediment concentration at any 
level remains constant until the largest particle has had 
time to settle from the surface to the level in question. 


7.31 Sedimentation Tube — Basic component of 
many items of equipment through which particles settle 
in a column of liquid, usually water. 


7.32 Pycnometer — Instrument for measuring the 
specific mass of liquids and solids. 


7.33 Depth-Sampler — Instrument that obtains a 
sample of the sediment-water mixture while it is moved 
vertically at a uniform rate through a given distance in 
a column of moving water. 


7.34 Instantaneous Sampler — Instrument that 
attempts to trap instantaneously a sample of sediment- 
water mixture. 


7.35 Point-Sampler — Instrument that obtains a 
sample of sediment-water mixture at a given point over 
a fixed period of time. 


7.36 Pumping Sampler — Instrument that consists 
of a pumping system with the intake usually 
perpendicular to the stream flow and the outlet leading 
to a container or a flushing system. 


7.37 Particle Size, Grain Size — Dimension that is 
representative of the size of an individual particle. 


7.38 Mean Particle Diameter — Arithmetic mean of 
the individual particle diameters. 


7.39 Median Particle Diameter, D; — Particle size 
of a given sample such that the mass of particles of 
larger diameter are equal to the mass of particles of 
smaller diameter. 


7.40 Geometric Mean Particle Diameter if — 
Diameter whose logarithm is the mean of the 
logarithms of the individual particle diameters. 


$ p; login 4, 


Dip; 


where p; is the probability or percentage of a sample 
having a particle diameter d.. 


log, d, F 


7.41 Nominal Diameter — Diameter of a sphere of 
the same volume as the given particle. 


7.42 Projected Diameter — Diameter of a circle that 
circumscribes the projected image of the particle when 
viewed in the plane of maximum stability. 


7.43 Sedimentation Diameter — Diameter of a 
sphere of the same specific mass and the same terminal 
settling velocity as the given particle in the same 
sedimentation fluid. 


7.44 Sieve Diameter — Length of the side of the 
smallest square opening through which the particles 
will pass. 


7.45 Baseline — Line established in a triangulation 
survey for reference, coordination and correlation. 
NOTE — This is the only line whose length is actually measured 


in the survey: the accuracy of the survey will depend on the 
accuracy of measurement of this line. 


7.46 Full Reservoir Level — Level corresponding to 
the gross storage which includes both the dead and 
live storages, but does not normally include additional 
flood storage. 


7.47 Horizontal Control — Basic framework of points 
whose horizontal position, azimuth and 
interrelationship have been determined accurately. 


7.48 Normal Ponded Reservoir — Storage reservoir 
normally ponded up to full reservoir level. 


7.49 Range Line — Line joining the ranging rods, in 
a survey. 


7.50 Ranging Rod — Rod (2 m or 3 m long), painted 
in two or three colours, and shod with iron shoes, used 
to mark stations or other points in a survey so that 
straight lines may be laid out over the ground and 
chained if necessary. 


7.51 Reservoir — Naturally-occurring space (such as 
a pond, lake or basin) or man-made construction 
intended for storage, regulation and control of water. 


7.52 Rate of Sedimentation of Reservoir — Annual 
or periodic reduction in the capacity of a reservoir 
caused by the deposit of suspended loads and bed loads 
in the reservoir. 


29 


IS 1191 : 2016 


7.53 Reservoir Delta — Delta formed by a river 
discharging into a reservoir, causing sediment 
deposition where the river enters the reservoir. 


7.54 Trap Efficiency of Reservoir — Ratio of 
sediment retained in the reservoir to the sediment 
brought in by the streams. 


7.55 Vertical Control, Level Control — Series of 
benchmarks or other points of known elevation 
established throughout an area. 


7.56 Sediment Material — Sediment (clay, silt, sand, 
gravel, cobble or boulder) as classified by particle size 
range in accordance with Table 1. 


Table 1 Particle Size Ranges for Sediment 
Materials 


(Clause 7.56) 


Material Particle Size Range, mm 
(1) (2) 

Clay <0.002 
Silt >0.002 to <0.075 
Sand >0.075 to <4.75 
Gravel >4.75 to <80 
Cobbler >80 to <300 
Boulder >300 


7.57 Bed-Load Transport Model — Physical or 
numerical model of hydraulic and sediment variables 
which can be used to predict the bed-load transport 
rates of sediment along the channel bed. 


7.58 Bed-Sampler Efficiency — Ratio of the quantity 
of sediment trapped in a bed-load sampler to the 
quantity of the sediment in the stream that would be 
transported as bed load through the width of the flow 
occupied by the intake of the sampler, without the 
sampler in position. 


7.59 Weathering — Process of rock breakdown and 
decomposition instigated by external agencies, such 
as wind, rain, change in temperature and vegetation. 


7.60 Point-Method — Method of sampling of 
suspended sediment in which the sampler, held 
stationary at a point, is filled at stream velocity to 
almost its full capacity during the sampling period with 
water-sediment mixture. 
NOTE — Prior to allowing filling, it is necessary to equalize 
the pressure inside the sampler with the water pressure at the 
point of sampling. 
7.61 Time-Method — Method of sampling of 
suspended sediment with respect to time, expressed as 
follows: 


8, "feat 


IS 1191 : 2016 


where 
g, = sediment transport mean flow rate, 
i, = time interval of integration, and 
g, = instantaneous transport flow rate. 


7.62 Range Pillar — Pillar erected at locations around 
the shoreline of a reservoir to identify the cross-section 
selected for conducting sedimentation surveys. 


7.63 Sedimentation — Aggregate result of five 
sediment processes (deposition, entrainment, erosion, 
transport and compaction). 


Example : 
Weathering and detachment. 


7.64 Bed Load Rate — Rate of bed load movement, 
expressed in mass of volume of bed load transported 
over the entire width of the river bed and per unit time. 


7.65 Isokinetic — Condition where the intake velocity 
of the suspended-sediment sampler equals the ambient 
velocity. 


7.66 Single-Sampler — Combination of a sample 
bottle, stopper, and intake and exhaust tubes for 
collecting a suspended-sediment sample during the 
rising stage of a stream or river. 
NOTE — This device is useful in obtaining sediment data on 
streams where remoteness of site location and rapid changes in 


stage make it impractical to use a conventional depth-integrating 
sampler. 


7.67 Fixed-Pumping Sampler — Pumping sampler 
that automatically collects a water-sediment mixture 
from a fixed point in a stream or river. 


7.68 Moveable-Sampler — Pumping sampler 
operated from a fixed platform, float or boat for 
collecting large-volume water-sediment mixtures. 


8 UNCERTAINTIES 
DETERMINATIONS 


IN HYDROMETRIC 


8.1 Resolution — Quantitative expression of the 
ability of an indication device to distinguish 
meaningfully between closely adjacent values of the 
quantity indicated. 


8.2 Precision — Closeness of agreement between the 
results obtained by applying the experimental 
procedures several times under prescribed conditions. 


NOTE — The smaller the random part of the experimental errors 
which affect the results, the more precise the procedure. 


8.3 Average Value x — Arithmetic mean of n 
readings of the value x. 
1 n 


x=- 
N iz 


30 


8.4 Sensitivity Coefficient, Influence Coefficient 6, 
— Ratio of the change in a result, R, to a change in an 
input parameter, x. 


AR 
9, =2" 
Ax 
NOTE — In relative terms, this becomes. 
_AR/R 
* Ax/x 


8.5 Frequency Distribution — Relationship between 
the measured values of variables and their frequency 
of occurrence. 


8.6 Population — Totality of items under 
consideration. 


8.7 Sample — One or more items taken from a 
population and intended to provide information on the 
population and, possibly, to serve as a basis for a 
decision concerning the population or the process that 
produced it. 


8.8 Sample Size, n — Number of items included in 
the sample. 


8.9 True Value — Value which characterizes a 
quantity perfectly defined in the conditions that exist 
when that quantity is considered. 


NOTE — It is an ideal value which can be determined only if 
all causes of measurement error are eliminated. 


8.10 Degree of Freedom, v — Number of terms in a 
sum minus the number of constraints on the terms of 
the sum. 


Example : 


The standard deviation is said to have (n - 1) degrees of freedom 
because it is necessary to use one degree of freedom to estimate 
the mean, an element of the equation for the standard deviation. 


8.11 Deviation — Difference between the value of a 
quantity and a standard reference value. 


NOTE — Particularly in statistics, the reference value is 
frequently the arithmetic mean of a series of measurements. 


8.12 Experimental Standard Deviation, S — For a 
series of n measurements of the same measurand, the 
parameter characterizing the dispersion of the results. 


where 
x; = result of the į th measurement, and 


x = arithmetic mean of the n results considered. 


NOTES 

1 The experimental standard deviation should not be confused 
with the standard deviation © of a population of size N and of 
mean m, given by the following formula: 


2 If the series of n measurements is considered to be an example 
of a population, s is an estimate of the population standard 
deviation. 


8.13 Experimental Standard Deviation of the Mean, 
s(x) — Estimate of the standard deviation of the 
arithmetic mean x calculated from a sample of 
n measurements with respect to the mean m of the 
overall population. 


ys) 
7 


8.14 Experimental Variance, s*— Measure of the 
scatter or spread of a distribution, estimated by 
calculating the sum of the squares of deviations of 
measurements about the means, divided by the number 
of degrees of freedom. 


n 


> -x7 


2 i=l 
n-1 


8.15 Residual Variance, s? — Square of the standard 
error of estimation. 


8.16 Weight of Measurement, w— Number which 
expresses the degree of confidence in the result of a 
measurement of a certain quantity, in comparison with 
the result of another measurement of the same quantity. 


8.17 Arithmetic Weighted Mean, Weighted 


Average, X 


w — Sum of the products of each value 
and their weight of measurement divided by the sum 


of the weights of measurement. 


izl 


8.18 Calibration — Process of comparing the 
response of a measuring device with a calibrator or a 
measuring standard over the measurement range. 


8.19 Calibration Hierarchy — Chain of calibrations 
which link or trace a measuring device to a primary 
standard. 


8.20 Normal Distribution, Laplace-Distribution — 
Probability distribution of continuous random variable 
x such that the probability density is 

| 


1I(x—m 
2\ G 


exp 


foe 


31 


IS 1191 : 2016 


where 
m = arithmetic mean, and 
© = the standard deviation of the normal distribution. 


8.21 Method of Least Squares — Technique used to 
compute the coefficients of an equation, when a 
particular form of equation is chosen for fitting a curve 
to data. 


NOTE — The principle of the method of least squares is to 
minimize the sum of squares of deviations of the data from the 
curve. 


8.22 Regression — Process of quantifying the 
dependence of one variable on one or more other 
variables. 


8.23 Least-Regression — Procedure for determining 
the unknown constants of a proposed model in such a 
manner that predictions from the model are as close as 
possible to the data. 


NOTE — “As close as possible” is taken to mean that the sum 
of squares of the deviation is a minimum. 


8.24 Error of Measurement — Result of a 
measurement minus the true value of the measurand. 


NOTES 

1 The term relates equally to 
— the uncorrected result, and 
— the corrected result. 


2 The known parts of the error of measurement may be 
compensated by applying appropriate correction. The error of 
the corrected result can only be characterized by an uncertainty. 


8.25 Absolute Error of Measurement — Result of a 
measurement minus the conventional true value of the 
measurand. 


NOTES 

1 The term relates equally to 
— the uncorrected result, and 
— the corrected result. 


2 The known parts of the error of measurement may be 
compensated by applying appropriate corrections. The error of 
the corrected result can only be characterized by an uncertainty. 


3 “Absolute error” which has a sign, should not be confused 
with “absolute value of an error” which is the modulus of an 
error. 


8.26 Outlier — Observed value in a set of data which 
appears to be inconsistent with the remainder of the 
set of data. 


8.27 Spurious Error — Error which invalidates a 
measurement 
NOTE — This type of error generally has a single cause, such 


as the incorrect recording of one or more significant digits or 
the malfunction of instruments. 


8.28 Random Error — Component of the error of 
measurement which, in the course of a number of 
measurements of the same measurand, varies in an 
unpredictable way (see Fig. 24). 


IS 1191 : 2016 


NOTE — It is not possible to correct for random error. 


8.29 Systematic Error — Component of the error of 
measurement which, in the course of a number of 
measurements of the same measurand, remains 
constant or varies in a predictable way (see Fig. 24). 


NOTE — Systematic errors and their causes may be known. 


8.30 Elemental Error — Random or systematic error 
associated with a single source or process in a chain of 
sources or processes. 


8.31 Standard Error of Estimation, Residual 
Standard Deviation, sg Measure of dispersion of the 
dependent variable (output) about the least-squares line 
obtained by curve fitting or regression analysis. 


number of data points, and 
number of coefficients in the equation. 


NOTES 

1 This equation is similar to the expression for standard 
deviation, except that the curve-fit value, y , replaces the mean 
value, y , and k replaces 1. 


Key 

1 — mean measured value of quantity 
2 — true value of quantity (unknown) 
3 — spurious error 

4 — random error 

5 — value of measured quantity 


6 — random uncertainty, e, assessed with specific confidence level 


2 The number of coefficients, k, is equal to the number of 
explanatory variables plus one (to include the intercept). 


8.32 Confidence Limits — Lower and upper limits 
within which the true value is expected to lie with a 
specified probability, assuming negligible systematic 
error. 


8.33 Confidence Level — Probability that the true 
value will lie between the specified confidence limits, 
assuming negligible systematic error. 


NOTE — The confidence level is expressed as a percentage. 


8.34 Student’s Distribution, Students t 
Distribution, t— Distribution of the deviations of the 
mean values of the samples from the population means. 


Example : 
(eos = bos 
where 


(e)s = 


tj; = appropriate value of Student’s ¢ distribution; 


random uncertainty at the 95 percent confidence level; 


s = sample standard deviation. 
NOTE — Student’s distribution is used to set the confidence 
limits of the population mean, in particular in cases where the 
mean has been estimated from small samples. It is obtained 
from tables giving the number of degrees of freedom and the 
confidence level, where 


te, 


—. 


7 — systematic error, e,, unseen within limits 
8 — probability density 

9 — systematic error 

10 — time during which a constant value of the 


guantity Y is being assessed 
time 


11 


Fic. 24 DIAGRAM ILLUSTRATING THE TERMS RELATING TO ERRORS AND UNCERTAINTIES 


32 


where 
m = population mean. 


8.35 Uncertainty, u — Estimate characterizing the 
range of values within which the true value of a 
measurand lies. 


8.36 Random Uncertainty, e, — Component of 
uncertainty associated with a random error (see 
Fig. 24). 


NOTE — Its effect on the mean value can be reduced by taking 
many measurements. 


8.37 Systematic Uncertainty, e, Component of 
uncertainty associated with a systematic error. 


NOTE — Its effect cannot be reduced by taking many 
measurements. 


8.38 Accuracy — Qualitative expression for the 
closeness of a measured value to the true value. 
NOTE — The quantitative expression of accuracy should be in 


terms of uncertainty. Good accuracy implies small random and 
systematic errors. 


8.39 Standard Uncertainty — Uncertainty of the 
result of a measurement, expressed as a standard 
deviation. 


8.40 Type A Evaluation of Uncertainty — 
Evaluation of a component of measurement uncertainty 


33 


IS 1191 : 2016 


by a statistical analysis of measured quantity values 
obtained under defined measurement conditions. 


8.41 Type B Evaluation of Uncertainty — 
Evaluation of a component of measurement uncertainty 
determined by means other than a type A evaluation 
of measurement uncertainty. 


8.42 Expanded Uncertainty — Quantity defining an 
interval about the result of a measurement that may be 
expected to encompass a large fraction of the values 
that could be attributed to the measurand. 


8.43 Combined Uncertainty — Standard uncertainty 
of the result of a measurement when that result is 
obtained from the values of a number of other 
quantities, equal to the positive square root of a sum 
of terms, the terms being the variances or covariances 
of these other quantities weighted according to how 
the measurement result varies with changes in these 
quantities. 


8.44 Coverage Factor — Numerical factor used as a 
multiplier of the combined standard uncertainty in 
order to obtain an expanded uncertainty. 


8.45 Level of Confidence — Percentage of instances 
that a set of similarly constructed tests will capture the 
true mean. 


IS 1191 : 2016 


ANNEX A 
(Normative) 


SYMBOLS USED IN HYDROMETRY 


Term Symbol Dimensions SI units 
Acceleration due to gravity g LT? m/s? 
Adjustment factor k a a 
Angle o b rad 
Area A Le m? 
Average value x a a 
Boundary layer displacement thickness ô L m 
Breadth (width) (partial) B L m 
Bulk (or volume) modulus of elasticity K ML-T? Pa 
Chezy coefficient C L!?T! m!?/s 
Concentration C ML? mg/l 
Constant K a a 
Conveyance K LT m/s 
Coordinate X,Y, Z L m 
Correction factor for measured discharge in open channels F,,, a a 
Depth D L m 
Diameter d L m 
Difference between two values of the same quantity A a a 
Dilution ratio N b b 
Dimensional sensitivity coefficient 0 a a 
Discharge Q LT! m?/s 
Dynamic viscosity n, u MLT! Pa-s 
Effective roughness height k L m 
Efficiency n b b 
Electrical resistance R MVT3r © 
Energy correction factor (Coriolis energy coefficient) OL b b 
Eguivalent sand roughness k, L m 
Experimental standard deviation s a a 
Experimental standard deviation of the mean s(x) a a 
Experimental variance s? a a 
Force, pull or thrust (tension) F MLT”? N 
Frequency f T! Hz 
Friction factor f b b 
Froude number Fr b b 
Geometric mean particle diameter dy L m 
Head loss per unit length a b b 
Total head, energy head H L m 
Height of flume invert p L m 
Height of weir p L m 
Hydraulic mean depth r L m 


34 


IS 1191 : 2016 


Term Symbol Dimensions SI units 
Hydraulic radius (hydraulic mean depth) Th L m 
Kinematic viscosity v LT! m?/s 
Length l L m 
Length (partial) l L m 
Loss of head per unit length (or hydraulic gradient) i L m 
Manning coefficient n LST s/m!/3 
Mass m M kg 
Mass per unit volume (density or specific mass) p ML” kg/m? 
Measured value M a 

Number of degrees of freedom v a a 
Number of measurements in a set n b b 
Number of sources of error in a result k b b 
Particle diameter d L m 
Percentage error of x X b b 
Power P ML?>T? W 
Pressure P ML!T? Pa (or N/m?) 
Probability p b b 
Radian measure p b rad 
Radius r L m 
Rate of injection of chemical tracer q LT! ml/s 
Rate of sampling q ETA ml/s 
Residual standard deviation SR a a 
Residual variance SR a a 
Result of a measurement R a a 
Reynolds number Re b b 
Rotation speed n T-1 rad/s 
Sample size n a a 
Sensitivity coefficient 6, b b 
Shape factor Z b b 
Shear stress x ML'T? Pa (or Nm?) 
Side slope m b b 
Slope, bed slope S b B 
Specific discharge q TI m/s 
Standard deviation o a a 
Student’s / distribution t b b 
Sub-area A L? m? 
Surface tension 0,7 MT? N/m 
Temperature (Celsius) 0, T 0 °C 
Thermodynamic temperature o o K 
Thomson’s 7 T b b 
Time t T s 
Total head, energy head H L m 
Total breadth (width) of the channel B L m 


35 


IS 1191 : 2016 


Term Symbol Dimensions SI units 
Transmissivity T VT! m/s 
Uncertainty u a a 
Uncertainty in a result (with various subscripts) e a a 
Unit discharge qa L’T! m?/s 
Variable quantity x a a 
Velocity v LT! m/s 
Volume V L3 m? 
Wave celerity, propagation velocity C LT! m/s 
Wavelength A L m 
Weber number We b b 
Weight W MLT”? N 
Weight of measurement w; a a 
Weighted average Xy a a 
Wetted perimeter Po L m 

x velocity component u LT! m/s 
y velocity component v LT! m/s 
z velocity component w LT! m/s 


NOTES 


1 The above symbols, except when otherwise stated, are indicated in their most general form. For any specific use, such symbols may 
bequalified by a subscript, where necessary, and explained to indicate the exact meaning. 


2 The subscripts “1” and “2” are used to indicate “upstream” and “downstream” respectively. 
a—Dimensional order depends on its meaning in context. 


b—Non-dimensional quantity. 


36 


A 


abnormal conditions of equipment use 6.61 
absolute error of measurement 8.25 
abutment 4.7 

accuracy 8.38 

acoustic Doppler current profiler 6.87 
acoustic Doppler velocity meter 6.89 
adsorption 5.13 

afflux 2.96 

air line correction 3.13 

alluvial river 2.24 

anchor ice 2.105 

anchorage 6.28 

annual flood 2.172 

annual storage 2.173 

antidunes 2.30 

apex height 4.3 

approach channel 4.13 

approach velocity 2.69 

arithmetic weighted mean 8.17 


average of the suspended concentration 
7.12 


average value 8.3 


B 


background concentration 5.6 
backlash 6.12 

backwater 2.97 

backwater curve 2.98 

baffle 4.15 

baffle pier 4.16 

bankfull stage 3.58 

base flow 2.174 

baseline 7.45 

baud 6.51 

Bd 6.51 

bed load 7.8 

bed load rate 7.64 

bed material 7.5 

bed material load 7.6 

bed profile 2.48 

bed slope 2.47 

bed-sampler efficiency 7.58 
bed-transport model 7.57 
benchmark 2.117 

bit 6.49 

blanking distance 6.90 
bottom slope 2.47 

bottom tracking 6.91 
bottom withdrawal tube 7.30 


Alphabetical Index 


boundary condition 2.154 
Boussinesq coefficient 2.160 
braided river 2.26 

breadth 2.103 

bridge winch board 6.35 
broad-weir 4.28 

brook 2.166 

bubbler technique 6.11 

bulk density 7.14 

byte 6.50 


Cc 


cableway 6.25 

cableway support 6.79 
cableway system 6.25 
calibration 2.92, 8.18 
calibration hierarchy 8.19 
calibration tank 6.23 

canal 2.15 

canal fall 2.52 

channel 2.13 

channel storage 3.22 

clinging nappe 4.29.1 

code 2.131 

collection of pings 6.83 
combined uncertainty 8.43 
component propeller-current meter 6.18 
compound structure 4.36 
conditions of storage and transport 6.59 
confidence level 8.33 
confidence limits 8.32 
constant fall method 3.33 
constant fall stage-relation 3.33 
constant level tank 5.7 
constant-injection method 5.3 
control 2.90 

control block 4.16 
converging reach 2.58 
conveyance 2.111 

Courant condition 2.155 
coverage factor 8.44 

creek 2.147, 2.148 

crest stage gauge 6.6 

critical depth 2.11 

critical flow 2.6, 4.26 

critical velocity 2.12 
critical-flume 4.38.1 
cross-section 2.55 

crossover 2.33 


cross-slope 4.12.3 


37 


IS 1191 : 2016 


cubature 3.27 

cumulative volume curve 2.86 
cup-type current meter 6.16 
current 2.22 


current meter 3.56 


D 


data 2.133 

data collection platform 6.85 

data logger 6.86 

debris line 2.60 

default mode 6.55 

degree of freedom 8.10 

degree of mixing 5.12 

delta 2.168 

delta reach of river 2.169 

density current 3.54 

depth 2.100 

depth integration method 7.17 
depth-sampler 7.33 

deviation 8.11 

differential global positioning system 6.92 
dilution factor 5.14, 5.15 

dilution gauging 5.2, 5.4 

dilution ratio 5.14, 5.15 

direct method of measurement 7.18 
discharge 2.35 

discharge coefficient 4.22 
discharge hydrograph 2.84 
discharge measurement 2.40 
discharge per unit width 2.36 
discontinuous rating 2.94 
dispersion coefficient of a tracer 5.19 
dispersion of a tracer 5.18 

diurnal inequality 3.51, 3.52 
divergence of tidal conditions 3.59 
divide wall 4.10 

Doppler shift 6.88 

double float 6.43 

double gauging 4.27 

double-winch 6.34 

downstream face weir slope 4.12.2 
downstream total head 4.6 

drag 2.110 

drainage basin 2.176 

drawdown curve 2.99 

drift 3.5, 3.6 

drift velocity 3.7 

drowned flow 4.24 

dune 2.29 


IS 1191 : 2016 


duration of tide 3.48 


E 


ebb current 3.36 

ebb predominance 3.61 

ebb tide 3.35 

ebb volume 3.43 

echo (cross) correlation velocity meter 6.96 
echo sounder 6.45 

elastic pressure bulb 6.10 
electromagnetic current meter 6.52 
electromagnetic gauging station 6.54 


elemental error 8.30 


flood volume 3.44 

flow measurement structure 4.1 
flow regime 2.2 

flume 4.38 

fluvial sediment 7.1 

fluvial sediment transport 7.2 
frazil ice 2.104 

free flow 4.21 

free surface flow 2.141 
frequency distribution 8.5 
friction 2.110 

Froude number 2.122 

full reservoir level 7.46 
full-weir 4.9 


hydraulic radius 2.114 
hydrogeology 2.144 
hydrograph 2.149 
hydrological cycle 2.143 
hydrometer 7.28 

hydrometer method 7.22 
hydrometric equipment 6.68 


hydrometry 2.142 


I 


ice cover 2.107 
ice sheet 2.107 


hysteresis of the stage-relation 3.28 


encoding 2.129 implicit finite-numerical scheme 2.157 
end-method 4.37 fully aerated nappe 4.29.3 incised river 2.25 
energy 2.134 fully developed contraction 4.29.4 inclined gauge 6.2 


fully ventilated nappe 4.29.3 


energy gradient 2.76 indirect method of measurement 7.19 


energy head 2.73 

energy head line 2.74 
energy loss 2.77 
energy-block 4.16 
ensemble 6.83 
environmental factor 6.56 
Epper effect 6.24 

error of measurement 8.24 
estuary 2.20 

expanded uncertainty 8.42 
expanding reach 2.59 
experimental standard deviation 8.12 


experimental standard deviation of the 
mean 8.13 


experimental variance 8.14 


explicit finite-difference numerical scheme 
2.156 


F 


fall 2.52 

fall stage-relation 3.31 
all velocity 3.64, 7.25 
filtration method 7.21 
firmware 2.139 
fixed-pumping sampler 7.67 
flat-weir 4.35 

float 6.40 

float gauge 6.3 

float gauging 3.20 

float well 2.120 

floating siphon 5.9 

flood current 3.38 

flood flow 3.57 

flood mark 2.60 

flood predominance 3.62 
flood storage 2.153 
flood tide 3.37 


G 


gas purge technique 6.11 
gauge 2.41 

gauge datum 2.116 

gauge height 2.79 

gauge height of zero flow 2.80 


gauge height of zero flow line 2.81 


gauge well 2.118 
gauged head 2.71 
gauging reel 6.33 
gauging section 2.56 
gauging station 2.87 


geometric mean particle diameter 7.40 


glacis 4.11 


gradually varied unsteady flow 2.150 


grain size 7.37 
grain size distribution 7.27 
gravimetric method 7.23 


guide vane 4.14 


H 


H-ADCP 6.87.1 
hand-suspension 6.32 
hardware 2.137 
hazardous area 6.62 
head loss 2.77 

head over the weir 4.4 
height of weir 4.3 

high water 3.41 

hook gauge 6.5 
horizontal control 7.47 
hydraulic grade line 2.171 
hydraulic gradient 2.145 
hydraulic jump 2.112 


hydraulic mean depth 2.113 


38 


inflection point 2.34 
influence coefficient 8.4 
influencing factor 6.56 
initial condition 2.158 
instantaneous sampler 7.34 
instrument carriage 6.72 
instrumental hysteresis 6.12 
integration method 5.4, 7.16 
invert 2.46 

isokinetic 7.65 

isotropic 2.162 


L 


Laplace-distribution 8.20 
lateral flow 2.9 
least-regression 8.23 

left bank 2.44 

length 2.102 

level control 7.55 

level of confidence 7.45 
line of saturation 2.171 
liquid flow 2.1 

liquid level 2.79 

liquid level recorder 6.13 
live storage 2.151 
load-brake 6.73 
longitudinal section 2.167 
long-flume 4.38.2 
looped stage-curve 3.28 


low water 3.42 


M 


main cable 6.26 

Mariotte vessel 5.8 

mass discharge curve 2.86 
mean depth 2.113 


mean direction of flow 3.3 
mean particle diameter 7.38 
mean section segment 3.23 
mean suspended concentration 7.11 
mean velocity 2.64, 2.65 

mean velocity depth 2.63 
meandering channel 2.28 
measuring reach 2.57 
measuring section 2.56 

median particle diameter 7.39 
method of characteristics 2.159 
method of least squares 8.21 
mid-segment 3.24 

minimum speed 6.22 

minimum winding diameter 6.77 
mixed tide 3.60 

mixing length 5.10, 5.11 
modular flow 4.21 

modular limit 4.23 

momentum coefficient 2.160 
moveable-sampler 7.68 
moving boat method 3.21 


multiple injection 5.5 


N 


nappe 4.29 

neap tide 3.40 

nodal point 2.34 

node 2.34 

nominal diameter 7.41 
nonmodular flow 4.24 
non-equipment 6.71 

normal depth 2.101 

normal distribution 8.20 
normal fall method 3.32 
normal fall stage-relation 3.32 
normal ponded reservoir 7.48 


normal velocity distribution 2.61 


o 


Oden theory 7.15 
one-method 2.66 

open channel 2.14 
operating conditions 6.60 
optical velocity meter 6.95 
outlier 8.26 


overall performance level 6.63 


P 


parity check 2.130 
Parshall flume 4.38.5 
particle size 7.37 


particle size distribution 7.27 


payout rate 6.74 

peak stage 2.109 

pendant wire 6.39 
percolation line 2.171 
performance measure 6.57 
period of pulsation 3.8 
permanent flowmeter 6.65 
personnel carriage 6.80 
photomultiplier 2.163 

pier post 6.76 

piezometric head 2.72 
ping 6.82 

pipette method 7.24 

point gauge 6.4 

point velocity method 3.19 
point-sampler 7.35 
point-method 7.60 
population 8.6 

portable flowmeter 6.67 
power 2.135 

precision 8.2 

projected diameter 7.42 
propeller pitch 6.19 
propeller-current meter 6.17 
pulse 6.48 

pumping sampler 7.36 
pycnometer 7.32 


R 


radar velocity meter 6.94 
ramp gauge 6.2 

random error 8.28 

random uncertainty 8.36 
range line 8.49 

range of values 6.58 

range pillar 7.62 

ranging rod 7.50 

rate of sedimentation of reservoir 7.52 
rating 2.91 

rating curve 2.82 

rating tank 6.23 

raw data 2.133 

reach 2.27 

real time 2.140 

recording device 6.69 
recording equipment 6.70 
rectangular broad-weir 4.28.1 
reference current meter 3.16 
reference gauge 3.15 
regression 8.22 

remote sensing 2.126 

remote telemetry station 2.127 


remote telemetry unit 2.128 


39 


IS 1191 : 2016 


reservoir 7.51 

reservoir delta 7.53 

residual standard deviation 8.31 
residual variance 8.15 
resolution 8.1 

Reynolds number 2.123 

right bank 2.45 

rime ice 2.106 

ripple 2.31 

river 2.23 

river capture 2.175 

rod float 6.44 

rotating element current meter 6.15 
rotor pitch 6.20 

roughness coefficient 2.121 
round-broad-weir 4.28.2 
rugosity coefficient 2.121 


S 


salt-wedge 3.55 

sample 8.7 

sample size 8.8 

sampling cross-section 5.16 
sampling station 5.16 

sand point 3.63 

Saniiri flume 4.38.6 
saturation line 2.171 
sediment concentration 7.10 
sediment material 7.56 
sedimentation 7.63 
sedimentation diameter 7.43 
sedimentation tube 7.31 
sedimentation-method 7.20 
seiche 3.53 

sensitivity coefficient 8.4 
sensitivity of the stage-relation 3.29 
sensor 6.14 

separation pocket 4.18, 4.19 
servo beam balance 6.9 
servo manometer 6.9 

servo system 6.8 

settling velocity 3.64, 7.25 
sharp-weir 4.30 

shift adjustment 2.85 

shift diagram 2.95 
short-weir 4.32 

short-flume 4.38.3 

side slope 2.49 
side-interference 6.93 
side-/horizontal ADCP 6.87.1 
sieve diameter 7.44 
siltometer 7.29 
single-station 2.88 


IS 1191 : 2016 


single-sampler 7.66 
sinker 6.36 

size distribution 7.26 
slope station 2.89 
slope-method 3.2 
slope-relation 3.31 
slush ice 2.108 
software 2.138 
sounding 3.12 
sounding line 6.37 
sounding rod 6.37 
sounding weight 6.36 
specific discharge 2.37, 2.38 
specific energy 2.78 
specific mass 7.13 
speed 2.43 

spin test 6.21 

spring tide 3.39 
spurious error 8.27 
stable channel 2.16 
staff gauge 6.1 

stage 2.79 

stage gauge 2.115 
stage hydrograph 2.83 
stage recorder 6.13 
stage-relation 2.82 


standard current meter 3.17 


standard error of estimation 8.31 


standard solution 5.17 
standard uncertainty 8.39 
standing wave 2.161 
standing-flume 4.38.1 
static head 2.146 

static water level 2.146 
stationary wave 2.161 
stay line 6.29 

steady flow 2.3 

stilling basin 4.17 
stilling tube 2.119 
stilling well 2.118 
stilling well lag 3.30 
storage curve 3.26 
straightening vane 4.14 
stratification of flow 2.10 
stream 2.21 

stream gauging 2.39 


stream panel 3.25 


streamlined triangular-weir 4.34 


Student’s distribution 8.34 
Student’s ¢ distribution 8.34 
subcritical flow 2.7 
submerged flow 4.24 
submergence ratio 4.25 
subsurface float 6.42 


supercritical flow 2.8 
suppressed weir 4.9 
surface drawdown 2.51 
surface float 6.41 
surface ice 2.107 
surface slope 2.50 
surface velocity 2.62 
suspended load 7.7 
suspension cable 6.30 
suspension equipment 6.27 
system 2.132 
systematic error 8.29 


systematic uncertainty 8.37 


T 


tag- 6.39 

telemetry 2.125 
temporary flowmeter 6.66 
terminal velocity 3.64 
thalweg 2.32 

thin-notch weir 4.31 
thinweir 4.30 
three-method 2.68 

throat 4.20 

throatless flume 4.38.4 
tidal amplitude 4.45 
tidal channel 2.18 

tidal cycle 3.46 

tidal day 3.47 

tidal prism 3.49 

tidal range 3.50 

tidal waterway 2.19 

tide 3.34 

time of travel of a tracer 5.20 
time-method 7.61 
time-mean-concentration 7.11 
timing performance 6.64 
top width 2.53 

torque limiter 6.75 

total head 2.73 

total head level 2.75 
total head line 2.74 

total load 7.3, 7.4 

total storage 2.152 

tow cable 6.31 

tower 6.76 

tracer 5.1 

tracer recovery ratio 5.21 
track 6.26 

track wheel 6.81 
tracking window 6.47 
transducer 6.46 


transect 6.84 


40 


transition 2.33 

transverse flow 2.9 

trap efficiency of reservoir 7.54 
trapezoidal broad-weir 4.28.3 
trash line 2.60 

traversing cable 6.31 
triangular-weir 4.33 

tributary 2.165 

true value 8.9 

twin-station 2.89 
two-method 2.67 


type A evaluation of uncertainty 8.40 
type B evaluation of uncertainty 8.41 


U 


ultrasonic (acoustic) velocity meter 6.53 


uncertainty 8.35 

unconfined nappe 4.29.2 
uniform flow 2.5 

unit discharge 2.36 

unit tracer concentration 5.22 
unit-rating 2.93 

unstable channel 2.17 

unsteady flow 2.4 

upstream face weir slope 4.12.1 


upstream total head 4.5 


Vv 


velocity 2.42 

velocity head 2.70 

velocity integration method 3.18 
velocity of approach 2.69 
velocity of response 6.22 
velocity rod 6.44 

velocity vertical gradient 3.10 
velocity-method 3.1 

vertical 3.4 

vertical control 7.55 

vertical gauge 6.1 

vertical underflow gate 4.39 
vertical velocity coefficient 3.11 
vertical velocity curve 3.9 
vertical velocity distribution 3.65 
vertical-method 3.66 
V-broad-weir 4.28.4 


WwW 


wading rod 6.38 
wash load 7.9 

water course 2.164 
water level 2.170 
weathering 7.59 
Weber number 2.124 


weight of measurement 8.16 
weighted average 8.17 

weir 4.2 

weir abutment 4.7 

weir block 4.8 

weir body 4.8 


weir slope 4.12 

wet line correction 3.14 
wetted perimeter 2.54 
width 2.103 

winch 6.33 

winding handle 6.78 


41 


IS 1191 : 2016 


wing wall 4.7 

wire weight gauge 6.7 
within-storage 2.173 
work 2.136 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 01(0633) 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


